Pada bulan Juli kemarin, dalam negosiasi yang penuh ketegangan dengan kreditor resminya – Komisi Eropa, Bank Sentral Eropa, danDana Moneter Internasional (IMF) – Yunani gagal membayarkan utangnya kepada IMF.
Yunani menjadi negara dengan ekonomi maju pertama – dan, sejauh ini, satu-satunya – yang mengalami hal itu.
Akan tetapi, sebagaimana biasa terjadi, yang terjadi bukanlah gagal bayar penuh, namun langkah maju menuju kesepakatan baru.
Mitra-mitra Yunani di Eropa akhirnya setuju untuk memberikan dukungan keuangan tambahan, dan sebagai gantinya pemerintahan Perdana Menteri Yunani Alexis Tsipras berjanji untuk melaksanakan reformasi struktural yang kompleks dan pemotongan anggaran besar-besaran.
Sayangnya, langkah-langkah tersebut sepertinya hanya menunda masalah krisis utang Yunani, dan tidak dapat menyelesaikannya.
Ekonomi lain yang juga dalam bahaya ialah Negara Persemakmuran Puerto Rico, yang membutuhkan restrukturisasi menyeluruh atas utang negaranya senilai $73 miliar.
Perjanjian terakhir untuk merestrukturisasi sebagian utang hanyalah awalnya; kenyataannya, restrukturisasi ini bahkan tidak mampu mengesampingkan gagal bayar penuh.
Namun perlu dicatat bahwa walaupun “kejadian kredit” tersebut tentunya akan menjadi masalah besar, kreditor mungkin terlalu melebih-lebihkan potensi dampak eksternalnya.
Mereka bermaksud untuk mengingatkan bahwa walaupun Puerto Rico adalah negara persemakmuran, bukan negara independen, kegagalannya membayar utang akan menjadi contoh buruk bagi negara-negara bagian dan kota-kota AS.
Akan tetapi itu bukanlah hal baru.
Di era 1840-an, sembilan negara bagian AS berhenti membayar utangnya.
Beberapa akhirnya membayar penuh nilainya; lainnya melakukan hal tersebut dengan pemotongan; dan beberapa bahkan menolak sebagian utangnya.
Di era 1870-an, gelombang gagal bayar lagi-lagi dialami oleh 11 negara bagian.
West Virginia terus menghadapi gagal bayar dan restrukturisasi sampai tahun 1919.
Beberapa risiko terbesar dihadapi oleh negara dengan ekonomi maju, yang terutama terkena dampak berbagai perubahan iklim ekonomi global.
Selama ledakan infrastruktur Cina, negara tersebut mengimpor komoditas dalam volume tinggi, meningkatkan harganya dan, sebagai akibatnya, pertumbuhan eksportir komoditas dunia, termasuk negara-negara dengan ekonomi berkembang seperti Brasil.
Ditambah dengan peningkatan pinjaman dari Cina dan arus modal masuk yang didorong oleh suku bunga AS rendah, maka negara-negara ekonomi berkembang tumbuh cepat.
Krisis ekonomi global di tahun 2008-2009 mengganggu, namun tidak menghentikan, pertumbuhan pesat ini, dan negara ekonomi berkembang menikmati satu dekade tanpa krisis sampai awal 2013.
Akan tetapi, langkah Bank Sentral AS (Federal Reserve) untuk meningkatkan suku bunga, bersamaan dengan pertumbuhan (dan, sebagai akibatnya, investasi) yang melambat di Cina dan harga minyak dan komoditas yang jatuh, menghentikan peningkatan arus modal masuk.
Belakangan, banyak mata uang pasar berkembang yang jatuh, sehingga meningkatkan biaya pelunasan utang dolar luar negeri.
Pendapatan ekspor dan sektor publik menurun, mengakibatkan perluasan transaksi berjalan dan defisit fiskal.
Pertumbuhan dan investasipun melambat hampir di seluruh aspek.
Dari segi sejarah, negara ekonomi berkembang sepertinya sedang menuju krisis besar.
Akan tetapi, negara-negara ini mungkin membuktikan bahwa mereka lebih tahan uji dari pendahulunya.
Namun mungkin saja yang terjadi sebaliknya.
Defusing the Third Space Race
WASHINGTON, DC – With China, Russia, and the United States fine-tuning anti-satellite (ASAT) warfare capabilities, the third round of competition to “seize the high ground” of space is well underway.
This round is distinctive, because it has three contestants, whereas the first and second rounds, which occurred during the Cold War, had only two.
But, like its predecessors, today’s space race poses the risks of quick escalation and intensification of conflict among major powers.
A set of common-sense rules could help defuse and prevent conflict in space.
Unfortunately, Russia and China seem uninterested in negotiating a code of conduct for responsible space-faring countries.
The first space race began in 1957, when the Soviet Union launched Sputnik, the first artificial Earth satellite.
US President Dwight Eisenhower’s administration opted to leave Sputnik and its successors alone, recognizing that the US could outpace Soviet space programs and had more to gain from not destroying them.
Eisenhower’s successor, John F. Kennedy, arrived at the same conclusion.
But he went a step further, joining with the Soviet Union to champion a United Nations resolution on cooperation in space.
Kennedy’s eyes had been opened by a July 1962 US atmospheric nuclear test that inadvertently destroyed at least six satellites, including some belonging to the USSR.
A few months later, the Cuban missile crisis spurred agreement on a ban on atmospheric testing.
In 1967, US President Lyndon Johnson and Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev turned UN resolutions into the Outer Space Treaty, which marked the end of the first military space competition.
The second round of competition emerged in the mid-1970s.
Brezhnev’s Soviet Union tested a new type of ASAT weapon, and President Gerald Ford’s administration decided to respond in kind.
Under President Jimmy Carter, the US tried diplomacy to limit ASAT programs, but the superpowers couldn’t begin to agree on how to define a space weapon.
Then, in 1983, President Ronald Reagan’s administration launched its Strategic Defense Initiative, which ratcheted up the competition.
The second wave of competition ebbed in 1987, when Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev agreed to a treaty eliminating intermediate-range missiles, and ended when the Soviet Union dissolved.
The latest round of military competition in space began in 2001, when the US, under President George W. Bush, withdrew from the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty and demonstrated advanced space-enabled military targeting in its war in Iraq.
At that time, Russia was in no position to compete.
But the Kremlin gradually boosted investment in “counter-space” capabilities.
China did the same, demonstrating a new “hit-to-kill” ASAT weapon system in 2007.
China’s test, like the US atmospheric nuclear test in 1962, was highly damaging to the space environment, creating a vast, indiscriminate, and lethal debris field.
In 2008, the US used a specially adapted sea-based interceptor missile to shoot down a malfunctioning US intelligence satellite just before its reentry into the atmosphere.
The US now uses an unmanned miniature version of the space shuttle to practice “proximity operations”: approaching other satellites without harming them.
Russia has launched three satellites for proximity operations.
Chinese ASAT tests have succeeded to the point that they are now designed to miss their targets.
The third round of military competition in space remains less intense than the first two, but it is gathering momentum.
The question is how to defuse it.
Russia and China support an international treaty to prevent the weaponization of space.
But their proposal has significant drawbacks, including the same old difficulty of agreeing on what constitutes a space weapon.
Most space-related capabilities, like lasers and proximity operations, have both peaceful and military applications.
Monitoring and verifying compliance is another challenge.
And even if provisions could be agreed, ratifying and implementing a treaty could take decades, as with the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
A simpler – though by no means easy – approach would be to agree on a code of conduct for space.
The good news is that the framework for such an international code – conceptualized by the Stimson Center (which I co-founded) in 2002 – already exists, drafted in detail by the European Union.
The bad news is that China and Russia, along with many developing countries, have voiced strong objections.
Developing countries disapprove of the EU’s attempt to avoid a UN-based drafting process.
And they have balked at the draft code’s affirmation of a national and collective right to self-defense – a right enshrined in the UN Charter.
China and Russia would like to limit the code to civilian and commercial space activities – even though military space programs are the crux of the problem and the main impetus for developing a code in the first place.
The draft treaty supported by Russia and China would constrain only weapons in space, not their ground-based ASAT programs.
Russia and China are clearly not ready to curtail their ASAT capabilities; and the US is ramping up its own.
Transparency and confidence-building measures can help.
So can guidelines for the sustainable use of outer space, which may emerge from the UN’s Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space.
But the third round of space competition will not end until all major powers are ready to endorse a code of conduct for responsible behavior.
Space, South Africa’s New Frontier
JOHANNESBURG – By hosting the World Cup this month, South Africa is set to defy Africa’s image as too poor and trouble-ridden to stage one of the world’s great spectacles.
With its pursuit of research into the farthest reaches of the universe – deep space – South Africa hopes to provide further proof that Africans can compete at all levels.
South Africa is investing heavily to join the world’s leaders in space research.
The government is investing in “micro” satellites, building on its existing SumbandilaSat platform.
It is also leading the African effort to host what is widely described as potentially the world’s largest scientific instrument, the Square Kilometer Array (SKA) radio telescope.
The SKA, whose massive collection of dishes would stretch across nine African countries, is a next-generation telescope that will examine gas clouds in the early universe at 100 times the power of the most powerful existing radio telescope, the Very Large Array in New Mexico.
An international selection committee has already eliminated China and South America, leaving only Australia and Africa – both clear choices for geographic reasons – in the running.
To lend credibility to its bid to host the SKA, in 2006 South Africa’s government committed $250 million to build an array of radio dishes within its own borders as a precursor to the SKA.
Seven of the planned 80 dishes in the network have been built.
Now people are taking South Africa seriously as a player in space research.
Today, the country is believed to have about 60 working astronomers, more than half of all the astronomers working in Africa.
“South Africa is the jewel of African astronomy,” says Charles McGruder, a professor in the Department of Physics and Astronomy at Western Kentucky University.
In a country that is deeply divided economically, “What on earth is the benefit to the poor and the downtrodden of deep space research?” asks physicist Harold Annegarn, a professor at the University of Johannesburg.
“The answer,” he says, “is partly that by supporting a thriving top-level intellectual community, we can train our next generation of intellectuals.”
McGruder, who works closely with African astronomers, agrees that a space program for the region is critical to raising the profile of careers in science and engineering in a part of the world where the most educated people still go into finance or management.
“Success in space research can capture the imaginations of a whole generation of young Africans,” he says.
“By putting Africa on the world’s ‘science map,’ more brainy Africans will be encouraged to stay at home, because recognition for their talents will come.”
Experts on economic development in Africa naturally concentrate on basic technologies: clean water, energy for cooking, electricity, and improved roads.
Even in South Africa, the wealthiest country on the continent, millions of people lack basics.
But space research is expected to yield practical benefits.
One payoff can come from Africans building distinctive satellite instruments, and thus spawning a globally competitive industry.
Better ways to cope with climate change also can come from space research.
Farmers, for example, might choose crops and growing patterns based on knowledge from earth observations.
And, because space exploration requires communications and control over vast distances, some of the applications could also enhance South Africa’s lucrative mining sector; after all, controlling machines under the ground is similar to doing so in deep space.
To be sure, South Africa’s push to join the world’s technological leaders is not limited to space research.
The country is also home to thriving communities of scientists and engineers specializing in nuclear and solar energy, software encryption, coal-to-oil conversion and even electric cars.
No other African country comes close to matching South Africa in even a single area of research and development.
Spain Can Still Rise
MADRID – July will enter Spanish history as having started on a tremendous high, spurred by Spain’s recent triumph in the 2012 Euro Soccer Championship.
But all signs indicate that the month will end in doubt and pessimism.
The image of joyful crowds and Spanish flags draped from cars and windows has given way to that of throngs of demonstrators holding banners protesting the government’s latest austerity measures.
With one in four Spaniards unemployed and Spain’s sovereign bonds rated just above junk status, Spain seems to be on the edge of falling into the abyss.
But very few analyses delve beneath the surface of immediate figures and assess the core of Spain’s strengths and weaknesses.
Observers today tend to forget that, until the early 1980’s, Spain qualified as a developing country, according to World Bank standards.
Indeed, together with Singapore and Ireland, Spain represents the biggest economic success story of the last quarter of the twentieth century.
And it should not be forgotten that, together with an astounding leap in GDP per capita (from $7,284 in 1980 to over $30,000 in 2010), Spain, under King Juan Carlos’s invaluable leadership, carried out a successful transition to democracy and joined the European Union.
Such feats always entail important asymmetries and political pacts; though fundamental to the post-Franco transition, when Spaniards were still fearful of reviving the deep divisions of the civil war, they plague the country to this day.
Furthermore, Spain’s success, coupled with lax credit policy in the eurozone, resulted in a financial bubble whose collapse exposed structural challenges.
As a result, Spain now requires a concerted effort from its citizens, one rooted in confidence in their achievements of the last 30 years.
One area in grave need of reform is the labor market.
The foundations of Spain’s current labor laws date to 1938, when the civil war was tearing the country apart.
The system created by Generalissimo Francisco Franco following his victory offered workers job security and strong collective-bargaining rights, which helped to maintain social stability in the absence of democracy.
Paradoxically, the bulk of this platform has survived as a banner of the left.
Changing it is, therefore, not only vital for regaining competitiveness; it is also a critical test of the maturity of Spain’s democracy.
The current system underpins Spain’s soaring unemployment rate.
Since the second half of the 1980’s, when net emigration abruptly reversed, Spain has experienced high levels of structural unemployment, even when annual growth was above 4%, in part owing to the high quality and generous provisions of Spain’s social-welfare system, which was also consolidated in the post-Franco period.
As of 2011, an estimated 5.7 million residents (12% of the population) were immigrants – over a million more than in the significantly larger United Kingdom (with a population of 62 million).
International observers often also target the need to reduce public employment.
Here, too, the problem is a direct consequence of the political agreements reached at the beginning of the transition to democracy.
The public sector underwent rapid and radical decentralization as part of the transition, owing to the creation of the country’s quasi-federal governmental structure, which created significant overlap and duplication, both in terms of effort and resources.
Meanwhile, it distorts reality to view Spain’s entire banking sector through the prism of the cajas, the savings banks that are the soft underbelly of the Spanish financial system.
Indeed, Santander and BBVA rank among today’s most successful international banks.
Nevertheless, it was the cajas that concentrated the risk associated with the housing bubble, and whose governance presented the worst face of public ownership.
The cajas had neither the corporate governance structures nor the management skills to withstand the crisis.
Moreover, Spanish schools trail behind in the international ranking system; the relatively effective Franco-era vocational training system became collateral damage in the transition; and the low number of patent applications reveals severe shortcomings in research and development.
This hindrance to competitiveness is also linked to an underperforming, state-regulated higher-education system, with no Spanish public university among the top 150 ranked in the 2012 Academic Ranking of World Universities, whereas three private institutions (IE, IESE, and ESADE) are all ranked among the top business schools worldwide.
Today, Spain has some of Europe’s best infrastructure, including high-speed trains, high-tech airports, fast highways, and top-notch green-energy networks.
Its entrepreneurial class has pioneered business ventures, such as Inditex and Mercadona, whose models are case studies in the best business schools.
Spain counts a fair number of successful, cutting-edge multinationals, from Ferrovial and FCC in public works to Iberdrola and Abengoa in the energy sector.
It is also important to emphasize the political stability – and public maturity – that allowed aparty whose program called for rationalization of spending to win an absolute majority in the parliamentary election held six months ago.
Spain’s soccer victory was not a fluke but the culmination of a long evolution to emerge as a winning machine from its Francoist furia española past.
After Spain’s victories at Euro 2008 and the 2010 World Cup, the national team demonstrated once again how diversity can coalesce into a winning formula through identification with a common goal. &nbsp;
Spaniards in general, and particularly their political leaders, must rediscover what it takes to succeed.
Dealt a difficult hand, Spain can overcome its critical situation only through collective hard work, responsibility, respect, and loyalty, thereby ensuring its standing in Europe and beyond.
Spanish Leadership for Europe’s Roma
NEW YORK – Continued discrimination against Roma in Europe not only violates human dignity, but is a major social problem crippling the development of Eastern European countries with large Roma populations.
Spain, which has been more successful in dealing with its Roma problem than other countries, can take the lead this month as it assumes the European Union presidency.
Up to 12 million Roma live in Europe today, primarily in the East.
Despite the region’s overall economic growth over the past two decades, life for many Roma is worse now than ever.
During the communist era, Roma received jobs and housing.
But the heavy industries in which many were employed have now closed, and unemployment is widespread.
Many Roma live in deplorable conditions unworthy of modern Europe.
These economic hardships are deepened by social tension.
The majority population is very hostile towards Roma, and discrimination against them occurs at every level.
For example, Roma children are often automatically put into classes for the mentally disabled, simply because they are Roma.
Despite court rulings ordering reform, Roma are regularly denied equal access to housing, education, and healthcare, creating a vicious cycle of poverty and marginalization.
Reality and stereotype reinforce each other in a reflexive fashion.
The EU is slowly realizing that it has a major social problem on its hands. Denied opportunities in the East, many Roma have moved to Western Europe, fueling a new wave of hostility.
In Italy, the Berlusconi government’s treatment of Roma settlements – destroying homes and fingerprinting Roma based solely on their ethnicity – blatantly violated human rights.
This prompted the EU to create the new position of Fundamental Rights Commissioner, with confirmation hearings set to begin in January; In the meantime, violations continue.
On a positive note, the Decade of Roma Inclusion, established in 2005, is receiving strong support from the structural funds administered by the European Commission and is making some inroads.
Yet this is not enough to reverse a rising tide of violence and discrimination, compounded by the recent economic recession.
What is needed now is a comprehensive European strategy to address Roma issues across borders.
This strategy must address both intolerable living conditions for Roma and the hostile stereotypes that prevail within majority populations, because they mutually reinforce each other.
This is not only a human rights issue, but also an economic one. Following current demographic trends, by 2040, Roma will comprise roughly 40% of Hungary’s working-age population.
Statistics are similar for neighboring countries.
Unless the Roma are well educated and socially integrated – in stark contrast to today’s reality – these countries’ economic future is bleak.
The key to success is the education of a new generation of Roma who do not seek to assimilate into the general population, but deliberately retain their identity as Roma. Educated, successful Roma will shatter the prevailing negative stereotypes by their very existence.
I speak with some authority on this subject.
My foundation network has made the education of Roma a priority since its inception in Hungary in 1984, and across the rest of Eastern Europe since 1989. These efforts have produced a small, well-educated Roma elite who are now making an important contribution to the emancipation of Roma.
These leaders have blazed a trail for future advocates, but there are far too few of them.
In conjunction with the launch of the Decade of Roma Inclusion in 2005, my foundation network formed an alliance with the World Bank and transferred its Roma educational programs to a newly established Roma Education Fund.
Last year, the Fund directly assisted 30,000 Roma children and 800 university students.
It also provided invaluable support to member countries’ public education systems to strengthen Roma inclusion.
The Fund plans to double its activities in the next five years, but, again, this is not enough.
Given the need, it ought to grow ten-fold.
The scale of this challenge demands a comprehensive, institutional response from the EU that goes well beyond the Decade and the capacity of my foundations.
While the European Roma Platform launched in 2009 paid lip service to Roma issues, it did not go far enough.
Europe must develop a long-term strategy tied to programs and monitoring mechanisms that will deliver real change on the ground.
Spain can be justly proud of the way it has dealt with its own Roma minority.
I hope that the Spanish EU Presidency will build on this experience to champion the launch of a comprehensive European Roma strategy.
If Spain leads the way, all of Europe will ultimately reap the benefits.
Speculators at the Pumps
WASHINTGTON, DC – Until a few weeks ago, while oil prices were surging, debate raged about the relative roles of economic fundamentals and speculation in boosting oil prices.
Although oil prices have now fallen back from their peak, that debate must not be forgotten, for it has profound policy implications that government officials would be derelict to ignore.
Of course, if higher prices are due to fundamentals, oil markets are working as they should.
But if they are due to speculation, then policymakers speculators must act to rein in behavior that has imposed huge and needless costs on the global economy. And, when the evidence is confronted, it points to speculation as a culprit.
Whereas many oil market participants have blamed speculation, most economists defend how oil markets have performed and point to economic fundamentals.
One argument that economists use is that higher prices are due to the weak dollar.
Because oil is priced in dollars, a weak dollar makes oil cheaper to users in other countries, which increases global demand.
A second argument is that higher oil prices are due to lower interest rates and anticipations of higher long-term prices. That supposedly reduced supply by encouraging producers to store oil in the ground and pump it later.
A third argument is that if speculation were to blame for price increases, there should have been an increase in oil inventories, because speculators do not consume oil but instead store it for later sale.
Since there has been no rise in inventories, there has been no speculation.
All three arguments are weak.
The price of oil has risen far more than the dollar has fallen.
That means that oil prices have increased in other countries, which should have reduced, not increased, demand.
Moreover, it is high oil prices that weakened the dollar, not vice versa. This is because high oil prices raised inflation in the United States, worsened the US trade deficit, and increased the likelihood of a US recession by acting as a tax on consumer spending.
Nor have there been any reports of unusual production cutbacks – the linchpin of the second argument.
Indeed, the spike in oil prices actually gives independent producers an incentive to boost production.
The last time real oil prices reached current levels was 1980, which shows that hoarding oil in the ground can be bad business.
OPEC also has a strong interest in maintaining production. It wants to keep prices lower to maintain the global economy’s oil addiction and deter technological substitution of alternative energy sources.
Finally, the storage argument fails to recognize different types of inventory.
Thus, record-high speculative prices have likely caused bunker traders to release inventory, but those releases may have been purchased by speculators who are now active lessees of commercial storage capacity.
The implication is that speculators can drive up prices and increase their inventory holdings even as total commercial inventories remain little changed.
Additionally, oil market speculation may have induced “echo speculation,” whereby ultimate users buy refined products in advance to protect against future price hikes.
They then take delivery on their premises so that overall refined inventories rise, but that increase is not part of reported commercial inventories.
Proving that speculation is responsible for higher prices is always difficult, because it tends to occur against a background of strong fundamentals.
However, there is considerable evidence that strongly indicates rampant speculation in today’s oil markets.
One key sign is the documented change in the character of oil trading, with speculators (i.e., financial institutions and hedge funds) now accounting for 70% of trades, up from 37% seven years ago.
With regard to market fundamentals, there have been no changes in demand and supply conditions that explain the scale of the unanticipated jump in oil prices.
Moreover, the actual behavior of oil prices is consistent with speculation.
In June, oil prices leapt by $11 in one day, and in July they fell back by $15 in three days.
Such volatility does not fit a fundamentals-driven market.
Despite the oil market’s size, speculation can move prices because of the inelasticity of demand and supply.
Oil demand is slow to change because of behavioral inertia and fixed technology, while adjusting production takes time.
These features make the oil market vulnerable to speculation.
Such speculative purchases may barely register in inventories, because the purchases are small compared to the overall market, and because of the global storage system’s many margins of accommodation.
As a result, speculatively driven high prices can persist for a considerable time before economic fundamentals bring them down, as finally seems to be happening.
With prices falling, the imperative to act inevitably tends to recede.
That is the nature of the behavioral response to crisis and why a bad status quo can persist.
But leaving the system unchanged will maintain the global economy’s vulnerability to future bouts of speculation that we cannot afford.
Just consider how the current bout has raised global inflation, lowered incomes of the global poor, weakened the dollar, deepened the US trade deficit, aggravated global financial instability, and increased the likelihood of a global recession.
That is an overwhelming indictment that merits urgent policy action.
A Speech of Hope for Greece
ATHENS – On September 6, 1946 US Secretary of State James F. Byrnes traveled to Stuttgart to deliver his historic “Speech of Hope.”
Byrnes’ address marked America’s post-war change of heart vis-à-vis Germany and gave a fallen nation a chance to imagine recovery, growth, and a return to normalcy.
Seven decades later, it is my country, Greece, that needs such a chance.
Until Byrnes’ “Speech of Hope,” the Allies were committed to converting “…Germany into a country primarily agricultural and pastoral in character.”
That was the express intention of the Morgenthau Plan, devised by US Treasury Secretary Henry Morgenthau Jr. and co-signed by the United States and Britain two years earlier, in September 1944.
Indeed, when the US, the Soviet Union, and the United Kingdom signed the Potsdam Agreement in August 1945, they agreed on the “reduction or destruction of all civilian heavy-industry with war potential” and on “restructuring the German economy toward agriculture and light industry.”
By 1946, the Allies had reduced Germany’s steel output to 75% of its pre-war level.
Car production plummeted to around 10% of pre-war output.
By the end of the decade, 706 industrial plants were destroyed.
Byrnes’ speech signaled to the German people a reversal of that punitive de-industrialization drive.
Of course, Germany owes its post-war recovery and wealth to its people and their hard work, innovation, and devotion to a united, democratic Europe.
But Germans could not have staged their magnificent post-war renaissance without the support signified by the “Speech of Hope.”
Prior to Byrnes’ speech, and for a while afterwards, America’s allies were not keen to restore hope to the defeated Germans.
But once President Harry Truman’s administration decided to rehabilitate Germany, there was no turning back.
Its rebirth was underway, facilitated by the Marshall Plan, the US-sponsored 1953 debt write-down, and by the infusion of migrant labor from Italy, Yugoslavia, and Greece.
Europe could not have united in peace and democracy without that sea change.
Someone had to put aside moralistic objections and look dispassionately at a country locked in a set of circumstances that would only reproduce discord and fragmentation across the continent.
The US, having emerged from the war as the only creditor country, did precisely that.
Today, it is my country that is locked in such circumstances and in need of hope.
Moralistic objections to helping Greece abound, denying its people a shot at achieving their own renaissance.
Greater austerity is being demanded from an economy that is on its knees, owing to the heftiest dose of austerity any country has ever had to endure in peacetime.
No offer of debt relief.
No plan for boosting investment.
And certainly, as of yet, no “Speech of Hope” for this fallen people.
It is the mark of ancient societies, like those of Germany and of Greece, that contemporary tribulations revive old fears and foment new discord.
So we must be careful.
Teenagers should never be told that, due to some “prodigal sin,” they deserve to be educated in cash-strapped schools and weighed down by mass unemployment, whether the scene is Germany in the late 1940s or Greece today.
As I write these lines, the Greek government is presenting the European Union with a set of proposals for deep reforms, debt management, and an investment plan to kick-start the economy.
Greece is indeed ready and willing to enter into a compact with Europe that will eliminate the deformities that caused it to be the first domino to fall in 2010.
But, if Greece is to implement these reforms successfully, its citizens need a missing ingredient: Hope.
A “Speech of Hope” for Greece would make all the difference now – not only for us, but also for our creditors, as our renaissance would terminate the default risk.
What should such a declaration include?
Just as Byrnes’ address was short on detail but long on symbolism, a “Speech of Hope” for Greece does not have to be technical.
It should simply mark a sea change, a break with the past five years of adding new loans on top of already unsustainable debt, conditional on further doses of punitive austerity.
Who should deliver it?
In my mind, the speaker should be German Chancellor Angela Merkel, addressing an audience in Athens or Thessaloniki or any Greek city of her choice.
She could use the opportunity to hint at a new approach to European integration, one that starts in the country that has suffered the most, a victim both of the eurozone’s faulty monetary design and of its society’s own failings.
Hope was a force for good in post-war Europe, and it can be a force for positive transformation now.
A speech by Germany’s leader in a Greek city could go a long way toward delivering it.
Europe’s Procrustean Nightmare
MANNHEIM – The European Union’s policy of saving the euro at all costs is enough to guarantee the euro’s survival.
But is preserving the “one-size-fits-all” euro really worth sacrificing the eurozone’s competitiveness and, ultimately, European solidarity?
It was the single market’s establishment in 1992 – not the euro’s introduction seven years later – that brought free trade, increased competitiveness, and new wealth to Europe.
In fact, the monetary union has become a political and economic nightmare, plagued by recession, record-high unemployment, social unrest, and rising distrust among member states.
But, even as politicians and economists run out of arguments in favor of the euro, few dare to challenge its fundamental structure, let alone propose alternatives.
To escape the crisis, EU leaders must recognize the shortcomings of the eurozone’s one-dimensional framework, and develop a system better suited to managing a multi-faceted monetary union.
Excessive centralization and harmonization are decimating the subsidiarity and competition needed to drive Europe’s economies, as the socialization of debt undermines weaker economies’ accountability.
Furthermore, closing competitiveness gaps – essential to saving the euro – would not only require weaker economies to become more productive; strong economies, like Germany, would face pressure to become less efficient, diminishing Europe’s overall competitiveness vis-à-vis the rest of the world.
At the same time, the euro crisis is inciting suspicion, antagonism, and new divisions in the eurozone.
German-French relations, once the cornerstone of European integration, are at their lowest point in decades.
And unemployed young people in Greece, Portugal, and Spain routinely protest against “German dictates.”
Likewise, the rift between the eurozone’s 17 members and the other ten EU countries is widening.
Most notably, the United Kingdom is seeking to renegotiate the terms of its EU membership, with a referendum on the outcome that will determine whether it leaves the EU altogether.
Historical precedents indicate that forcing disparate nations and states to unite under a single idea – whether communism in the Soviet Union, socialism in Yugoslavia, or a shared currency in the eurozone – generates centrifugal forces that can trigger the union’s collapse.
A one-size-fits-all approach to integration is simply unsustainable.
But the eurozone is not only replicating other unions’ mistakes; it is repeating its own.
While 25 of the EU’s 27 governments agreed to the “fiscal compact,” aimed at imposing fiscal discipline on member states, there is no guarantee that governments will not violate the rules, just as they violated those established by the Maastricht Treaty.
Similarly, although the one-size-fits-all monetary policy contributed to Greece’s excessive indebtedness, and to Spain’s real-estate bubble, eurozone leaders have consistently sought to re-align interest rates, for example, by compelling holders of Greek debt to accept “haircuts” (write-downs on principal).
But the impact is severely limited without external devaluation, which is impossible within a monetary union.
While Greece’s eurozone partners may be able to carry it for decades this way, and even to bail out Spain, the system would surely collapse under the weight of a larger economy.
And such an economy – France – is in serious jeopardy.
In 2011, France’s ratio of new debt to GDP was three times higher than Germany’s, with the public sector accounting for more than 56% of national income.
Currently, 9% of French citizens are employed by the government, compared to 5% in Germany.
And unemployment hovers above 10%, with youth unemployment far higher, at roughly 25%.
While some of France’s largest companies – like Michelin, LVMH, and Air Liquide – remain successful, they cannot offset the economy’s lack of a solid base of small and medium-size enterprises.
As a result, France’s competitiveness is deteriorating.
Indeed, its ranking on the World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Index fell from 18th last year to 21st this year (Germany ranked sixth both years).
Recent actions taken by President François Hollande’s government – including raising the minimum wage, increasing taxes on business, and lowering the retirement age for some workers – threaten to exacerbate the situation.
Given this, it is no surprise that Moody’s downgraded France’s credit rating last year.
But, like the struggling countries of southern Europe, France has few options.
Austerity programs have been largely counterproductive, generating vicious cycles of slow or no growth, business closures, skyrocketing unemployment, and tax-base erosion.
As a result, the eurozone’s fiscally sound countries are being asked repeatedly to compromise their prudent policies in order to finance endless bailouts.
This situation is untenable.
Europe’s leaders must pursue a controlled segmentation of the eurozone, in which the most competitive countries – Austria, Finland, Germany, and the Netherlands – adopt a new currency, the “northern euro.”
This new monetary union would be managed according to the original Maastricht Treaty, with a truly independent central bank responsible for regulating the northern euro’s exchange rate against the euro, which less competitive countries would retain.
The rump euro’s weakened exchange rate would lead to renewed economic growth, job creation, and a stronger tax base in southern European countries.
Initially, to facilitate debt reduction, bondholders would face another haircut.
Countries departing for the northern euro should make a one-time contribution to these debt-reduction efforts.
A flexible membership system would enable countries to join the northern euro when their economic and fiscal conditions became strong enough.
Europe’s leaders must stop treating the eurozone as a homogeneous entity, imposing one-size-fits-all policies on vastly different countries.
The euro’s framework should be adjusted to suit current fiscal and economic realities – not the other way around.
Spooked by Glass-Steagall’s Ghost?
CAMBRIDGE – America’s long-controversial Glass-Steagall Act of 1933, which separated deposit-taking commercial banks from securities-trading investment banks in the United States, is back in the news.
This separation long symbolized America’s unusual history of bank regulation – probably the most unusual in the developed world.&nbsp;
American banking regulation had long kept US banks small and local (unable to branch across state lines), unlike their European and Japanese equivalents, while limiting their operational capacity (by barring banks from mixing commercial and investment banking).
These limits on American banking persisted until the 1990’s, when Congress repealed most of this regulatory structure.
Now the idea of a new Glass-Steagall is back, and not only in the US.
Sandy Weill, Citigroup’s onetime CEO, said last month that allowing commercial and investment banks to merge was a mistake.
This is the same Weill who had lobbied to gut Glass-Steagall in order to build today’s Citigroup, which put insurance companies, securities dealers, and traditional deposit-taking banks all under one roof.
In fact, he engineered an agreement to merge Citi with a large insurer – illegal at the time under Glass-Steagall – and then pushed for the law’s repeal, so that the merger could proceed.
A similar debate has been underway in Britain.
A commission headed by Sir John Vickers, the Oxford economist and former Bank of England chief economist, wants banks’ retail operations to be “ring-fenced” from riskier trading and investment banking businesses.
Ring-fencing is not exactly Glass-Steagall-style separation – Glass-Steagall forbade commercial banks from even affiliating with investment banks – but it is in the same spirit.
The impetus for the rethinking is, of course, the recent financial crisis.
Are Weill and Vickers right now, people are asking, or was Weill right two decades ago, when he backed allowing investment and commercial banks to merge?
That is actually the wrong question to ask first.
The first question is whether Glass-Steagall’s repeal strongly contributed to the financial crisis in the US.
If it did, Glass-Steagall’s repeal should be revisited, and quickly.
If it did not contribute much to the crisis, keeping risky trading away from commercial banks’ deposit base may still be desirable, but not something that the financial crisis “proved” is necessary.
Those who say that the financial recent crisis tells us to re-enact Glass-Steagall overlook what failed and what did not: the largest failures in the 2008 crisis – Lehman Brothers, AIG, and the Reserve Primary Fund – were not deposit-taking commercial banks on which Glass-Steagall’s repeal had a major impact.
AIG was a mega-insurer.
Lehman was an investment bank.
The Reserve Primary Fund – brought down by its purchases of IOU’s from Lehman – was a money-market mutual fund, not a commercial bank.
True, major commercial banks, like Citibank and Bank of America, tottered, but they were not at risk because of their securities underwriting for corporate clients or their securities-trading divisions, but because of how they (mis)handled mortgage securities.
Mortgage lending, however, is a long-standing activity for commercial and savings banks, mostly unaffected by Glass-Steagall or its repeal.
Some commercial-banking activities are closer to securities trading.
The so-called “Volcker Rule,” proposed by Paul Volcker, the former US Federal Reserve chairman, is a mini-Glass-Steagall, aiming to bar deposit-taking commercial banks from derivatives trading – now seen to be a dangerous activity for them.
But, again, although derivatives trading played an important role in the crisis (AIG’s inability, without a government bailout, to honor its risky credit-default swaps is the best example), Glass-Steagall’s repeal did not unleash the riskiest trades in the institutions that failed.
Reenacting it will do little, if anything, to remedy crisis-related ills, beyond what the Volcker Rule is supposed to do anyway.
The best case against Glass-Steagall’s repeal is not that mixing investment and commercial banking caused the crisis.
Rather, the best case arises from a general sense that financial institutions have become too complicated to regulate and too big to fail even when staying within their traditional businesses.
Hence, we should simplify and strengthen them.
But even if those are the goals, the recent focus on repealing Glass-Steagall is not helpful, because it is not the most important way to simplify and strengthen America’s banks.
It thereby diverts policymakers’ attention from the main issues.
If the financial crisis reveals a structural problem in banking, it is more likely to come from insufficient capital to cushion a bank’s fall, or from too many financial institutions having become too big to fail.
The US Dodd-Frank legislation, enacted in 2010, did (weakly) cap the size of future bank mergers.
But, if size is still the problem, more could be done.
If big banks have become too complex to regulate, then a workable Volcker Rule is the best way to start simplifying them.
And, if the problem is systemically risky derivatives trading in banks and elsewhere, then the priority given to derivatives traders over nearly every creditor ought to be curtailed.
Ironically, Glass-Steagall itself arose in the 1930’s from commercial bankers’ efforts to divert regulators’ attention from other remedies.
Small-town bankers throughout the country wanted government-guaranteed deposit insurance, while stronger big-city banks feared that government deposit insurance would put them at a competitive disadvantage.
After all, deposits from the small-town banks were running off to big banks in money centers like New York, Chicago, and Los Angeles.
Two decades ago, Donald Langevoort, now a law professor at Georgetown, showed that major bankers – indeed, the leaders of First National City, the predecessor to Weill’s Citibank – proposed Glass-Steagall in lieu of deposit insurance.
No big bank was at risk from trading securities then, but the big banks’ investment-banking affiliates were not making money trading and underwriting securities during the Depression, so the banks were willing to surrender that part of their business.
The irony is that Congress took up the big banks’ offer to separate commercial and investment banking, but then enacted deposit insurance anyway.
Glass-Steagall was a distraction then; it is a distraction now.
If the goal is to shore up the weaknesses revealed by the global financial crisis, policymakers in the US and other countries should first look elsewhere.
Cina dan Laut Dalam
HO CHI MINH CITY – Sejak Desember 2013, Cina melakukan perluasan sebanyak lebih dari 1.200 hektar di kepulauan di Laut Cina Selatan.
Akibat geopolitik dari upaya reklamasi lahan ini sangat jelas: sebagian besar reklamasi dilakukan di kepulauan Spratly, yakni pulau-pulau di perairan antara Vietnam, Malaysia, dan Filipina, dimana seluruh negara ini – termasuk Cina, Taiwan, dan Brunei – memperebutkan klaim di wilayah tersebut.
Satu hal yang jarang dibicarakan adalah dampak lingkungan hidup dari proyek ini yang bisa mengakibatkan bencana besar.
Tindakan Cina akan membahayakan cadangan ikan, mengancam keanekaragaman hayati di laut, dan menimbulkan ancaman jangka panjang terhadap beberapa kehidupan laut yang paling menakjubkan di dunia.
Ribuan terumbu karang, padang lamun, dan ekosistem perairan dangkal lainnya dengan cepat menjadi musnah dan terkubur ketika pimpinan Cina tergesa-gesa ingin mengambil alih kepemilikan di wilayah tersebut.
Proyek reklamasi lahan ini merusak keterkaitan ekologis antara Kepulauan Spratly dengan Laut Cina Selatan, memutuskan pasokan nutrisi yang diandalkan oleh beberapa ekosistem ini.
Selain itu, sikap mental Cina yang suka berperang, ditambah dengan ketidakjelasan status kepemilikan wilayah perairan dan cadangan ikan di dalamnya, mengarah pada praktik penangkapan ikan yang bersifat merusak, membahayakan ekosistem laut dan spesies yang terancam punah, termasuk penyu laut, hiu, dan kerang raksasa.
Sejak tahun 2010, kawasan lindung laut di Kepulauan Spratly dan bagian barat Laut Cina Selatan sudah berkurang sebanyak 16%.
Sekitar 300 juta penduduk bergantung pada sumber daya laut di Laut Cina Selatan demi penghidupan mereka; apabila Cina terus bergerak dengan laju sekarang, risiko dislokasi ekonomi secara besar-besaran akan naik.
Tetapi Laut Cina Selatan adalah wilayah perairan yang penting bagi dunia, tidak hanya bagi negara-negara yang berbatasan dengannya.
Laut Cina Selatan merupakan jalur transportasi maritim internasional yang penting – menghubungkan Samudera Hindia dan Samudera Pasifik – dan setiap harinya dilewati oleh sekitar 300 kapal, termasuk 200 tanker minyak.
Komunitas internasional seharusnya mengutuk militerisasi Cina di Kepulauan Spratly dan mendesaknya untuk berbalik arah, sehingga mengurangi risiko konflik yang bisa jadi lebih fatal dampaknya bagi lingkungan laut.
Lebih luasnya, semua negara yang bertanggung jawab atas degradasi dan kerusakan di ekosistem perairan dangkal di Laut Cina Selatan harus menghentikan segala tindakan yang mengancam keanekaragaman hayati dan produktivitas ekonomi di wilayah tersebut.
Klaim Cina terhadap Kepulauan Spratly dan sebagian besar Laut Cina Selatan dibuat berdasarkan sembilan garis putus-putus (nine-dash line), yakni batas demarkasi di sepanjang wilayah selatan yang sudah berulang kali diperdebatkan sejak pertama kali diajukan setelah Perang Dunia II.
Upaya reklamasi lahan yang dilakukan Cina baru-baru ini melanggar beberapa konvensi internasional tentang lingkungan hidup, terutama Konvensi Keanekaragaman Hayati (CBD) dan Konvensi Perdagangan Internasional Tumbuhan dan Satwa Liar  (CITES).
Tindakan Cina di Laut Cina Selatan juga melanggar Konvensi PBB tentang Hukum Laut tahun 1982, yang menjamin hak lintas di perairan tersebut.
Militerisasi atas Kepulauan Spratly dengan jelas merupakan pelanggaran terhadap Deklarasi Perilaku Pihak di Laut Cina Selatan.
Deklarasi ini mewajibkan negara penandatangan (negara anggota ASEAN dan Cina) untuk “menahan diri dari tindakan yang dapat meningkatkan eskalasi konflik dan berdampak pada perdamaian dan stabilitas”.
Hal ini meliputi “menahan diri dari tindakan menduduki pulau, karang, dangkalan, pulau karang, dan fitur lainnya yang saat ini tidak dihuni dan menyelesaikan sengketa secara damai”.
Tiga belas tahun semenjak deklarasi tersebut dibuat, ASEAN harus menggandakan upayanya untuk mencapai persetujuan dengan Cina perihal status Kepulauan Spratly dan Laut Cina Selatan dan komunitas internasional harus mendukung upaya tersebut.
Semua negara di kawasan ini bertanggung jawab untuk mengawasi dan melindungi lingkungan laut dan mengelola sumber dayanya.
Tetapi tanggung jawab yang sesungguhnya berada di Cina.
Dalam kondisi yang mengharuskan penerapan hukum internasional, negara-negara yang paling berkuasa yang selayaknya menjadi teladan.
Cina harus memenuhi kewajiban ini – dimulai di Laut Cina Selatan.
Sputnik Redux
CAPE CANAVERAL – More than 50 years ago (1957), the Soviets launched the world’s first orbiting satellite, beating the US into space.
For Americans, the so-called “Sputnik moment” was a wake-up call that pushed the United States to increase investment in technology and science education.
Months later, the US launched the Explorer 1 satellite, and the race was on.
Children were encouraged to study math and science, and American know-how helped the US meet the challenge.
But things have slowed down dramatically since then, and NASA has been trying since early November to get its latest shuttle ready for launch.
In December, US President Barack Obama talked of the need for a new “Sputnik moment” to revitalize America’s once-leading role in technology.
Ironically, that moment happened two days later, but with lamentably little media coverage.
However, this Sputnik moment – actually a “Dragon moment” – delivers a somewhat different message.
The launch of the Dragon spacecraft was in fact a US achievement, in a traditionally American spirit.
On December 8, a US company, SpaceX, founded by an immigrant and financed mostly by private US investors, successfully launched a spacecraft into orbit and then recovered it from a splashdown in the Pacific Ocean.
The message is not just that STEM (science, technology, engineering, and math) education is necessary, but also that this achievement by a private company cost just a fraction of NASA's budget in money and time.
Governments are great at funding and carrying out research, but competitive private companies motivated by profit and glory tend to be more efficient and speedier in applying the results.
One notable example: right before the launch, SpaceX engineers found a few cracks in the second-stage engine nozzle extension.
Rather than haul the spacecraft back to the shop for repairs, they simply analyzed the flaw, trimmed off the affected section, and proceeded with the launch.
(To be sure, they might have acted differently had the Dragon been carrying humans.)
The message of the Dragon moment is not that NASA is clueless, but that government research agencies are not the right type of organization to run routine operations that could be better handled by businesses.
(NASA in particular has been constrained by years of political infighting and patronage in the US Congress, to the point where its mission seems to be employment maintenance rather space exploration.)
Of course, I must confess a personal interest in this question.
I am writing this from Cape Canaveral, Florida.
As a member of NASA's Advisory Council, I am currently visiting its Kennedy Space Center, which is badly in need of upgrading and repairs.
Yet right now NASA is spending $475 million on a program that has already been canceled instead of on the space center.
The reason: a congressman managed to introduce a legal provision that prohibits NASA from stopping the spending until a new budget has been approved.
Because NASA is still operating under an old budget, the canceled program continues to be funded.
Imagine how those workers must feel: grateful for the paychecks, but completely cynical about the value of the work they are doing.
Why not pay them the same amount to share their knowledge and skills in high schools?
That would be a more appropriate response.
But back to the Dragon, which succeeded for a number of reasons.
First and foremost, SpaceX is a private company.
Someone’s own money is at stake, so it is not wasted.
Its founder, Elon Musk, an immigrant from South Africa (who in his spare time also runs Tesla, the electric-car company), funded it with his own money (which he earned at PayPal, another start-up) and that of other private investors.
(Yes, SpaceX does have contracts with NASA, but for a fixed price per launch.)
The emphasis at SpaceX is on getting the job done, rather than just doing the job.
Whereas governments and government contractors generally enjoy job security, private companies know that the money may run out.
Also, private companies compete.
Behind SpaceX is a crowd of other private companies developing spacecraft, including Masten Space Systems, XCOR Aerospace, Armadillo Aerospace, and Blue Origin.
These companies aren’t all competing to build precisely the same kind of vehicle; in fact, each considers its own approach superior.
This kind of redundancy is actually efficient in the long run, as each player experiments and all of them learn from everyone’s failures and successes.
In the meantime, each of them is competing not for a single grand prize but for a share of a growing market, risking investors’ money and their own reputations.
It is this free-market economy, which rewards useful innovation and purposeful risk-taking, that we should honor and recognize.
The US government (or European governments, for that matter) can’t get us out of our current economic mess any better than they can get us to the moon at this point.
In most areas of endeavor, the government should be a demanding customer rather than a provider (or subsidizer).
In the US, government fostered the airline business – largely by buying cargo services from private airlines.
It also built what became the Internet – and then sensibly left most of the development and day-to-day operations to the private sector.
Now, under Obama’s new and sensible space policy, the US government is planning to focus on flying to Mars and so-called “near-Earth objects,”  purchasing routine transportation to the International Space Station from companies such as SpaceX (instead of from the Russian space program at $60 million or so per astronaut for every round-trip).
What the Dragon moment makes clear is that the ability to commercialize innovation, not just to create it, is what has made the US economy so robust over the long run.
Spying on Eros
A Sydney-based Muslim cleric, Sheik Hilaly, recently made headlines in Australia when he publicly reflected that immodest women invite rape because they are like “uncovered meat.”
More unfortunate still was his implication that this was the cause of a series of gang rapes in Sydney in 2000, in which the attackers’ legal defense was that they thought the women were sexually available because they wore Western clothes.
Although local Muslim leaders have since criticized Hilaly’s attitude, the incident again raises the question of attitudes regarding sex in “orthodox” communities, and how they can be reconciled with prevailing norms in the West.
Meanwhile, in the United States, the controversy over government spying on its citizens seems to have died down, mostly because people are now convinced that their government will only look at the really bad guys.
What do these two issues have in common?
Gathering sophisticated intelligence is largely a matter of understanding trends.
It is less important, for instance, to steal a copy of North Korea’s bomb designs than to know the morale and capability of its scientists.
It is important to know how much deprivation in a country would swing public opinion.
Like most social science, measurement of these dynamics is conducted indirectly.
Intelligence analysts operate like scientists, in the sense that they develop theories, then measure and test them.
Like scientists, they prefer to work with huge amounts of data, which is why the US government wants a record of every call and financial transaction made by every inhabitant of the country.
Tracking the movement of individuals by the locator in their cell phones is possible, and it is surely under consideration.
That is because intelligence agents look for indicators, correlations, and causes. Causes are the hardest to understand.
For example, the civil services in Iraq have recently crossed a threshold beyond which they are now probably impossible to administer.
A significant reason is believed to be the steady flight of intellectuals from Iraq, which seems obvious, but is difficult to measure.
Indicators and correlations are easier to demonstrate.
If a lot of people are leaving their seats during a sporting event, you might consider it an indication that the event is not exciting.
During the Cold War, Western intelligence agencies developed an immense catalogue of indicators and correlations.
If train traffic on certain routes increased, it suggested that army food supplies were being delivered, thus hinting at impending military action.
Likewise, shipments of toilet paper are amazingly accurate indicators of military activity.
Once the Soviets realized this, they began to send bogus shipments around the country on random schedules, creating shortages for the baffled civilian population.
As it turns out, another extremely useful view into a society is the type of pornography it consumes, together with how that pornography is manufactured and delivered.
Yes, it is true. Spies are interested in prurient behavior everywhere.
One reason is that pornography in orthodox societies is illicit, so the distribution channels opened by sexual materials are usually used for other goods as well.
In the Muslim world, there is a significant, important flow of pornography.
According to one story, possibly apocryphal, in the 1970’s, the Islamic insurgency in Iran was initially planned using material delivered through porn-related channels because the mosques were so tightly controlled.
But there are other trends indicated by pornographic content that are useful to spies.
Movies produced for the sexual gratification of consumers reveal cultural norms of restriction, transgression, and otherness.
In fact, porn is so specifically tuned to the tastes of consumers that shifts can indicate changes in a society almost immediately.
Interestingly, many purveyors of pornography initially thought that better quality video would make their product more desirable.
However, it seems that high production values were actually less popular.
So a “casual” production style was adopted, similar to the design of worn and ripped jeans.
Part of the raw appeal of pornography, it seems, is that the product itself be raw, and conspicuously illicit.
But local tastes nonetheless vary widely.
Japanese porn features schoolgirls, often bound.
Egyptian porn before Nasser featured local beauties and voyeurism, but now focuses on fair-haired and pale-skinned women, sometimes with forced sex as a theme.
Egyptian-born Sheik Hilaly, in Sydney, may have been verbalizing a latent sense of otherness and mistaking it for insight.
This means that tinkering with the content of porn could be in the national interest, under certain circumstances.
Anyone privy to details of such activities cannot comment on them, but one story circulating in the research community involved attempts to introduce condoms into African porn as part of an anti-AIDS effort.
Then, of course, there is the biggest market of all: the US, where it is estimated that annual revenue for pornography in 2004 exceeded the combined revenue of the ABC, CBS, and NBC television networks by many billions of dollars.
We should not be surprised if someone eventually tries to tweak the content of pornography to exploit Americans’ cultural proclivities on behalf of other products, causes, or even political candidates.
Squaring Asia’s Nuclear Triangle
TOKYO – Just before the fourth trilateral summit between Japan, China, and South Korea began on May 21, Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao, South Korean President Lee Myung-bak, and Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan jointly visited the areas affected by the Great East Japan Earthquake, offering encouragement to the disaster’s victims living in evacuation centers.
Since the accident at Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant in March, Kan has aimed at lifting the bans that many countries have imposed on imports of Japanese agricultural products, and so offered the two heads of state cherries from Fukushima in a bid to highlight their safety.
At the summit, the three countries issued a joint statement outlining cooperation on a wide range of issues, including nuclear safety, disaster prevention, economic growth, and the environment.
The lessons learned from Japan’s earthquake and nuclear accident would be shared with China, South Korea, and the wider international community, and, in an addendum, the Japanese authorities promised to “continue to provide information…with the greatest transparency possible.”
In fact, the Kan administration – which loathes the involvement of bureaucrats, who are professionals, in managing public affairs – delayed notifying neighboring countries when it was forced to order the release of water containing low concentrations of radioactive material.
For Kan, the real priority was his government’s effort to maintain its grip on power, not reassuring Japan’s neighbors of the actions it was taking to contain a potential threat to their citizens.
The codicil to the summit communiqué was created to address these concerns. It emphasized the importance of sharing information about nuclear safety, and incorporated specific measures, including the creation of a framework for rapid notification in the event of an emergency and exchanges of experts to assist in managing future nuclear crises and ensuring that regional concerns are taken into account.
Ever since the Fukushima accident, opposition to nuclear power has been growing in China and South Korea, both of which had been planning a massive expansion of their nuclear generating capacity – and both of which face a change of political leadership next year.
China’s succession, though set, will nonetheless bring a period of uncertainty, while South Korea will undoubtedly face its usual no-holds-barred democratic battle in its coming presidential election.
Given these political realities, keeping ordinary citizens content about civilian nuclear power has become a greater priority than usual in both countries.
This confluence of political need has created an opportunity for all three countries to cooperate more closely in the management of civilian nuclear power, and this opportunity should not be missed.
Sensing this, China and South Korea have provided humanitarian and economic aid to areas affected by the earthquake, and both countries were quick to send specialized teams to Japan to search for the missing.
The first country to send a rescue team to Japan, however, was Taiwan (which also was the largest single provider of donations, amounting to ¥20 billion).
But, owing to what Kan’s government called “confusion on the ground,” Taiwan’s rescue team was kept waiting for days.
And, while the people of Japan were grateful for Taiwan’s unexpected generosity, the Japanese government failed to offer any thanks, despite running advertisements in major newspapers expressing gratitude for the relief sent from other countries. (Eventually, a public campaign raised the money to run an advertisement in a Taiwanese newspaper.)
Taiwanese President Ma Ying-jeou was as surprised as the Japanese by the size of the contributions made by his people.
Ma had been tilting his government’s policies increasingly toward China, concluding a bilateral framework agreement on economic cooperation. But, in the wake of Taiwanese society’s outpouring of sympathy for Japan, he has adjusted his stance.
The Ma government has also been kept on its toes by the opposition Democratic Progressive Party’s call for the phase-out of nuclear power in Taiwan by 2025.
Taiwan has three nuclear power plants, and, like the plant at Fukushima, they directly face the ocean.
Two are located within 20 kilometers of the capital, Taipei, and it is generally agreed that there would be no escape for the vast majority of the capital’s citizens should a major nuclear accident occur.
Construction of a fourth nuclear power plant, which began in 1999, was suspended by DPP President Chen Shui-bian the following year.
Although Chen’s government, under pressure from the opposition Kuomintang, later restarted work on the plant, design revisions have repeatedly delayed its completion.
Opposition from local residents remains stiff.
At their recent trilateral summit, Japan, China, and South Korea skillfully evaded direct mention of the delicately poised security issues that they face. And, while they did bring nuclear safety to the fore and agreed to cooperate and share information with each other, efforts to meet this region-wide challenge cannot succeed without bringing Taiwan into the discussions.
Taiwan should also be allowed to participate in the International Atomic Energy Agency in the area of nuclear safety, just as it became an observer at the World Health Organization during the SARS and avian flu pandemics of the 1990’s.
Where nuclear safety is concerned, China must rethink its policy of isolating Taiwan from international bodies.
Sri Lanka’s Rebirth
COLOMBO – Sri Lanka has been deservedly praised for the progress it has made since the end of the war against the separatist Tamil Tigers in 2009.
The economy has grown at an average annual rate of 6.7%, and education and health statistics are impressive.
All developing countries face myriad challenges, but this is especially the case for a country that has suffered an intense 30-year civil war.
The government will need to set priorities; but success will require a comprehensive approach.
Underlying wars such as the fight with the Tamil Tigers are, typically, social and economic grievances such as real or perceived discrimination, and the failure of government to address wealth and income disparities adequately.
Thus, more than transitional justice is required in Sri Lanka (or, to take another example, in Colombia, where peace with the FARC guerillas seems increasingly likely).
What is required is full integration of the Tamils, Sri Lanka’s embittered minority, into the country’s economic life.
Markets on their own won’t solve this problem.
Sri Lanka will need balanced affirmative-action programs that address the various dimensions of economic disparity and are attuned to the inequalities within the Tamil population.
It will do no good to give a leg up to Sri Lanka’s many rich Tamils, while leaving poor, lower-caste Tamils further behind.
Economic integration of the northern Tamil region will require heavy public investment in infrastructure, education, technology, and much else.
Indeed, such investments are needed for the entire country.
And yet tax revenue as a share of GDP is only 11.6%, about one-third that of Brazil.
Like many other developing countries, Sri Lanka simply enjoyed the fruits of high commodity prices in recent years (tea and rubber account for 22% of exports).
Sri Lanka should have used the commodity boom to diversify its export base; the previous government of Mahinda Rajapaksa did not.
With export prices down, and with tourism likely to suffer from the global economic downturn, a balance-of-payments crisis looms.
Some suggest that Sri Lanka turn to the International Monetary Fund, promising belt tightening.