But I want France to avenge its defeat at the last World Cup in Seville, not its defeat at Verdun.
The Ghost of Appeasement
PRAGUE – One of the fundamental pillars of Europe’s political architecture is a strong and enduring belief in the universal validity of equal, universal, and inalienable human rights.
At the core of this is a belief in the rights of human beings to a life of freedom and the protection of their dignity.
In the years after World War II, this humanist ideal became the basis of Europe’s spiritual and political identity and hence it is contained in the founding documents of the European Union.
Of course, this does not mean that the EU could or would want to conquer the rest of the world in the name of imposing its values, rules and culture on the rest of humanity.
Far from it. What Europe’s devotion to humanism does mean, however, is a determination, no matter the circumstances, to stand firm and not abandon the fundamentals of European civilization and European unification.
As a result, Europe places a primary emphasis on the universality of human rights and freedoms.
To be sure, there are many places around the globe where human rights and civil liberties continue to be trampled underfoot: North Korea, Iran, Burma, Tibet, Zimbabwe, and many others.
This week, a meeting of the EU’s General Affairs and External Relations Council (GAERC) will discuss once more relations between the EU and Cuba.
Despite repeated reminders from the EU, the Cuban government has done none of the things that the Union has been urging it to do for many years – above all, to release all political prisoners and stop the persecution of independent civil-society groups and the regime’s political opponents.
On the contrary, the Cuban government continues to detain prisoners of conscience and to criminalize demands for a society-wide dialogue.
This year, the peoples of Europe are marking the twentieth anniversary of the fall of the Iron Curtain that once divided Europe in two.
That 20 years after this epochal event an iron curtain remains around Cuba makes this anniversary poignant.
Of course, the tourists who crowd Cuba’s beaches are not aware of this iron curtain.
But, regardless of this ignorance and of its economic interests, the EU should insist on the release of political prisoners and use all international institutions to bring pressure to bear on the Cuban government to respect the human and civil rights of Cuba’s people.
During any negotiations with Cuba’s leaders, European politicians and diplomats should remind their Cuban partners of their obligations. They should also be in contact with Cuban civil society to express their solidarity with the families of the political prisoners.
From its own experiences in the twentieth century, Europe knows what catastrophes can result when concessions are made to evil.
The history of the twentieth century is an object lesson in this.
Time and again, Europe paid a high price for policies of compromises with evil that were dictated by economic interests or the illusion that evil can be appeased and will disappear of its own accord.
The EU should not and must not repeat this error.
The Ghost of Biafra
When Nigerian President Olusegun Obasanjo made his surprise announcement on 13 January to begin a nationwide dialogue to discuss constitutional reform, he was bowing to the inevitable.
The clamor by disaffected politicians and human rights activists for such a conference had reached a crescendo.
Obasanjo and the ruling Peoples Democratic Party were re-elected in May 2003 in controversial circumstances.
Opposition forces, led by Muhammadu Buhari, the candidate of the All Nigeria People’s Party, accused Obasanjo of using the police to intimidate voters and falsify the election results.
Initially, it looked like Obasanjo would weather the storm and serve out his last term without making concessions to his opponents.
However, in late December 2004, the national election tribunal, sitting in Abuja, the capital, ruled that while the election had been free and fair in most parts of the country, the number of votes was larger than the population in Ogun, the President’s home state.
The opposition seized on the ruling and called on Obasanjo to resign.
Simultaneously, the eastern part of the country descended into anarchy.
Political thugs linked to the president resorted to strong-arm tactics in an attempt to remove one of the governors, angry that he had not given them lucrative public contracts.
Obasanjo refused to call them to order, even after they invaded and razed government offices.
In the Niger delta, where oil production and official neglect have devastated the environment and wrecked livelihoods, enraged youths took to the swamps and led an insurgency against Federal troops.
But the most powerful push for the conference came from politicians in the largely Christian south, apprehensive that power would return to the Muslim north in 2007 after Obasanjo, himself a southern Christian, completed his second term.
Since political independence in 1960, politics has revolved round Nigeria’s major ethnic groups – the Igbo and Yoruba in the south, and the Hausa and Fulani in the north.
Southerners’ apprehension is well founded.
The north dominated the armed forces following the Biafra civil war in the late 1960’s.
As military rule became the norm in Africa in the 1970’s, northern army officers imposed an authoritarian and predatory mode of governance on the country, a vicious grip that was loosened only when a resurgent civil society forced them to return to the barracks in 1999.
Obasanjo’s election marked the return of civilian rule.
The demand for a new constitution emulating Nigeria’s First Republic of the early 1960’s, when the country was a federation of powerful regions enjoying a large measure of fiscal autonomy, grew over the years as Nigeria’s economy plummeted.
But Obasanjo is a passionate advocate of unitary government and counts many influential northerners as personal friends.
The northern business and political elite see him as a bulwark against their increasingly restive southern rivals who openly threaten a repeat of the Igbo attempt to secede in 1967 that caused the Biafra conflict, taking the rich oil fields of the Niger delta with them.
Obasanjo’s latest move, his proposed “National Political Reform Conference” in March, is an attempt to steal the opposition’s thunder.
There will be 400 delegates, but the bulk of them nominated by the president and his party, and the government-controlled National Assembly will vet their proposals.
The opposition has responded by calling on Nigerians to boycott the conference, arguing that it lacks legitimacy.
The opposition, grouped in the Pro-National Conference Organization (PRONACO), a new umbrella coalition of political parties and human rights groups, has said it would convene an alternative national conference in June.
PRONACO has formidable leaders in Wole Soyinka, the Nobel literature laureate, and Anthony Enahoro, an elderly politician who made his name as a fiery young nationalist in the 1940’s.
The group’s demands include dividing the country into six or eight new regions along broad ethnic lines with powers to generate and spend revenue.
Opposition leaders also intend to debate such issues as the rights of women and minority groups, and the place of Shari’a, the Islamic legal code, which has replaced civil courts in several northern states.
Reformers also have the Obasanjo government’s neo-liberal economic policies, which they describe as “punitive and intellectually bankrupt,” in their sights.
But it is PRONACO’s demand that at least 50% of the oil revenue derived from the Niger delta and other states in the south be retained in the area of production that most threatens the survival of the country’s survival as a united entity.
The Biafra war was largely an oil war, prosecuted by northern officers and politicians to win back the delta oil fields from the Igbo.
It is not likely that northern elites will stand by idly as a fresh attempt is made to take away what they consider a glittering prize.
For now, the north appears divided.
But a hardening of the mood there, and a brokered armistice between its disenchanted youth and older but vastly more experienced political war horses, will not only present PRONACO with a formidable opponent, but could throw West Africa into turmoil if matters degenerate into a frontal clash.
The Ghost of North Korea
TOKYO – At 7:39 a.m. on April 13, North Korea fired a missile (which it called a satellite launch) in the face of opposition from almost the entire international community.
In a perverse way, the world got its way, because the vehicle exploded a minute after takeoff, its debris falling harmlessly into the sea.
North Korea typically goes silent after such episodes: “failure” does not exist in its political lexicon, so it cannot be reported or discussed.
The country’s media routinely meets any failure with outpourings of patriotic music and bombastic praise for the regime.
But this time was different.
Behind the scenes in North Korea, failure does have consequences.
In the coming weeks, we will most likely learn of a purge of those responsible.
Indeed, the engineers and scientists involved in the launch probably put their lives on the line.
Moreover, North Korea could not deny failure this time, because the regime invited international media to attend the event – even allowing foreign reporters into the mission-control room – in order to legitimize it as a “satellite” launch and not a weapons test.
The “failure” could not be concealed, so it was quickly admitted.
What was supposed to be a celebration of the 70th anniversary of the late Kim Jong-il on April 15, and of the regime’s new beginning under his successor, his youngest son, Kim Jong-un, ended up being a funereal salute.
Supposedly ordinary people in Pyongyang told foreign media, with a practiced spontaneity, that “success is born of repeated failure.”
That is a chilling sentiment.
The missile launch is believed to have been a legacy of Kim Jong-il, who fervently believed that the North’s survival required it to develop nuclear and biochemical weapons.
So the failed missile launch probably means that a resumption of nuclear testing is inevitable, following tests in 2006 and 2009.
However, radioactive elements, such as Krypton-85 or Xenon-135, were not detected in the atmosphere after previous tests.
Just as the North called the recent missile a “satellite,” an underground explosion caused by conventional explosives cannot be used as a bargaining chip unless it is called a “nuclear test.”
The next one probably will occur as soon as 500-1,000 tons of dynamite have been secured.
The failed launch also marked a security fiasco for the North, as a South Korea think tank obtained the final orders for it.
These instructions casually referred to Kim family business, indicating that “the teachings should be executed by Kim Kyong-hui” (Kim Jong-il’s sister), that “Kim Kyong-hui and Kim Jong-un should take care of the family,” and that “Kim Kyong-hui should handle management of all assets inside and outside the country.”
Foreign media often focus on Kim Kyong-hui’s role as the wife of regime insider Jang Sung-taek, but, as Kim Jong-il’s sister, she has been firmly in control of personnel changes since her brother’s death.
Of the 232 members on Kim Jong-il’s funeral committee, she was listed 14th; her husband was 19th.
She is routinely ranked higher than her husband in terms of protocol.
Indeed, Jang Sung-taek’s promotion to General was her decision.
The problem is that Kim Kyong-hui is in poor health, owing to years of alcohol abuse.
Moreover, she is so capricious and self-centered that even Kim Jong-il had trouble keeping her in check.
Due to her poor health, it is unclear how long she will be able to continue advising Kim Jong-un, now surrounded by military personnel in their seventies and eighties who supported past generations.
He needs advisers closer to his own age, but none is at hand.
Dynastic concerns now seem to be paramount for the regime.
Speculation is growing, for example, about whether Kim Sol-song – the second daughter of Kim Jong-il’s third wife – will be appointed when Kim Kyong-hui is no longer able to perform her duties.
Before his death, Kim Jong-il reiterated that at least three nuclear reactors should be built.
He also warned that China, despite being North Korea’s closest ally, is also the country that merits the most caution.
North Korea, he insisted, must not allow itself to be used by China.
When Kim Il-sung (the “Eternal Great Leader”) died in 1994, Kim Jong-il relied on his father’s teachings to reinforce his authority.
Indeed, there is no way of knowing whether his ideas and policies throughout his reign were actually Kim Il-sung’s.
Perhaps Kim Jong-il’s “Ten Principles for the Establishment of the One-Ideology System” should now be viewed as an official document that stipulates which instructions are to be followed when, where, and by whom.
In that case, his successor, the callow Kim Jong-un, can claim to be bound to do as he was told.
North Korea routinely pushes the international community around.
But the North is itself being pushed around by the teachings of a ghost, conveniently used by the people who remain in charge in Pyongyang.
How long will the rest of the world allow itself to be pushed around by a ghost?
The Ghosts of History in East Asia
This year marks the centenary of the Russo-Japanese War of 1905, and on August 15 many countries will commemorate the sixtieth anniversary of the end of WWII in the Pacific.
Of course, Japan’s military dominance in East Asia – which began with the Russo-Japanese War and led to WWII – is no more.
The ghosts of this history still hang over in East Asia, with each country struggling to find ways to deal with the past.
China is a benchmark.
Over the centuries, Japan and China have taken turns dominating East Asia, and both now seek to assert regional hegemony.
Historically, the Korean Peninsula was the playground for this rivalry, but, with North and South Korea appearing to make peace with each other, South Korea is also staking a claim to regional influence.
Resentment over past wrongs buttresses all of these rival claims for influence.
During his visit to the US in June, South Korean President Roh Moo Hyun told President Bush that China had invaded Korea over 100 times in history.
His remarks shocked China, which views itself as the victim of invasions (most humiliatingly, by the Japanese) and has forgotten its own history of bullying its neighbors.
Roh also openly criticizes Japan for its cowardice in not facing up to its historic war crimes, saying that it does not deserve a seat on the UN Security Council.
Japan long colonized Korea, and during WWII, Koreans were forced to join the Japanese Imperial Army – a situation similar to that of Taiwan.
But, whereas the struggle between China and Japan for dominance over Korea was the focal point of the East Asian drama, Taiwan was but a side-show, a mere outpost to the Imperial Qing Dynasty, while Korea was a vassal paying tribute to China.
After defeating both the Qing dynasty and Russia, Japan not only gained control over the Korean Peninsula, but also extended its reach deep into Northeast China.
As East Asia’s “Big Brother,” Japan’s Kwantung Army founded Manchukuo, in Northeast China, in 1932.
Japan wanted Manchukuo to become what India was to Britain or what Algeria was to France – a crown jewel of the empire – and sent a million immigrants (800,000 of whom died there after post-war Manchukuo was taken over by Russia) while investing huge sums to develop heavy industry.
Japan’s Nanjing government in China, under Wang Jingwei, was like Germany’s Vichy government in France, under Henri Philippe Pétain.
Both men were treated as traitors after the war ended.
By contrast, as a result of long colonization, Taiwan and Korea had developed a complex of both resistance and reliance towards their rulers.
With only a few exceptions, the local elite was assimilated into the colonial system.
But the outcome was similar throughout the region following Japan’s defeat in WWII.
Civil war broke out in China, the Korean Peninsula was divided, and the other Southeast Asian colonies, with the sole exception of Thailand, resorted to military force to achieve independence.
China has still failed to face up to the history of Manchukuo and its civil war, not to mention opening the secret files concerning Mao Zedong’s decision to send almost a million soldiers into the Korean War.
South Korea initiated talks with the Japanese government only recently on retrieving the remains of Korean slave workers.
More than 20,000 Taiwanese and about the same amount of Korean soldiers who died for the Imperial Japan are worshipped in Japan’s Yasukuni shrine.
And Recently, some civil groups in both countries started to demand the return of the remains of their countries’ soldiers interred at Yasukuni.
Taiwan’s delayed re-awakening reflects the early reliance of its nationalist government on protection from the US and assistance from Japan.
Chiang Kaishek had no choice but to return good for evil by abjuring compensation claims on Japan, as well as by secretly arranging for the Kwantung Army’s ex-Chief of Staff to join Taiwan’s efforts in confronting the Communists.
Japan has never apologized for its colonization of Taiwan, and Taiwanese had no opportunity for historical reflection during 30 years of martial law.
This spring, anti-Japanese demonstrations broke out almost simultaneously in both China and Korea, with both countries seeking to place the memory of Japanese dominance in the service of building a new national identity and strategic position.
So we can expect that, like the events in May to mark 60 years since the end of WWII in Europe, Asia’s commemoration on August 15 of the end of the war in the Pacific will expose lingering – and still raw – historical sensitivities.
Unlike in Europe, however, historical memory in Asia continues to be wedded to current strategic ambitions.
One hundred years ago, the rise of Japanese military power changed the fate of Asia.
Sixty years ago, the demise of Japanese power changed Asia’s fate again.
Today, as China rises in wealth and power to rival Japan, Asia holds its breath, waiting for the ghosts of history to disappear.
The Global Cost of Turkey’s Crisis
Turkey will hold its parliamentary election in July, four months earlier than scheduled, thereby narrowly avoiding a constitutional crisis over the choice of the country’s next president.
Nonetheless, Turkey’s bout with political instability has damaged its foreign policy and international standing.
At the center of the storm are Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, head of the moderately Islamist Justice and Development Party (AKP), and Yasar Buyukanit, Chief of the General Staff of the Turkish military, which regards itself as the guardian of the secular republican tradition established by Kemal Ataturk.
When Erdogan contemplated moving from the prime minister’s job to the presidency earlier this spring, the military and secular political parties indicated profound dissatisfaction.
General Buyukanit said in April that the country’s new president must be secular “not just in words, but in essence.”
Having met and conversed with Erdogan on more than one occasion, I found him a moderate and reasonable man.
Moreover, the AKP has broad support among Turkish voters and an admirable record of economic growth, human rights legislation, and improvement in the treatment of Turkey’s Kurdish minority.
Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul, a close associate of Erdogan in the AKP, pressed Turkey’s application to join the European Union.
So when Erdogan decided to nominate Gul as the AKP candidate for the presidency, I was surprised by the strength of the secularist opposition.
The secular establishment argues that the AKP’s moderation thus far reflects the checks and balances implied by secularist control of the presidency.
They argue that if the AKP comes to control the presidency, it may no longer pursue moderate policies.
Secularists point with concern to other AKP, such as Speaker of the Parliament Bulent Arinc, who are noted for their pronounced religious and social conservatism.
When the Turkish Parliament attempted to elect the president on April 27, Gul did not receive enough votes to win on the first ballot.
The main opposition party argued that the vote was invalid, and the General Staff issued a statement that it was “watching this situation with concern.”
Massive public demonstrations were held in Istanbul to support Turkey’s Kemalist secular tradition.
The issue went to Turkey’s highest court, which annulled the parliamentary vote, effectively blocking Gul’s candidacy, resulting in Erdogan’s decision to call an early election.
These events were closely watched in Washington and Brussels.
The United States had been pressing the EU to advance Turkey’s application for admission, but Turkish membership was already controversial in several EU countries.
This reflects concerns about Turkey’s Muslim culture and its large population, as well as concern that any further enlargement will overly dilute the European project.
Now opponents of Turkey’s EU accession bid have seized upon recent events to argue that the country does not meet the democratic standards necessary for full membership.
They point out that Turkey’s military has ousted four elected governments since 1960, and continues to play an inappropriately large role in Turkish politics.
While the high court decision and the appeal to the electorate means that Turkish democracy has dodged a bullet for now, the progress of Turkey’s EU accession negotiations has been further slowed.
This is unfortunate for both Turkey and Europe.
With a slowdown in accession negotiations, Turkish politicians will have less incentive to continue the reforms necessary for membership.
Turkey suffers from nationalist sensitivity, and extremist groups have orchestrated several unfortunate incidents, including attacks on minorities and harassment of cultural figures like the Nobel Prize-winning novelist Orhan Pamuk.
If Turkey pulls away from Europe, the EU’s claim that it successfully wields “soft power” in world politics will be powerfully undermined.
In the larger picture, Turkey is not only an important member of NATO, with influence both in the Balkans and the Middle East, but it also plays a vital role in the wider world.
One of the crucial questions of twenty-first century politics will be how the world copes with the rise of political Islam.
For radical Islamists (and some Westerners), the rise of Islam sets the scene for a “clash of civilizations,” which they welcome as a polarizing device that will allow them to recruit from the much larger Muslim mainstream.
But Turkey has the potential to show the shallowness of such a scenario by demonstrating the compatibility of liberal democracy and Islam.
Unfortunately, this appears to have been lost on the neo-conservatives in the Bush administration, for whom it was the invasion of Iraq and its liberation from Saddam Hussein that was supposed to provide a beacon for a wave of democratization that would transform the Middle East.
What they produced instead was an “electocracy” that, in the absence of liberal institutions, replaced the tyranny of the Sunni minority with a tyranny of the Shiite majority and a religious sectarian civil war.
Indeed, the invasion of Iraq also hurt Turkey, both economically and by strengthening the base for the Kurdish terrorist PKK organization operating from northern Iraq.
The result has been a dramatic increase in anti-Americanism in Turkish politics.
If the neo- conservatives had instead focused their attentions on strengthening the soft power of Turkey, they could have done far more to advance the cause of democracy in the Middle East.
In fact, this year, four American utilities have decided to shut down a total of five reactors permanently – the first closures in the United States in 15 years.
One of the units – Kewaunee Power Station in Wisconsin – was abandoned after massive investment in upgrades and a 60-year license renewal; it simply could not generate power at competitive prices.
For the same reasons, Vermont Yankee, another plant with a license to operate through 2032, is now scheduled to close in 2014.
Similarly, the world’s largest nuclear operator – the French state-controlled utility Électricité de France – announced its impending withdrawal from nuclear power in the US, after having sunk roughly $2 billion into aborted projects.
And, in order to help offset soaring operating costs, which resulted in losses of €1.5 billion ($2 billion) last year, EDF will raise electricity prices this year for its French customers by 5%, on average, and by another 5% next year.
Over the five years ending in March 2013, EDF lost 85% of its share value.
Likewise, the world’s largest nuclear builder – the French state-controlled company AREVA – lost up to 88% of its share value between 2008 and 2012.
Not surprisingly, investors have welcomed new strategic plans by both companies, as well as EDF’s withdrawal from the US market; the downward pressure on their share prices has eased, though for how long remains to be seen.
The nuclear-energy industry’s decline began decades ago.
But, since the March 2011 triple-meltdown at Japan’s Fukushima Daiichi plant, the pace of the decline has accelerated significantly.
Indeed, in 2012, annual nuclear generation worldwide dropped by an unprecedented 7%, exceeding the previous year’s record-breaking drop of 4% and bringing total annual nuclear-power generation to 12% below its historic maximum, achieved in 2006.
Although Japan accounts for three-quarters of this decline, with only two of the 50 units that are officially in operation in Japan actually producing power, 16 other countries, including the world’s top five nuclear generators, also decreased their output.
As a result, nuclear power’s share of global electricity generation dropped to around 10% in 2012, compared to its 1993 peak of 17%.
Only the Czech Republic reached its historic maximum nuclear share last year.
Moreover, of the 66 reactors under construction worldwide, two-thirds are located in just three countries – China, India, and Russia – with China alone accounting for 28.
Nine of the 66 have been listed as “under construction” for more than two decades.
(The Watts Bar 2 reactor in Tennessee holds the record, having been under construction for 41 years.)
An additional four projects have been underway for more than ten years.
In total, at least 23 of the 66 units currently under construction have encountered delays, many of which have lasted for several years.
Whether the other projects, all of which have been initiated in the past five years, are on schedule remains to be seen.
As a result of such delays, only three new units began operating last year – half the number of reactors that were shut down.
The average age of the world’s reactor fleet now stands at 28 years, and continues to increase steadily.
By contrast, new renewable technologies are gaining traction, illustrating a fundamental shift in international energy policy and investment strategies.
Last year, China, Germany, Japan, and India generated more power from renewables than from nuclear for the first time.
In China and India, wind alone outpaced nuclear.
Since 2000, global onshore wind-power generation has averaged 27% annual growth, while the growth rate for solar photovoltaics has been a staggering 42%.
Last year, an additional 45 GW of wind and 32 GW of solar were installed worldwide, compared to a net addition of 1.2 GW of nuclear.
The shift to renewables has been particularly pronounced in the world’s major advanced economies.
For example, Germany’s ongoing nuclear phase-out has been complemented by accelerated renewables implementation, with up to 3,000 MW of solar photovoltaic capacity connected to Germany’s power grid in a single month.
As a result, the price per installed solar kilowatt has dropped by three-quarters over the last seven years.
Even in the US, where cheap shale gas is reshaping the energy industry, more wind power was connected to the grid last year than gas, and, in the first three months of this year, more than 80% of new capacity was renewable.
Over the past decade, the nuclear industry has attempted to capture global leaders’ attention with a promotional campaign centered around the notion of a “nuclear renaissance.”
But their promises – including investment costs of $1,000 per installed kilowatt and building times of four years – have proved to be false.
Indeed, since the industry launched its public-relations campaign in the early 2000’s, cost estimates have increased roughly sevenfold, and profits have declined.
The 34 reactors that started up over the last decade had a mean construction time of nearly ten years, but contributed just 26 GW – one-third of what solar and wind added in one year.
The IAEA’s optimistic rhetoric cannot obscure fundamental arithmetic: skyrocketing maintenance expenses and, in many cases, post-Fukushima upgrade costs, together with the impossibility of building competitive new capacity without massive government subsidies, are devastating the nuclear industry.
As the economist Mark Cooper has put it, nuclear power is actually undergoing a “renaissance in reverse.”
The Global Economy’s Dialogue of the Deaf
CHICAGO – As governments do more to try to coax the world economy out of recession, the danger of protectionism is becoming more real.
It is emerging in ways that were unforeseen by those who founded our existing global institutions.
Unfortunately, the discussion between countries on trade nowadays is very much a dialogue of the deaf, with countries spouting platitudes at one another, but no enforceable and verifiable commitments agreed upon.
The number of inefficient workers protected by these measures is offset by the number of efficient workers laid off by foreign multinationals responding to political pressures in their home country.
Perhaps of greatest concern, moreover, is that the public, especially in poor countries that cannot undertake offsetting measures, will come to distrust global integration, with multinationals viewed as Trojan horses.
In addition to explicit protectionist measures, governments now plan actions that will affect others across the globe.
For example, the large volume of public debt that industrial countries will issue will undoubtedly raise interest rates and affect developing country governments’ borrowing costs.
There is little dialogue about how industrial country issuances can be staggered to minimize the impact on global markets, and what alternatives can be developed for countries that are shut out.
If developing countries are left to their own devices, they will conclude that they should self-insure by rebuilding foreign-exchange reserves to even higher levels, a strategy that has clearly hurt global growth.
We need a moderate-sized representative group of leaders of the world’s largest economies to meet regularly to discuss such issues, informed by an impartial secretariat that will place its analyses before the group.
Initially, the group should only exert peer pressure on its members to comply with international responsibilities.
But, as confidence in the group’s decision-making – and in the impartiality of the secretariat – improves, members might give it some teeth, such as the ability to impose collective economic sanctions on recalcitrant members.
The United Nations is too large to serve this purpose, and the most obvious candidate for the group, the G-20, is not representative.
There is, however, a representative alternative – the International Monetary and Financial Committee (IMFC), a group of finance ministers and central bank governors that meets twice a year to advise the International Monetary Fund.
While the IMFC could be shrunk (for example, if euro-zone countries agree to a common seat), the real challenge is to make it a venue in which countries talk to one another rather than at one another.
Important decisions should be vetted by the IMFC and others delegated to IMF management.
Current executive directors typically do not have the authority to make commitments on their countries’ behalf, so their effort is often diverted to minutiae.
And, in an attempt to preserve its turf, the Board constantly attempts to keep the IMFC from discussing anything of substance.
Third, the obvious secretariat is the IMF.
Unfortunately, the Fund is not regarded as being impartial, especially by countries that have been seared by its past conditionality.
The IMF has, however, become far more neutral than it is given credit for – though it could take more steps to distance itself from its past.
These include abolishing any region or country’s right to appoint IMF management; allowing the Fund to borrow from markets, so that it does not have to keep seeking key countries’ permission to expand; eliminating any country’s official veto power over major decisions; and having its agenda set by the IMFC rather than outside bodies.
Industrial countries should be happy that developing countries would take greater responsibility for global economic outcomes, rather than simply sulking about their lack of voice and representation.
Developing countries, in turn, would gain greater voice, but would also be forced to contribute ideas (and resources) to deal with global problems.
And maybe, just maybe, we would preserve faith in globalization.
The Global Economy\u0027s Gathering Storm
MUNICH – From 2004 to 2007, the world economy experienced an unusually long and strong boom, with growth rates of nearly 5% and with many countries participating.
The European Union (EU15) recorded 2.4% growth on average during these years.
In Germany, where growth averaged 1.8% during this period, some journalists proclaimed a new economic miracle.
Now, however, increasingly bad news is giving rise to serious doubts; dark clouds are hovering over the United States, in particular.
Is the world economy on the brink of recession?
In the US, real-estate prices remain in free fall, and the banking crisis is still claiming new victims (Bear Stearns, IndyMac, First Heritage Bank, First National Bank of Nevada, First Priority Bank, Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, etc.).
In the banking world as a whole, expected write-offs now considerably exceed the €400 billion mark projected just last spring.
Unemployment, moreover, is rising at its fastest rate in seven years.
Overall employment, which is still high in historical terms, has been declining continuously since the beginning of 2008.
It is surprising that America’s stock market hasn’t crashed yet, since all other indicators are pointing downward.
The Standard ampamp; Poor’s price/earnings ratio recently stood at around 20, well above the long-term average of around 16 since 1881.
Disturbing signals for the world economy have also come from recent surveys of economic activity.
The Ifo World Economic Climate index deteriorated in the third quarter of 2008 for the fourth consecutive time.
That decline was primarily the result of more unfavorable appraisals of the current economic situation, but also reflected another downward revision of expectations for the next six months.
Today, the index is at its lowest level since the fourth quarter of 2001.
The cooling of the Ifo World Economic Climate index was particularly marked in Western Europe and Asia.
This has dispelled hopes that Asia economic activity could develop separately from that of the US, thereby offsetting European exporters’ losses in America.
In the third quarter of 2008, the Ifo index for Asia was at its lowest level since the attack on the World Trade Center in 2001, with particularly poor economic assessments coming from Japan.
In the US, the climate indicator declined again, after having sunk dramatically in the second quarter, bringing it to its lowest level since 1991.
The University of Michigan’s Consumer Sentiment Index fell in June 2008 to its lowest level in decades and has since recovered only insignificantly.
Also for the euro area, the Ifo Economic Climate index registered a dramatic decline.
Europe’s largest economy, Germany, is now going into the doldrums.
The Ifo Business Climate index, which, though based on a survey for Germany, is regarded as Europe’s most important economic activity indicator, has been falling with few interruptions since the autumn of last year.
It is now clearly in territory that implies an economic downturn.
In addition, export expectations for German manufacturing are heading south.
Incoming orders in manufacturing, the most important indicator in the official statistics, fell more sharply in the first two quarters of 2008 than at any time since the beginning of 1993.
In the second quarter, the German economy shrank at an annualized, seasonally and calendar adjusted rate of 2%.
All in all, there is now hardly any doubt that the economic upturn in Germany that began in the summer of 2005 is now coming to an end.
Amid this gloomy outlook, we anxiously look for encouraging signs.
The price of crude oil, which hit a record level of $148 a barrel in July, has since fallen almost 25%, or $36.
Whether recent developments in America’s economy give reason for hope is now the question.
With an annualized 1.9% quarterly rise in GDP in April-June, growth was twice as high as in the first quarter (0.9%).
Unfortunately, the weight of these countries and regions is small; China, the biggest of them, accounts for only 5% of the world economy.
So the signs of a worldwide economic slowdown have increased.
The American crisis is now spreading to other areas of the world.
Former US Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan may be right when he says: “This crisis is different – a once or twice a century event deeply rooted in fears of insolvency of major financial institutions.”
The Economic Fundamentals of 2013
NEW YORK – The global economy this year will exhibit some similarities with the conditions that prevailed in 2012.
No surprise there: we face another year in which global growth will average about 3%, but with a multi-speed recovery – a sub-par, below-trend annual rate of 1% in the advanced economies, and close-to-trend rates of 5% in emerging markets.
But there will be some important differences as well.
Painful deleveraging – less spending and more saving to reduce debt and leverage – remains ongoing in most advanced economies, which implies slow economic growth.
But fiscal austerity will envelop most advanced economies this year, rather than just the eurozone periphery and the United Kingdom.
Indeed, austerity is spreading to the core of the eurozone, the United States, and other advanced economies (with the exception of Japan).
Given synchronized fiscal retrenchment in most advanced economies, another year of mediocre growth could give way to outright contraction in some countries.
With growth anemic in most advanced economies, the rally in risky assets that began in the second half of 2012 has not been driven by improved fundamentals, but rather by fresh rounds of unconventional monetary policy.
Most major advanced economies’ central banks – the European Central Bank, the US Federal Reserve, the Bank of England, and the Swiss National Bank – have engaged in some form of quantitative easing, and they are now likely to be joined by the Bank of Japan, which is being pushed toward more unconventional policies by Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s new government.
Moreover, several risks lie ahead.
First, America’s mini-deal on taxes has not steered it fully away from the fiscal cliff.
Sooner or later, another ugly fight will take place on the debt ceiling, the delayed sequester of spending, and a congressional “continuing spending resolution” (an agreement to allow the government to continue functioning in the absence of an appropriations law).
Markets may become spooked by another fiscal cliffhanger.
And even the current mini-deal implies a significant amount of drag – about 1.4% of GDP – on an economy that has grown at barely a 2% rate over the last few quarters.
Second, while the ECB’s actions have reduced tail risks in the eurozone – a Greek exit and/or loss of market access for Italy and Spain – the monetary union’s fundamental problems have not been resolved.
Together with political uncertainty, they will re-emerge with full force in the second half of the year.
After all, stagnation and outright recession – exacerbated by front-loaded fiscal austerity, a strong euro, and an ongoing credit crunch – remain Europe’s norm.
As a result, large – and potentially unsustainable – stocks of private and public debt remain.
Moreover, given aging populations and low productivity growth, potential output is likely to be eroded in the absence of more aggressive structural reforms to boost competitiveness, leaving the private sector no reason to finance chronic current-account deficits.
Third, China has had to rely on another round of monetary, fiscal, and credit stimulus to prop up an unbalanced and unsustainable growth model based on excessive exports and fixed investment, high saving, and low consumption.
By the second half of the year, the investment bust in real estate, infrastructure, and industrial capacity will accelerate.
And, because the country’s new leadership – which is conservative, gradualist, and consensus-driven – is unlikely to speed up implementation of reforms needed to increase household income and reduce precautionary saving, consumption as a share of GDP will not rise fast enough to compensate.
So the risk of a hard landing will rise by the end of this year.
Finally, serious geopolitical risks loom large.
The entire greater Middle East – from the Maghreb to Afghanistan and Pakistan – is socially, economically, and politically unstable.
Indeed, the Arab Spring is turning into an Arab Winter.
While an outright military conflict between Israel and the US on one side and Iran on the other side remains unlikely, it is clear that negotiations and sanctions will not induce Iran’s leaders to abandon efforts to develop nuclear weapons.
With Israel refusing to accept a nuclear-armed Iran, and its patience wearing thin, the drums of actual war will beat harder.
The fear premium in oil markets may significantly rise and increase oil prices by 20%, leading to negative growth effects in the US, Europe, Japan, China, India and all other advanced economies and emerging markets that are net oil importers.
While the chance of a perfect storm – with all of these risks materializing in their most virulent form – is low, any one of them alone would be enough to stall the global economy and tip it into recession.
And while they may not all emerge in the most extreme way, each is or will be appearing in some form.
As 2013 begins, the downside risks to the global economy are gathering force.
Global Markets\u0027 Time Factor
BARCELONA – In recent months, the dichotomy between booming financial markets, on the one hand, and sluggish economies and dysfunctional politics, on the other, has loomed large.
Yet insufficient attention is being devoted to a critical factor – time, and who controls it – that could well mean the difference between an orderly global resolution of today’s growing inconsistencies and a return to a more troubled phase.
Markets have been understandably buoyant in the first quarter of 2013.
Most economic data confirm that, after the trauma caused by the global financial crisis, the United States’ economy is healing, and doing so in an accelerated fashion.
The sequence is now well established.
It started with large multinational companies, which are on as solid a financial footing as I can remember.
Smaller firms are gradually recuperating; banks have rebuilt their capital cushions and reduced their dubious assets; the housing sector has stabilized; and a growing number of households are reestablishing healthier balance sheets, especially as employment gradually picks up.
This private-sector recovery is helping government finances.
The US budget deficit has been on a downward trend for now, helped by both higher revenues and lower pressure on spending (for example, payments to the unemployed have fallen as joblessness has declined).
The healing process is also evident in Europe, though, unfortunately, it is effectively limited only to sovereign-bond markets.
The real economy remains under enormous pressure in several countries, as economies contract and unemployment remains alarmingly high.
After flirting with disaster last July, interest-rate spreads for eurozone bonds have generally been subdued, and financial segmentation has been slowly reversed (that is, at least before European officials embarked on the controversial path of trying to impose losses on guaranteed bank deposits in Cyprus).
Moreover, as Ireland’s highly successful €5 billion ten-year bond issue in mid-March demonstrated, some countries are in the process of restoring normal access to capital markets.
The impact on markets of these trends has been turbocharged by central banks, which are risk markets’ best friends.
This is not because they wish to play that role; rather, it is because higher asset prices are essential if central bankers stand any chance of delivering the desired economic outcomes of higher growth and stronger job creation.
This is most evident in the US, where markets love the Federal Reserve’s trifecta of near-zero policy interest rates (negative in real terms), aggressive forward policy guidance, and asset purchases – all of which push investors to take more risk.
Markets also welcome the fact that the Fed’s hyperactive experimentation is forcing other central banks around the world to pursue more expansionary policies.
Indeed, from the Bank of Japan’s dramatic policy U-turn to the Bank of Mexico’s surprise interest-rate cuts, the Fed’s approach is affecting central banks in a growing number of countries.
Pushed further away from best-case scenarios, they are unable to ignore the global liquidity impact of the Fed’s policies, yet they lack the right policy tools to address it.
The mix of endogenous healing and strong central-bank tailwinds, including from a “whatever it takes” European Central Bank, has also helped markets shrug off troubling political uncertainties.
Be it the US Congress’s paralyzing polarization or Italy’s protest vote against the established political order, politicians are being given time to overcome their dysfunction, thereby minimizing any immediate disruptive impact.
Understandably, investors have interpreted all of this as a green light to take more risk.
And with the hype this month over eight successive records for the Dow Jones index (and many other records around the world), excitement induces more investors to enter riskier asset markets.
The excitement is not anxiety-free, however, and rightly so.
Investors worry about the longer-term consequences of political dysfunction, another year of European economic contraction, disastrously high unemployment, unprecedented – and thus untested – central bank policies, and increasing global tensions.
And the recent bungling of the Cyprus rescue does not help. No wonder some have called the recent market rally “one of the most unloved” in history.
This mix of excitement and anxiety is, in fact, a sign of the looming crossroads that faces investors.
One road, involving a relatively orderly handoff from policy-assisted recovery to self-sustaining growth, offers the possibility of even greater financial rewards, as rapidly improving economic and political conditions validate current artificial pricing and drive it higher.
The other road is a lot less attractive.
With insufficient endogenous healing and no economic escape velocity, the effectiveness of central banks’ policies wanes and political dysfunction increases, leading to financial losses, volatility spikes, and huge risk-management challenges.
Given current policy and political uncertainties – and the multiple equilibria that they entail – it is difficult to predict with a high degree of confidence which road eventually will be taken and when.
Those who claim otherwise may well fail to appreciate fully the exceptional nature of the current situation.
In these circumstances, timing may not be everything, but it may prove to be a key determinant of the probabilities.
If the journey to the crossroads is accelerated by a large geopolitical shock (originating in, say, the Middle East or North Korea) and/or a serious political breakdown in Europe (for example, a meltdown in Cyprus or prolonged political paralysis in Italy), the probability of taking the adverse path rises to an uncomfortably high level.
If, however, central banks can contain domestic and global inconsistencies long enough, the combination of endogenous healing and eventual political progress would significantly improve the probability distribution.
Have no doubt: today’s markets rely heavily on the old adage that “time heals all wounds.”
The timekeepers are central banks.
But their control of the clock is less than perfect; and it will become increasingly ineffective if economic improvement faces additional political headwinds in the months ahead.
The Global Home
Homes are the most local of investments, rooted to a particular place like a tree, and thus thriving or withering in response to local economic conditions.
The whole world flashes by on our television screens, but the market for our homes, which is comprised almost entirely of local amateurs, remains grounded right there in our own backyard.
Soon, however, this could all change.
Within a month, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME), in collaboration with my company, MacroMarkets, as well as Fiserv and Standard & Poor’s, will launch futures and options contracts on home prices in ten cities in the United States.
The contracts will be settled on the S&P/Case-Shiller Home Price Indices, which developed out of academic work that my colleague Karl Case and I pioneered almost twenty years ago.
For many years we have been campaigning for housing futures, but no exchange wanted to use such indices to create a futures market until now.
The futures markets on home prices will allow investors around the world to invest in US homes indirectly, by buying interests in them through these markets.
An investor in Paris, Rio de Janeiro, or Tokyo will be able to invest in owner-occupied homes in New York, Los Angeles, and Las Vegas.
A fundamental principle of financial theory – “diversification” or “risk spreading” – implies that interest in the new contracts will be high.
People and businesses in New York, for example, are overexposed to their local real estate risks, so they should reduce this risk by selling New York home price futures.
People in Tokyo will assume some of this risk by purchasing New York home price futures if the price is right.
The New Yorkers still live in their own homes, but now they have spread their investment risk worldwide.
A genuine futures market on single-family homes has not been attempted since 1991 when the London Futures and Options Exchange (now merged into Euronext.liffe) failed in its effort to launch such a market in Britain.
That attempt never generated much trading volume.
The Exchange threw a party and no one came.
British spread-betting markets for home prices, and some retail online markets, have never amounted to much either.
Will it be different this time?
To be sure, starting a new market is always an uncertain proposition: people want to go to parties only if a lot of other people are there; if no one is there, no one wants to come.
Likewise, in markets without many investors, not enough trades can be executed to generate the returns needed to attract them.
As is often true of great parties, it can be a bit of a mystery how substantial new markets get started, but we know that it does happen from time to time.
Initial indications suggest growing interest in futures trading for home prices, particularly as so much talk about the “housing bubble” underscores the importance of diversifying risk.
After the CME’s announcement, one of its competitors, the Chicago Board Options Exchange, said that it plans to create futures and options contracts on major US regions, to be based on the median home price published by the National Association of Realtors.
But, aside from strong public interest in investing in housing and in hedging housing risks, another critical issue must be resolved if futures markets are to succeed: prices must be revealed, and investors must understand what these prices mean.
I believe there is a very good chance that many of these futures markets will soon be predicting substantial price declines in some US cities over the next year.
They will be in what traders call “backwardation”: the future price in the market today is lower than the price of a home today.
Maybe backwardation won’t appear on the first day that housing futures are traded, but there is a good chance it will come within a matter of months.
We may need backwardation in some of these markets if they are to fulfill their function.
Everyone knows that there has been a huge real estate boom in many of these cities (and elsewhere in the world) in recent years.
International investors are not likely to want to invest in these cities unless expectations of a price decline are built into the futures markets, as people in Tokyo understand from their own bitter experience.
But if backwardation is strong enough, even investors who think that the US housing market is headed for a fall will still be able to expect a good return from home price futures, because they are already getting a discounted price in the futures market.
Nevertheless, it will require some adjustment for New Yorkers seeking to hedge their own real estate investments to sell futures contracts that have a built-in price decline.
They will have to get used to the idea that the market already expects the decline, and that they can protect themselves only for that margin of possible future price declines that exceed this expectation.
In fact, such adjustments in our thinking will likely occur when we actually see the futures market prices.
Until now, the future course of real estate prices has been merely a matter of diverse opinion.
When markets create an international consensus on the future price of homes in cities around the world, we will be better able to manage the risks facing these cities, thereby stabilizing their economies – and our own lives.
The Global Imagination of Protest
NEW YORK – When graffiti appeared last spring on a wall near Tunisia’s interior ministry reading “Thank you, Facebook,” it was not just praise for a social-media company that had facilitated the country’s uprising.
It was also a celebration of the sense of shared experience that defined the Tunisian revolution – and the many other historic protests and revolutions that erupted in 2011.
As we discovered collecting essays for our new book From Cairo to Wall Street: Voices from the Global Spring, one of the defining characteristics of the new age of protest is the dovetailing of the desire and the ability to connect – across neighborhoods, cities, countries, and even continents.
In every contributor’s country, a new awareness of shared destinies and of a global community permeated protest movements.
Social-media technology was one tool that advanced it; but so was a reconceptualization of the meaning of public space, and the view that a plurality of ideas is superior to dogma – that the act of collaboration is as important as the outcome.
So these were not just political revolutions. They were also revolutions of ideas – the globalization of protest as a strategy.
To be sure, protesters’ grievances vary greatly according to local circumstances (though there is surprising consistency across regions and even continents when it comes to issues like housing, unemployment, inequality, and the frustration of young people who have studied hard and cannot find jobs).
At the same time, the philosophy of change through mass, collaborative, and inclusive action is common to – and cross-fertilized between – almost every movement.
Consider Tunisia, where Mouheb Ben Garoui, a 24 year-old activist, writes in our book about how fellow citizens from all walks of life and no definite political affiliation poured out of their homes to occupy squares and demand a say in the country’s future.
Facebook helped, but mainly because it magnified and accelerated the process.
As in other countries, the very act of seizing territory meant a lot to protestors.
In the squares of both Tunisia and Egypt, demonstrators who had felt alienated and isolated under repressive regimes were overjoyed to discover that they were not alone.
Sitting in the square became more than an act of defiance: in Spain, Greece, and in the Occupy Movements of the United States and the United Kingdom, the occupied zones became places where a new democratic society could be practiced, sometimes through the time-consuming General Assembly process of group decision-making.
In Greece and Spain, protesters told us that their neighbors’ stories were a revelation.
People unburdened themselves to strangers.
As Spain’s indignados sat in the squares, they felt for the first time connected to the people in their communities – a feeling that became a large part of why they stayed.
In our book, the story of Egyptian protester Jawad Nabulsi, 29, shows how some activists used technology to mobilize people.
Nabulsi, who worked for charities in Upper Egypt that raised money to provide running water and electricity to poor households, wrote about how Malcolm Gladwell’s The Tipping Point and Jim Collins’s Good to Great affected his thinking about social change.
“I had gone to villages and slums, saw the depth of problems in these places and assumed they could not be fixed.
I’d tell myself, ‘They are too humungous, it’s like throwing something in the sea,’” he writes.
Reading Gladwell and Collins, Nabulsi realized he didn’t need to change the whole country, but just “a circle of key players who could have an influence,” and that he “needed to focus on the leaders in the community and work with them.”
He began setting up Facebook groups in order to connect like-minded people.
These groups took on a life of their own.
Seeing that there were others who felt the same frustrations, people became willing to make their voices heard in Tahrir Square, and, like the Spaniards, rediscovered their community.
Satellite, tweets, and Facebook statuses beamed that same message to the world.
The immediate political results of this new connectivity are tenuous.
Egypt, Tunisia, and Libya have had their regime change, but it is unclear what role, if any, the young idealistic revolutionaries will play in their countries’ future.
In Egypt, the power of the military is more concentrated now than it was under former President Hosni Mubarak.
In the US, the protests of 2011 will have a lasting effect only if Occupiers remain organized and continue their work on fighting foreclosures.
They certainly will not feel motivated to turn out to support President Barack Obama’s re-election campaign if their voices are not heard in the White House as they were in Zuccotti Park and other public spaces from Oakland to Madison.
But if the movements’ gains are uncertain, the connectivity that they created is likely to endure.
With American protesters citing Egyptians and Spaniards as direct inspiration, online communities from Syria to Europe cross-pollinating, and continuing strong turnout for rallies like those on May Day 2012 in the US, it is clear that the spirit of community is here to stay.
And, worldwide, it is clear that if politicians do not respond to demands for fairness, freedom, a more prosperous future, and government that actually serves the people, the protests will continue.
The Global Impact of America’s Health Care Debate
CAMBRIDGE – Since assuming the presidency earlier this year, Barack Obama’s primary legislative focus has been on reforming the financing of American health care.
Yet his proposals are meeting strong opposition from fiscally conservative Democrats as well as from Republicans, owing to their potential impact on future fiscal deficits.
Because those deficits are the primary cause of America’s current-account deficit – and thus of global imbalances – the health-care debate’s outcome will affect governments and investors around the world.
About 85% of all Americans are now covered by some form of health insurance.
All individuals over the age of 65 are eligible to be insured by the federal government through the Medicare program.
Low-income families (and those whose income and assets are depleted by high medical costs) are covered by the Medicaid program, which is financed jointly by the states and federal government.
Many uninsured get free care in emergency rooms of public and private hospitals and receive free care for chronic conditions in those same institutions.
In the most recent budget, the federal government’s outlays for Medicare in 2010 are projected to be over $500 billion, while Medicaid will cost taxpayers over $250 billion.
Private health insurance is generally provided by employers, which is encouraged by treating employer payments for health insurance as a tax-deductible business expense while not including the value of that insurance as taxable income to employees.
That rule reduces income and payroll taxes by more than $200 billion.
In short, an overwhelming majority of Americans are insured, with government a major financer of health care.
But there remain about 54 million individuals who are not formally insured, and some insured individuals still face the risk of financially ruinous medical costs if they have very expensive medical treatment.
Obama campaigned on the goals that everyone should have health insurance, that high medical costs should not bankrupt anyone, and that increased efficiency in the production and delivery of care should slow the overall growth of health-care costs.
But, rather than producing a specific proposal, he left it to Congress to design the legislation.
Several competing plans emerged from the different Congressional committees that have jurisdiction over the issue.
The leading proposal, produced by the Senate Finance Committee, fails to achieve any of Obama’s goals.
It would cut the number of uninsured roughly in half, but would still leave about 25 million people uninsured – with the threat of ruinously high medical bills deterring them from getting care.
There is also no clear plan to slow the growth of health-care costs.
As a sign of their support for the administration’s goals, the pharmaceutical industry and the hospital industry have together promised to reduce costs by a total of about $20 billion a year – a token amount, given government health spending of roughly $1 trillion and total health outlays of more than $2 trillion.
The non-partisan Congressional Budget Office (CBO) estimates that the Senate Finance Committee plan would cost about $800 billion between now and 2019.
Most of this increased cost would, in principle, be financed by $215 billion of taxes on high-premium insurance policies, and by about $400 billion of cuts in payments to physicians and hospitals that provide services to older patients in the Medicare program.
If the cost and financing estimates are accurate, and if Congress does not change any of these provisions in the future, the CBO’s calculations imply that the Senate Finance Committee plan would reduce fiscal deficits between now and 2019 by $49 billion, less than 1% of the projected deficits of more than $7 trillion.
In fact, there is a strong risk that this legislation would ultimately add to the fiscal deficit.
Increasing the number of insured by 35 million and broadening protection for some who are now insured implies increased demand for health care, which could raise the cost of care paid for by the government as well as by private health-care buyers.
In addition, both sources of financing are also uncertain.
Taxes on high-premium insurance policies would lead many employees and employers to shift their sources of tax-free income from these health-insurance benefits to other forms of untaxed compensation.
If they do this, the government would not collect the additional revenue from the insurance companies, employers, or employees.
Similarly, the proposed cuts in payments to providers of services to Medicare patients are unlikely to receive the necessary Congressional support in future years, especially if it turns out that doing so would reduce the volume of services, rather than just providers’ incomes.
There is a long history of legislating such spending cuts, only to reverse them in subsequent years.
In considering the fiscal implications of Obama’s health proposals, it is important that the current legislation would still leave 25 million individuals without insurance.
How much would it cost to insure them if the gross cost is now projected at $800 billion for the easier-to-insure 35 million?
And how could that cost be financed if the proposed taxes on existing health policies and the reductions in Medicare outlays have already been used?
Closing that gap could add more than $1 trillion to the government’s cost over the next 10 years.
It is clear that there is a significant danger that the current legislation would add substantially to future US deficits – and establish a precedent for even more expensive expansions of health care in the future.
This would come on top of the currently projected fiscal deficits in both the near term and over the coming decade – and before America’s demographic shift substantially raises the cost of Social Security and Medicare.
Surprisingly, the bond market still seems almost oblivious to this risk.
But holders of US debt worldwide have every reason to be concerned.
The World After November
MADRID – On November 6, either Barack Obama or Mitt Romney will emerge victorious after an exhausting electoral race, setting the wheels in motion for the coming four years.
An ocean away, on November 8, more than 2,000 members of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) will gather in Beijing.
Approximately a week later, the members of the Politburo Standing Committee will walk out in hierarchical order, preparing to take charge of a growing country of 1.3 billion people.
The leaders of the world’s two largest economies are changing.
So is the world itself.
The Middle East, in particular, is experiencing a moment of intense transformation.
While reconstruction – both literal and figurative – is commencing in some parts of the region, countries like Syria are aflame.
Others, such as Iran, with its moribund revolution, have never ceased rumbling.
Amidst a crumbling economy, the country remains belligerent, using its Lebanese proxy, Hezbollah, to launch at least one successful drone flight above Israel and reportedly initiating recent cyber attacks.
As a result, relations among regional actors remain tense.
After his speech at the United Nations appealing for a “red line” on the Iranian nuclear program in the spring or summer of 2013, Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu called an early general election, which could potentially give him a strong mandate for action against Iran.
Egypt, meanwhile, is finding its own equilibrium, both domestically, drafting a new constitution, and in terms of foreign policy.
Then there is Turkey, straddling Europe and the Middle East.
An emerging economy poised to become a regional power, it has exchanged fire with its neighbor to the south, Syria, and has called on its NATO allies to bolster its security.
This is part of the changing panorama that new world leaders will inherit in the Middle East – a region in which the United States has been deeply involved.
After nearly a decade of draining military engagement, the US combat mission in Iraq concluded in 2010, and the combat mission in Afghanistan is set to end in 2014.
The next American president will also inherit a country with a markedly changed geopolitical perspective.
Technological advances and innovation have begun to turn the longstanding dream of energy independence into a reality.
Whereas extraction of America’s extensive reserves of natural gas was previously thought to be unfeasible, technologies such as hydraulic fracturing (“fracking”) have ushered in a shale-gas revolution.
Indeed, the US is on the cusp of energy self-sufficiency.
Last year, for the first time in 15 years, less than one-half of the oil consumed in the US was imported.
Annual growth in shale-gas production has increased from 17% between 2000 and 2006 to 48% between 2006 and 2010.
By 2035, shale gas is projected to account for roughly one-half of total US energy production.
The repercussions of this revolution will not be only economic.
Politically, reduced reliance on foreign oil may allow the US to concentrate on its foreign-policy shift toward Asia.
But it is not just the new US leader who will inherit a changed world.
Across the Pacific, the days of record-breaking economic growth in Asia – a key component of social and political stability – may be coming to an end.
Indeed, events in China in recent months have revealed internal unease.
Though nationalist sentiment directed against external foes tends to divert attention temporarily from internal turmoil, the country’s serious domestic problems need to be addressed.
China’s economy and politics, ideologically transformed in all but name, will soon need to be adapted to address rising social inequality.
Despite global economic headwinds, China’s leaders will surely remain focused on maintaining and boosting growth, in order to lift more Chinese out of poverty and avert social unrest; they are also certain to continue monitoring the oil-rich Middle East.
After years of relying on America’s presence in the region, playing an advantageous waiting game, China’s next leaders may embrace a more active role.
And, because China’s reputation in the region is untainted by a legacy of imperialism, they may be in a rather advantageous position to do so.
Meanwhile, the European Union is struggling with its own demons.
Despite the EU’s need to focus inward while weathering the global economic crisis, the Union must not abandon its neighbors to the south.
It is crucial to engage with the southern Mediterranean region as a critical meeting point – a place of political, economic, and energy cooperation.
In this respect, the EU’s most valuable tools are its signature, Nobel Prize-winning model of multilateral dialogue and soft power.
Next door, Russia, too, must respond to new vulnerabilities stemming from changing global conditions.
The Kremlin continues to support Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s regime, maintaining a strict aversion to military intervention and seeking to defend its strategic interests, including its naval base in the Syrian city of Tartus.
That stance has translated, most obviously, into repeated vetoes of UN Security Council resolutions aimed at ending a conflict that has already produced tens of thousands of victims.
International inaction on Syria is bad news not only for the country’s people; it is also eroding the legitimacy of one of the world’s most important multilateral institutions.
Given that the issues of Iran and Syria are closely connected, internal division among the Security Council’s five permanent members (the US, China, Britain, France, and Russia) could be extremely damaging to the search for a solution to Iran’s nuclear-enrichment drive.
That is reflected in the current stalemate in talks between them (plus Germany) and Iran.
Too much is at stake, which is why all possible tracks for a negotiated outcome must be pursued.
Whether or not recent rumors of bilateral US-Iran talks prove true, such initiatives should be welcomed.
While the big players remain preoccupied with their internal changes, the region continues to smolder.
The main question now is whether the leaders who emerge in November will be firefighters or fire starters.
Mental Health for All
MELBOURNE – One spring evening in 1997, when I was a mental-health researcher at the Australian National University in Canberra, I was discussing with my wife, Betty Kitchener, a registered nurse who taught first-aid courses for the Red Cross in her spare time, the inadequacy of conventional first-aid training.
Such courses typically neglect mental-health emergencies, leaving participants poorly equipped to help people who are struggling with suicidal thoughts, panic attacks, post-traumatic stress, the effects of alcohol or drug abuse, or a diminishing grip on reality.
Betty knew firsthand the potential consequences of this lack of knowledge.
When she was 15, she experienced an episode of severe depression, which culminated in a suicide attempt.