In addition to its growing political and natural-resource challenges, Asia has made the mistake of overemphasizing GDP growth to the exclusion of other indices of development.
As a result, Asia is becoming more unequal, corruption is spreading, domestic discontent is rising, and environmental degradation is becoming a serious problem.
Worse, while many Asian states have embraced the West’s economic values, they reject its political values.
So make no mistake.
Asia’s challenges are graver than those facing Europe, which embodies comprehensive development more than any other part of the world.
Despite China’s aura of inevitability, it is far from certain that Asia, with its pressing internal challenges, will be able to spearhead global growth and shape a new world order.
The Resource Curse Revisited
There is a curious phenomenon that economists call the resource curse - so named because, on average, countries with large endowments of natural resources perform worse than countries that are less well endowed.
Yet some countries with abundant natural resources do perform better than others, and some have done well.
Why is the spell of the resource curse cast so unequally?
Thirty years ago, Indonesia and Nigeria - both dependent on oil - had comparable per capita incomes.
Today, Indonesia's per capita income is four times that of Nigeria.
Indeed, Nigeria's per capita income (as measured in constant dollars circa 1995) has fallen.
A similar pattern holds true in Sierra Leone and Botswana. Both are rich in diamonds.
Yet Botswana averaged 8.7% annual economic growth over the past thirty years, while Sierra Leone plunged into civil strife.
The failures in the oil-rich Middle East are legion.
Economists put forward three reasons for the dismal performance of some richly endowed countries:
• First, the prospect of riches orients official efforts to seizing a larger share of the pie, rather than creating a larger pie.
The result of this wealth grab is often war. At other times simple rent-seeking behavior by officials, aided and abetted by outsiders, is the outcome.
It is cheaper to bribe a government to provide resources at below-market prices than to invest and develop an industry, so it is no surprise that some firms succumb to this temptation.
• Second, natural resource prices are volatile, and managing this volatility is hard.
Lenders provide money when times are good, but want their money back when, say, energy prices plummet.
(As the old adage has it, banks only like to lend to those who do not need money.)
Economic activity is thus even more volatile than commodity prices, and much of the gains made in a boom unravels in the bust that follows.
• Third, oil and other natural resources, while perhaps a source of wealth, do not create jobs by themselves, and unfortunately, they often crowd out other economic sectors.
For example, an inflow of oil money often leads to currency appreciation - a phenomenon called the Dutch Disease .
The Netherlands, after its discovery of North Sea gas and oil, found itself plagued with growing unemployment and workforce disability (many of those who could not get jobs found disability benefits to be more generous than unemployment benefits.)
When the exchange rate soars as a result of resource booms, countries cannot export manufactured or agriculture goods, and domestic producers cannot compete with an onslaught of imports.
So abundant natural wealth often creates rich countries with poor people.
Two thirds of the people in Venezuela, the Latin American country with the largest oil deposits, live in poverty.
No wonder that they are demanding that the small group of those who benefit from the country's wealth start to share it.
Fortunately, as we have become aware of these problems, we have learned much about what can be done about them.
Democratic, consensual, and transparent processes - such as those in Botswana - are more likely to ensure that the fruits of a country's wealth are equitably and well spent.
We also know that stabilization funds - which set aside some of the money earned when prices are high - can help reduce the economic volatility associated with natural resource prices.
Moreover, such fluctuations are amplified by borrowing in good years, so countries should resist foreign lenders who try to persuade them of the virtues of such capital flows.
The Dutch disease, however, is one of the more intractable consequences of oil and resource wealth, at least for poor countries.
In principle, it is easy to avoid currency appreciation: keep the foreign exchange earned from, say, oil exports out of the country. Invest the money in the US or Europe.
Bring it in only gradually. But in most developing countries, such a policy is viewed as using oil money to help someone else's economy.
Some countries, notably Nigeria, are trying to implement these lessons.
Nigeria has proposed creating stabilization funds, and, in the future, it will sell its natural resources in transparent, competitive bidding processes.
Most importantly, the Nigerians are taking measures to ensure that the fruits of this endowment are invested, so that as the country's natural resources are depleted, its real wealth - fixed and human capital - is increased.
Western governments can help with common-sense reforms.
Secret bank accounts not only support terrorism, but also facilitate the corruption that undermines development.
Similarly, transparency would be encouraged if only payments that are fully documented were tax deductible.
Violent conflict is fed and its effects worsened by massive sales of arms by Western governments to developing countries.
This should be stopped.
Abundant natural resources can and should be a blessing, not a curse.
We know what must be done. What is missing is the political will to make it so.
The Responsibility to Protect Comes of Age
NEW YORK – Good news not only sells less well than bad news, but also often seems harder to believe.
Reaction to Harvard psychologist Stephen Pinker’s majestic new book, The Better Angels of Our Nature, is a case in point.
In 800 meticulously argued and documented pages, Pinker shows that, over the course of history, there has been a dramatic decline in violence, both domestically and internationally – and that this downward trend is continuing through the post-Cold War years.
But the response of many reviewers to Pinker’s work has been incomprehension, denial, or a tenacious focus on individual horror stories, as though they somehow change the larger picture.
Many will be similarly slow to accept that when it comes to the most conscience-shocking classes of violence – genocide, ethnic cleansing, and other mass atrocities – dramatic progress has been made recently.
Those gains culminated in the interventions, unthinkable a decade ago, that the United Nations Security Council authorized this year to stop unfolding human-rights catastrophes in Côte d’Ivoire and Libya.
With progress like this, it is no longer fanciful to hope that never again will there be another Holocaust, Cambodia, Rwanda, or Srebrenica.
It is ten years since an international commission that I co-chaired gave birth to the concept of the Responsibility to Protect (“RtoP”), and six years since more than 150 heads of state and government endorsed it unanimously at the UN’s World Summit in 2005.
The core idea was simple: stop arguing for a “right to intervene,” which inevitably generates a backlash, and talk instead about “responsibility” – that of every state to protect its own citizens from atrocities, but also that of the wider international community to act if a state is unable or unwilling to do so.
The new concept also made clear that international protective action meant military coercion only in extreme and unavoidable cases.
The normal sequence would be assistance, persuasion, and non-military pressure like sanctions and criminal prosecution.
For some time after 2005, it was possible to argue that all of this was hot air, and that fast, decisive action to respond to genocidal atrocities would remain as unlikely as ever.
The jury remained out even after Kenya in early 2008, when horrific post-election violence was widely considered an RtoP case, and former UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan led a successful diplomatic mission to persuade ethnic-group leaders to quell the storm.
But it was in Côte d’Ivoire, and especially in Libya early this year, that RtoP really came of age.
The two Security Council resolutions on Libya in February and March were textbook examples of a phased response to an increasingly desperate situation.
Invoking RtoP, that response began with a warning and the threat of sanctions and prosecution at the International Criminal Court, and only subsequently allowed military force to protect civilians.
The threat was real, and the response – in terms of many thousands of lives saved – was unquestionably effective.
Other developments, both before and since, have reinforced and embedded the RtoP norm.
Even as the NATO-led intervention in Libya was being widely criticized for overreaching its narrow mandate, a major General Assembly debate in July 2011 reaffirmed overwhelming support among UN member states for the RtoP concept, in all of its dimensions.
The arguments now are not about the principle, but about how to apply it.
In particular, unlike previous situations – ranging from the Burmese response to Cyclone Nargis to the Sri Lankan military’s civilian massacres masquerading as a legitimate response to terrorist insurgency – there is little conceptual disagreement now about what are, and are not, “RtoP cases.”
For all of the lamentable inadequacy of the Security Council’s response to the situation in Syria, no one has seriously argued that it is not an RtoP case.
Moreover, there have been important institutional developments in terms of early-warning mechanisms and civilian and military preparedness, not least with President Barack Obama’s recent initiation in the United States of an interagency Atrocities Prevention Board.
Nobody denies that challenges remain in ensuring that RtoP is applied effectively and consistently.
An immediate need is to counter the perception that any condemnatory response to an unfolding RtoP situation means stepping onto a slippery slope to military confrontation – a perception that Russia and China heavily milked in seeking to justify their vote against an early-stage Security Council resolution on Syria.
It is crucial in this context that RtoP advocates continue to emphasize that coercive military force can be contemplated only in the most extreme and exceptional circumstances.
The best way to make that point would be to revive the dormant debate about adopting narrow guidelines for military intervention, as recommended by my commission and Secretary-General Annan prior to the UN vote in 2005.
Clear criteria like “last resort,” “proportionality,” and “balance of consequences” would make it harder to use cynical diversionary tactics in the Security Council and elsewhere.
I have learned from long experience that to be optimistic about almost anything in international affairs is to run the risk of being thought ignorant or naïve, if not demented.
But, on the issue of mass-atrocity crimes – where the international community has long had good reason for shame – real optimism is now justified.
That is very good news indeed.
The Cooperation Crisis
PARIS – The rise of emerging economies worldwide has generated much optimism, in terms not only of economic development, but also of global cooperation.
But the shift to a multipolar world order has not bolstered multilateralism.
In fact, the opposite is true: the logic of national sovereignty has staged a comeback, with major economies consistently undermining cooperation on issues ranging from security to trade to climate change.
Consider the muddle in the United Nations Security Council over Syria’s civil war.
Just two years ago, the Council approved a resolution authorizing a military intervention in Libya – the first resolution to implement the “responsibility to protect” (R2P) principle, which the general assembly adopted unanimously in 2005.
But the emerging powers soon came to believe that the West had used the protection of Libya’s civilian population as a pretext for regime change (though, realistically, it would have been impossible to protect the population without toppling Muammar el-Qaddafi’s government).
Now, these countries are largely rejecting R2P, viewing it as a device employed by Western governments to legitimize their attempts to infringe upon national sovereignty.
Brazil has attempted to address the issue by crafting a resolution that would decouple the R2P mandate from the use of force – effectively eliminating the possibility that the doctrine could be applied.
For their part, Russia and China have blocked three resolutions condemning the Syrian regime, and Russia has worked hard – with evident success – to derail any military intervention in Syria.
In this sense, Russia and China now exercise de facto control over the formal international legality of the use of force.
To be sure, many countries ­now believe that the West is going too far in challenging state sovereignty, with even European countries like Germany recoiling at the prospect of military confrontation.
At the G-20 summit in early September, for example, US President Barack Obama struggled to convince ten states to sign a declaration on Syria that did not even mention the use of force.
Only the US, the United Kingdom, and France remain willing to use force if it is deemed necessary.
But viewing intervention in Syria within the paradigm of Western messianism is a mistake.
After all, in Syria, as in Libya, the forces challenging the government are not a creature of Western manipulation.
They are indigenous – and they are asking the West for help.
The legal basis for military intervention may be weak, but Syria is no Iraq, either.
Security is not the only area where sovereignty concerns have superseded multilateralism.
In 2008, the US abandoned its commitment to the World Trade Organization’s Doha Round of global trade negotiations.
While the decision followed a technical disagreement with India, it was driven largely by the belief that any agreement would benefit China more than the US.
Given that the Doha Round has failed to address the main problems that the US and Europe have encountered in trade relations with China – non-compliance with intellectual-property rules, subsidies for state-owned enterprises, closed government-procurement markets, and limits on access to the services market – both are now emphasizing bilateral trade agreements.
But, while the world may be happy to pretend that bilateral cooperation will revitalize multilateralism, nobody should be fooled.
The WTO will survive, but its centrality in the trade system is rapidly diminishing.
Even cooperation on climate change is crumbling, with the US and China rejecting the multilateral, top-down approach to policymaking.
This implies the end of the Kyoto Protocol model, which, like the Doha model, is based on a detailed agenda, established according to specific and ambitious targets, with all relevant actors then compelled to negotiate each topic.
Rather than being subject to an internationally agreed standard, the US and China want the fight against climate change to begin with countries’ individual commitments.
But this new, bottom-up framework, in which states determine the conditions for a multilateral agreement, lacks an authority to establish standards.
Multilateralism requires minimal consensus on global rules and norms among all major powers.
The greater the number of countries that have the power to block or veto international initiatives, the more difficult multilateralism becomes – and the less motivated dominant countries are to cooperate.
In the emerging multipolar world, characterized by sovereignty concerns and strategic competition, progress toward resolving global issues will be more difficult than ever – with potentially devastating consequences.
The Return of 1948
TEL AVIV – The forthcoming United Nation’s conference commemorating the 60th anniversary of UNRWA (The UN Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees) could not come at a better moment.
The restitution of lands occupied in 1967 will obviously continue to be indispensable to resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, but it is the legacy of the 1948 war that both parties to the conflict have now put at the center of the debate.
Oddly, it was Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu who, by requesting that the Palestinians recognize Israel as a Jewish state, reopened the 1948 file.
That demand brought the quest for peace back to its fundamentals, where the question of the refugees is bound to play a central role.
Netanyahu’s intention was essentially to force the Palestinians into admitting that the right of return of refugees applies only to the Palestinian state, not Israel.
But the true significance of his demand lies in that it’s being pronounced at a time when Prime Minister Salam Fayaad’s policies are posing a genuine challenge to the Palestinian national movement to choose between an ethos of vindication and one of state building.
Under Fayaad, the Palestinian Authority seems to be superseding the Palestinian national movement’s diaspora-based emphasis in favor of state-building within the territorial confines of the occupied territories.
It is as if the voice of the diaspora were being silenced in Palestine.
Conspicuously, the recently elected PLO Executive Committee – which in the past consisted exclusively of representatives of the Palestinian Diaspora – now has only one member from the diaspora, a delegate from Lebanon.
This could mark a sea change in the evolution of Palestinian nationalism.
In Zionism, the Jewish community in Palestine was the focus of decision making, with the Jewish Diaspora a strategic back-up.
But the situation was reversed in the case of the Palestinians: the ethos of the diaspora, with the plight of the refugees at its center, has been the beating heart of the Palestinian cause and the focus of decision making for the national movement.
As a result, the Palestinian community in the occupied territories was always subservient to the primacy of the Palestinian Diaspora.
When it sought to assume a leading role – during the first Intifada in 1987, for example, its effort was suppressed by the diaspora-based PLO.
Fayaadism, by contrast, seeks the “Zionization” of the Palestinian national movement.
It imbues the Palestinian cause with a positive ethos of nation- and state-building by superseding Palestinian nationalism’s diaspora-centered preoccupations – and thereby transcending the paralyzing obsession with a never-fulfilled vindication of rights and justice.
In the peace process as it has been conducted up to now, the Israelis always wanted to concentrate on the issues of 1967 – that is, land and security.
The Palestinians, however, always wanted to return to the issues of 1948: refugees, dispersion, and what Akram Hanya, a close Arafat confidant, defined as the need “to make the Israelis face the tribunal of history.”
It looks as if now the roles have been inversed.
Precisely when Israel managed to domesticate the Palestinian national movement by forcing it to abandon its revolutionary path in favor of state-building and economic development – a reorientation undertaken by Zionism as well – the Israelis decided to draw the Palestinians back to the fundamentals of the conflict.
Indeed, despite of the rise of Fayaadism, the Palestinian national movement will be careful not to betray its real sources of legitimacy: the ethos of dispossession and the refugee.
The decisions taken at the last Fatah Convention were explicit in calling for the refugees to “return to their homes and cities.”
The Palestinians are attempting to hold the stick at both ends, claiming before the world their endorsement of the two-state solution while calling for the right of return at the same time.
Any sober Palestinian leadership must know by now that the rhetorical promise of a return to an abandoned house and to the olive tree is an irresponsible mirage that fundamentally contradicts the rationale for a separate Palestinian state.
Peace is frequently not about justice but about stability.
The Palestinians must align their national conversation with what is realizable, while Israel must resolve its own contradictions and address the refugee problem in a way that secures the legitimacy and durability of a future peace agreement with the Palestinians.
Because Israel will have to implement practical measures of resettlement and compensation that will not be based on an automatic right of physical return, a symbol of genuine moral compensation is also called for.
Instead of suppressing the memory of the refugees, Israel needs to recognize that in 1948 the land was bisected by the sword, and that the Jewish state came into being partly because of the massive uprooting and dispossession of Palestinian communities.
Israel should develop enough self-confidence in its solidity as a nation to integrate into its schools’ curriculum the tragedy of the Palestinian Naqbah.
The resolution of conflicts of this nature requires the recovery of historical memory and a proper hearing of the two parties’ historical narratives, perhaps through the creation of Truth and Reconciliation Committees.
Israel’s consolation would be that the Palestinians, too, will have to come to terms with their share of responsibility for the calamities that have befallen them.
Only an acceptable deal on the refugees can definitely close the 1948 file – and only then can the conflict in Palestine end.
The Return of American Realism
NEW YORK – There are many recurring debates in American foreign policy – for example, isolationism versus internationalism, and unilateralism versus multilateralism. But no debate is more persistent than that between those who believe that American foreign policy’s principal purpose should be to influence the external behavior of other states and those who hold that it should be to shape their internal nature.
This debate between “realists” and “idealists” is intense and long-standing.
During the Cold War, there were those who argued that the United States should try to “roll back” the Soviet Union, bring down the communist system, and replace it with democratic capitalism.
Others deemed this to be too dangerous in an era defined by nuclear weapons, and the US opted instead for a policy of containment, working to limit the reach of Soviet power and influence.
As it turned out, after 40 years of containment, the Soviet Union and its empire unraveled, though this outcome was a byproduct of US policy, not its principal purpose.
George W. Bush was the most recent “idealist” proponent of making democracy promotion the main priority for US foreign policy.
Bush embraced the so-called “democratic peace” theory, which holds that democracies not only treat their own citizens better, but also act better toward their neighbors and others.
It was, of course, his father, George H.W. Bush, who was a strong representative of the alternative, “realist” approach to American foreign policy.
Much of this debate can be viewed through the lens of American involvement with Iraq.
George W. Bush went to war with Iraq in 2003 to change the government.
He expected regime change in Baghdad to lead to a democratic Iraq, a development that would in turn transform the region when people elsewhere in the Arab world saw this example and forced their own governments to follow suit.
By contrast, in the earlier Iraq war, the first President Bush, after amassing an unprecedented international coalition that succeeded in liberating Kuwait, did not press ahead to Baghdad to oust Saddam Hussein and his government, despite the urging of many that he do just that.
Nor did he intervene on behalf of the Shia and Kurdish uprisings that erupted just after the war ended early in 1991.
To him, intervention would have placed US soldiers in the midst of a complex domestic struggle, one that would have cost enormous resources to sort out if it could be sorted out at all.
President Barack Obama appears to agree with this realist approach.
The new US policy toward Afghanistan makes no mention of trying to transform that country into a democracy.
On the contrary, as Secretary of Defense Robert Gates stated before Congress in January, “If we set ourselves the objective of creating some sort of Central Asian Valhalla over there, we will lose.”
For his part, Obama said in March that “We have a clear and focused goal: to disrupt, dismantle, and defeat al-Qaeda in Pakistan and Afghanistan, and to prevent their return to either country in the future.”
This shift is also evident in US policy toward China.
Speaking during her trip to Asia in February, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton made clear that human rights issues would be a secondary concern in US-China relations.
Similarly, the joint statement issued by Obama and Russian President Dmitry Medvedev after their April 1 meeting in London, while mentioning that US-Russia relations would be “guided by the rule of law, respect for fundamental freedoms and human rights, and tolerance for different views,” placed far greater emphasis on reducing nuclear arms, addressing Iran’s nuclear program, and stabilizing Afghanistan.
US support for Russia’s admission to the World Trade Organization was unconditional.
This change in US foreign policy is both desirable and necessary.
Mature democracies do tend to act more responsibly, but immature democracies can easily succumb to populism and nationalism.
It is difficult and time-consuming to build mature democracies.
While encouraging the rule of law and the growth of civil society, the US still needs to work with other governments, democratic and otherwise. Pressing problems, such as the economic crisis, nuclear proliferation, and climate change, will not wait.
The good news is that history shows that it is possible to make peace with and work with non-democracies.
Israel, for example, has had peaceful relations with non-democratic Egypt and Jordan for more than three decades.
The US and the Soviet Union cooperated in limited ways (for example, in controlling nuclear arms) despite fundamental differences.
Today, the US and authoritarian China have mutually beneficial trade and financial ties, and have shown on occasion that they can work together on strategic issues, for example in shaping North Korea’s behavior.
This is not to say that promoting democracy will have no role in American foreign policy.
It will, and it should.
But democracy promotion is too uncertain a proposition, and the world too dangerous a place, for it to occupy center stage in what the United States does.
Barack Obama’s foreign policy will thus resemble that of George Bush – the father, that is, not the son.
Bretton Woods III
SINGAPORE – Many analysts and observers believe that the global imbalances that characterized the world economy in the years before the 2008 crisis have substantially dissipated.
But, while it is true that China’s current-account surpluses and America’s deficits have somewhat moderated since then, have the imbalances really been corrected?
More important, can the post-crisis global economy enjoy both growth and balance?
To answer these questions, it is important to understand the imbalances’ underlying dynamics.
An economy’s current account is the difference between its investment rate and its savings rate.
In 2007, the United States had a savings rate of 14.6% of GDP, but an investment rate of 19.6%, generating a current-account deficit.
By contrast, China had a fixed investment rate of 41.7% of GDP and a savings rate of 51.9%, reflected in a large surplus.
Since 2007, the US current-account deficit has narrowed, but not because of a higher savings rate.
Rather, the external deficit has been squeezed by a collapse in investment activity, while America’s overall savings rate has fallen below 13% of GDP, owing to worsening government finances.
Meanwhile, China’s savings rate remains stubbornly high.
The surplus has narrowed because investment has been ramped up even higher, to roughly 49% of GDP.
In other words, the Americans save even less today than they did before the crisis erupted, and the Chinese invest even more.
Any future recovery in the US economy will almost certainly trigger a revival in investment activity.
American businesses have postponed much-needed capital spending and, with American airports and bridges in appalling condition by developed-country standards, investment in infrastructure is crucial as well.
Indeed, it is very likely that reviving growth will lead to larger current-account deficits, even if the savings rate improves and domestic energy production curtails oil and gas imports.
China has the opposite problem.
In order to sustain growth, it needs to continue to invest half of its $9 trillion annual GDP – no easy task for a country that already has brand new highways and airports.
In fact, over the next decade, as China attempts to move up the value chain into services and adjusts to a shrinking workforce, its investment requirements will shrink – and its investment rate will fall sharply.
Of course, China’s savings rate will also decline, but Japan’s experience since the 1980’s demonstrates how a sharp fall in investment can generate large and persistent current-account surpluses, even when the savings rate is falling and the currency is appreciating.
Indeed, a stronger currency can paradoxically feed external surpluses, while discouraging investment in export-oriented industries.
The implication is that the post-crisis global economy will not be characterized by balance, but by a return to large macroeconomic imbalances.
But, although many economists will consider this problematic, history shows that symbiotic imbalances have characterized virtually all periods of global economic expansion.
The Roman Empire ran a persistent trade deficit with India for centuries.
Although the resulting outflow of gold caused monetary debasement in the Roman Empire, Indo-Roman trade remained the backbone of the global economy.
Similarly, Spain ran persistent deficits in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, paid for by Andean silver.
The resulting flood of liquidity caused a global boom that benefited economies from Elizabethan England to Mughal India.
And 1870-1913, another period of rapid growth and globalization, was not characterized by balance; it was funded by the United Kingdom, acting as the world’s “bank.”
In the last 60 years, the US has underpinned global growth by running persistent current-account deficits.
Under the Bretton Woods system, the US ran deficits that enabled war-torn Europe and Japan to rebuild.
In return, Europe funded the US deficits.
The system broke down when European countries, particularly France, decided to stop funding those deficits.
But the economic model persisted, with Asian economies stepping in to finance the US deficits, while using the US market to grow rapidly.
China is the latest and largest beneficiary of the economic model dubbed “Bretton Woods II.”
Clearly, periods of global growth are almost always characterized by symbiotic imbalances.
But, while each of these episodes was characterized by macroeconomic distortions caused by the imbalances, they lasted for years, or even decades.
So, the real question is what the next generation of symbiotic imbalances will look like.
It is likely that China will soon return to running very large current-account surpluses – potentially large enough to fund the US, with plenty left over for the rest of the world.
As this capital cascades through the global financial system, it will re-inflate the economy.
In the “Bretton Woods III” system, China will transform from “factory to the world” to “investor to the world.”
Like all imbalanced systems, it will have its distortions, but the arrangement could last for many years.
The New Mercantilist Challenge
CAMBRIDGE – The history of economics is largely a struggle between two opposing schools of thought, “liberalism” and “mercantilism.”
Economic liberalism, with its emphasis on private entrepreneurship and free markets, is today’s dominant doctrine.
But its intellectual victory has blinded us to the great appeal – and frequent success – of mercantilist practices.
In fact, mercantilism remains alive and well, and its continuing conflict with liberalism is likely to be a major force shaping the future of the global economy.
Today, mercantilism is typically dismissed as an archaic and blatantly erroneous set of ideas about economic policy.
And, in their heyday, mercantilists certainly did defend some very odd notions, chief among which was the view that national policy ought to be guided by the accumulation of precious metals – gold and silver.
Adam Smith’s 1776 treatise The Wealth of Nations masterfully demolished many of these ideas.
Smith showed, in particular, that money should not be confused for wealth.
As he put it, “the wealth of a country consists, not in its gold and silver only, but in its lands, houses, and consumable goods of all different kinds.”
But it is more accurate to think of mercantilism as a different way to organize the relationship between the state and the economy – a vision that holds no less relevance today than it did in the eighteenth century.
Mercantilist theorists such as Thomas Mun were in fact strong proponents of capitalism; they just propounded a different model than liberalism.
The liberal model views the state as necessarily predatory and the private sector as inherently rent-seeking.
So it advocates a strict separation between the state and private business.
Mercantilism, by contrast, offers a corporatist vision in which the state and private business are allies and cooperate in pursuit of common objectives, such as domestic economic growth or national power.
The mercantilist model can be derided as state capitalism or cronyism.
But when it works, as it has so often in Asia, the model’s “government-business collaboration” or “pro-business state” quickly garners heavy praise.
Lagging economies have not failed to notice that mercantilism can be their friend.
Even in Britain, classical liberalism arrived only in the mid-nineteenth century – that is, after the country had become the world’s dominant industrial power.
A second difference between the two models lies in whether consumer or producer interests are privileged.
For liberals, consumers are king.
The ultimate objective of economic policy is to increase households’ consumption potential, which requires giving them unhindered access to the cheapest-possible goods and services.
Mercantilists, by contrast, emphasize the productive side of the economy.
For them, a sound economy requires a sound production structure.
And consumption needs to be underpinned by high employment at adequate wages.
These different models have predictable implications for international economic policies.
The logic of the liberal approach is that the economic benefits of trade arise from imports: the cheaper the imports, the better, even if the result is a trade deficit.
Mercantilists, however, view trade as a means of supporting domestic production and employment, and prefer to spur exports rather than imports.
Today’s China is the leading bearer of the mercantilist torch, though Chinese leaders would never admit it&#160; – too much opprobrium still attaches to the term.
Much of China’s economic miracle is the product of an activist government that has supported, stimulated, and openly subsidized industrial producers – both domestic and foreign.
Although China phased out many of its explicit export subsidies as a condition of membership in the World Trade Organization (which it joined in 2001), mercantilism’s support system remains largely in place.
In particular, the government has managed the exchange rate to maintain manufacturers’ profitability, resulting in a sizable trade surplus (which has come down recently, but largely as a result of an economic slowdown).
Moreover, export-oriented firms continue to benefit from a range of tax incentives.
From the liberal perspective, these export subsidies impoverish Chinese consumers while benefiting consumers in the rest of the world.
A recent study by the economists Fabrice Defever and Alejandro Riaño of the University of Nottingham puts the “losses” to China at around 3% of Chinese income, and gains to the rest of the world at around 1% of global income.
From the mercantilist perspective, however, these are simply the costs of building a modern economy and setting the stage for long-term prosperity.
As the example of export subsidies shows, the two models can co-exist happily in the world economy.
Liberals should be happy to have their consumption subsidized by mercantilists.
Indeed, that, in a nutshell, is the story of the last six decades: a succession of Asian countries managed to grow by leaps and bounds by applying different variants of mercantilism.
Governments in rich countries for the most part looked the other way while Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, and China protected their home markets, appropriated “intellectual property,” subsidized their producers, and managed their currencies.
We have now reached the end of this happy coexistence.
The liberal model has become severely tarnished, owing to the rise in inequality and the plight of the middle class in the West, together with the financial crisis that deregulation spawned.
Medium-term growth prospects for the American and European economies range from moderate to bleak.
Unemployment will remain a major headache and preoccupation for policymakers.
So mercantilist pressures will likely intensify in the advanced countries.
As a result, the new economic environment will produce more tension than accommodation between countries pursuing liberal and mercantilist paths. It may also reignite long-dormant debates about the type of capitalism that produces the greatest prosperity.
The Return of Mexico’s Nemesis
MEXICO CITY – On July 1, Mexico will in all likelihood vote the Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI), which ruled the country for seven decades, back into power.
The PRI’s candidate, Enrique Peña Nieto, holds an insurmountable lead late in the campaign.
Many Mexicans, as well as the country’s foreign friends, fear that this turn of events heralds a return to the authoritarian, corrupt, and discredited past that Mexico had left behind when the National Action Party’s candidate, Vicente Fox, won the presidency in 2000.
As someone who contributed to the PRI’s defeat, I would prefer a different victor this year: an independent candidate, a center-left social democrat, or a center-right leader running on the best parts of Fox’s and outgoing President Felipe Calderón’s record (while repudiating Calderón’s bloody and futile war of choice against Mexico’s drug lords).
But I reject the notion that a PRI victory would automatically restore the status quo ante, as if Mexico, its links to the world, and the PRI itself had stood still throughout the last 12 years.
Mexico has changed immensely since 1994, the last time a PRI president was elected.
If Peña Nieto wins, he will have to deal with a strong opposition bloc in Congress, and in all likelihood with minority status for the PRI, at least in the lower house.
Moreover, more than ten of Mexico’s 32 state governors will belong to the opposition, while the center-left Party of the Democratic Revolution will continue to control the country’s second-most important elected position and budget: the mayor’s office in Mexico City, which the PRD has held since 1997.
Meanwhile, Mexico’s media are freer, better, and stronger than ever, even if on occasion the quality of their output leaves much to be desired.
The country’s civil society has become more organized, more powerful, and more vibrant.
The government can no longer do what it wants, for better or for worse.
Indeed, many key institutions have achieved wide autonomy from the government since 2000: the Central Bank, the Transparency Institute, the National&nbsp;Statistics Office, as well as the securities, communications, elections, anti-trust, and drug authorities.
Perhaps most important, Mexico, for the first time in its history, has a truly independent and effective Supreme Court. This occasionally made life miserable for Fox and Calderón, but has made things better for ordinary Mexicans in every walk of life.
Mexico’s relations with the world have changed as well since 2000.
Today, the country is enmeshed in a web of free-trade agreements and other international instruments that have locked in its open economy, orthodox macroeconomic policies, and commitment to democratic rule.
It is subject to constant, intrusive, and welcome foreign scrutiny.
Peer pressure now matters, too.
Other countries will listen to Mexico only if Mexico abides by its obligations with respect to labor, the environment, free and fair elections, private property, and human rights.
In this era, the government can’t get away with stealing elections, throwing political opponents in jail, expropriating foreign or domestic private assets, large-scale corruption, or profligate spending.
The degree of economic integration with the United States and Canada – which together account for the great bulk of Mexico’s trade, tourism, foreign investment, and remittances – make it especially difficult for the country to be impervious to foreign criticism.
And accountability is no longer absent in Mexico.
In the end, one either believes that free and fair elections, respect for individual rights and liberties, and rotation in power are the essence of democracy, or one does not.
The PRI’s comeback, under Mexico’s current rules, may not be ideal for the country, but it is not a restoration.
If Mexico is not ready for the PRI’s return to power, then we all did our job poorly: we did not build the institutions, the civil society, the political parties, and the international covenants that would have ensured that only democratic players remained in the political game.
But I believe that we did accomplish the task, and that to fear an authoritarian restoration would be to deny everything that we have all achieved over the past 12 years.
The Return of Post-Communism
The collapse of communism in Central and Eastern Europe 15 years ago brought vast and positive democratic changes.
But in 2006, after more than a decade of striving for acceptance by the West, the moral and political vacuum left by communism was fully exposed.
Can a new balance between the democratic ethos and the undertows of the region’s political history and culture be found?
In Poland, for example, the prevailing mix of Catholicism and nationalism made society particularly resistant to communism (certainly in comparison with the egalitarian, social-democratic ethos of pre-war Czechoslovakia).
But these anti-communist antibodies also worked against the universal acceptance among Poles of liberal democracy.
Indeed, right-wing populists in Poland and left-wing populists in Slovakia are now allied in government with extreme nationalist parties.
In Hungary, the main opposition party Fidesz organizes demonstrations in front of Parliament for the resignation of a government, even after it won a confidence vote.
In the Czech Republic, a minority right-wing government has not gained a confidence vote in Parliament after six months of bickering.
Bulgaria’s entry into the European Union was heralded by a presidential race between an ex-communist (the victor, who claimed to like the EU) and a proto-fascist (who says he hates Turks, Gypsies, and Jews).
Political instability and unpredictable behavior by elected leaders typifies affairs throughout the region.
Even more worrying is the erosion of trust in democratic institutions.
According to a recent Gallup International poll, Central and East Europeans are the most skeptical about democracy, which only about one-third of people trust.
In contrast to a majority of West Europeans, East Europeans do not consider their elections free and fair.
Only 22% responded affirmatively when asked, “Do you think your voice matters?”
Democracy today has no rivals, but it is losing support.
Populist movements harvest that ambivalence and discontent.
They are not anti-democratic; indeed, they claim to be the “true voice of the people,” and constantly demand new elections or referenda.
But they are anti-liberal; they accept democracy’s demand for the popular legitimacy, but reject its demand for constitutionalism (the separation of powers).
They do not believe that constitutional norms and representative democracy have primacy over values and “legitimate” popular grievances.
In Poland, the “politics of values” is based on the assumption that a “moral order” based on religion should prevail over the freedoms guaranteed by permissive liberalism on issues such as abortion, gay rights, and the death penalty.
In Slovakia, the anti-liberal reaction applies also to the treatment of national minorities.
Although there has so far been no significant shift in practice, the legitimation of xenophobia is a major feature of this onslaught on political liberalism: Jan Slota, the leader of the Slovak National Party, has said that he envies the Czechs for having expelled the Germans after WWII, and regularly accuses the Hungarian minority of “oppressing the majority nation.”
Acute polarization is occurring everywhere, and it is here where the legacy of communist political culture is mostly keenly felt: an opponent is not someone with whom you argue or negotiate, but an enemy that you must destroy.
After 15 years of free-market policies, populists in Warsaw, Bratislava, and Budapest want to bring back the state.
And, since even socialist parties pushed liberal economic policies, it is not surprising that the far right, with its nationalist and protectionist overtones, has hijacked the social question.
The populist challenge to the pro-market, pro-Western elite consensus that has prevailed in the region since 1990 takes two forms: an anti-corruption drive and “de-communization.”
In Poland, the two are combined in a denunciation of the “original sin” of the 1989 compromise between moderate dissident elites and moderate communist elites, which enabled a non-violent exit from communism, but allegedly allowed the ex-communists to convert their political power into economic power.
Hence the need for a two-pronged attack: anti-corruption and de-communization, which is also a leitmotiv of Fidesz in Hungary, and to some extent of the right-wing Civic Democratic Party now in power in Prague.
Moreover, these populists attack the EU as an elite-imposed project, while pro-European coalitions have become exhausted, disintegrating in the aftermath of EU accession in 2004.
Significantly, the Polish, Czech, and Hungarian prime ministers resigned within days or weeks after fulfilling the “historic” task of “returning to Europe.”
Populist nationalists present themselves as the only defenders of national identity and sovereignty against “external threats,” as Polish Premier Jaroslaw Kaczynski put it.
Their vision is a “Christian Europe” of “sovereign nation-states” that opposes the existing materialist, decadent, permissive, and supra-national model.
The EU can probably learn to live with these populists, because it has to.
Indeed, populism moves in cycles.
Populists come to power promising “to clean house,” but once they move in and become identified with the house and all its flaws, they fall back on clientelism and state capture by the ruling parties (as we are now seeing in Poland) rather than becoming more radical.
Many argue that the pro-EU consensus of the last decade emptied politics of its substance, contributing to the current populist backlash.
But the EU can also constrain populism.
After all, populist nationalists have joined (and since left) government coalitions in Austria, Italy, Holland, and Denmark.
And, while nationalist populism is a trans-European phenomenon, populism today, unlike in the 1930’s, it does not hold itself out as an alternative to democracy.
The Return of Religion?
BUDAPEST – It’s a well-worn contrast: the United States is religious, Europe is secular.
Yet, in some respects, this clichéd opposition has actually been reversed recently: religion played virtually no role during the last American presidential elections, while in a range of different European countries major controversies about religion have flared up, suggesting that questions of faith are back at the center of European politics.
Consider French President Nicolas Sarkozy.
On numerous occasions, he has argued that his country needs to rethink its traditional strict separation of state and religion, called laïcité .
In particular, according to the twice-divorced self-confessed “cultural Catholic,” France should develop a “positive secularism.”
In contrast to negative laïcité , which according to Sarkozy “excludes and denounces,” laïcité positive invites “dialogue” and recognizes the social benefits of religion.
In a much criticized speech in Rome at the end of 2007, Sarkozy acknowledged the Christian roots of France, “the eldest daughter of the Church”; he also praised Islam during a visit to Saudi Arabia.
Now he wants state subsidies for faith-based organizations – a policy proposal that upsets his many secularist critics.
This new appeal to religion – after a long period when it was taken for granted that secularization would make religion less and less politically relevant – is not an exclusively French phenomenon.
The Spanish People’s Party tried hard to mobilize Catholics during the election campaign in March 2008.
The church supported the PP against a prime minister, José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero, whose advocacy of gay marriage, more relaxed divorce laws, and the removal of compulsory religion classes from the national curriculum upset many religious conservatives.
Zapatero eventually felt it necessary to tell a Vatican envoy that Spanish bishops should stop meddling in the elections (which he won).
In Italy, Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi precipitated a constitutional crisis by trying to rush through emergency legislation to prevent a comatose patient from being taken off life support.
This reminded many observers of what the America’s Republican Party tried to do in order to demonstrate its “pro-life commitments” during George W. Bush’s presidency.
Finally, there is Britain, usually seen as perhaps the most secular country in Western Europe, and thus the least likely candidate to see the return of religion of any kind (outside its Muslim community).
Under David Cameron’s leadership, the newly invigorated Conservative Party is listening to a number of thinkers, dubbed “red Tories,” who urge the party to turn its back on Thatcherism and embrace civil society, local community, the family, and, not least, religion as a major force in fostering responsible social behavior. 
In short, there is a pattern here.
But the point is not that individuals in different European countries are becoming more religious – there is hardly any evidence for that.
Globally, there might be good reasons to talk about what sociologists describe as the rise of “post-secular societies,” but Europe remains the exception.
What really explains these new public controversies surrounding religion is something else, something political: the dilemma in which right-wing and center-right European parties find themselves.
Many of these parties used to advocate market radicalism, or at least strong doses of economic liberalization.
Not just since the financial crisis have they retreated from these positions and tried to fashion a gentler, more socially conscious image.
Yet, in the search for what Cameron has called a new “look, feel, and identity,” these parties have been treading a fine line: on the one hand, they have attempted to appear more modern – for example, by appointing an increasing number of women and members of ethnic minorities to cabinet posts.
On the other hand, they have painted themselves as sworn enemies of the left’s supposed moral relativism – an image for which the recourse to religion is obviously helpful.
In fact, some intellectuals close to the right have long advocated an opening towards Europe’s Muslim immigrants and their descendants.
Where they can vote, so the argument goes, Muslim traditionalists would rather vote for a conservative party, even if it has Catholic roots, than for a secular left-wing party perceived as advocating loose morals.
This is not to say that all appeals to religion are just cynical election ploys.
Especially in the face of the financial crisis, religion has been presented as a source for what Sarkozy and German Chancellor Angela Merkel have called the project of “moralizing capitalism.”
That is not an absurd idea.
There is a long and distinguished tradition of Catholic social thought.
But taking these traditions seriously would require much larger transformations of capitalism than even avowed Christian Democrats are prepared to contemplate, including a much wider distribution of ownership and mechanisms for involving workers in management.
In the past two years, Africa has seen successful coups in Niger, Guinea, Madagascar, and Mauritania.
In addition, there have been a handful of indirect interventions, failed coups, and whispered threats elsewhere.
Despite the development of democratic institutions in some parts of Africa, coups appear to be once again an option when democracy seems to be failing, political gridlock has taken hold, or impoverished populations are alienated from constitutional authority.
Successful coups legitimated by popular support (or at least acquiescence) and oiled with promises to “restore democracy” may become infectious, encouraging copycats in neighboring states where governments are also weak or failing.
At the end of February in Niamey, Niger’s capital, armed troops surrounded the presidential palace and arrested President Mamadou Tandja in the midst of a cabinet meeting.
While the African Union, the United States, and other members of the international community protested, popular reaction in Niamey was jubilant.
Tandja, originally democratically elected, had become increasingly autocratic, dismissing the National Assembly and the constitutional court, and eliminating presidential term limits.
As his governance descended into authoritarianism, the military and at least a visible part of the population came to view a coup as the only way to stop Niger’s downward course.
Accordingly, the army rode in promising democracy and free and fair elections.
While the military junta has since kept control over the executive branch of government, its head, Salou Djibo, appointed a civilian, Mahamadou Danda, as prime minister.
In addition to vowing elections, which have not yet been scheduled, Djibo has pledged that members of the junta will not run for office.
If current reports from Niger are accurate, there appears to be a belief that the military will restore democracy.
Niger’s story sounds familiar.
In Guinea, despite 24 previous years of authoritarian military rule, the population largely supported the December 2008 bloodless coup staged by Captain Moussa Dadis Camara’s immediately following President Lansana Conté’s death.
Guineans in fact had little choice but to accept Dadis Camara’s promise of elections and a return to civilian rule – at least until the murder of 157 opposition protesters by members of the Guinean military at Conakry stadium in October 2009 seemed to dash all hope for such an outcome.
Yet a peaceful democratic transition may actually happen.
Following an assassination attempt by an aide-de-camp, Dadis Camara fled the country, and the interim junta leader, General Sékouba Konaté, allowed the opposition political parties to appoint a civilian prime minister.
He has since scheduled elections for June 27. Accordingly, the public mood is optimistic.
Escalating popular protests by both incumbent and opposition supporters in Madagascar brought the country to a standstill until the army itself splintered and sacked the president’s office and central bank, forcing the president to step aside in favor of the opposition leader, Andry Rajoelina.
Unrest has continued, and the military has issued an ultimatum to Rajoelina to resolve the political deadlock.
While he has pledged not to run in the elections set for November 26, 2011, an alleged mutiny within the military, as well as arrests in April of suspected coup plotters, suggests a widening divide within the military itself.
The international community branded each of these countries a pariah, and various international organizations, such as the Economic Community of West African States, the African Union, and the Southern African Development Community, have responded by suspending membership and occasionally imposing sanctions.
But these steps are largely ineffective – or worse.
The international community has limited leverage, and sanctions may have a greater negative impact on the population than on the coup-makers.
Malagasies, for example, have been the ones to feel the brunt of the suspension of foreign aid, which dominates Madagascar’s budget.
Africa’s recent coups have taken place in small countries.
With the possible exception of Madagascar, they play only a limited role on the continent.
Nevertheless, successful coups may encourage the military to move in other, larger countries.
Many feared that the example of the coup in Niger could encourage Nigeria’s military to move at the height of the country’s crisis in executive authority over President Umaru Yar’Adua’s prolonged absence.
In fact, rumors of coup plotting in Nigeria prompted military officers to restrict the movements of soldiers, and may have spurred the political elite to reach the consensus that installed Goodluck Jonathan as acting president.
Even more unsettling was the anecdotal evidence of public support for military intervention.
Successful coup makers regularly pledge to restore democratic governance, and sometimes they keep that promise.
Nevertheless, coups, whether violent or peaceful, are the antithesis of democratic institutions, and military rule can last a long time.
Nigeria endured almost 15 years of it, despite repeated pledges – by three successive dictators – to restore democracy.
Yet, until governments – and the elites that support and benefit from them – are prepared to commit to democracy, good governance, and the rule of law, and until they are accountable to their populations, coups will remain a viable option.
The very rise of that specter over the past two years has been a setback for Africa’s democratic development.
The Return of the French?
PARIS – How difficult is it to erase one’s past as a colonial power?
Tunisia has been independent for 55 years, and Côte d’Ivoire for 51 years, yet France is once more playing a decisive role in these countries.
Naturally, many Africans are unconvinced that France is acting only to defend the lives of a few thousand of its citizens, rather than its economic and strategic interests, which are negligible for the former and null for the latter.
The damage that slavery and colonialism inflicted in these countries has left a powerful legacy.
And, though they have been handling their own business for decades, France still has a duty of friendship that forbids it to forget and requires it to adopt a certain mode of conduct.
The more time a woman has had to live alone and acquire knowledge, the stronger her desire and capacity to pass it on to her children.
Northern Germany and southern Scandinavia were the first regions to experience mass literacy, which was followed by faster economic development a few decades later.
These are places where women’s average age at marriage has been around 23 for some time. In the Arab world and most of Africa, women marry, on average, at around 15.
Tunisia, Egypt, and Libya are three clear cases of massive popular anger against economic underdevelopment and the dictatorships that were justifiably blamed for it.
The major difference between the three is that in Tunisia and Egypt, economic development had gone far enough to give rise to a small trading and salaried middle class, which initiated the rebellions and whose members were sufficient in number to succeed – at least in deposing the dictators.
Libya is entirely different.
The anger there, fueled by misery and insufficient food, is popular, not bourgeois.
The forces of resistance are too limited, while the military – a key tool of social advancement for the poor – remains in the hands of the dictatorship.
The rebellion could not succeed by itself; from the start, terrible and bloody repression was to be expected.
Côte d’Ivoire looks nothing like North Africa: its troubles are purely local, ethnic, and religious.
The Republic’s first president, Félix Houphouet-Boigny, was elected at independence in 1960 and remained in office until he died in 1993 – always careful to construct governments with representatives from all the tribes, and with a balance between southern Catholics and northern Muslims.
Houphouet-Boigny’s successor, Henri Konan Bédié, had neither his talent nor his courage.
Bédié founded his power on the country’s Catholics and his government on tribal membership.
And he invented a legitimizing concept of Ivorian identity (Ivoirité), which was largely meant to disqualify northern Muslims as foreigners, because their tribes extended into Mali and Burkina Faso.
This policy ignited a latent conflict, with a military coup in 1999 putting General Robert Gueï in power. But Gueï lasted only three years, with his assassination in 2002 setting the country’s conflicting sides on a path to civil war.
In this tense climate, the northern candidate, Alassane Ouattara, a Muslim and former senior official at the International Monetary Fund, was denied the right to run in the 2005 presidential election.
The winner, the southerner Laurent Gbagbo, then refused to concede his defeat by Ouattara in 2010, leading to violent conflict and fear of a long and potentially genocidal civil war.
In both Libya and Côte d’Ivoire, massacres of civilians were foreseeable.
In both cases, the question in Paris and other capitals was whether to intervene.
And in both cases, France had an obvious interest in not intervening, in order to erase its colonial past (more so in Côte d’Ivoire than in Libya, where Italy had been the European colonizer).
But tens of thousands of French citizens live in Côte d’Ivoire. France had to protect them.
In Libya, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi’s wanton violence brought the situation firmly under the purview of the United Nations Security Council and the UN’s recently proclaimed “responsibility to protect” civilians threatened by their own governments.
Libyan civilians are now under the protection of international law.
Only an international decision could have accomplished this.
Indeed, Lebanon’s vote for military intervention in Libya not only enhances its legitimacy, but also raises the suspicion that even Iran condemns Qaddafi’s brutality.
Once the decision to intervene was taken, France, with the largest armed forces in the Mediterranean, alas became the most visible of the intervening countries – with few others capable of joining it, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
Unfortunately, international solidarity for the armed protection of endangered populations does not yet really exist.
The danger is that in much of Africa, former imperialists are suspected of being imperialists still, which could make the development of international law appear to be a mere power play.
This is even clearer in Côte d’Ivoire: it is the UN that explicitly demanded that France, the only foreign presence, implement the resolution that ratified Ouattara as the elected president and Gbagbo as the usurper.
France did the job rather well, leaving, for example, the arrest of Gbagbo to Quattara’s forces.
Civil war was averted.
It is, in fact, pure stupidity to believe that France is trying to restore its defunct empire.
Defunct imperialisms no longer make sense.
Today’s real problems are vastly different from when colonial empires held sway, and they need to be dealt with in a non-imperialist fashion.
So what is really needed nowadays is for the world public to become convinced of the need for an effective international watchdog for peace and human rights.
The Return of the King in Nepal
Every time we in Nepal think things can’t get worse, they do.
In 2001, as our Maoist insurgency intensified and casualties soared, almost the entire royal family – including King Birendra – were massacred by one of Nepal’s princes.
The next year, parliament was dissolved and local elected bodies were disbanded.
As political parties bickered, King Gyanendra, who succeeded his murdered brother, sacked the prime minister in 2002 and ruled through an appointed cabinet.
Last week, King Gyanendra sacked his prime minister again, declared a state of emergency, and suspended civil liberties.
Nepal’s 15-year experiment with democracy now seems over.
Since February 1, the Nepali media have been subjected to absolute censorship. Nothing that goes against the “letter and spirit” of the king’s dismissal of his government is allowed to be printed and broadcast, and “action will be taken against anyone violating the notice.”
Armed soldiers now sit in newsrooms, vetting the galleys before they go off to press.
Sometimes, they change headlines that they think are critical of the royal move.
Nepal’s vibrant FM radio stations – once models for decentralized public-service broadcasting and community radio – have been prohibited from broadcasting current affairs.
Some FM stations have been locked down and are silent.
The BBC’s Nepalese service, which used to be relayed through a network of 12 FM stations all over the country, has been stopped.
All Indian news channels have been dropped from cable networks.
On Saturday, two senior journalists were detained for issuing statements critical of the crackdowns.
Newspapers and magazines are blandly reproducing official pronouncements and reports from the state-run news agency.
Some have taken the risk of resorting to metaphors and allegory, while others poke fun at the whole thing by writing editorials on ballet or bee-keeping.
At least one newspaper came out with its news pages completely blank.
Most young journalists, especially those in radio, have been shocked by the censorship.
The freedoms that they were so accustomed to, and maybe even took for granted, have now been snatched away.
But, for older journalists like me, there is a strong sense of déjà vu—the controls hark back to the times of the partyless absolute monarchy that existed here before 1990, when self-censorship was the order of the day.
Back then, irrational news decisions, sycophancy, and propaganda were passed off as journalism.
In those days, editors, reporters, and columnists played a cat-and-mouse game with the authorities, resorting to satire, humor, or metaphor.
But punishment could be harsh.
Many journalists spent time behind bars, and there was a price to be paid when the morning newspapers contained even accidental typos, such as occurred when a headline concerning a royal birthday read “suspicious” instead of “auspicious.”
Old jokes from the pre-1990 days have returned, like this one: a man was walking down a Kathmandu street, shouting, “Down with dictatorship in Pakistan.”
A policeman grabbed him and took him in.
At the police station, he asked the protestor, “Why are you denouncing dictatorship in Pakistan when it exists here?”
To be sure, many Nepalis have welcomed King Gyanendra’s move this week.
Much of the public is disenchanted by the instability caused by fractious and corrupt parliamentary leaders and by the Maoist insurgency, which has cost 12,000 lives in nine years.
If this is what the king had to do to restore peace, they say, so be it.
After all, the king has staked all and gambled his own throne by taking over power.
They have a point. Many expect the king to pull a rabbit out of his hat, to restore peace and start raising the living standards of Nepal’s 25 million people, most of whom live below the poverty line.
In his speech on February 1, King Gyanendra said the Nepali people would have to temporarily give up democracy in order to save democracy, and many Nepalese will go along with that, at least for a while.
The king has a window of opportunity to deliver on his promises.
Perhaps King Gyanendra does have something up his sleeves.
In the long run, however, the answer to Maoist totalitarianism is greater and more inclusive democracy, a vibrant free press, and civil liberties.
Curtailing freedom merely polarizes society.
Indeed, even as a short-term strategy against the Maoists, it may well prove counterproductive.
The Return of the Radicals in Iran
Twenty-six years after the Islamic Revolution, just when the West had expected Iran to settle down and become more pragmatic, the regime of President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad seems to have lurched back toward radicalism.
By looking at earlier revolutions, we can perhaps come to understand what is happening in Iran, for recent events there have clear historical precedents.
Many revolutions have passed through an initial “quiet” period after an early phase of radicalism, only to experience a resurgence of radicalism 15-25 years later.
This is because the initial quiet period is often marked by corruption and a retreat from revolutionary goals, leading idealists to feel that the revolution is losing its way.
Believing that stronger pursuit of revolutionary ideals is the only way to strengthen their country, these idealists seek to inspire a “return of the radicals,” triggering sharp conflict with their more pragmatic co-revolutionaries.
The Mexican Revolution of 1910 began with a challenge to the dictator Porfirio Díaz that ignited peasant uprisings and worker revolts.
The revolution’s radical phase seemed to end in 1920 when General Alvaro Obregón seized power; he limited land reforms and sought reconciliation with the United States.
For the next 14 years, Obregón and his ally General Plutarco Calles ruled Mexico.
Then, in 1934, resentment against growing corruption led Calles to choose an “honest idealist” to become president, a young man who had fought for him early in the revolution, who he thought he could control but who would help the government regain popularity.
That “honest revolutionary,” Lázaro Cárdenas, toured the country, building his popular support, and then turned on Calles, expelling him from Mexico.
Known for both his radicalism and his honesty, Cárdenas refused to live in the presidential palace and cut his salary in half.
He also took seriously the early goals of the revolution, embarking on massive land reforms.
In 1938 – twenty-eight years after the revolution began – Cárdenas provoked a major confrontation with the US and Britain by expropriating their oil companies and nationalizing Mexico’s petroleum.
Only in the 1940’s, after Cárdenas left power, did Mexico turn to a more conservative political path.
Similarly, China’s Communist Revolution began with a decade of attacks on the middle and professional classes and a reshaping of the countryside, culminating in the Great Leap Forward of 1958-59.
But that disastrous campaign weakened Mao’s influence; by the early 1960’s he seemed to be relegated to the sidelines while pragmatists like Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping grew stronger.
Yet Mao worried that his revolution was going off track, and in the mid-1960’s he launched an effort to regain control of the Party by educating a new generation of radical youth.
These “Red Guards” launched the Cultural Revolution in 1966-68, targeting the more conservative elements within the Communist Party.
The Cultural Revolution tore China apart, but it returned Mao to supreme power and allowed him to purge the pragmatists.