But that is facile: inadequate attribution affects inter-state deterrence as well, yet it still operates.
Even when the source of an attack can be successfully disguised under a “false flag,” governments may find themselves sufficiently enmeshed in symmetrically interdependent relationships such that a major attack would be counterproductive.
China, for example, would lose from an attack that severely damaged the American economy, and vice versa.
An unknown attacker may also be deterred by cyber-security measures.
If firewalls are strong, or redundancy and resilience allow quick recovery, or the prospect of a self-enforcing response (“an electric fence”) seems possible, an attack becomes less attractive.
While accurate attribution of the ultimate source of a cyber attack is sometimes difficult, the determination does not have to be airtight.
To the extent that false flags are imperfect and rumors of the source of an attack are widely deemed credible (though not legally probative), reputational damage to an attacker’s soft power may contribute to deterrence.
Finally, a reputation for offensive capability and a declared policy that keeps open the means of retaliation can help to reinforce deterrence.
Of course, non-state actors are harder to deter, so improved defenses such as pre-emption and human intelligence become important in such cases.
But, among states, even nuclear deterrence was more complex than it first looked, and that is doubly true of deterrence in the cyber domain.
Given its global nature, the Internet requires a degree of international cooperation to be able to function.
Some people call for the cyber equivalent of formal arms-control treaties.
But differences in cultural norms and the difficulty of verification would make such treaties hard to negotiate or implement.
At the same time, it is important to pursue international efforts to develop rules of the road that can limit conflict.
The most promising areas for international cooperation today most likely concern problems posed for states by third parties such as criminals and terrorists.
Russia and China have sought to establish a treaty establishing broad international oversight of the Internet and “information security,” which would prohibit deception and embedding malicious code or circuitry that could be activated in the event of war.
But the US has argued that arms-control measures banning offensive capabilities could weaken defenses against attacks and would be impossible to verify or enforce.
Likewise, in terms of political values, the US has resisted agreements that could legitimize authoritarian governments’ censorship of the Internet – for example, by the “great firewall of China.”
Moreover, cultural differences impede any broad agreements on regulating online content.
Nonetheless, it may be possible to identify behaviors like cyber crime that are illegal in many domestic jurisdictions.
Trying to limit all intrusions would be impossible, but one could start with cyber crime and cyber terrorism involving non-state parties.
Here, major states would have an interest in limiting damage by agreeing to cooperate on forensics and controls.
The transnational cyber domain poses new questions about the meaning of national security.
Some of the most important responses must be national and unilateral, focused on hygiene, redundancy, and resilience.
It is likely, however, that major governments will soon discover that the insecurity created by non-state cyber actors will require closer cooperation among governments.
A Democratic Burma?
TOKYO – Historic transformations often happen when least expected.
Mikhail Gorbachev’s liberalizing policies of glasnost and perestroika in the Soviet Union emerged at one of the Cold War’s darkest hours, with US President Ronald Reagan pushing for strategic missile defense and the two sides fighting proxy wars in Afghanistan and elsewhere.
Deng Xiaoping’s economic opening followed China’s bloody – and failed – invasion of Vietnam in 1978.
And South Africa’s last apartheid leader, F. W. de Klerk, was initially perceived as just another apologist for the system – hardly the man to free Nelson Mandela and oversee the end of white minority rule.
Now the world is suddenly asking whether Burma (Myanmar), after six decades of military dictatorship, has embarked on a genuine political transition that could end the country’s pariah status.
Is Burma, like South Africa under de Klerk, truly poised to emerge from a half-century of self-imposed isolation?
And can Aung San Suu Kyi, the heroic opposition leader, and Thein Sein, Burma’s new president, engineer a political transition as skillfully and peacefully as Mandela and de Klerk did for South Africa in the early 1990’s?
Despite her two decades of house arrest and isolation, Suu Kyi possesses two of the gifts that enabled Mandela to carry out his great task: a reassuring serenity and an utter lack of vindictiveness.
As Burma’s authorities test reform, these gifts, together with her negotiating skills and, most of all, her vast moral authority, will be tested as never before.
Moreover, unlike Mandela during his 27-year imprisonment, Suu Kyi has had her hopes raised – and dashed – before.
In the mid-1990’s, and again in 2002-2003, reconciliation between Suu Kyi’s National League for Democracy (NLD) and the military junta seemed to be in the offing.
On both occasions, however, the regime’s hardliners gained the upper hand, crushing prospects for reform.
Yet Suu Kyi, and much of the Burmese opposition, is beginning to admit that today’s political liberalization might be the real thing.
Because Burma’s generals say almost nothing in public, it is difficult to fathom why they allowed elections that elevated Thein Sein to power, or to explain their willingness to embrace dialogue with the long-suppressed opposition.
Recent events suggest one possible explanation: Burma’s rulers have grown wary of China’s almost smothering embrace – a result of the country’s international isolation.
Indeed, public protests against China’s commercial exploitation of Burma’s natural resources became so widespread that the government called a halt to construction by Chinese investors on the huge and environmentally damaging Myitsone Dam on the Irrawaddy River.
Thein Sein’s decision to halt the project is clearly an important policy shift.
It is also a signal to the outside world that Burma’s new government may be much more willing than any of its predecessors to heed both public pressure and international opinion, both of which vehemently opposed the dam’s construction.
Almost simultaneously, Thein Sein offered even stronger signals that his was a very different Burmese administration: he freed political prisoners and invited Suu Kyi for direct talks with him.
Indeed, Suu Kyi now enjoys far greater freedom of movement than she has at any time since she received the Nobel Peace Prize 20 years ago, and the NLD recently announced that it will field candidates in the forthcoming by-elections to the country’s newly established parliament.
If Suu Kyi is permitted to campaign free of restraint, for both her own seat and to boost the electoral chances of her NLD colleagues, it will be clear that Thein Sein and his government are truly determined to bring their country in from the cold.
For both Suu Kyi and Thein Sein, every step from now on will be delicate, to be calibrated with the same care and deliberation that Mandela and de Klerk used in bridging their differences and leading their country out of isolation.
But the international community, too, must act with great care.
While Thein Sein would undoubtedly wish to see the myriad economic and political sanctions imposed on Burma quickly lifted, it is too soon for a general easing of such measures.
But the outside world should demonstrate that every clear move toward greater political openness will merit more international political and economic engagement.
The Japan Investment Bank’s decision to invest in port development in Burma – essential if the economy, too, is to be opened – is one positive sign that the world will keep pace with Thein Sein step for step.
And US President Barack Obama’s decision to send Secretary of State Hillary Clinton to Burma to meet Thein Sein is another clear sign that the world is ready to end the country’s isolation.
Closer to home, ASEAN’s recent decision to give Burma a chance to chair the organization in 2014 underscores its neighbors’ desire for the country’s full participation in Asia’s growing prosperity.
No one should rush to judgment yet, but Thein Sein’s decisions, at least so far, are beginning to resemble those of South Africa’s de Klerk when he initiated his country’s reform process.
Fortunately, Burma already has in Aung San Suu Kyi its very own Nelson Mandela.
A Devaluation Option for Southern Europe
CAMBRIDGE – This year is likely to mark a make-or-break ordeal for the euro.
The eurozone’s survival demands a credible solution to its long-running sovereign-debt crisis, which in turn requires addressing the two macroeconomic imbalances –&nbsp;external and fiscal –&nbsp;which are at the heart of that crisis.
The crisis has exposed the deep disparities in competitiveness that have developed within the eurozone.
From 1996 to 2010, unit labor costs in Germany increased by just 8%, and by 13% in France. Compare that to 24% in Portugal, 35% in Spain, 37% in Italy, and a whopping 59% in Greece.
The result has been large trade imbalances between eurozone countries, a problem compounded by large fiscal deficits and high levels of public debt in southern Europe (and France) – much of it owed to foreign creditors.
Does addressing these imbalances require breaking up the eurozone?
Suppose, for example, that Portugal were to leave and re-introduce the escudo. The ensuing exchange-rate devaluation would immediately lower the price of Portugal’s exports, raise its import prices, stimulate the economy, and bring about much-needed growth.
But a euro exit would be a messy affair. The resulting turmoil could very well trump any short-term gains in competitiveness from devaluation.
There is a remarkably simple alternative that does not require southern Europe’s troubled economies to abandon the euro and devalue their exchange rates.
It involves increasing the value-added tax while cutting payroll taxes.
Our recent research demonstrates that such a “fiscal devaluation” has very similar effects on the economy in terms of its impact on GDP, consumption, employment, and inflation.
A currency devaluation works by making imports more costly and exports cheaper. A VAT/payroll-tax swap would do exactly the same thing.
An increase in VAT raises the price of imported goods, as foreign firms face a higher tax.
To ensure that domestic firms do not have an incentive to raise prices, an increase in VAT needs to be accompanied by a cut in payroll taxes.
Moreover, since exports are exempt from VAT, the price of domestic exports will fall.
The desired competitiveness effects of exchange-rate devaluation can thus be had while staying in the euro.
This policy can also help on the fiscal front.
As is true of an exchange-rate devaluation, the positive impact on growth of an increase in competitiveness can strengthen the fiscal position by raising tax revenues.
Moreover, an important advantage of fiscal devaluations is that they generate additional revenues in proportion to the country’s trade deficit.
For countries that are suffering from weak competitiveness and, as a consequence, running trade deficits, this typically means more revenues, especially in the short run.
Like exchange-rate devaluations, fiscal devaluations create winners and losers.
Both act as a wealth levy: inflation means that bondholders suffer a real loss in proportion to their wealth and the size of the devaluation.
If taxes on capital are not adjusted, holders of domestic stocks suffer a comparable loss.
By contrast, many transfers, such as unemployment benefits, health benefits, and public pensions, are indexed to inflation, and thus maintain their real value.
The same is true of minimum wages.
These distributive effects play an important role in the politics of exchange-rate devaluations, and most of these effects appear in fiscal devaluations as well.
Fiscal devaluations already have some advocates.
To be sure, feasible fiscal devaluations would be limited in size.
But, together with debt restructuring, accommodative monetary policy, liquidity support from the European Central Bank, and much-required structural reforms, they can help to put these troubled economies on a sound footing without a euro breakup or a major austerity-induced recession.
A Dissident in China
TOKYO – 2009 was a good year for China.
The Chinese economy still roared ahead in the midst of a worldwide recession.
American President Barack Obama visited China, more in the spirit of a supplicant to an imperial court than the leader of the world’s greatest superpower.
Even the Copenhagen summit on climate change ended just the way China wanted: failure in its attempt to commit China, or any other industrial nation, to making significant cuts in carbon emissions, with the United States getting the blame.
The Chinese government, under the Communist Party, has every reason to feel confident.
So why did a gentle former literature professor named Liu Xiaobo have to be sentenced to 11 years in prison, just because he publicly advocated freedom of expression and an end to one-party rule?
Liu was co-author in 2008 of a petition, Charter 08, signed by thousands of Chinese, calling for basic rights to be respected.
Liu is not a violent rebel. His opinions, in articles published on the Internet, are entirely peaceful.
Yet he was jailed for “inciting subversion of state power.”
The notion that Liu might be capable of subverting the immense power of the Communist Party of China is patently absurd.
And yet the authorities clearly believe that they had to make an example of him, to prevent others from expressing similar views.
Why does a regime that appears to be so secure consider mere opinions, or even peaceful petitions, so dangerous?
Perhaps because the regime does not feel as secure as it looks.
Without legitimacy, no government can rule with any sense of confidence.
There are many ways to legitimize political arrangements. Liberal democracy is only a recent invention.
Hereditary monarchy, often backed by divine authority, has worked in the past.
And some modern autocrats, such as Robert Mugabe, have been bolstered by their credentials as national freedom fighters.
China has changed a great deal in the last century, but it has remained the same in one respect: it is still ruled by a religious concept of politics.
Legitimacy is not based on the give and take, the necessary compromises, and the wheeling and dealing that form the basis of an economic concept of politics such as that which underpins liberal democracy.
Instead, the foundation of religious politics is a shared belief, imposed from above, in ideological orthodoxy.
In imperial China, this meant Confucian orthodoxy.
The ideal of the Confucian state is “harmony.”
If all people conform to a particular set of beliefs, including moral codes of behavior, conflicts will disappear.
The ruled, in this ideal system, will naturally obey their rulers, just as sons obey their fathers.
After the various revolutions in the early decades of the twentieth century, Confucianism was replaced by a Chinese version of Communism.
Marxism appealed to Chinese intellectuals, because it was bookish, introduced a modern moral orthodoxy, and was based, like Confucianism, on a promise of perfect harmony.
Ultimately, in the Communist utopia, conflicts of interests would melt away.
Chairman Mao’s rule combined elements of the Chinese imperial system with Communist totalitarianism.
This orthodoxy, however, was also destined to fade away.
Few Chinese, even in the top ranks of the Communist Party, are convinced Marxists anymore.
This left an ideological vacuum, swiftly filled in the 1980’s by greed, cynicism, and corruption.
Out of this crisis came the demonstrations all over China, collectively known as “Tiananmen.”
Liu Xiaobo was an active spokesman in 1989 for the student protests against official corruption and in favor of greater freedom.
Soon after the bloody crackdown on Tiananmen, a new orthodoxy replaced Chinese Marxism: Chinese nationalism.
Only one-party rule would guarantee the continuing rise of China and put an end to centuries of national humiliation.
The Communist Party represented China’s destiny as a great power.
To doubt this was not just mistaken, but unpatriotic, even “anti-Chinese.”
From this perspective, Liu Xiaobo’s critical views were indeed subversive.
They cast doubt on the official orthodoxy, and thus on the legitimacy of the state.
To wonder, as many have, why the Chinese regime refused to negotiate with the students in 1989 – or to find some accommodation with its critics today – is to misunderstand the nature of religious politics.
Negotiation, compromise, and accommodation are the marks of economic politics, where every deal has its price.
By contrast, those who rule according to a shared belief cannot afford to negotiate, for that would undermine the belief itself.
This is not to say that the economic concept of politics is utterly strange to the Chinese – or, for that matter, that the religious notion of politics is unknown in the democratic West.
But the insistence on orthodoxy is still sufficiently strong in China to remain the default defense against political critics.
These things can change.
Other Confucian societies, such as South Korea, Taiwan, and Japan, now have thriving liberal democracies, and there is no reason to believe that such a transition is impossible in China.
But external pressure is unlikely to bring it about.
Many non-Chinese, including me, have signed a letter of protest against the jailing of Liu Xiaobo.
One hopes that this will lend comfort to him, and give a moral boost to Chinese who share his views.
But it is unlikely to impress those who believe in the current orthodoxy of Chinese nationalism.
Until China is released from the grip of religious politics, Liu’s ideals are unlikely to take root.
This does not bode well for China, or, indeed, for the rest of the world.
A Drug War on Auto-Pilot
THE HAGUE – The war in Afghanistan, now approaching its tenth year, may seem to many to have no end in sight, but Latin America has endured an even longer fight, one that has recently become much more bloody: the “war” against drug trafficking.
So rote – and so violent – has that war become that many people in Latin America now wonder which side is suffering the more pathological addiction.
The new strategy that US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has been promoting to staunch the upward trend of narco-trafficking-related murders – which leaked Mexican government reports put at more than 22,000 since late 2006 – is to build “stronger, more resilient communities.”
Ciudad Juárez, a sprawling Mexican border town that is now the homicide capital of the world, would have to be high on the list.
Four bridges and innumerable tunnels and drainage canals connect Ciudad Juárez and El Paso, Texas.
Rival cartels sparring for control of a plaza, the name given to any trafficking route, butcher each other and the security forces.
There is apparently no shortage of young, unemployed men willing to join the carnage.
Addressing the deep-seated social and economic problems of a city like Juárez, however, is a lot harder than flooding its streets with 8,000 soldiers carrying assault rifles.
Mexican President Felipe Calderón has, in this respect, remained faithful to the script written in previous theaters in the drug war, whether in Bolivia, Colombia, or Peru, where governments have used military force and extradition to placate the US and punish those with the least voice and influence.
But the language used by the Obama administration to describe the violence and state corruption that snakes from the Andes to the US border is starting to capture new thinking on narcotics.
Three former Latin American presidents, Mexico’s second richest man, Ricardo Salinas, and the Supreme Court of Argentina, among others, have criticized the war on drugs as a manifest failure that has lowered street prices, fueled production, and undermined weak states.
More strikingly, both Bolivia and Ecuador are governed by presidents who suffered directly from the collateral insensitivities of the war on drugs.
Bolivia’s Evo Morales rose to prominence as leader of the country’s coca growers during a brutal campaign to wipe out their crops, the so-called Dignity Plan.
Ecuadoran President Rafael Correa’s father was jailed for smuggling drugs to the US when the future leader was five years old.
These leaders’ profound ambivalence toward the goal of a world free of illegal drugs is shared by the European Union, where restrictions on narcotics consumption have slackened over the past decade.
The past three US presidents, furthermore, have all admitted to consuming – to one extent or another – illegal psychoactive substances, while seven million Americans, according to the United Nations, are regular cocaine users.
But the inertia of a bureaucratic drug-enforcement superstructure (worth approximately $40 billion each in the US and the EU), sustained by a deep-seated fear of the “threat” posed by drugs and cartels, appears to push policy repeatedly towards the familiar option of repressive auto-pilot.
For example, US support for Mexico’s campaign against the cartels looks set in stone, with Congress apparently ready to provide $300 million for another year of military and security upgrading.
In Colombia, seven new joint military installations are planned, and support for US private contractors who have cornered the market in crop fumigation presumably will not be interrupted.
Nevertheless, as the flaws in the four-decade-old edifice of counter-narcotics become more visible, it is increasingly difficult to regard the risks of drug use as being greater than the damage done by repression.
Prohibition hikes the mark-up on prices – an astounding 15,000% in the case of cocaine traveling to Europe from Andean processing facilities.
While the war on drugs focuses on bringing down cartels and their kingpins, it perversely aids the health of their markets, which nestle within legitimate trade flows and respond to price incentives.
Interviewed by the Mexican magazine Proceso this year, the second-in-command of the giant Sinaloa cartel, Ismael Zambada, made the point clearly: “The narco problem involves millions of people.
How do you control it?
The capos can be jailed, killed, or extradited, but their replacements are already wandering around.”
The emergence of Latin America’s powerful drug mafias cannot be traced to the radical evil of certain individuals.
These people emerged under conditions created in deeply inequitable societies by a misapplied, inconsistent, and bureaucratic war.
Indeed, the furies of the Zetas in Mexico originate in the counter-insurgency training provided in the 1990’s to a select group of special-forces soldiers, who later deserted.
The Zetas’ star recruits in recent years have come from the Guatemalan military’s special forces, whose infamous induction technique involved biting off the head of a live chicken.
Meanwhile, in Jamaica and across the rural outposts of Central America, drug lords have become benefactors and heroes to the poor.
It is time for serious reconsideration of the status and regulation of illegal drugs, pointing to selective legalization, as well as reclassification of the market as a public-health, rather than a criminal, concern.
For now, policymakers across the Americas are tiptoeing towards the obvious.
A Global \
ATHENS – The International Monetary Fund’s belated admission that it significantly underestimated the damage that austerity would do to European Union growth rates highlights the self-defeating character of “orthodox” recipes to address the causes of the debt crisis that followed the financial crash of 2008-2009.
Conventional theory suggests that a single country (or group of countries) consolidating its finances can expect lower interest rates, a weaker currency, and an improved trade position.
But, because this cannot happen for all major economies simultaneously – one country’s (or group of countries’) austerity implies less demand for other countries’ products – such policies eventually lead to beggar-thy-neighbor situations.
Indeed, it was this dynamic – against which John Maynard Keynes fought – that made the Great Depression of the 1930’s so grim.
Today’s problems are compounded by a lack of sufficient private demand – particularly household consumption – in the advanced economies to compensate for demand losses stemming from austerity.
During the last two decades, consumption drove these countries’ economic growth, reaching historically high GDP shares.
Moreover, major advanced economies, such as the United States, Germany, and Japan, face longer-term fiscal problems in the form of aging populations or oversize welfare states, limiting their capacity to contribute to demand management.
Recent moves to ease monetary policy have been a step in the right direction; but, so far, they have not proved to be a game changer.
For domestic demand to act as an engine of growth, policies should shift resources from investment to consumption.
While the magnitudes involved are huge, they must be attained if an extended period of low growth, high unemployment, and declining living standards among the world’s poorest is to be avoided.
International economic policy coordination should be significantly strengthened in order to deal effectively with changes on such a scale.
Start with Europe.
It is by now patently obvious that austerity and domestic reforms are not enough to pull the eurozone’s periphery out of deep recession.
Growing awareness of the failure of current policies is causing social discontent, civil disorder, and political instability, with the recently concluded Italian elections and the growing popular resistance to Greek reform efforts serving as a bellwether.
Returning the eurozone’s peripheral economies to the path of growth requires more than structural reforms and fiscal consolidation.
But Europe should move more decisively in this direction.
Otherwise, speculation on member states’ national debt will persist, keeping borrowing costs at levels that are inconsistent with the conditions required to sustain economic recovery.
Concerning external demand, intra-European help in the form of reflationary policies in stronger economies is unlikely to prove sufficient, owing primarily to the fiscal and political conditions prevailing in Germany.
Implementing a Marshall Plan-type initiative by mobilizing EU budget resources and additional lending by the European Investment Bank to finance investments in weaker countries could be an alternative, but it lacks political support.
On a global scale, neither the US nor Japan is in a position to provide significant external stimulus.
Only the emerging and developing economies of Asia could effectively contribute to lifting global demand through a coordinated effort aimed at boosting domestic consumption, which, in turn, would stimulate additional investment.
Recent IMF experience suggests that, through appropriate coordination, private funds could be mobilized for big private-public partnership projects linking demand expansion with infrastructure investment.
In other words, a global “New Deal” – combining policies designed to achieve an orderly realignment of consumption and investment worldwide – seems to be required.
The advanced economies should promote productivity-enhancing structural reforms with renewed vigor.
The eurozone should solidify its currency union.
And the emerging and developing economies should support domestic sources of growth.
For such a deal to become possible, certain preconditions must be met.
First, international policy coordination by the G-20 must be tightened by creating a permanent secretariat to make policy proposals and recommendations concerning macroeconomic and financial developments.
The secretariat should actively cooperate with the IMF to benefit from its analysis, notably regarding exchange rates.
Second, global financial reform must proceed at a faster pace.
The financial sector requires tougher regulation, strengthened supervision, and internationally consistent resolution mechanisms to address the problems posed by very large, global institutions that are considered too big (or too complex) to fail.
Such reform is essential if the international financial system is to mediate the sizeable resource transfers that will underpin the required changes in the structure of global demand.
Finally, a new trade pact – possibly, but not necessarily, within the Doha Round – is needed to ensure the major trading powers’ access to foreign markets.
This is critically important for inspiring confidence in Asian countries, which might be persuaded to favor domestic, as opposed to external, sources of demand.
Moreover, trade liberalization will also increase consumer confidence worldwide.
The time is right for a new global settlement that targets growth, addresses crisis conditions in certain parts of the world, and rebalances the global economy to set it back on a path of strong and steady growth.
The Other Financial Crisis
NEWPORT BEACH – Two variants of financial crisis continue to wreak havoc on Western economies, fueling joblessness and poverty: the one that we read about regularly in newspapers, involving governments around the world; and a less visible one at the level of small and medium-size businesses and households.
Until both are addressed properly, the West will remain burdened by sluggish growth, persistently high unemployment, and excessive income and wealth inequality.
The sovereign-debt crisis is well known.
In order to avert a likely depression, governments around the world engaged in fiscal and monetary stimulus in the midst of the global financial crisis.
They succeeded in offsetting nasty economic dislocations caused by private-sector deleveraging, but at the cost of encumbering their fiscal balances and their central banks’ balance sheets.
While sovereign credit quality has deteriorated virtually across the board, and will most probably continue to do so, the implications for individual countries vary.
Some Western countries – such as Greece – had fragile government accounts from the outset and tipped quickly into persistent crisis mode.
There they remain, still failing to provide citizens with a light at the end of what already has been a long tunnel.
Other countries had been fiscally responsible, but were overwhelmed by the liabilities that they had assumed from others (for example, Ireland’s irresponsible banks sank their budget).
Still others, including the United States, faced no immediate threat but failed to make progress on longer-term issues.&nbsp;A few, like Germany, had built deep economic and financial resilience through years of fiscal discipline and structural reforms.
It is not surprising that policy approaches have also varied.
Indeed, they have shared only one, albeit crucial (and disappointing) feature: the inability to rely on rapid growth as the “safest” way to deleverage an over-indebted economy.
Greece essentially defaulted on some obligations.
Ireland opted for austerity and reforms, as has the United Kingdom.
The US is gradually transferring resources from creditors to debtors through financial repression.
And Germany is slowly acquiescing to a prudent relative expansion in domestic demand.
So much for the sovereign-debt crisis, which, given its national, regional, and global impact, has been particularly well covered.
After all, sovereigns are called that because they have the power to impose taxes, regulations, and, at the extreme, confiscation.
But the other credit crisis is equally consequential, and receives much less attention, even as it erodes societies’ integrity, productive capabilities, and ability to maintain living standards (particularly for the least fortunate).
I know of very few Western countries where small and medium-size companies, as well as middle-income households and those of more limited means, have not experienced a significant decline in their access to credit – not just new financing, but also the ability to roll over old credit lines and loans.
The immediate causes are well known.
They range from subdued bank lending to unusually high risk aversion, and from discredited credit vehicles to the withdrawal of some institutions from credit intermediation altogether.
Such credit constraints are one reason why unemployment rates continue to rise in so many countries – often from already alarming levels, such as 25% in Greece and Spain (where youth unemployment is above 50%) – and why unemployment remains unusually high in countries like the US (albeit it at a much lower level).
This is not just a matter of lost capabilities and rising poverty; persistently high unemployment also leads to social unrest, erosion of trust in political leaders and institutions, and the mounting risk of a lost generation.
Indeed, unemployment data in many advanced countries are dominated by long-term joblessness (usually defined as six months or more).
Skill erosion becomes a problem for those with prior work experience, while unsuccessful first-time entrants into the labor force are not just unemployed, but risk becoming unemployable.
Governments are doing too little to address the private credit debacle.
Arguably, they must first sort out the sovereign side of the crisis; but it is not clear that most officials even have a comprehensive plan.
Policy asymmetry is greatest for the countries most acutely affected by the sovereign-debt crisis.
There, the private sector has essentially been left to fend for itself; and most households and companies are struggling, thus fueling continued economic implosion.
Other countries appear to have adopted a “Field of Dreams” – also known as “build it and they will come” – approach to private credit markets, In the US, for example, artificially low interest rates for home mortgages, resulting from the Federal Reserve’s policy activism, are supposed to kick-start prudent financing.
The European Central Bank is taking a similarly indirect approach.
In both places, other policymaking entities, with much better tools at their disposal, appear either unwilling or unable to play their part.
As such, action by central banks will repeatedly fail to gain sufficient traction.
In fact, only the UK is visibly opting for a more coordinated and direct way to counter the persistent shortfalls stemming from the private part of the credit crisis.
There, the “Funding for Lending Scheme,” jointly designed by the Bank of England and the Treasury, seeks “to boost the incentive for banks and building societies to lend to UK households and non-financial companies,” while holding them accountable for proper behavior.
The UK example is important; but, given the scope and scale of the challenges, the proposal is a relatively modest one.
The program may stimulate some productive credit intermediation, but it will not make a significant dent in what will remain one of the major obstacles to robust economic recovery.
Proper access to credit for productive segments is an integral part of a well-functioning economy.
Without it, growth falters, job creation is insufficient, and widening income and wealth inequality undermines the social fabric.
That is why any comprehensive approach to restoring the advanced countries’ economic and financial vibrancy must target the proper revival of private credit flows.
Politik Beracun Versus Ekonomi yang Lebih Baik
NEW YORK – Hubungan antara politik dan ekonomi berubah.
Para politikus negara maju terkunci di dalam konflik-konflik yang aneh, sering kali beracun, dan tidak bertindak berdasarkan konsesnsus ekonomi yang berkembang mengenai bagaimana keluar dari periode yang berlarut-larut ini, yang berkaitan dengan pertumbuhan yang rendah dan tidak seimbang.
Tren ini harus diputarbalikkan, sebelum melumpuhkan dunia yang sudah maju secara struktural dan menghapus ekonomi yang sedang berkembang juga.
Jelas, pertengkaran politik bukanlah sesuatu yang baru.
Sampai baru-baru ini, ada harapan bahwa jika para ahli ekonomi profesional mencapai konsensus teknokratik mengenai pendekatan politik yang baik, maka para pemimpin politik akan mendengarkan.
Bahkan saat partai-partai politik yang lebih radikal berusaha untuk mendorong agenda yang berbeda, kekuatan-kekuatan besar – baik itu bujukan moral dari para pemerintah G7, pasar modal swasta, atau secara bersyarat bergantung pada pinjaman International Monetary Fund dan World Bank– hampir selalu pasti terlihat bahwa pendekatan konsensus akhirnya selalu unggul.
Pada tahun 1990an dan 2000an, sebagai contoh, apa yang dikenal sebagai Konsensus Washington mendominasi pembuatan keputusan di sebagian besar dunia, dan semua orang dari Amerika Serikat sampai ke gelombang besar ekonomi yang sedang berkembang yang menginginkan kebebasan perdagangan, swastanisasi, penggunaan mekanisme harga yang lebih besar, deregulasi sektor keuangan, dan reformasi fiskal dan moneter dengan penekanan yang besar pada sisi pasokan.
Pelaksanaan Konsensus Washington oleh berbagai institusi multilateral memperbesar penyebarannya, membantu meningkatkan proses globalisasi ekonomi dan keuangan yang lebih besar.
Pemerintah-pemerintah baru – khususnya pemerintahan yang dipimpin oleh gerakan-gerakan non-tradisional, yang kebangkitan kekuasannya berasal dari balik ketidakpuasan dan kefrustrasian dalam negeri atas partai-partai arus utama – terkadang tidak sepakat dengan kelayakan dan relevansi Konsensus Washington.
Namun, seperti yang ditunjukkan oleh Presiden Brazil Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva dengan kebijakan porosnya pada tahun 2002, konsensus tersebut cenderung menyebar lebih jauh. Dan hal ini terus berayun sampai sekitar dua tahun yang lalu, saat Perdana Menteri Yunani Alexis Tsipras menjalankan putar balik yang sama terkenalnya.
Namun setelah bertahun-tahun pertumbuhan yang rendah dan terlihat jelas tidak inklusif, konsensus tersebut mulai menurun.
Para warga negara negara maju frustasi dengan “kemapanan” – termasuk “para ahli” ekonomi, para pemimpin politik arus utama, dan perusahaan-perusahaan multinasional yang dominan – yang terus-menerus mereka salahkan atas penderitaan ekonomi mereka.
Berbagai gerakan dan tokoh anti-kemapanan secara cepat menangkap frustasi ini, menggunakan retorik yang membakar dan bahkan agresif untuk memenangkan dukungan.
Mereka bahkan tidak perlu memenangkan pemilihan umun untuk mengganggu mekanisme transmisi antara ekonomi dan politik.
Kerajaan Inggris menunjukkan bahwa pada bulan Juni, dengan voting Brexit-nya --- sebuah keputusan yang secara langsung membelokkan konsensus ekonomi luas yang ada di Uni Eropa  adalah berdasarkan kepentingan terbaik Inggris.
Referendum tersebut terjadi karena satu alasan: pada tahun 2013, Perdana Menteri saat itu, David Cameron, takut bahwa ia tidak akan mampu mengamankan suara dari basis Partai Konservatif dalam pemilihan umum tahun tersebut.
Sumber dari ketakutan Cameron?
Gangguan politik dari Partai Independen Inggris –sebuah partai anti kemapanan yang akhirnya hanya memenangkan satu kursi di Parlemen dan akhirnya sekara tidak punya pemimpin dan sedang bergejolak.
Sekarang, nampaknya, bendungan sudah terbuka.
Di dalam konferensi tahunan Partai Konservatif, pidato dari Perdana Menteri Teresa May dan anggota-anggota kabinetnya menunjukkan keinginan untuk melakukan “Brexit keras,” yang akhirnya melucuti pengaturan-pengaturan perdagangan yang telah berguna selama ini bagi ekonomi menereka.
Mereka juga memasukkan serangan terhadap “elit internasional” dan kritik dari kebijakan-kebijakan Bank of England yang penting dalam menstabilisasi ekonomi Inggris seketika setelah referendum terjadi—ini memberikan pemerintah May waktu untuk membentuk strategi Brexit yang utuh.
Berbagai ekonomi berkembang lainnya mengalami perkembangan politik yang mirip.
Di Jerman, keberadaan Alternative für Deutschland, sebuah partai yang sangat kanan, yang keberadaannya dalam beberapa pemilihan umum pusat secara mencengangkan kuat, tampak sudah mempengaruhi perilaku pemerintah.
Di Amerika Serikat, bahkan kampanye Donald Trump untuk menjadi presiden gagal untuk menaruh seorang Republikan balik lagi ke Gedung Putih (seperti yang makin terlihat, di dalam kejadian akhir-akhir ini dari kampanyenya yang sangat tidak biasa, banyak pemimpin Republikan yang telah meninggalkan nominasi partai mereka tersebut), pencalonannya sebagai presiden akan meninggalkan dampak berkepanjangan dalam politik Amerika.
Jika tidak diatur dengan baik, referendum Italia berdasarkan Undang-Undang pada bulan Desember –sebuah gagasan yang beresiko dari Perdana Menteri Matteo Renzi untuk menyatukan dukugnan – dapat berbahaya, seperti yang dilakukan oleh Cameron, menyebabkan gangguan politik dan meremehkan tindakan yang efektif untuk mengatasi tantangan-tantangan ekonomi negara tersebut.
Jangan salah: pilihan-pilihan kebijakan yang solid dan meyakinkan itu ada.
Setelah kinerja ekonomi yang biasa-biasa saja selama bertahun-tahun, ada persetuhuan yang berkembang bahwa gerakan menjauh dari ketergantungan yang berlebihan terhadap kebijakan moneter yang tidak konvensional dibutuhkan.
Seperti yang dikatakan  oleh Managing Director IMF Christine Lagarde, “bank-bank sentral tidak boleh menjadi satu-satunya permainan yang ada.”
Namun, bank-bank sentral masih menjadi satu-satunya permainan yang ada.
Seperti argumen saya di The Only Game in Town, yang diterbitkan pada bulan Januari, negara-negara membutuhkan pendekatan kebijakan yang lebih komprehensif, yang melibatkan reformasi struktural yang pro terhadap pertumbuhan, manajemen permintaan yang lebih seimbang (termasuk pembelanjaan fiskal yang lebih besar dalam infrastruktur), dan arsitektur serta koordinasi kebijakan lintas batas yang lebih baik.
Ada juga sebuah kebutuhan, yang dicontohkan oleh krisis Yunani yang berkepanjangan, untuk mengatasi kantong-kantong keberhutangan yang berlebihan, yang dapat menyebabkan dampak yang menghancurkan, melebihi mereka yang telah terkena dampaknya.
Munculnya konsensus-konsensus baru dalam hal-hal tersebut adalah berita baik.
Namun, dalam lingkungan politik saat ini, menerjemahkan konsensus tersebut menjadi tindakan akan terjadi dengan lambat, dengan cara yang terbaik.
Resikonya adalah, seperti halnya politik yang buruk menghasilkan ekonomi yang baik, kemarahan dan frustasi populer akan muncul, meracuni politik lagi.
Satu harapan yang menggarisbawahi kepemimpinan politik mengambil kendali waktu untuk membuat koreksi-koreksi di tengah-tengah proses terjadi secara suka rela, sebelum tanda-tanda krisis ekonomi dan keuangan memaksa para pembuat keputusan sibuk meminimalisasi kerusakan.
A Rest Stop for Europe
PRINCETON – Last week, in a highly anticipated speech, German President Joachim Gauck cautioned against the blind pursuit of an “ever-closer” European Union, acknowledging that the growing inequality among member states is generating “a sense of unease, even unmistakable anger,” and increasing the risk of national humiliation.
He pointed out that, in addition to the economic crisis, there is “a crisis of confidence in Europe as a political project.”
While Gauck made clear that he remains decidedly pro-Europe, he highlighted the need for closer reflection about Europe’s future – and especially that of the eurozone.
Standing on the verge of greater integration, Europeans are hesitant, “unsure whether we should really stride out on the onward journey.”
Addressing this hesitation, he declared, will require a thoughtful, nuanced understanding of what “more Europe” actually means.
Gauck may not have gone far enough: At this point, an ever-closer union may be a political mirage.
Any meaningful progress toward stabilizing the eurozone would require a significant – potentially open-ended – financial commitment, and the EU is not politically ready to cross that threshold.
Repeatedly pretending to move forward, then pulling back at the critical point, exacerbates political uncertainty and economic vulnerability.
Rather than indecisively pursuing more unity, this may be the moment to restore effective sovereignty to national authorities in eurozone countries.
Such a move would alleviate anxiety in the short term, thereby giving Europeans the opportunity to regroup in preparation for future steps toward a more integrated Europe and a more resilient euro.
To this end, eurozone leaders must take three key steps.
The dysfunctional system of European fiscal governance should be dismantled; fiscal responsibility should be returned to member states; and, to minimize the risk of excessive future lending, private lenders should be required to bear the losses implied by unsustainable sovereign debt.
The case against European fiscal governance is straightforward.
Before the crisis, the single-minded emphasis on reducing national budget deficits to less than 3% of GDP led to extensive abuse.
Either the target was openly flouted, as it was in leading economies like Germany and France, or the data were manipulated to obscure problems (a common practice throughout the eurozone, not just in Greece).
And the belief in economic growth as a fiscal panacea led to unrealistically optimistic GDP forecasts.
When the crisis struck, the 3% deficit target became the focal point for unrelenting austerity – a form of what anthropologist Clifford Geertz described as “involution,” which occurs when a process intensifies rather than changes in response to external or internal pressure.
In other words, EU leaders began to complicate fiscal governance, ultimately creating an inefficient, inescapable labyrinth of regulation and bureaucracy.
As fiscal metrics become increasingly intricate, monitoring efforts will become ever easier to undermine.
The case for returning fiscal responsibility to national authorities is also strong – and not only because centralized fiscal authority has proved to be so inefficient.
With citizens of distressed countries bearing the fiscal burden of the crisis, the enduring presumption that they will not act responsibly is patronizing, at best.
And the current strategy of exchanging goodies for good behavior encourages game-playing and dilutes responsibility.
While the risk that governments will succumb to fiscal temptation remains, citizens’ current suffering is likely to deter future excesses.
National fiscal sovereignty would facilitate the final crucial step: building a more mature relationship with private lenders.
The eurozone was founded on the “no bailout” principle: if member states could not repay their debts, lenders would bear the losses.
But lenders chose – correctly, as it turned out – to disregard that threat.
Instead of enforcing the no-bailout principle and establishing a precedent, debtor countries used official loans to repay private creditors.
As a result, these countries have condemned themselves to continued austerity, low growth, and high debt, while diminishing any future incentive for private lenders to impose fiscal discipline on sovereign borrowers.
Only by shifting the burden of responsibility back onto private lenders can debtor countries escape this quagmire.
In the United States, each state is responsible for its fiscal management, without being forced to comply with a single, overarching template.
The states are not regulated by the federal government; they are disciplined by the knowledge that no one will repay their debts for them.
And the system seems to work: entering the crisis, US states had significantly lower deficit and debt ratios than the eurozone’s vulnerable member states.
So far, European integration has largely been a process of “falling forward,” with each stumble serving as a lesson from which a stronger union emerges.
But, while this uncertain approach may suffice as a basis for declarations of good intentions, it does not inspire the confidence required for countries to make the profound financial commitment that is now needed.
Europeans should have the chance to regain their footing.
Transferring fiscal responsibility back to national authorities would not only mean the end of counterproductive efforts to manage fiscal affairs centrally; it would also diminish the sense of frustration and lack of control that is fueling Euro-skepticism.
In short, taking a step back would provide an opportunity to reset, to reflect, and to plot the best course toward a more stable, more integrated Europe.
For a fiscal union to function – however unlikely that outcome may be – a solid foundation is crucial.
As Gauck explained, Europeans “are pausing to… equip [themselves] both intellectually and emotionally for the next step, which will require [them] to enter uncharted territory.”
Giving Europeans the time and space to choose more Europe would reinforce the core values upon which integration has rested for more than six decades.
Continuing to stumble forward, however, would inevitably lead to a debilitating, if not fatal, fall.
A European Cure for Balkan Depression
VIENNA – European politics is mostly shaped by events and anniversaries.
But while events are often unforeseeable, anniversaries are not.
Five years from now, Europe will be reflecting on the 100th anniversary of the outbreak of World War 1, which led to a loss of life almost without parallel and set in motion a chain of events that led to the creation of Europe as we now know it.
World leaders may have already reserved some days in August 2014 to mark the occasion.
It is easy to predict that Sarajevo will be the place where they will meet to look back on Europe’s savage twentieth century.
But how will Sarajevo look in five years?
Will it still be the capital of a country whose citizens view the future bleakly and whose politicians have totally lost touch with the electorate?
Or is there a hope that European leaders will use the anniversary to announce the successful integration of the remaining Balkan countries into the European Union?
A Balkan Monitor survey recently conducted by Gallup Europe gives suggests the state of public opinion in Serbia, Montenegro, Macedonia, Albania, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Kosovo 20 years on from the fall of the Berlin Wall and a decade after the end of the Kosovo war.
The findings seem to indicate that the next five years will be a make-or-break period for the region’s future development.
While the overwhelming majority of citizens are convinced that further armed conflict in the region is unlikely, the public’s mood – with the exception of Kosovars and Albanians – is pessimistic.
The future promises peace without development.
Trust in political elites and in national and European institutions has been steadily declining.
The majority of citizens have experienced a decline in living standards in the last year, and there remains a perception that people have more opportunities outside their own countries.
Pessimism about employment is alarmingly high among young people, while corruption and government mismanagement are regarded as being widespread.
All those who have made it their job to praise the stability in the region should look at these figures.
Indeed, it is striking that the majority of citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina believe that their leaders are not interested in their country joining the EU.
An absolute majority of citizens in each of the surveyed countries are convinced that their country is heading in the wrong direction.
Less than one in 10 Croats (whose country could be joining the EU in the near future) believes that their country is heading in the right direction.
There are now two options for the region: one is a “shock integration” program that takes all of the Western Balkan states into the EU; the other is a journey into the unknown.
The hope that these countries can muddle through on their own is a dangerous illusion.
Stability alone can no longer be the EU’s only objective in the region.
The EU’s continuing presence as a colonial power in places like Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo could cause even more problems in the future, especially if benefits are not forthcoming.
In particular, a delay in Serbia’s integration into the EU could bring Tito-inspired fantasies to the heart of the country’s foreign and security policy.
Thus, demoralization of Balkan society creates a dynamic of its own when the best and the brightest see their future outside of their own countries and where “stability” is just another name for political and economic stagnation.
If European leaders do plan to meet in 2014 in Sarajevo, they should act now.
The ratification of the Lisbon Treaty allows for an element of visionary realism in European politics, as there are no longer any institutional obstacles to the future enlargement of the EU.
Today, unlike a year ago, we know how many states are in the Balkans, and the Balkan Monitor results show that all of them want to join the Union.
What the EU has learned from the results of the last parliamentary elections in Bulgaria is that, contrary to conventional wisdom, the leverage of Brussels over new member states increases rather than diminishes after they join.
The EU’s decision to liberalize its visa regime for Serbia, Montenegro, and Macedonia – and the fact that George Papandreou, the major architect of the EU’s Balkan integration strategy, is back in power in Greece – is another source of optimism.
But it is now or never for the Balkans.
Visa liberalization can be a strategic step in the direction of “shock integration,” but if it is not followed by bold political action from the EU, it could merely become a re-packaging of the status quo .
In short, the moment has arrived for shaping events instead of simply marking anniversaries.
Closing Europe’s Strategy Gap
MADRID – The ongoing crisis in Ukraine has been a hot topic of analysis for almost a year.
But one question has largely escaped thorough examination: what Russia’s annexation of Crimea and invasion of eastern Ukraine indicates about the European Union’s foreign policy.
During the early stages of the crisis, Germany, which had bet heavily on Russia’s modernization, was averse to taking any consequential action.
But, as the crisis deepened, German Chancellor Angela Merkel worked to persuade her European counterparts to implement a broad and biting sanctions regime.
This certainly was a step in the right direction, but it did nothing to address the foreign-policy failings that helped spark the Ukrainian crisis and continue to undermine Europe’s response – namely, the EU’s misguided Neighborhood Policy (ENP) and its muddled approach to energy.
On both of these fronts, the EU’s lack of strategic vision has created the impression that Europe is repeatedly being outmaneuvered by Russian President Vladimir Putin.
It increasingly appears that Ukraine is becoming locked in a “frozen conflict” – Russia’s foreign-policy specialty.
Indeed, the situation in Ukraine represents a tactical victory for Russia, with the fragile but enduring ceasefire – and accompanying legislation that grants Donetsk and Luhansk considerable political autonomy – allowing Russia to entrench the conflict near the EU’s border.
Moreover, the delayed implementation of key elements of the EU’s association agreement with Ukraine is clear evidence that, at the moment, Russia dictates the terms of EU-Ukrainian engagement.
In Europe, the Kremlin has been able to pursue a successful divide-and-rule strategy, particularly in view of Hungary’s decision to suspend gas flows to Ukraine.
Prime Minister Viktor Orbán’s government, whose behavior in recent years has been at odds with the EU’s criteria for democracy, now openly approves of authoritarian regimes – and Putin’s, in particular – with serious potential consequences for European unity.
Nonetheless, the timing of the current ceasefire, which coincides with the installation of a new EU Commission, is advantageous, as is Putin’s shortsighted emphasis on tactical victories.
EU leaders should take advantage of the break in the fighting to stop reacting and start anticipating.
With a long-term strategic vision, the EU could overwhelm and ultimately undermine Putin’s short-term successes.
Such a vision must include a reconceptualization of the ENP.
The program’s mission – to help guide the political, social, and economic transitions of neighboring states – is not inherently problematic; the problem lies in the way that the mission has been interpreted and pursued.
For starters, the ENP assumes that all of the EU’s neighbors, both in the south and in the east, ultimately want to realize European values and structures in their own countries.
In other words, the ENP does not account for the developmental, cultural, and aspirational differences among the EU’s partner countries.
The ENP suffers operationally from its excessively technical approach and lack of strategic vision.
For example, before the Ukraine crisis, the European Commission was so focused on negotiating the technical features of the association agreement that it did not consider adequately the potential fallout of the process – such as, say, a response from Russia.
To be sure, the EU recognized its need for a coherent strategy, and attempted to resolve it by establishing the European External Action Service and the position of High Representative for Foreign Affairs.
But the EEAS ended up in a turf war with the European Commission, and outgoing High Representative Catherine Ashton did little to ease the tension, owing to her unwillingness to involve herself in intra-EU disagreements.
It is telling that Ashton has made progress exclusively in areas defined by ample consensus, such as the negotiations on Iran’s nuclear program and the pact between Kosovo and Serbia.
Further eroding Europe’s effectiveness is its fragmented approach to securing energy supplies.
With every country largely controlling its own energy policy, Europe’s energy market has become inefficient and excessively dependent on Russian supplies.
To the extent that there has been an EU-wide energy strategy, it has related to renewables, rather than the intersection of geopolitics and energy security.
But there is reason for hope.
The new Commission, which its president, Jean Claude Juncker, has restructured significantly, could provide Europe with the strategic leadership it so badly needs.
In fact, Juncker has already expressed a desire to integrate incoming High Representative Federica Mogherini into the Commission’s policy program.
The new structure – which tasks Mogherini with guiding and coordinating the work of multiple commissioners, including those responsible for trade, the ENP, and climate and energy – should strengthen the coherence and direction of EU policies, particularly after Mogherini completes her European Council-mandated assessment of the global strategic landscape.
But a restructured Commission is not enough to ensure a reset of Europe’s foreign-policy strategy.
For that to happen, Mogherini must assert herself as a leader, backed by Juncker and the new European Council president, Donald Tusk.
And, most important, all EU member states must recommit themselves to cooperation.
The Ukrainian people have demonstrated the power of Europe’s values.
Indeed, Europe has a large set of tools at its disposal; it just needs to figure out how to use them.
If it can, it will be better able to respond not only to the Russian challenge, but also to many of the other challenges that characterize today’s rapidly shifting global environment.
A Europe of Women?
PARIS – Are women in Europe on the verge of becoming an engine for political change?
In economic-development circles, experience and common sense suggest that progress, accountability, and hard work start with and depend on women.
Micro-credits, for example, are much more efficient when women receive and repay them.
Perhaps because they bear children and must find the means to feed them, women are now perceived as the best and most determined “agents of change.”
That seems to be as true now of European politics as it has been of economics in parts of Africa and Asia.
The results of Italy’s recent municipal elections could be a signal of an incipient electoral dynamic: it was women who voted Silvio Berlusconi’s party out of power in Milan, a city that he has long controlled (and the original seat of his power).
No direct link exists between that result and the dramatic Dominique Strauss-Kahn scandal in New York, but in the immediate aftermath of DSK’s arrest, Italian women and young voters decisively mobilized to defeat Berlusconi’s party (led in Milan, ironically, by a woman).
These voters could no longer stand the combination of machismo and vulgarity that had once served so well the man Italian humorists now call “Berlus-Kahn.”
When Berlusconi first came to power 17 years ago, he had the support of a majority of women.
They were not discouraged by his ambivalent perception of them (by turns celebrating their traditional domesticity and glorifying their sexual objectification).
But Italian society has changed: most women are now working, and they are no longer willing to accept Belusconi’s anachronistic and outrageous chauvinism.
Italian men may pity the aging, isolated leader, who looks increasingly like his wax effigy at Madame Tussaud’s.
But Italian women (indeed, women everywhere, it seems) feel only anger and humiliation over a man so obsessed with himself, his various criminal trials, and his vulgar pleasures that he appears to them to have no purpose left except to remain in power as long as possible.
Women, of course, are not alone in their opposition to Berlusconi, but they made the difference in Milan.
They are the incarnation of modernity, animated by a yearning for simple dignity and respect.
They are not alone in the vanguard of a new Europe of women.
As Iceland spiraled into bankruptcy, owing the irresponsible behavior of its mostly male political and financial elites, the people of Iceland decided that only a strong and responsible woman could redress the country’s problems.
So they elected one as President.
The depth and gravity of the current economic and social crisis in countries like Greece, Portugal, and Spain present women with a new opportunity.
Confronted with what many of them perceive as the equivalent of an “economic war,” women are playing an increasingly important role in maintaining their families’ financial security.
And the more widespread this becomes, the more women will seek a political role that reflects their economic clout.
Of course, women’s changing status may not translate immediately into growing political influence.
And the rest of Europe might never follow the example of Scandinavia, where gender equality has advanced much further than anywhere else.
But such a dynamic does now seem to be in motion.
Similarly, regardless of the outcome of DSK’s trial in New York, the case might represent a turning point in the treatment of women in Europe.
Public and private displays of atavistic machismo, one hopes, will no longer be considered acceptable.
In the Arab world, too, from Tunis to Cairo, young women have played an important role in the revolutionary process.
Their appetite for change – understandable, given the treatment of women in traditional Muslim societies – appears to be one of the main causes underlying the force of the revolutionary impulse in Tunisia and Egypt.
None of this is to argue that “women” are a universal force for positive change in Europe and around the world.
Consider, for example, Marine Le Pen, the new head of France’s National Front, Elena Ceaucescu, the sordid wife of the former Romanian dictator, or, more recently, Tunisian ex-President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali’s wife, Leila Trabelsi, who fled to Dubai with 1.5 tons of gold plundered from the central bank.
The point, simply, is that with so many people in so many countries demanding far-reaching change, the politics of gender is very much in play – in Europe and beyond.
The main question is whether the growing number of women in politics will deliver the different perspectives and modes of leadership that many voters (or protesters) now seem to crave.
A Euro Sabbatical
MUNICH – Under substantial external pressure, the eurozone’s crisis-hit countries are, at long last, bringing themselves to make painful cuts in their government budgets.
Salaries are being slashed and public employees sacked to reduce new borrowing to a tolerable level.
And yet, competitiveness in Greece and Portugal, in particular, is not improving.
The latest Eurostat figures on the evolution of the price index for self-produced goods (GDP deflator) show no tendency whatsoever in the crisis-stricken countries towards real devaluation. But real devaluation, achieved by lowering prices vis-à-vis their eurozone competitors, is the only way to re-establish these countries’ competitiveness.
A reduction in unit labor costs can also increase competitiveness only to the extent that it actually results in price reductions.
After all, it was price inflation in the crisis countries, fueled by massive inflows of cheap credit following the introduction of the euro, that resulted in their loss of competitiveness, ballooning current-account deficits, and accumulation of enormous foreign debt.
Now that capital markets are no longer willing to finance these deficits, prices should be going into reverse, but this, obviously, is not happening.
This internal devaluation is paying off: while Ireland was still running a current-account deficit of 5.6% of GDP in 2008, the European Commission expects the outturn for 2011 to have been a 0.7%-of-GDP current-account surplus.
True, much of this is mere debt-service relief, given that Ireland was able to repay its foreign liabilities with self-printed money, for which it pays only 1% interest.
However, Ireland’s big trade surplus did improve further.
Ireland owes much of this turnaround to its efficient export sector, whose supporters were able to enforce a political U-turn.
Greece, on the other hand, is under the influence of a strong import lobby.
As the Greek economics minister, Michalis Chrysochoidis, has said, this is attributable to European Union subsidies, which drove entrepreneurs to follow the easy money into the import sector.
Now these importers form a powerful bulwark against any policy that causes deflation, even though lowering prices – and thereby redirecting Greek demand from foreign to domestic products and helping tourism – is the only way to put the Greek economy back on its feet.
Since Greece’s current-account deficit as a share of GDP was three times higher than Ireland’s, Greek prices would have to fall by about half to achieve the same kind of success.
It is inconceivable that Greece could manage that within the eurozone without widespread social unrest, if not conditions approaching those of civil war.
But it isn’t just importers who are blocking real devaluation. Unions, too, are resisting the necessary wage reductions, and public and private debtors fear the prospect of insolvency if their assets and revenues are assessed at a lower value, while their debts remain unchanged.
The situation is intractable.
Many people regard debt relief and socialization of debts as the only way out.
This help has been given.
The recent agreement gave Greece relief of €237 billion ($316 billion), about 30% more than Greece’s net national income of roughly €180 billion euros.But such help only entrenches the wrong prices – and thus the economy’s lack of competitiveness.
The debts will re-emerge like a tumor, growing year by year, while undermining the creditworthiness of stable eurozone countries.
If that happened, the euro would eventually collapse.
Only a price reduction would create current-account surpluses and enable the crisis countries to pay off their foreign debts.
It is time for Europe to come to terms with this remorseless truth.
Those crisis countries that do not want to take it upon themselves to lower their prices should be given the opportunity to leave the eurozone temporarily in order to devalue prices and debts.
In other words, they should take a kind of euro sabbatical – a proposal that has now also been taken up by American economist Kenneth Rogoff.
After the ensuing financial thunderstorm died down, the sun would come out again very quickly.
The creditor countries would have to shoulder big losses from write-downs, but they would still end up with more than they would have gotten had the crisis countries remained within the eurozone, because these countries’ new prosperity, gained by leaving, offers the only chance of recovering any assets at all.
A Fair Deal for Turkey
Turkey has been given what looks like an ultimatum from the EU Commission: open your ports for ships from Cyprus within a month, or you may risk a halt to the EU accession talks now underway.
At the same time, the Commission’s latest report on Turkey’s progress toward accession notes that political reforms have slowed down, further calling into question the country’s future EU membership.
The Commission’s progress report will be dealt with by the European Council next month.
At that meeting, European leaders should ask themselves the following questions: Has the EU given Turkey a fair deal in the case of Cyprus?
Has the EU’s behavior been consistent in supporting political reform in Turkey?
What are the EU’s long-term interests vis-à-vis Turkey?
If the answers to the first two questions are “no” – as I believe they are – the third question becomes vitally important.
True, Turkey has closed its ports to ships from (Greek) Cyprus, and this is a violation of agreements.
But it is also true that the northern Turkish part of Cyprus is denied access to free trade and other benefits from EU-membership.
This is because Cyprus remains a divided island.
It was assumed that Cyprus should be united when the country joined the EU in 2004.
A United Nations plan for unification was accepted by the Turkish part.
But the Greek Cypriots voted against the plan because their leaders did not live up to the implicit deal with the EU to support it.
Nevertheless, Cyprus became an EU member – but only the Greek part.
This was clearly a mistake, because it made the EU part of the conflict.
It gave Greek Cypriot leaders the possibility of blocking progress in negotiations between the EU and Turkey.
So how can Turkey under these conditions maintain confidence in the EU’s fairness?
Political and legal reforms in Turkey in recent years have been remarkably far-reaching, for they have clearly been spurred by Turks’ wish to move closer to the EU.
But Turkish public support for EU membership has fallen dramatically as Turks have grown to feel that they are not being given a fair deal.
This has given new strength to those who want Turkey to develop in another direction, towards a more Islamic society instead of a modern secular state.
Therefore, the recent lack of progress in Turkey’s reform process can to a large extent be explained by the EU’s behavior.
This leaves us with the third question: what kind of Turkey does the EU want?
There should be no doubt about the answer: it is clearly in the EU’s interest to see Turkey’s democracy and economy continue to strengthen.
More than 40 years ago, it was promised that once Turkey lives up to the preconditions for membership, it will be welcome in the EU.
It is high time that European leaders take this promise seriously.
It is a sad fact that a large majority of voters in the EU are against Turkish membership.
But they are reacting to the current situation.
When they are asked if they would like a reformed Turkey as a partner – a Turkey that lives up fully to the conditions for membership described in the Copenhagen Criteria (democracy, rule of law, respect for human rights, and an effective market economy) – many more are inclined to say yes.
European leaders must therefore take up two challenges.
First, they should say clearly to their own voters that the EU must live up to its promises to Turkey, and that this is in the larger interest of all Europeans.
Second, they should give Turkey a fair deal in the negotiations.
The first litmus test on European leadership concerns the practical problem of access to harbors.
Here the Finns, who chair the EU right now, have taken an initiative to implement a pragmatic solution that takes into consideration both sides in the conflict.
The Finnish initiative should be given strong support from all European leaders.
At the same time, a new effort should be made to bring life to the UN’s proposals regarding Cyprus.
If this means putting pressure on some actors within the EU’s own ranks, so be it.