After serving as Singapore’s trade minister, finance minister, and deputy prime minister, Lee Hsien Loong took over the top post in 2004.
What is unresolved is where power goes next, and how.
Perhaps the answer will simply be that the ruling People’s Action Party will choose a successor in the conventional way.
Certainly, Singapore’s cadre of talented and experienced officials and ministers is deep.
Still, the question is an open one, owing to Lee Kuan Yew’s somewhat paradoxical sensitivity to the prominence of his family members in some of the country’s most senior posts.
Lee fought many battles with the international media over their coverage of Singapore, especially from the mid-1980s onward, by which point the country’s success had become abundantly clear.
As a Cambridge-trained lawyer, he was especially keen on using the law to browbeat his media (and political) critics, knowing full well that he had no serious chance of losing in Singapore’s own courts.
During my time as the editor-in-chief of The Economist (1993-2006), I received such browbeatings on many occasions.
What eventually became clear was that under no circumstances could Lee Kuan Yew countenance one particular word or concept: nepotism.
After all, he had set up Singapore as an intensely meritocratic society, in which competition, under clear and accepted rules, was king.
So when his own son became Prime Minister, and his daughter-in-law, Ho Ching, took the helm at Temasek, one of the state’s huge investment companies, any insinuation that they had done so on anything other than their own merit was unacceptable.
Lee established a high-minded committee to establish that nepotism was not the reason, and then set about suing anyone who dared to suggest otherwise.
Yet this abhorrence of nepotism was illogical – and Lee was generally nothing if not logical, even ruthlessly so – because in this case a perfectly good justification for it followed smoothly from his own analysis of Singapore.
A tiny, multi-racial society ejected from Malaysia in 1965, Singapore was born in an atmosphere of vulnerability, lack of legitimacy and trust, and ethnic conflict.
Up through the 1980s and 1990s, Lee often justified the continuation of authoritarian policies by reference to those communal riots, and to the ever-present possibility of a loss of social trust and a return to conflict.
So, in passing the baton to his eldest son, he could be said to have dealt with that risk in the most logical way possible.
If you trusted the founder of Singapore and thought him legitimate, who better to trust than the founder’s own son?
Indeed, the father would remain on the scene, first as “Senior Minister” and then in his mentor role, and had made his son prove his abilities openly in a series of prominent positions.
It worked, and Lee Hsien Loong has by all accounts done a good job as Prime Minister, whatever the explanation for his rise.
There is no current risk to Singapore’s political stability, and the younger Lee is only 63 years old; he could remain in office for a long time to come.
The question, though, remains: What happens next?
Lee Kuan Yew dealt with the question of succession by deferring it.
His son will need to provide the answer.
The Right Left for Europe
ATHENS – The United Kingdom’s referendum on whether to leave the European Union created odd bedfellows – and some odder adversaries.
As Tory turned mercilessly against Tory, the schism in the Conservative establishment received much attention.
But a parallel (thankfully more civilized) split afflicted my side: the left.
Having campaigned against “Leave” for several months in England, Wales, Northern Ireland, and Scotland, it was inevitable that I faced criticism from left-wing supporters of “Brexit,” or “Lexit” as it came to be known.
Lexiteers reject the call issued by DiEM25 (the radical Democracy in Europe Movement, launched in Berlin in February) for a pan-European movement to change the EU from within.
They believe that reviving progressive politics requires exiting an incorrigibly neoliberal EU.
The left needed the resulting debate.
Many on the left rightly disdain the easy surrender of others on their side to the premise that globalization has rendered the nation-state irrelevant.
While nation-states have become weaker, power should never be confused with sovereignty.
As little Iceland has demonstrated, it is possible for a sovereign people to safeguard basic freedoms and values independently of their state’s power.
And, crucially, Iceland, unlike Greece and the UK, never entered the EU.
Back in the 1990s, I campaigned against Greece’s entry into the eurozone, just like Britain’s Labour Party leader, Jeremy Corbyn, campaigned in the 1970s against joining the EU.
Indeed, when asked by friends in Norway or Switzerland whether they should support their countries’ entry into the EU, my answer is negative.
But it is one thing to oppose entering the EU; it is quite another to favor exiting it once inside.
Exiting is unlikely to get you to where you would have been, economically and politically, had you not entered.
So opposing both entry and exit is a coherent position.
Whether it makes sense for leftists to advocate exit hinges on whether a nation-state freed from EU institutions provides more fertile ground for cultivating a progressive agenda of redistribution, labor rights, and anti-racism.
It also depends on the likely impact of an exit campaign on transnational solidarity.
As I travel across Europe, advocating a pan-European movement to confront the EU’s authoritarianism, I sense a great surge of internationalism in places as different from one another as Germany, Ireland, and Portugal.
Distinguished Lexiteers, like Harvard’s Richard Tuck, are prepared to risk quashing this surge.
They point to pivotal moments when the left took advantage of Britain’s lack of a written constitution to expropriate private medical business and create its National Health Service and other such institutions.
“A vote to stay within the EU,” Tuck writes, “will…end any hope of genuinely left politics in the UK.”
Similarly, on immigration, Tuck claims that, despite the insufferable xenophobia dominating the Leave campaign, the only way to overcome racism is to let Britain’s people “feel” sovereign again by returning control of their borders to London.
Tuck’s historical analysis is correct.
The EU is inimical to projects such as the NHS and nationalized industries (though it was the British nation-state, under Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, that gave the EU its neoliberal cast).
And perhaps the loss of control over immigration from Europe inspired greater xenophobia.
But once locked into this EU, a political campaign to exit it is unlikely to steer national politics in the direction of leftist goals.
Most likely, it will result in a new Tory administration that tightens the screw of austerity further and erects new fences to keep despised foreigners out.
Many leftists find it hard to fathom why I campaigned for “Remain” after EU leaders vilified me personally and crushed Greece’s “Athens Spring” in 2015.
Of course, no truly progressive agenda can be revived through the EU institutions.
DiEM25 was founded on the conviction that it is only against EU institutions, but within the EU, that progressive politics has a chance in Europe.
Leftists once understood that the good society is to be won by entering the prevailing institutions in order to overcome their regressive function.
“In and against” used to be our motto.
We should revive it.
Another critic of DiEM25, Thomas Fazi, believes that, “given the current make-up of the European Parliament,” Greece would still have been crushed, even if the parliament were more democratic.
But DiEM25’s view is not simply that the EU suffers a democratic deficit; it is that the European Parliament is not a proper parliament.
Creating a proper parliament, able to dismiss the executive, would destroy the European Parliament’s “current make-up” and usher in a democratic politics that would prevent official creditors from crushing countries like Greece.
Fazi’s fellow economist Heiner Flassbeck likewise argues that the nation-state, not some airy-fairy pan-European terrain, as DiEM25 purportedly suggests, is the right place to push for change.
In fact, DiEM25 focuses on both levels and beyond.
The left, once upon a time, understood the importance of operating simultaneously at the municipal, regional, national, and international levels.
Why do we, suddenly, feel the need to prioritize the national over the European?
Perhaps Flassbeck’s harshest criticism of DiEM25’s radical pan-Europeanism is the charge that we are peddling left-wing TINA: “there is no alternative” to operating at the level of the EU.
While DiEM25 advocates a democratic union, we certainly reject both the inevitability and the desirability of “ever closer union.”
Today, the European establishment is working toward a political union that, we regard as an austerian iron cage.
We have declared war on this conception of Europe.
Last year, when Greece’s official creditors threatened us with ejection from the eurozone, even from the EU, I was undaunted.
DiEM25 is imbued with this spirit of defiance: we will not be forced by the prospect of the EU’s disintegration to acquiesce to an EU of the establishment’s choosing.
In fact, we believe it is important to prepare for the collapse of EU under the weight of its leaders’ hubris.
But that is not the same as making the EU’s disintegration our objective and inviting European progressives to join neo-fascists in campaigning for it.
The philosopher Slavoj Žižek, a DiEM25 signatory, recently quipped that socialist nationalism is not a good defense against the postmodern national socialism that the EU’s disintegration would bring.
He’s right.
Now more than ever, a pan-European humanist movement to democratize the EU is the left’s best bet.
Criminalizing Consent?
LONDON – Canada’s Parliament is debating a new anti-prostitution bill.
Entitled the “Protection of Communities and Exploited Persons Act,” the proposed legislation would criminalize the purchase of “sexual services.”
For those who are uncertain about what might constitute a sexual service, the term is helpfully defined by Canada’s Department of Justice to include lap-dancing, but not stripping or “acts related to the production of pornography.”
Canada is not alone in seeking to criminalize transactional sex between consenting adults.
More than 120 countries criminalize some aspect of sex work or solicitation, including 13 that, like the Canadian bill, criminalize the customer, and eight where possession of a condom is deemed to be proof of sex work, and thus punishable.
While the French Senate recently struck down a similar law, several European countries are pressing ahead.
In February, the European Parliament adopted a resolution to outlaw the purchase of sexual services from anyone below the age of 21.
The impact of such laws will be much more significant than many believe.
Surveys across 54 countries worldwide have found that up to 14% of men in nationally representative samples – and a global average of 9-10% – report paying for sex in the past year.
Similar population-based surveys among women find much smaller proportions selling sex.
Efforts to regulate or ban the sex trade are hardly new.
Religious and cultural proscriptions aimed at controlling sexual behavior have been around for millennia.
Over time, however, the concept of what, when, where, and with whom sexual activity is permissible has changed – sometimes quite arbitrarily, depending on who is in power.
As a result, laws governing sexual behavior are almost as varied as human sexuality itself.
Many countries criminalize extra-marital sex.
Moreover, more than 20 countries criminalize premarital sex between consenting adults, though in at least 34 countries, young people cannot marry until they are 20 – and, in one country, men need to be 29.
Conversely, in more than 50 countries, a girl under 15 can be married off if her parents consent to it, even if she does not.
The United Nations estimates that more than 14 million girls under the age of 18 – of whom one third are under 15 – get married each year.
That is 39,000 girl brides every day.
In three countries, a third of all girls are married by their 15th birthday.
Laws governing sex among consenting adults can be similarly harsh.
In 78 countries, homosexuality is prohibited, and in seven it is punishable by death.
The damage caused by such repressive and restrictive laws is well documented, including, for example, an increased risk of HIV transmission among gay men.
Do local cultural and religious values outweigh such concerns?
A universal definition of sexual health and sexual rights is sorely needed.
The UN has long attempted to define what constitutes a sexually healthy society.
Over the past 40 years, expert committees convened by the World Health Organization have agreed that sexual health includes physical, emotional, mental, and social well-being in relation to sexuality, and is underpinned by respect for human rights and individual autonomy.
But WHO has never proposed such a definition to its governing body, the World Health Assembly, presumably because some of its member states would reject the definition and the accompanying obligations to promote it domestically.
Now, however, the world has an opportunity to move from criminalization to consent.
With the debate on the post-2015 Sustainable Development Goals starting at last month’s UN General Assembly, an oblique reference to “ensuring access to services” can be fully explored.
This would normally include sexual and reproductive health-care services such as family planning and treatment of sexually transmitted infections.
Access to services, though important, is not synonymous with a view of sexuality founded on human rights and individual autonomy.
Indeed, rights are mentioned only in relation to reproduction, and concern only girls and women.
However, if consent becomes central to the issue of sexual health, all adults will have the right to make autonomous decisions about their sexuality.
These sexual rights would include the right to choose one’s sexual partners; decide whether, when, and whom to marry; decline sexual advances; and even buy sex from another consenting adult.
With rights come the responsibility to protect children who cannot legally consent; to ensure that sexual partners are not coerced; and to promote a safe and satisfying sex life for all.
It is these rights and responsibilities that Canada and other countries should be enshrining in their laws.
That would be a sexual service that no one should oppose.
Legitimacy and Elections
So Ukraine now has a legitimate government. Or does it?
Viktor Yushchenko has been elected with 52% of the popular vote. His opponent received 44%.
Observers confirm that infringements of the electoral rules were but minor. Yet questions remain.
The defeated candidate, Viktor Yanukovych, contests the result. The country is deeply divided.
Will the miners of Donetsk start the next revolution, this time in red against the orange of the protests staged by Yushchenko’s supporters against the original election with its clearly illegitimate result?
Will there be a secession movement in eastern Ukraine?
Legitimacy is a delicate, yet utterly important feature of stable democratic politics. It is also complicated.
Was George W. Bush the legitimately elected President of the United States in his first term, having gained office only after America’s Supreme Court ordered an end to the Florida recount and with Bush having secured only a minority of the votes nationwide?
Are the presidents of some former Soviet republics who seem to command 90% of the popular vote legitimately elected?
Will the planned elections in Iraq be regarded as legitimate internally as well as externally?
It is vital to remember that elections alone do not guarantee legitimacy, even if they are seen to be free and fair.
Americans find it hard to understand this, as do others in the lucky democracies of the Anglo-Saxon world.
For them, legitimacy simply means that voting and counting votes happens according to undisputed rules.
What is legal, they think, is also legitimate.
For many others in the world, however, at least two other questions remain.
First, turnout is crucial: who has voted and who has not.
The second question is whether there remains any systematic, potentially violent opposition to the outcome.
The point about George W. Bush’s first term was that despite grumblings and continued vocal opposition, the result of the election of 2000 was generally accepted.
Or consider Tony Blair’s “landslide victory” in 2001, when Labour won 40% of the vote with turnout of 60%.
In effect, 25% of the total electorate gave him nearly two-thirds of the seats in the House of Commons.
Did anyone doubt the legitimacy of the result?
Not in Britain, nor among Britain’s partners.
But there are not many countries where that would be true.
Most others would – at the very least – demand a coalition government to reflect the existing diversity of views.
Legitimacy by election is particularly problematic in countries with what might be called “endemic minorities.”
In Canada, for example, it would be risky to overlook the special interests of Quebec.
In Ukraine, the divergent interests of the country’s west and east have to be recognized if legitimacy is to be established.
In Iraq, a technical majority in a wholly legal election is almost meaningless if the position of Sunni Muslims and Kurds is not explicitly recognized.
The occupation powers are therefore right to be worried about an election in which massive abstention among Sunnis results in a large Shiite majority.
So legitimacy is more than legality. It rests on what the people concerned believe to be real.
At the very least, there has to be an absence of violent opposition, including the threat of secession.
In Western countries, notably in the US, people tend to assume too much when it comes to bringing democracy – meaning elections in the first instance – to others.
In particular, we assume an essentially homogenous electorate, so that even a low turnout does not involve any disadvantage for particular ethnic or cultural groups.
We also assume an automatic acceptance of rules that in fact took a long time to become embedded even in the US.
Without legitimacy, there can be no stability in any political system, and without elections – that is, an explicit expression of popular consent to the holders of power – there can be no legitimacy.
But while free elections are a necessary condition of legitimacy, they are far from being sufficient to assure it.
Constitutional arrangements must guarantee all entrenched groups a place in the countries’ political institutions.
It is equally imperative to establish the rule of law, exercised by an independent and respected judiciary.
We should remember this as we pursue the elusive objective of democracy in Iraq, so that we are not surprised if the upcoming election fails to generate a legitimate government.
Egypt’s Revolutionary Reset
CAIRO – Whether or not Egypt’s first-ever democratically elected president, Mohamed Morsi, was pushed aside by a military coup may be debatable, but it is undeniable that the June 30 protest that triggered his ouster was the largest mass movement in Egypt’s history. It was also glaring testimony to the failure of the first phase of Egypt’s revolution.
Politicians, generals, and jurists could not rise above myopic concerns to build the bedrock for a new republic.
The forcible removal of an elected president should have been avoided – the liberal opposition could have eased popular anger by demanding that the government make some concessions until legislative elections, which had been set for later this year.
With a good showing, they could have then compelled Morsi’s Muslim Brotherhood to accept the necessary compromises.
The most dangerous consequences of Morsi’s overthrow became apparent on July 8, when security forces in Cairo opened fire on some of the tens of thousands of his supporters who had turned out to call for his reinstatement, killing more than 50 people.
Egyptians now fear an outcome like that in Algeria in 1992, when the military scrapped elections and sparked a bloody civil war, or in Pakistan in 1999, when General Pervez Musharraf led a widely celebrated – and soon regretted – coup against Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif.
Egypt is at its most volatile since former President Hosni Mubarak’s ouster in early 2011.
But past mistakes have also taught Egyptians important lessons about what a successful transition demands.
The first transition did not manage to gather broad popular legitimacy.
Instead of uniting the various political forces around an accepted set of democratic institutions, the constitutional process ended up polarizing society along identity lines, owing in large part to a faulty sequence: unlike Tunisia, a president with full powers was elected before a new constitution was produced.
As a result, Morsi’s incentives were to consolidate power rather than produce an inclusive constitution; put to a referendum, the draft backed by the Brotherhood was approved by 64% of voters, but with a turnout of just 33%.
Opposition forces were also to blame; they refused to cooperate with the Brotherhood, betting that political isolation and a failing economy would end up weakening their opponents.
The second revolution highlighted the unwillingness of a large part of Egypt’s diverse population to accept this non-inclusive process.
Those who took to the streets to demand a replay – largely secular, liberal, educated Egyptians – were driven not just by political and economic grievances, but also, like restive middle classes elsewhere, by aspirations for freedom and inclusiveness.
Against this background, future progress depends on three major factors.
First, Egypt needs a broadly agreed constitution and political road map.
The new transition process must emphasize consensus, with “no victor, no vanquished” serving as a guiding principle.
The revision of the constitution must include public debate, and the resulting text must gain the support of a supermajority in a popular referendum.
Ensuring that Islamic groups are included in the political process is a prerequisite for progress.
Egypt’s Islamists traded violent militancy for moderation and participation when they started to compete in parliamentary elections under Mubarak.
The recent events threaten this historic transformation.
Unless Islamists are brought permanently into the political fold, political Islam will return in more violent forms in the future.
Second, the country’s new leaders will have to initiate unpopular measures aimed at revitalizing the ailing economy.
This will require explaining to the population the real economic challenges facing the country.
The new government needs to convince the middle class to accept a cutback in energy subsidies, which now consume 30% of public expenditures, and ensure better regulation of competition and democratization of credit.
It needs to protect the poor and provide them with security and broader access to state services, and to convince them that reforms will work to their advantage.
Finally, the “street” will have to keep pressure on politicians to ensure that the transition delivers a political settlement with which the main parties can live.
The street has now become much more strategic.
Tamarod, the grassroots movement that led the recent protests by collecting millions of signatures on a petition demanding an early presidential election, has forced the fragmented liberal parties to become more disciplined.
While Morsi’s supporters have also shown resilience, increased support for other religious parties reflects dissatisfaction with the Brotherhood’s performance even among Islamists.
Success requires dialogue and compromise.
The sequence in the road map announced by interim President Adli Mansour is a good starting point – first a constitution, then a parliament, and finally a president.
Interim Prime Minister Hazem El-Beblawi, a highly regarded economist and experienced manager and diplomat, is both a respected liberal and a scion of the scholars of the Al-Azhar Mosque, the highest authority in Sunni Islam.
He is ideally positioned to lead a technocratic cabinet of last resort.
Both Mansour and Beblawi can rise above short-term temptations, because they will not contest the upcoming elections.
Meanwhile, the military should be chastened by its recent blunders and choose to keep a low profile.
Egypt’s democratic transition can still succeed.
But progress toward inclusive, durable institutions will require Egyptians to take heed of the main mistakes of the past two and a half years.
Complacency in a Leaderless World
DAVOS – The World Economic Forum’s annual meeting in Davos has lost some of its pre-crisis panache.
After all, before the meltdown in 2008, the captains of finance and industry could trumpet the virtues of globalization, technology, and financial liberalization, which supposedly heralded a new era of relentless growth.
The benefits would be shared by all, if only they would do “the right thing.”
Those days are gone.
But Davos remains a good place to get a sense of the global zeitgeist.
It goes without saying that developing and emerging-market countries no longer look at the advanced countries as they once did.
But a remark by one mining company executive from a developing country caught the spirit of change.
In response to one development expert’s heartfelt despair that unfair trade treaties and unfulfilled promises of aid have cost the developed countries their moral authority, he retorted: “The West never had any moral authority.”
Colonialism, slavery, the splintering of Africa into small countries, and a long history of resource exploitation may be matters of the distant past to the perpetrators, but not so to those who suffered as a result.
If there is a single topic that concerned the assembled leaders the most, it is economic inequality.
The shift in the debate from just a year ago seems dramatic: no one even mentions the notion of trickle-down economics anymore, and few are willing to argue that there is a close congruence between social contributions and private rewards.
While the realization that America is not the land of opportunity that it has long claimed to be is as disconcerting to others as it is to Americans, inequality of opportunity at the global scale is even greater.
One cannot really claim that the world is “flat” when a typical African receives investment in his or her human capital of a few hundred dollars, while rich Americans get a gift from their parents and society in excess of a half-million dollars.
A high point of the meeting was the speech by Christine Lagarde, the International Monetary Fund’s managing director, who stressed the marked change in her institution, at least at the top: deep concern about women’s rights; renewed emphasis on the link between inequality and instability; and recognition that collective bargaining and minimum wages could play an important role in reducing inequality.
If only the IMF programs in Greece and elsewhere fully reflected these sentiments!
The Associated Press organized a sobering session on technology and unemployment: Can countries (particularly in the developed world) create new jobs – especially good jobs – in the face of modern technology that has replaced workers with robots and other machines in any task that can be routinized?
Overall, the private sector in Europe and America has been unable to create many good jobs since the beginning of the current century.
Even in China and other parts of the world with growing manufacturing sectors, productivity improvements – often related to job-killing automated processes – account for most of the growth in output.
Those suffering the most are the young, whose life prospects will be badly hurt by the extended periods of unemployment that they face today.
But most of those in Davos put aside these problems to celebrate the euro’s survival.
The dominant note was one of complacency – or even optimism.
The “Draghi put” –&#160;the notion that the European Central Bank, with its deep pockets, would and could do whatever necessary to save the euro and each of the crisis countries – seemed to have worked, at least for a while.
The temporary calm provided some support for those who claimed that what was required, above all, was a restoration of confidence.
The hope was that Draghi’s promises would be a costless way of providing that confidence, because they would never have to be fulfilled.
Critics repeatedly pointed out that the fundamental contradictions had not been resolved, and that if the euro was to survive in the long run, there would have to be a fiscal and banking union, which would require morepolitical unification than most Europeans are willing to accept.
But much of what was said in and around the meetings reflected a deep lack of solidarity.
One very senior government official of a northern European country did not even put down his fork when interrupted by an earnest dinner companion who pointed out that many Spaniards now eat out of garbage cans.
Perhaps the most optimistic note came from the emerging markets: while the risk of globalization was that it implied a new interdependence, so that flawed economic policies in the US and Europe could torpedo developing countries’ economies, the more successful emerging markets have managed globalization well enough to sustain growth in the face of failures in the West.
With the US politically paralyzed by the Republicans’ infantile political tantrums, and Europe focused on ensuring the survival of the ill-conceived euro project, the lack of global leadership was a major complaint at Davos.
In the last 25 years, we have moved from a world dominated by two superpowers to one dominated by one, and now to a leaderless, multi-polar world.
While we may talk about the G-7, or G-8, or G-20, the more apt description is G-0.
We will have to learn how to live, and thrive, in this new world.
The Detroit Syndrome
SINGAPORE – When the city of Detroit filed for bankruptcy last week, it became the largest such filing in United States history.
Detroit’s population has dropped from 1.8 million in 1950, when it was America’s fifth-largest city, to less than 700,000 today.
Its industrial base lies shattered.
And yet we live in a world where cities have never had it so good.
More than half of the world’s population is urban, for the first time in history, and urban hubs generate an estimated 80% of global GDP.
These proportions will rise even higher as emerging-market countries urbanize rapidly.
So, what can the world learn from Detroit’s plight?
As recently as the 1990’s, many experts were suggesting that technology would make cities irrelevant.
It was believed that the Internet and mobile communications, then infant technologies, would make it unnecessary for people to live in crowded and expensive urban hubs.
Instead, cities like New York and London have experienced sharp increases in population since 1990, after decades of decline.
One factor that has helped cities is the nature of twenty-first century life.
Previously, life in developed countries was based on daily routines: people went to work in offices and factories, returned home to eat dinner with their families, watched their favorite television programs, went to sleep, and repeated the cycle when they awoke.
Such regular cycles no longer apply to most peoples’ lives.
In the course of a work day, people mix and match many activities – they may work at a desk, but they may also meet a friend for lunch, go to the gym, do chores, travel on business, shop online, and so on.
Similarly, time at home is no longer clearly demarcated, with people working online or participating in conference calls even as they manage their family life.
We have discovered that this multi-tasking life is best done in cities, which concentrate a multiplicity of hard amenities – airports, shops, schools, parks, and sports facilities – as well as soft amenities like clubs, bars, and restaurants.
Another factor is that cities have increased in importance as hubs for innovation and creativity.
Until the nineteenth century, innovation was carried out mostly by generalists and tinkerers, which meant that the accumulation of new knowledge was slow, but that its diffusion across different fields was rapid.
In the twentieth century, knowledge creation became the job of specialists, which accelerated knowledge creation but retarded inter-disciplinary application.
But recent studies have shown that this source of innovation is rapidly decelerating (the productivity of an American research worker may now be less than 15% of a similar researcher in 1950).
Instead, innovation is increasingly based on mixing and matching knowledge from different specializations.
Certain cities are ideally suited for this, because they concentrate different kinds of human capital and encourage random interactions between people with different knowledge and skills.
The problem with this post-industrial urban model is that it strongly favors generalist cities that can cluster different kinds of soft and hard amenities and human capital.
Indeed, the growth dynamic can be so strong for some successful cities that they can hollow out smaller rivals (for example, London vis-à-vis the cities of northern England).
Some specialist cities could also do well in this world.
But, as Detroit, with its long dependence on the automotive industry, demonstrates, cities that are dependent on a single industry or on a temporary location advantage may fare extremely poorly.
All of this has important implications for emerging economies.
As it transformed itself into the “factory of the world,” the share of China’s urban population jumped from 26.4% in 1990 to around 53% today.
The big, cosmopolitan cities of Beijing and Shanghai have grown dramatically, but the bulk of the urban migration has been to cookie-cutter small and medium-size industrial towns that have mushroomed over the last decade.
By clustering industrial infrastructure and using the hukou system of city-specific residency permits, the authorities have been able to control the process surprisingly well.
This process of urban growth, however, is about to unravel.
As China shifts its economic model away from heavy infrastructure investment and bulk manufacturing, many of these small industrial cities will lose their core industry.
This will happen at a time when the country’s skewed demographics causes the workforce to shrink and the flow of migration from rural areas to cities to slow (the rural population now disproportionately comprises the elderly).
Meanwhile, the post-industrial attractions of cities like Shanghai and Beijing will attract the more talented and better-educated children of today’s industrial workers.
Unlike rural migrants heading for industrial jobs, it will be much more difficult to guide educated and creative professionals using the hukou system.
The boom in the successful cities, therefore, will hollow out human capital from less attractive industrial hubs, which will then fall into a vicious cycle of decay and falling productivity.
Stories like Detroit’s have played out several times in developed countries during the last half-century.
And, as the fate of Mexico’s northern towns suggests, emerging economies are not immune from this process.
That is why China needs to prepare for this moment.
Rather than building ever more cookie-cutter industrial towns, China needs to refit and upgrade its existing cities.
As its population begins to shrink, it may even be worthwhile to shut down unviable cities and consolidate.
Detroit’s fate should serve as a warning, not only for China, but for the next generation of urbanizing countries (for example, India) as well.
Following from Above
PARIS – France’s military intervention in Mali is proceeding apace, with the recent fall of Timbuktu representing a significant milestone in the effort to rout the Islamist rebels who took control of the north of the country.
More broadly, the intervention’s apparent success underscores three key points.
First, it confirms that France retains the ability to act as Europe’s prime mover.
France has a large and rapidly deployable military force, as it demonstrated in Libya in 2011.
Furthermore, this military capability is tied to a worldview, rather than just to the defense of economic interests.
In Mali, France is not seeking to lay claim to resources, export democracy, or extend a Françafrique in which it no longer believes.
More prosaically, France seeks to stabilize a country that is subject to violent forces that are not always led by Malians, and that are likely to disrupt the whole sub-region while threatening Europe.
Second, the intervention once again highlights the strategic insignificance of the European Union, which is promoting a “comprehensive strategy” for Mali and the whole region in order to avoid the crucial question: Under what conditions will Europe use force?
The final point concerns the nature of American involvement in the conflict.
The United States remains France’s most valuable strategic ally in this endeavor, but the terms have changed.
Indeed, after a decade of fruitless (to say the least) military interventions, tightening budget constraints have led President Barack Obama’s administration to sacrifice some ground forces in order to keep intact its substantial air and naval capabilities, the purpose being, apparently, to contain China.
Obama’s recalibration has accentuated the realist turn in American foreign policy, according to which the US is now willing to intervene only when its immediate interests are at stake.
In other cases, America’s allies will have to demonstrate their commitment in order to receive conditional backing.
This new approach was applied to Libya, where it was characterized as “leading from behind.”
But this concept is inapt, because it implies that, ultimately, the US was the leader.
Clearly, it was not.
Absent the initial push from France and Great Britain, the US would most likely have remained passive, which was what the State and Defense Departments advised.
(The State Department even went so far as to warn France and Great Britain not to vote for United Nations Resolution 1973, which authorized intervention.)
Obama ultimately overturned his bureaucrats’ position, proposing a strong military intervention, without ground troops, for a very limited period.
In the end, the US delivered 75% of the intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR), 75% of air-to-air refueling, and 90% of the targeting intelligence – an indisputably significant contribution.
Yet Libya marked the beginning of a concept – applicable to Mali today – that might be termed “following from above.”
In other words, the US is conveying to its allies that it will no longer intervene in low-priority areas unless its allies commit first, just like an investor waiting for the promoter to make a down payment.
As in Libya, France had to take the initiative in Mali.
And, as in Libya, American support was crucial in the four areas where France and other European countries fall short: aerial reconnaissance, targeting, air transportation, and air-to-air refueling.
Unlike in Libya, though, in Mali the US took an unprecedented step in the history of transatlantic relations by considering making France pay to lease troop transport aircraft.
Although this proposal ultimately was discarded, it reveals both the erosion of US support and America’s determination to signal its non-assistance to Europeans who are in harm’s way.
Moreover, there are real disagreements within the US bureaucracy when it comes to assessing the threat that Al Qaeda in Mali poses for US interests.
Following from above thus has operational and symbolic significance.
Operationally, it is limited to ISR and does not involve ground troops.
Symbolically, it means backing initial and significant efforts undertaken by others.
For Europe, this situation is worrying on two counts.
First, it illustrates the stop-and-go dynamic undergirding American politics, which can swing – within just five years – from a disturbing expansionism to an equally worrying withdrawal from the world.
A jihadist Mali admittedly does not directly threaten the US, or at least less so than it does Europe.
But does it make sense to stick to such a simple analysis after what occurred on September 11, 2001?
Second, Europe persists in ignoring the need to determine under what conditions it can and should use force, not for peacekeeping but to fight potentially hostile forces.
The aversion to war is one of the most serious risks that Europe currently faces.
For the French, the US position will force a reevaluation of the importance of Africa in France’s global strategy, given that the government’s 2008 white paper on defense clearly minimized the continent’s importance, most likely to justify a reduction in French ground forces.
Moreover, it will encourage France to broach the subject of military force with its European allies.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel is known to criticize France for being less than enthusiastic about European political union.
The question is how to build Europe with states that bury their heads in the sand at the mention of the use of force, while cynically admitting that France is defending all of Europe in Mali.
France must now insist on addressing the question of the use of force as a pre-condition to any negotiations on Europe’s political integration.
By showing Europe that it is following its actions from above, the US will once again force Europeans to awaken from their political torpor and strategic mediocrity.
The question remains whether Europeans will be willing to do so.
Lessons from the Black Tsunami
The world has been horrified at America’s response to Hurricane Katrina and its aftermath in New Orleans.
Four years after the terrorist attacks of September 2001, and with billions of dollars allegedly spent on “preparedness” for another emergency, America has shown the world that it was not prepared – even for an event that came with ample warning.
The difference between the Tsunami in Asia last December and what is coming to be called the Black Tsunami in America – because it brought so much devastation to the poor, mostly black, people of Louisiana – is striking.
The Asian disaster showed the ability of those affected to overcome long-standing rifts, as Aceh rebels put down their arms in common cause with the rest of Indonesia.
By contrast, the disaster in New Orleans – and elsewhere along America’s Gulf Coast – exposed and aggravated such rifts.
The Bush administration’s response to the hurricane confirmed the suspicion among blacks that, while they might send their boys to fight America’s wars, they had not only been left behind in America’s prosperity, but that there was neither understanding nor concern when they needed it most.
An evacuation was ordered, but no means to do so were provided for the poor.
When help came, it was, as one New York Times columnist noted, like the Titanic: the rich and powerful got out first.
I was in Thailand right after the Tsunami, and I saw that country’s impressive response.
The Thais flew consular and embassy officials to the affected areas, aware of the sense of helplessness among those stranded far from home.
America kept foreign officials from coming to the aid of their nationals in New Orleans – embarrassed, perhaps, at what they would see. 
Even the richest country in the world has limited resources.
If it gives tax cuts to the rich, it will have less to spend on repairing levees; if it deploys the National Guard and reserves to fight a hopeless war in Iraq, there will be fewer resources at home to cope with a domestic crisis.
Choices must be made, and choices matter.
Shortsighted politicians like Bush often skimp on long-term investments in favor of short-term advantage.
He recently signed a lavish infrastructure bill that included, among other payoffs to political supporters, an infamous bridge to nowhere in Alaska.
Money that could have been used to save thousands of lives was spent to win votes. 
Seldom do the “chickens come home to roost” as quickly as they have in recent years – an ill-conceived war, attempted on the cheap, has not brought peace to the Middle East.
Now America has had to pay the price for ignoring loud warnings about the weakened levees of New Orleans.
Clearly, nothing could have spared New Orleans completely from Katrina’s impact, but the devastation could certainly have been lessened.
Markets, for all their virtues, often do not work well in a crisis.
Indeed, the market mechanism is often revolting to behold in emergencies.
The market did not respond to the need for evacuation by sending in huge convoys of buses to get people out; in some places, it did respond by tripling hotel prices in neighboring areas, which, while reflecting the marked change in supply and demand, is reviled as price gouging.
Such behavior is so odious because it brings little allocative benefit – no significant increase in supply in the short run – and carries a huge distributive cost, as those with resources take advantage of those without.  
The Nobel Prize-winning economist Amartya Sen has emphasized that most famines are associated not with a shortage of food, but the failure to get food to the people who need it, largely because they lack purchasing power.
America, the richest country in the world, clearly had the resources to evacuate New Orleans.
Bush simply forgot the poor – the tens, perhaps hundreds of thousands, who simply did not have the resources to pay for their own evacuation. 
When you’re poor, you don’t have a credit card, and most of the stranded were especially strapped for funds because it was the end of the month.
But even if they had had the money, it is not obvious that markets would have responded quickly enough to provide the needed supply; in times of crisis, they often simply don’t.
That’s one of the reasons why the military does not use a price system to allocate resources.
Last January, after the tsunami, in response to widespread calls for an early warning system, I observed that the world had been given an early warning on global warming.
The rest of the world has begun to take heed, but Bush, having ignored warnings about Al Qaeda’s plans prior to September 11, 2001, and having not only ignored the warnings about New Orleans levees, but actually gutted funding to shore them, has not led America to do likewise. 
Scientists increasingly believe that global warming will be accompanied by larger climatic disturbances.
Recent evidence is at least consistent with that hypothesis.
Perhaps Bush had hoped that the consequences of global warming would be felt long after he left office – and would be felt more by poor, low-lying, tropical countries like Bangladesh than by a rich country astride the temperate zones.
Yet there is perhaps a silver lining in the clouds over New Orleans.
Perhaps America, and especially Bush, will be persuaded to join the rest of the world in the fight against poverty and to protect our planet’s environment.
In facing and planning for disasters, whether natural or man-made, we must do more than hope and pray for the best.
Lessons from the Kaczyńskis\u0027 Poland
The defeat of the Kaczyński twins’ Law and Justice Party (PiS) in Poland brought sighs of relief across Europe.
But, as Donald Tusk’s new government assumes office it is important to learn the lessons that their defeat holds for all of us.
Many governments waste good economic times by postponing the reforms needed to build a prosperous future.
The PiS-led government, elected in 2005, inherited a fast-growing economy, but did nothing to strengthen that legacy.
Instead, privatization was blocked, while fiscal reforms and deregulation remained paper proposals.
Indeed, the Kaczyński government embarked on a program of anti-reform.
The separation of powers (an independent judiciary and central bank) was undermined in favor of a “strong” state.
The PiS captured the public media, the general prosecutor’s office was politicized, and, with the use of the media, was turned into a tool of party propaganda aimed at showing that Poland was ruled by malicious hidden forces, known as the układ , which cheated Poles and kept them poor.
Anyone who disagreed with this diagnosis or criticized the PiS’s methods, particularly those used by its leader, Jarosław Kaczyński, was promptly classified as belonging to the układ .
No one was spared.
Indeed, Lech Wałęsa and Władysław Bartoszewski, the Polish Mandela, were ruthlessly attacked.
Contrary to popular cliché, PiS’s victory in 2005 did not result from “reform fatigue,” since there were not many reforms implemented in 2000-2005 (except for an ambitious but partially blocked attempt at fiscal consolidation).
This explanation seems dubious elsewhere, too.
In Slovakia, the reformist leader Mikuláš Dzurinda won the 1998 elections after having implemented a tough stabilization program, and he could have continued to govern after the 2006 elections if not for disagreements in his coalition.
In the Czech Republic, a reformist government was elected in 2006, and in Hungary, political divisions rather than reform fatigue dominates electoral campaigns.
Of course, it is not easy for reformers to win elections.
On the contrary, reforms usually are undertaken only when the signs of an impending crisis are so strong that it is increasingly difficult to ignore them, or after the crisis has already “educated” voters.
(However, if the crisis follows reforms, populist politicians may win by blaming the reforms, instead of their incomplete nature, as in Argentina.)
Reformers can win elections if they are better at public communication than the populists.
Bad policies are, more often than not, easier to sell than good ones.
In Poland in 2005, the issue was mainly corruption.
The PiS jumped on the anticorruption bandwagon and strengthened its appeal by linking the fight against corruption to the vision of hidden forces supposedly perverting Polish society and democracy.
If not for that, the results of the 2005 elections would most likely have been quite different.
To criticize anticorruption campaigns is risky, because words can be twisted to imply indifference.
Therefore, let me first present my anticorruption credentials: as Deputy Prime Minister in 1999 I was the first Polish politician to ask the World Bank to prepare a report on corruption in Poland and ways to eradicate it.
In my public life, I emphasized eliminating discretionary regulations – the main source of both inefficiency and corruption.
But we should not be blind to what can happen when political demagogues hijack the anticorruption card.
Interestingly, all the available measures of actual corruption were already declining before the Kaczyński twins were elected.
On perception, it fares much worse than Slovakia, the Czech Republic, Hungary, and Greece, while it fares better – or at least not worse – on indicators of actual corruption.
Of course, Poles should not settle for today’s levels of corruption.
Instead, the battle with corruption should aim at removing its root causes: the scope of the discretionary public sector and the suppression of market forces.
This is the only path that promises both less corruption and more economic growth.
Combating corruption through increased punitive action, while leaving intact a bloated and discretionary public sector, will only paralyze public officials, delay important decisions, and play into the hands of cynical demagogues and political fanatics.
Lessons From the North
Fewer debates over economics would be needed if the world spent more time examining what actually works and what does not.
Almost everywhere, debate has raged about how to combine market forces and social security.
The left calls for an expansion of social protection; the right says that doing so would undermine economic growth and widen fiscal deficits.
But the debate can be moved forward by examining the successful economies of Denmark, Finland, Iceland, the Netherlands, Norway, and Sweden.
While no regional experience is directly transferable, the Nordic countries have successfully combined social welfare with high income levels, solid economic growth, and macroeconomic stability.
They have also achieved high standards of governance.
To be sure, there are also differences among the Nordic states, with social welfare spending the highest in Denmark, the Netherlands, Norway, and Sweden, and a bit lower in Finland and Iceland.
Nevertheless, whereas the taxes at the national level in the United States are equal to around 20% of GNP, in the Nordic countries the ratio is more than 30%.
High taxation supports comprehensive national health care, education, pensions, and other social services, resulting in low levels of poverty and a relatively narrow income gap between the richest and poorest households.
In the US, the poorest 20% of households receive just 5% of total income, putting their income at around one-fourth of the national average.
In the Nordic countries, by contrast, the poorest 20% of households receive nearly 10% of total income, putting them at roughly one-half of the national average.
American conservatives argue that a large public sector is subject to inefficiency and mismanagement, corruption, and bureaucratic abuse, while the taxation needed to support it blunts economic efficiency.
But each of these propositions is refuted by the Nordic experience.
Consider the claims of inefficiency and waste.
As a result of government-funded national health insurance, the Nordic countries have a higher life expectancy and a lower infant mortality rate than the US.
Life expectancy is close to 80 years in the Nordic countries, compared to 78 years in the US, where the government does not guarantee national health insurance and millions of families are too poor to pay for it on their own.
Ironically, the heavy reliance on the private sector in the US system is so inefficient that Americans pay a larger share of GNP for health (14%) than do the Nordic countries (11%), but get less.
Similarly, although social welfare spending is lower in the US than in the Nordic countries, its budget deficit as a share of national income is much larger.
The US spends less in the public sector, but it taxes even less than it spends.
Nor has high taxation in the Nordic countries impeded economic performance.
Rather than relying mainly on income taxation, as in the US, the Nordic countries rely on value-added taxation, which provides a relatively high amount of revenue with relatively low rates of evasion and few distortions to the economy.
The Nordic experience also belies conservatives’ claim that a large social welfare state weakens incentives to work and save.
National saving in the Nordic countries averages more than 20% of national income, compared to around 10% in the US.
Moreover, economic growth in the Nordic countries has been similar to that in the US in recent years. Income levels are higher on average in the US, but mainly because the Nordic countries work fewer hours per week.
In any case, all of the Nordic countries have very high incomes, and Norway’s per capita income actually exceeds the US.
Several factors appear to explain the Nordic countries’ economic success.
Taxation is broad-based and relatively non-distorting, while open international trade, market forces, and private ownership of industry are relied on to maintain incentives.
The Nordic countries are not “socialist” economies, based on state ownership and planning, but “social welfare” economies, based on private ownership and markets, with public provision of social protection.
Importantly, they invest heavily in higher education and in science and technology, so they remain at the cutting edge of high-technology industries.
Half a century ago, the free-market economist Friedrich von Hayek argued that a large public sector would threaten democracy itself, putting European countries on a “road to serfdom.”
Yet the Nordic states have thrived, not suffered, from a large social welfare state, with much less public-sector corruption and far higher levels of voter participation than in the US.
According to Transparency International, the Nordic countries have the world’s least corrupt political systems (with Iceland and Finland ranking as the least corrupt), while the US, with its big money politics, is fairly far down on the list.
But how replicable are the Nordic successes?
These countries have small populations, easy access to international trade, natural resources, and peaceful neighbors.
Most notably, they are ethnically homogeneous, so that social divisions are more amenable to compromise.
However, this means that the challenge of maintaining a strong social welfare state in ethnically and racially diverse societies such as the US is not economic, but one of promoting respect and inclusiveness.
Lessons from the Tsunami
There are many lessons that emerge from the tsunami that brought such devastation and loss of life to Asia.
It demonstrated the power of globalization, as television brought vivid pictures of the destruction to homes around the world.
Indeed, it is at times like this that the world truly does seem like a global village.
Of course, it seemed to take somewhat longer for news of the extent of the disaster to reach the Crawford, Texas, ranch of President Bush.
But, in the end, he decided to interrupt his vacation and offer amounts of aid that were successively revised upwards, in a global competition which promised to benefit those who were desperate for help.
America’s aid still appeared niggardly when compared with the amounts offered by countries with a fraction of America’s economic wealth.
Lightly populated Australia offered more than twice America’s assistance, Japan promised almost 50% more, and Europe pledged more than five times as much.
This led many observers to reflect on the fact that the world’s richest country was in general the most miserly in foreign assistance – all the more so in comparison to the amount it spends on war and defense.
The disaster was international, so it was appropriate that the United Nations take the lead in coordinating the relief effort.
Unfortunately, in an effort that was widely seen as another attempt to undermine multilateralism, the US tried to lead a “core group” driving the assistance program, ignoring ongoing efforts within the region and at the UN.
Whatever America’s motive, it later wisely decided to join the UN effort.
The Bush administration’s face-saving rhetoric that it had rushed to push together the core group in the absence of other efforts was quietly let to pass.
The response of some countries within the region was truly impressive, showing how far they had come in establishing efficient and effective governments.
Myriad details were addressed: Thailand flew ambassadors to the affected part of the country to help attend to the needs of their citizens, helped those who lost their money and passports return home, provided health care for the injured, set up systems to identify bodies, and dealt with the difficulties posed by shortages of body bags and the lack of cold storage facilities.
Countries, like Thailand, that felt that they could handle the finances on their own asked that assistance be directed to others.
They did ask one thing: a reduction of tariff barriers and greater access to markets abroad.
They didn’t want a handout, only a chance to earn income.
The response, at least at the time of this column’s writing, has mostly been deafening silence.
On the other hand, the G-7 made a truly important contribution in offering debt relief.
This is especially important for Indonesia, which must service a debt of $132 billion (of which $70 billion is owed to public creditors or guaranteed by government agencies).
Even without the tsunami, this debt burden would have been an enormous hindrance to the country’s development as it finally recovers from the aftermath of the 1997 financial crisis.
Indeed, there is a compelling case to be made for Indonesian debt relief in any case, given that much of the debt was incurred in loans to the corrupt Suharto government.
Lenders knew, or should have known, that not all of the money was going to help Indonesian development.
Moreover, some of the debt was incurred as part of the 1997-1998 crisis, which was aggravated and deepened by IMF-imposed policies.
No one pretends that we can prevent or alter the forces of nature. Rather, we have to learn to cope with them.
There are now calls for improved tsunami early warning systems.
But in one area, global warming, we have already received an early warning.
Most countries have recognized this, coming together in Rio and Kyoto to do something about it—not enough, but the Kyoto protocol was intended only as a start.
Sadly, global warming will likely destroy some of the same countries ravaged by the tsunami. Low lying islands like the Maldives will become submerged.
We are, however, still not a global village.
After first disputing that there was scientific evidence of the problem, the largest polluter in the world, the US, is now simply refusing to do anything about it (other than preaching voluntary restraint—of which there is little evidence, at least in America).
The international community has yet to figure out what to do with an aberrant member who fails to live up to its responsibilities as a global citizen.
Optimists say that technology will solve the problem.
Realists observe that in the long race between the environment and technology, it appears that technology has so far been losing.
Nature, as we have learned from the tsunami, has its own timetable.
Unless we learn how to respect it, we will all miss the boat.
Two Policy Prescriptions for the Global Crisis
WASHINGTON, DC – One thing that experts know, and that non-experts do not, is that they know less than non-experts think they do.
This much was evident at the just-completed Spring Meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank Group – three intense days of talks that brought together finance ministers, central bankers, and other policymakers.
Our economic expertise is limited in fundamental ways.
Consider monetary and fiscal policies. Despite decades of careful data collection and mathematical and statistical research, on many large questions we have little more than rules of thumb.
For example, we know that we should lower interest rates and inject liquidity to fight stagnation, and that we should raise policy rates and banks’ cash-reserve ratios to stifle inflation.
Sometimes we rely on our judgment in combining interest-rate action with open-market operations.
But the fact remains that our understanding of these policies’ mechanics is rudimentary.
These rules of thumb work (at least tolerably so) as a result of evolution.
Over time, the wrong moves are penalized, and their users either learn by watching others or disappear.
We get our monetary and fiscal policies right the same way that birds build their nests right.
As with all behaviors shaped by evolution, when the environment changes, there is a risk that existing adaptations become dysfunctional.
This has been the fate of some of our standard macroeconomic policies.
The formation of the eurozone and a half-century of relentless globalization have altered the global economic landscape, rendering once-proven policies ineffective.
When Sweden’s Riksbank was founded in 1668, followed by the Bank of England in 1694, the motivation was that a single economy should have a single central bank.
Over the next three centuries, as the benefits of instituting a monopoly over money creation became more widely recognized, a slew of central banks were established, one for each politically bounded economy.
What was not anticipated was that globalization would erode these boundaries.
As a result, we have returned to a past from which we tried to escape – a single economy, in this case the world, with multiple money-creating authorities.
This is clearly maladaptive, and it explains why the massive injections of liquidity by advanced-country central banks are failing to jump-start economies and create more jobs.
After all, in a globalized economy, much of this liquidity spills across political boundaries, giving rise to inflationary pressures in distant lands and precipitating the risk of currency wars, while unemployment at home remains dangerously high, threatening to erode workers’ skills.
The long-run damage could be devastating.
What was evident at the World Bank/IMF Spring Meetings was that virtually all policymakers are distressed and no one has a complete answer.
Neither do I. But here are two simple ideas that could help to mitigate the crisis.
First, in the absence of a single global central-banking authority, a modicum of monetary-policy coordination among major economies is required.
We need a group of the major economies – call it “G Major” – that announces monetary policies in a coordinated fashion.
To see why, consider the case of Japan.
Japanese policymakers have good reason to try to promote some inflation and even correct some of the yen’s secular appreciation over the last six or seven years.
But, in today’s unilateral world, other central banks would soon respond by injecting liquidity, prompting the Bank of Japan to act again.
These actions are usually justified as policies for boosting domestic demand, but they end up fueling a surrogate, low-grade currency war.
If, however, the G Major economies issued quarterly announcements of significant upcoming policy changes – for example, a small round of quantitative easing by country X, a larger liquidity injection by countries Y and Z, and so on – markets would be reassured that a currency war was not being fought.
Exchange-rate movements would be minimal and only as intended, and volatility would be contained, because tit-for-tat injections would no longer occur and speculation would wane.
Moreover, liquidity injections would be likely to have a greater impact on demand, because synchronization would reduce leakage across national boundaries.
The second recommendation pertains to the mechanics of liquidity injection, much of which takes place nowadays – in Europe, Japan, and elsewhere – through asset purchases.
The US Federal Reserve, for example, is currently purchasing assets (many of them mortgage-backed) worth $85 billion each month.
Liquidity injections and low interest rates have a microeconomic effect that has received little attention: they lower the cost of capital vis-à-vis the cost of labor, which causes a relative decline in demand for labor.
This is very likely exacerbating the unemployment problem; it certainly is not mitigating it.
One solution is to channel part of the liquidity injections toward countering this factor-cost asymmetry.
Thus, for every $100 of new liquidity, we could use $60 to purchase assets and the remainder to give firms a marginal job-creation subsidy, which could be especially effective in economies with flexible labor markets that enable short-term hiring.
Even if the employment subsidy were offered only for, say, one year, firms would be tempted to use more labor during this time.