In fact, the history of the stock market's reactions to changing interest rates is mixed.
Sometimes interest rate changes have the predicted effect, sometimes they don't.
For example, the NASDAQ stock price index made a spectacular 14% jump upwards on the day (January 3, 2001) when America's Fed began its latest series of interest rate cuts.
A jump in the market is what one might have expected.
But then the NASDAQ index fell 22% over the following year, although the Fed continued to cut interest rates aggressively.
Does that experience suggest that the NASDAQ index will drop sharply if the Fed raises interest rates on June 30?
No.
The timing of the 2001 rate decrease stunned the market.
By contrast, the Fed is widely expected to raise rates at the end this month, so there will be no surprise element.
The market may know, not just from the experience of 2001-2, that interest rate movements do not have predictable effects on stock prices.
But, there are reasons to believe that higher interest rates, even though expected, can have a negative impact on home prices.
That is because home buyers are mostly ordinary people with little financial sophistication, unlike the professionals who trade in stocks.
Untrained people with other things on their minds can make serious economic errors.
Home values have soared to high levels in many countries as irrational exuberance grips the markets.
High home prices are already putting great stress on many families, which are struggling to make their mortgage payments.
When interest rates go up, these payments will (when the rate is variable) also go up, possibly becoming unsustainable.
If one borrows the equivalent of three years' income to buy a house, a mortgage rate of 6% means that 18% of one's income goes to interest payments, which may be tolerable.
But if the rate rises to 8%, mortgage interest payments rise to 24%, which, together with amortization, taxes, other debts, and necessary expenditures, may claim too much of the family budget.
Some will then try to sell their overpriced homes, and the resulting market imbalance will cause prices to fall.
People with fixed-rate mortgages are also vulnerable to rate increases, though less directly.
This is because if they have to move and sell their house, there may be no buyers who can afford higher interest payments, unless the home's price also falls.
By contrast, sophisticated investors, such as big stock market players, are unlikely to fall prey to this trap.
But homebuyers are not as savvy, so they may not see the change coming or they may fail to plan for it.
As psychologists have shown, people are susceptible to "wishful thinking bias," wishing away possible future problems that they would rather not think about.
They may overemphasize the likelihood of economic success ("I will be making a lot more money in a few years") and underemphasize the commonplace problems that regularly challenge family budgets ("I will be losing my job or getting a divorce").
This blithe attitude is ultimately behind real estate bubbles where they are occurring.
Low interest rates did not cause the bubbles.
They only made it easier for people, in those areas of the world where there is a half-believable story about a fabulous future economy, to indulge their fantasies.
Interest rate increases will deliver a fresh dose of reality: the interest expense of owning a home is going to claim a larger share of family budgets, a hard fact that will eventually sink into our thinking.
But declines in home prices will not occur quickly when central banks begin to raise interest rates.
After two years of rate increases, Australia's home price boom only recently shows signs of abating.
Dominated by amateur investors, home markets do not turn on a dime.
In places where home prices have been rising rapidly, the upward trend may continue or level off for a while.
In most high-priced places, a real decline may not come for some time.
Will Russia Save the West?
MOSCOW – Rapid changes in the global economy and international politics are raising, once more, an eternal issue in Russia: the country’s relations with Europe, and with the Euro-Atlantic region as a whole.
Of course, Russia partly belongs to this region.
Yet it cannot and does not want to join the West wholeheartedly – at least not yet.
Meanwhile, this choice looks very different now compared to just a few years ago.
It is becoming obvious that the Euro-Atlantic world, whose economic and political model seemed so triumphant 20 years ago, is now lagging somewhat behind China and other Asian countries.
So is Russia, where, despite encouraging talk about innovation-based development, the economy continues to de-modernize as corruption has been allowed to metastasize, and as the country relies increasingly on its natural-resource wealth.
Indeed, it is Asia that has turned out to be the true winner of the Cold War.
These rising powers raise problems regarding Russia’s geo-strategic choices.
For the first time in decades, the values gap between Russia and the EU appears to be increasing.
Europe is overcoming state nationalism, while Russia is building a nation state.
Broken by history and not wishing to be ravaged by war again, Europeans have embraced compromise and renounced the direct use of force in international relations.
Russians, on the other hand, emphasize their “hard power,” including military force, because they know that they live in a dangerous world and have no one to hide behind.
And, because of the country’s comparative lack of “soft power” – social, cultural, and economic attractiveness – it stands ready to use the competitive advantages (i.e., its resource wealth) available to it.
Internal political developments in Russia are also pushing the country in a different direction from the West.
Quite simply, Russia is moving away from democracy.
And yet the West’s unwillingness to abandon that effort is coupled with a repeated refusal to recognize Russia’s right to have its own zone of interest.
So NATO expansion has left the Cold War unfinished.
The ideological and military confrontation that underlay it is gone, but the geopolitical rivalry that it entailed has returned to the fore.
Thus, the old mentality survived on both sides.
Energy debates are another example of this.
Non-Russian Europe should thank the Almighty for the presence of energy-rich Russia at its borders, while Russia should be thankful for having such wealthy customers.
But the natural differences in the interests of energy consumers and producers have been given a political/security twist – witness the discussions about an “Energy NATO.”
F aced with the impossibility of advantageous accession to Euro-Atlantic institutions, Russia is drifting fast towards alignment with China – a “younger brother,” though a respected one. Russia’s “Asian choice” of today is not the same as the Slavophile/Eurasian choice of the past.
On the surface, it looks like a choice in favor of a rapidly rising civilization. But the current estrangement from Europe – the cradle of Russian civilization and modernization – threatens Russia’s identity and will increase its geostrategic risks in the future.
Europe does not benefit from this estrangement either. It will continue to move towards beautiful decay – Venice writ large.
The United States also loses. Without Russia, which will remain the world’s third strongest power for the foreseeable future, it is impossible to solve the key problems of international security.
The current Euro-Atlantic security architecture seems to suit the majority of Americans and Europeans, though it is becoming increasingly fragile and counterproductive.
So Russia will struggle to create a new architecture largely on its own – whether through a new treaty on collective European security, or even through its accession to NATO.
This is not only in Russian political and civilizational interest, but it also reflects our duty to the entire community of Euro-Atlantic nations, which is being weakened by the “unfinished Cold War.”
The idea of a “Union of Europe” between Russia and the EU should be put on the long-term agenda.
That Union should be based on a common human, economic, and energy space.
The combination of a new security arrangement for the Euro-Atlantic community and the establishment of the Union of Europe could arrest the decline in the international weight of the West.
Will Success Spoil Brazil?
RIO DE JANEIRO – Brazil has been making international headlines of late, but not for traditional stories about urban violence, natural catastrophes, political corruption, or deforestation in the Amazon.
At the G-20 Summit in London last April, for example, US President Barack Obama called for the world to pay heed to Brazilian President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, the “most popular politician on earth,” and shook hands with him, saying: “My man right here.
I love this guy.”
In September, the ousted president of Honduras, Manuel Zelaya, reappeared in the country inside the Brazilian embassy in Tegucigalpa after three months of exile.
Although his presence dramatically fuelled the situation for a time, Brazilian diplomats, working with the US, were able to reach agreement with Honduran authorities to allow Manuel Zelaya to return to office.
Then came the news that Brazil will host the 2016 Summer Olympic Games – this coming on top of hosting the 2014 World Cup.
As for the global – and fortunately now abating – economic crisis, Brazil has shined throughout, recording a fast and strong recovery.
And, as if this good news were not enough, Brazil’s giant state oil company, Petrobrás, is already at work developing two huge deep-water oil fields discovered in the sea off the coast of Rio de Janeiro.
For these and other reasons, Brazil is gaining the world’s attention.
Brazilian democracy, at long last, is working well, following many years of military government, and its economy seems more robust than ever.
As a result, many people are enthusiastically pointing to an increased international role for Brazil in the future.
But two connected and major challenges lie ahead for Brazil and its government: the need to build a far more equal society and to resist the temptation to use nationalism to mask whatever domestic failures may manifest themselves.
Brazil’s current success is rooted not only in Lula’s two terms, which must end in 2010.
The economic stabilization program enacted by Fernando Henrique Cardoso since 1994 (the Real Plan), first as finance minister and then as president for two terms, solidified a structure that made it possible for Lula’s tenure to be so prosperous.
This is not meant to take anything away from Lula.
His presidency has guaranteed political stability and strengthened social cohesion.
Indeed, by managing the political process to make the government work for Brazil’s people, Lula’s administration has made Brazil a truly stable and consensual democracy.
There is nothing modest about that achievement, given Brazil’s traditional institutional instability and the series of major corruption scandals that engulfed Lula’s government in 2005 and 2006.
Lula survived those scandals and did not move to amend the constitution in order to seek a third term, though some in Brazil pressed him to do so.
Lula also enacted critically important social policies.
Under his government, two million homes received electric power for the first time, 11 million very poor families gained the support of a minimum income (the Bolsa Família), the minimum salary grew 45% in real terms, thus benefiting 42 million people.
Moreover, eight million jobs were created, 17 million people escaped poverty, and the income of the poorest 50% grew 32% – twice as fast as the income of the richest 10% in the same period.
And Lula achieved all this without triggering inflation, which he knows – perhaps a result of his own impoverished childhood – wreaks havoc on the poor most of all.
This vast transformation has not only generated a virtuous circle that strengthened institutional stability and social capital. It has also differentiated Brazil from other countries in Latin America, putting the country in the forefront in the region in terms of dealing with traditional social and economic injustices in a democratic way.
Yet the remaining challenges are huge, for Brazil remains the seventh most unequal society in the world – and severe violence persists.
Sixty-four percent of Brazilian homes lack electricity and sanitation, and only 22% have electricity, a telephone, a computer, a refrigerator, a television, and a washing machine.
In the poorest region, the North and Northeast, the numbers fall to 8.6% and 8.3%.
Among the young, almost 37% of 18-24-year-olds do not finish high school.
Only half the population over age 25 has more than eight years of formal education.
As for Brazil’s international role, a subtle competition is emerging with the US.
America wants to conclude as many free-trade agreements in the region as it can, while Brazil favors expanding its custom union, Mercosul/Mercosur.
The entrance of Venezuela into the Brazilian bloc, Brazilian leadership at the United Nations mission in Haiti, and Brazil’s role in the Honduran affair are all part of this emerging competition.
If Brazil is to remain on its prosperous path, it must continue to give higher priority to its social and economic programs than to foreign adventures.
The construction of a major egalitarian, free, and democratic society that respects and works with the international institutions is the best thing that Brazil can give to the world right now.
Will Technology Kill Convergence?
WASHINGTON, DC – At last week’s annual meetings of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund in Lima, Peru, one topic that dominated discussions was the slowdown in emerging-economy growth.
Hailed in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis as the new engines of the world economy, the emerging economies are now acting as a drag on global growth, and many argue that their era of rapid expansion – and their quest to achieve convergence with advanced-country income levels – is over.
Are the doomsayers right?
There is certainly reason for concern – beginning in China.
After decades of nearly double-digit growth, China appears to be experiencing a marked slowdown – one that some argue is actually worse than official statistics indicate.
As China’s growth slows, so does its demand for oil and commodities, with severe effects for other emerging economies that depend on commodity exports.
Moreover, the benefits of lower commodity prices do not seem to have materialized among net importers, except perhaps India; if they have, they have been far from adequate to offset other growth-damaging forces.
Meanwhile, the advanced economies are tentatively recovering from the 2008 crisis.
First, they argue that much convergence has already taken place in manufacturing.
This is true, but it neglects the increasing interconnectedness of manufacturing and services, and the changing nature of many services.
An iPad, for example, must not just be built; it also needs coding services.
In a sense, it is actually more the product of the modern services sector than of manufacturing.
And there are plenty of untapped opportunities for technological catch-up in, say, health, education, and financial services.
Second, emerging-market bears point out that these economies have gained major productivity benefits from the migration of surplus rural labor to urban areas, a surplus that will soon be exhausted.
This, too, is true.
But it ignores the fact that there still is a huge reservoir of urban labor in the informal sector that, upon shifting to the formal sector, would provide an additional boost to productivity.
The pessimists’ third argument is that emerging economies are not implementing fast enough the structural reforms needed to support long-term growth.
Again, there is some truth to this argument: structural reforms are needed everywhere.
But there is no proven way to measure the pace of their implementation.
As a result, it is difficult to argue that the emerging economies have collectively slowed in their structural-reform efforts.
But there may be a fourth mechanism at work, related to the changing – and seriously disruptive – nature of new technologies.
A major driver of past catch-up, if only in terms of incremental growth, was the shift of many activities in both the services and manufacturing sectors from advanced economies to developing countries with lower wages.
Now, however, a growing array of activities can be automated.
And coding-supported products often have lower costs per unit of output than even very cheap labor can provide.
So, whereas call centers, for example, used to be mostly staffed in low-wage countries, now the computer-robot that does most of the talking can be located in New York.
That observation should not, however, overshadow fundamental economic insights – specifically, that trade and the location of production are determined by comparative, not absolute, advantage.
A country will always have a comparative advantage in something; but that something changes.
Many advanced countries, for example, now have a comparative advantage in high-value-added activities.
In other words, thanks to their highly skilled labor forces, they are better equipped than their developing-country counterparts for activities like the production of made-to-measure specialized goods or, indeed, anything that requires a highly trained team to work in close proximity.
But the technology-induced shifts that are underway could portend big disruptions in global value chains – disruptions affecting both developed and developing countries.
In fact, we may have entered a period of fundamental change that could weaken growth everywhere, as the “old” shrinks before the “new” can occupy sufficient space.
To be sure, the creative destruction that is taking place seems to be affecting developing-economy growth proportionately more than advanced-economy growth, largely because the new technologies are being put to work where they were invented, and developing countries have not yet managed sufficient imitation.
But I am not convinced that “catch-up” opportunities will remain diminished – not least because it will always be easier to imitate than to invent.
In fact, it could be argued that new “leap-frogging” may become possible.
As experience in the telecommunications sector shows, the ability to adopt new technologies without first having to dismantle old systems can enable rapid progress.
The key to enabling continued convergence – even at a fairly rapid pace – is good political governance.
Developing-country governments must implement policies aimed at managing the impending transformation, while maintaining social solidarity and cohesion.
That is the challenge they must meet at this time of great disruption.
Will the EU Keep Faith with Turkey?
EMBARGO 6 SEPTEMBER 2004
More than forty years ago, Turkey applied for associate membership of the European Economic Community.
With the Association agreement of 1963, a special relationship was established, culminating in the customs union of 1996.
During all these years, European governments consistently confirmed Turkey's eligibility for full membership, making accession dependent on compliance with membership criteria.
Turkey's formal recognition as a candidate state in 1999 led Turkey to undertake unprecedented reform efforts in the area of human and minority rights, including abolition of the death penalty, safeguards against torture, promotion of religious freedoms, gender equality, and restriction of the military's role in political life.
Should the EU consider the accession criteria as having been fulfilled, it must decide to open negotiations in early 2005.
Not to do so would mean to renege on political commitments and to severely damage the EU's credibility in the world.
In many parts of Europe, however, Turkey's admission to the EU is viewed with skepticism owing to its size, relatively poor economy, fears of massive immigration, and, above all, cultural and societal differences - a euphemism for Islam. It would be foolish to deny that some of these factors represent serious challenges.
However, they are often exaggerated and certainly not insurmountable.
Negotiations with Turkey would be lengthy and accession may not occur before 2015.
This period of time would offer both Turkey and the Union an opportunity to come to terms.
With 80 million people, Turkey would be one of the largest EU states.
But the size of a country plays only a limited role in the EU's decision-making process, because political influence within the Union depends more on economic power.
Moreover, for decades Turkey has been a responsible member of many European institutions, and there is no reason to believe that it would act differently in the EU.
Because of its weak economy, Turkey would be eligible for substantial EU assistance.
The size of these transfers, however, would depend on the EU's financial policies at the time of admission, the outcome of accession negotiations, and economic developments in Turkey.
In any case, the EU's practice of "capping" its budget would prevent an explosion in the financial costs entailed by Turkey's accession.
Immigration should not be a cause for undue concern, either.
Human mobility is limited, and Turkey workers' would probably be allowed to move freely within the EU only after a long transition period, possibly not before 2025.
Given the expected upswing of Turkey's economy and its declining birthrate, experts predict a figure of around 2.7 million immigrants by that point.
Meanwhile, diminishing and aging populations in most of Europe will have made immigration a necessity.
Among the countries from where immigration to the EU is probable, Turkey has the best prospects for successful adaptation.
It is Turkey's Muslim population that creates the strongest emotions.
Many feel that Turkey simply does not fit into a European society based on Christian traditions and culture.
It is also feared that Islamists may one day turn Turkey into a fundamentalist state.
Unlikely as it may be in view of Turkey's deeply rooted secularism, such a risk cannot be totally excluded.
But the same is true for any other democracy, where radical groups could well misuse the democratic process for their purposes.
Surely, the best protection against such a calamity is to strengthen Turkey's democratic system, which can best be achieved by anchoring it firmly in a bloc of similarly democratic countries.
As for the EU, it must decide whether it wants to be a closed "Christian club" or an open and inclusive society, drawing strength from cultural and religious diversity.
Turkish EU membership presents both opportunities and challenges.
On balance, however, the advantages far outweigh the risks.
Will the Euro Dethrone the Dollar?
Much of America’s dominance in world finance comes from the dollar’s status as international money.
America’s commitment to free capital markets, the rule of law, and price stability confer credibility on the dollar as a store of value.
But American spending habits have undermined the dollar’s reputation, with the excess supply of dollars on world markets depressing its price.
This spring, the euro’s exchange rate against the dollar reached an all-time high, and central banks have increased the euro share of their international reserves.
Is the dollar about to lose the crown of world finance to the euro?
History suggests otherwise, despite a vulnerable dollar.
American financial supremacy in the twenty-first century resembles Britain’s position in world finance a century ago.
Before the outbreak of World War I in August 1914, the pound sterling served as the currency of choice for international transactions, just as the dollar does today, and the world’s borrowers visited the City of London to raise capital.
The British economist John Maynard Keynes worried that countries would not use sterling to settle trading balances with each other if the pound were not viewed as a reliable store of value.
The “future position of the City of London,” according to Keynes, depended on the pound sterling continuing to serve the business world as the equivalent of gold.
Britain maintained the pound’s convertibility into gold at the outbreak of the Great War to preserve its credibility as the international medium of exchange.
The dollar could not challenge sterling’s role as the world’s currency without matching its reputation.
August 1914 provided the opportunity.
The biggest gold outflow in a generation imperiled America’s ability to repay its debts abroad.
Fear that the US would abandon the gold standard sent the dollar plummeting on world markets.
But Treasury Secretary William G. McAdoo secured American financial honor in August 1914 by remaining true to gold while everyone else, except for the British, abandoned their obligations.
Despite the dollar’s instant credibility, however, it took more than a decade for America’s currency to match Britain’s as an international medium of exchange.
Payment habits melt at a glacier’s pace.
Britain’s transformation from international creditor to international debtor during the Great War gave the dollar a second wind in its battle with sterling.
The British were forced to abandon gold convertibility in April 1919 – a tactical withdrawal intended to pave the way for Britain’s return to the former $4.8665 parity with the American dollar.
Six years later, in April 1925, Britain confirmed its monetary credibility and returned to the gold standard.
But the pound had already suffered irreparable damage.
The experience of 1914 implies that a credible alternative can replace an entrenched world currency, especially after an unfavorable balance of trade has weakened it.
But even then, dethroning the reigning king of international exchange takes time.
Today, the euro – a currency without a country – lacks a long track record of credibility.
Thirteen countries in the European Union use the euro as money.
But the commitment of these independent political entities to the euro cannot match the history of America’s commitment to the dollar.
The European Central Bank, established in 1998, has a mandate to manage the new currency to maintain price stability.
But the ECB needs time to establish its inflation-fighting credentials.
It cannot hitch a ride on gold, the way America did a century ago.
So the euro must earn its reputation crisis by crisis to confront the dollar’s dominance as the currency of choice for international transactions.
Recent experience with the euro as an official reserve asset is instructive.
Between 2000 and 2005, the dollar lost more than 25% of its value against the euro.
Meanwhile, the fraction of international reserves held in euros grew from 18% to 24%, and the dollar’s share dropped from 71% to 66%.
In short, the euro has clearly made some headway during this period of US balance of payment deficits, but this reflects an evolutionary decline in the dollar’s dominance, not a revolutionary regime shift.
What might trigger a fatal run on the dollar in world markets?
While a broad and abrupt sell-off by major foreign holders of dollars – for example, China – appears unlikely, a cataclysmic event, similar to the outbreak of the Great War in 1914, could prompt a search for a new international medium of exchange.
In the modern era of automated payments, the upheaval might come from a terrorist attack that undermines the computerized transfer facilities of the world’s banking system.
A catastrophic loss of electronic records could surely destroy the credibility of the dollar as the international medium of exchange.
But exactly what would replace the dollar under such circumstances remains an open question.
After all, a loss of computer records would make the euro equally suspect.
Perhaps gold, a store of value impervious to physical distortion, could make a comeback.
Of course, one can only hope that such a scenario remains pure conjecture.
Will the Euro Survive the Current Crisis?
CAMBRIDGE – The European Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) and the euro are about to celebrate their tenth anniversary.
The euro was introduced without serious problems and has since functioned well, with the European Central Bank delivering the low inflation that is its sole mandate.
But the current economic crisis may provide a severe test of the euro’s ability to survive in more troubled times.
While the crisis could strengthen the institutions provided by the EMU, it could also create multiple risks, of which member countries need to be aware if they want to avoid them.
The primary problem is that conditions in individual EMU members may develop in such different ways that some national political leaders could be tempted to conclude that their countries would be better served by adopting a mix of policies different from that of the other members.
The current differences in the interest rates of euro-zone government bonds show that the financial markets regard a break-up as a real possibility.
Ten-year government bonds in Greece and Ireland, for example, now pay nearly a full percentage point above the rate on comparable German bonds, and Italy’s rate is almost as high.
There have, of course, been many examples in history in which currency unions or single-currency states have broken up.
Although there are technical and legal reasons why such a split would be harder for an EMU country, there seems little doubt that a country could withdraw if it really wanted to.
The most obvious reason that a country might choose to withdraw is to escape from the one-size-fits-all monetary policy imposed by the single currency.
A country that finds its economy very depressed during the next few years, and fears that this will be chronic, might be tempted to leave the EMU in order to ease monetary conditions and devalue its currency.
Although that may or may not be economically sensible, a country in a severe economic downturn might very well take such a policy decision.
The Stability and Growth Pact, which limits euro-zone members’ fiscal deficits, is another reason why a country might want to leave the EMU.
In a serious downturn, a country may wish to pursue a traditional Keynesian policy through large-scale, deficit-financed fiscal stimulus.
Although the Stability and Growth Pact may be elastic enough to permit some deficit stimulus, a country may feel constrained from acting as aggressively as it wants.
The current financial crisis raises yet another problem: the lack of a clear “lender of last resort.”
It remains to be seen how willing the ECB will be to provide national central banks with the volume of euros needed to play this role fully.
If a country sees its banks failing because its national bank cannot lend them enough, it may chose to leave the EMU so that its central bank can provide whatever amount of local currency it deems necessary.
Moreover, the current economic crisis has led to renewed talk about the need for the European Union to have taxing authority.
Whatever the logic of that proposition, it would open the door to much greater income redistribution.
High-income countries might find that reason enough to want out.
Even if officials do not want to abandon the euro, they may come to do so as a result of a strategy of trying to get other countries to agree to a policy change.
A country that believes that monetary or fiscal policy is too tight may threaten to leave if policy is not changed.
That is clearly a substantial risk if the country is Germany or France.
But even if it is one of the smaller countries, it might be a serious threat because it could be seen as the beginning of the end.
So either type of country could make the threat in the hope that it would be enough to cause their EMU colleagues to agree to their desired change in policy.
The risk, of course, is that the other countries may not be intimidated.
The threatening country would then have to choose whether to accepting a humiliating defeat and stay, or stand on “principle” and leave.
All of this assumes that political leaders would select only a policy change that they think will be in their nation’s long-term interest.
But there is also a risk that some politicians act solely out of self-interest, seizing on the economic downturn as an opportunity to get elected by promising to withdraw the country from the EMU, or by saying that they will threaten to do so if the other member countries do not agree to their proposed policy changes.
None of these risks implies that the monetary union will inevitably be a victim of this severe economic downturn.
But the downturn will be a more severe test for the euro than any that it faced during its first ten years.
Will the IMF Stand Up to Europe?
CAMBRIDGE – As the eurozone crisis continues to deepen, the International Monetary Fund may finally be acknowledging the need to reassess its approach.
New Managing Director Christine Lagarde’s recent call for forced recapitalization of Europe’s bankrupt banking system is a good start.
European officials’ incensed reaction – the banks are fine, they insist, and need only liquidity support – should serve to buttress the Fund’s determination to be sensible about Europe.
Until now, the Fund has sycophantically supported each new European initiative to rescue the over-indebted eurozone periphery, committing more than $100 billion to Greece, Portugal, and Ireland so far.
Unfortunately, the IMF is risking not only its members’ money, but, ultimately, its own institutional credibility.
Only a year ago, at the IMF’s annual meeting in Washington, DC, senior staff were telling anyone who would listen that the whole European sovereign-debt panic was a tempest in a teapot.
Using slick PowerPoint presentations with titles like “Default in Today’s Advanced Economies: Unnecessary, Undesirable, and Unlikely,” the Fund tried to convince investors that eurozone debt was solid as a rock.
Even for Greece, the IMF argued, debt dynamics were not a serious concern, thanks to anticipated growth and reforms.
Never mind the obvious flaw in the Fund’s logic, namely that countries such as Greece and Portugal face policy and implementation risks far more akin to emerging markets than to truly advanced economies such as Germany and the United States.
As the situation deteriorated, one might have guessed that the IMF would mark its beliefs to market, as it were, and adopt a more cautious tone.
Instead, at the IMF’s April 2011 interim meeting, a senior official declared that the Fund now considers troubled Spain to be a core eurozone country like Germany, rather than a peripheral country like Greece, Portugal, or Ireland.
Evidently, investors were supposed to infer that for all practical purposes they should think of Spanish and German debt as identical – the old hubris of the eurozone.
My own sarcastic reaction was to think, “Oh, now the IMF thinks that some of the core eurozone countries are a default risk.”
Having served as the IMF’s chief economist from 2001 to 2003, I am familiar with the Fund’s need to walk a tightrope between building investor confidence and shaking up complacent policymakers.
But it is one thing to be circumspect in the midst of a crisis; it is quite another to spew nonsense.
The late Chicago-school economist George Stigler would have described the IMF’s role in Europe as reflecting acute “regulatory capture.”
Simply put, Europe and the US control too much power in the IMF, and their thinking is too dominant.
What European leaders may want most from the Fund are easy loans and strong rhetorical support.
But what Europe really needs is the kind of honest assessment and tough love that the Fund has traditionally offered to its other, less politically influential, clients.
The IMF’s blind spot in dealing with Europe until now is only partly due to European voting power.
It also stems from an “us” and “them” mentality that similarly permeates research at the top Wall Street investment houses.
Analysts who have worked their entire lives only on advanced economies have learned to bet on things going well, because for the couple of decades prior to the crisis, things mostly did go well – very well.
That is why, for example, so many keep assuming that a normal rapid recovery is just around the corner.
But the financial crisis should have reminded everyone that the distinction between advanced economies and emerging markets is not a bright red line.
In his recent speech in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, US Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke forcefully complained that political paralysis has possibly become the principal impediment to recovery.
But analysts accustomed to working on emerging markets understand that such paralysis is very difficult to avoid after a financial crisis.
Rather than slavishly believing policymakers’ assurances, emerging-market researchers have learned to be cynical about official promises.
All too often, everything that can be done wrong will be done wrong.
The IMF needs to bring much more of this brand of skepticism to its assessment of eurozone debt dynamics, instead of constantly seeking strained assumptions that would make the debt appear sustainable.
Anyone looking closely at Europe’s complex options for extricating itself from its debt straightjacket should realize that political constraints will be a huge obstacle no matter which route Europe takes.
Even outside Europe, the IMF has long given too much credence to sitting governments, rather than focusing on the long-term interests of the country and its people.
The Fund is doing Europe’s people no favor by failing to push aggressively for a more realistic solution, including dramatic debt write-downs for peripheral eurozone countries and re-allocating core-country guarantees elsewhere.
Now that the Fund has squarely acknowledged the huge capital holes in many European banks, it should start pressing forcefully for a comprehensive and credible solution to the eurozone debt crisis, a solution that will involve either partial breakup of the eurozone or fundamental constitutional reform.
Europe’s future, not to mention the future of the IMF, depends on it.
Will the Polluters Pay for Climate Change?
I am writing this in New York in early August, when the mayor declared a “heat emergency” to prevent widespread electricity outages from the expected high use of air conditioners.
City employees could face criminal charges if they set their thermostats below 78 degrees Fahrenheit (25.5 Celsius).
Nevertheless, electricity usage has reached near-record levels.
Meanwhile California has emerged from its own record-breaking heat wave.
For the United States as a whole, the first six months of 2006 were the hottest in more than a century.
Europe is experiencing an unusually hot summer, too.
July set new records in England and the Netherlands, where weather data go back more than 300 years.
The hot northern summer fits well with the release of An Inconvenient Truth, a documentary film featuring former US Vice-President Al Gore.
Using some remarkable graphs, images, and other information, the film makes a compelling case that our carbon dioxide emissions are causing global warming, or, at the very least, contributing to it, and that we must urgently address the issue.
Americans tend to talk a lot about morality and justice.
But most Americans still fail to realize that their country’s refusal to sign the Kyoto protocol, and their subsequent business–as-usual approach to greenhouse gas emissions, is a moral failing of the most serious kind.
I deal with the heat by using more energy, which leads to burning more fossil fuel, putting more greenhouse gases into the atmosphere and heating up the planet more.
It even happened when I watched An Inconvenient Truth: on a warm evening, the cinema was so chilly that I wished I had brought a jacket.
Heat kills.
A heat wave in France in 2003 caused an estimated 35,000 deaths, and a hot spell similar to the one Britain had last month caused more than 2,000 deaths, according to official estimates.
Although no particular heat wave can be directly attributed to global warming, it will make such events more frequent.
Moreover, if global warming continues unchecked, the number of deaths that occur when rainfall becomes more erratic, causing both prolonged droughts and severe floods, will dwarf the death toll from hot weather in Europe.
More frequent intense hurricanes will kill many more.
Melting polar ice will cause rising seas to inundate low-lying fertile delta regions on which hundreds of millions of people grow their food.
Tropical diseases will spread, killing still more people.
Overwhelmingly, the dead will be those who lack the resources to adapt, to find alternative sources of food, and who do not have access to health care.
Even in rich countries, it usually isn’t the rich who die in natural disasters.
When Hurricane Katrina hit New Orleans, those who died were the poor in low-lying areas who lacked cars to escape.
If this is true in a country like the US, with a reasonably efficient infrastructure and the resources to help its citizens in times of crisis, it is even more evident when disasters strike developing countries, because their governments lack the resources needed, and because, when it comes to foreign assistance, rich nations still do not count all human lives equally.
According to United Nations figures, in 2002 per capita emissions of greenhouse gases in the US were 16 times higher than in India, 60 times higher than in Bangladesh, and more than 200 times higher than in Ethiopia, Mali, or Chad.
Other developed nations with emissions close to those of the US include Australia, Canada, and Luxembourg.
Russia, Germany, Britain, Italy, France, and Spain all have levels between a half and a quarter that of the US.
This is still significantly above the world average, and more than 50 times that of the poorest nations in which people will die from global warming.
If a polluter harms others, those who are harmed normally have a legal remedy.
For example, if a factory leaks toxic chemicals into a river that I use to irrigate my farm, killing my crops, I can sue the factory owner.
If the rich nations pollute the atmosphere with carbon dioxide, causing my crops to fail because of changing rainfall patterns, or my fields are inundated by a rise in the sea level, shouldn’t I also be able to sue?
Camilla Toulmin, who directs the International Institute for Environment and Development, a London-based NGO, was present at a lecture on climate change that Al Gore gave in June.
She asked him what he thought about compensation for those who are hit hardest by climate change, but who have done the least to cause it.
The question, she reports on www.opendemocracy.net, seemed to take him by surprise, and he did not support the idea.
Like Toulmin, I wonder if this is a truth that is just too inconvenient, even for him.
Will the Rumsfeld Revolution Continue?
America’s defense policy is at a crossroads.
Since 1997, the United States Congress has required the Department of Defense to undertake a major defense review every four years.
The department is currently developing the third such review and will release it later this year.
The review promises to be nothing short of a watershed.
The last Quadrennial Defense Review was published a few weeks after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.
As a result, it gave only hints of the counterterrorism strategy to come.
The 2005 review, by contrast, will represent several years of thinking by the Bush administration, and thus will serve as a key indicator of the future course of American defense policy.
The grand strategy that serves as the foundation for American defense policy has not undergone major change since 2002.
Focusing on terrorism, the strategy calls for strengthening the network of international partners seeking to eradicate transnational terrorism, and for direct action against terrorist organizations and their sponsors.
Ultimately, it seeks to address what President Bush considers the root causes of terrorism, particularly the absence of open political systems and economic opportunity.
What is changing is the way that US military power is used to implement this grand strategy.
There is little doubt that the 2005 Defense Review will formalize the change in focus underway since September 11, 2001.
Before that, the American military concentrated on swift victory in a major theater war against another state’s military forces.
Today, however, the US military is more likely to be used to stabilize and rebuild failed states, assist partners in countering insurgency and terrorism, control nuclear weapons when regimes collapse, or directly eradicate terrorist organizations and their supporters.
This requires a different type of force, and one capable of running a marathon rather than a sprint, sustaining major deployments for extended periods.
The global configuration of America’s military is also changing.
The goal is to keep most of the force stationed at home in the US, with a network of lightly-manned bases abroad that can serve as forward operating locations during a crisis or war.
Rather than being miniature Americas, many of these bases will be operated in conjunction with or by the host nation.
This will capitalize on the US military’s ability to project force around the world quickly, while providing a more flexible and politically palatable way of doing so. 
But, beyond the ongoing changes, major strategic questions persist.
First, how much conventional war-fighting capability should the US military retain?
The goal is to maintain enough to deter aggressors, but not so much that it detracts from other, more likely missions.
Second, what will America’s relationship with its traditional allies be?
Will formal alliances such as NATO remain the centerpiece of American strategy, or will they be superseded by mission-specific coalitions?
Third, how much should the US continue to invest in advanced, high-tech weapons more appropriate for conventional enemies than for fighting terrorists or insurgents?
Systems such as the F/A-22 Raptor aircraft and the Army’s Future Combat System are extraordinarily expensive.
At a time when deployments to Iraq and Afghanistan are straining the defense budget and much of the military’s existing equipment needs repair or replacement, questions arise as to whether such programs are a good investment.
Fourth, what is the appropriate size of the US military?
Many defense intellectuals, former military leaders, and politicians believe that America’s military, particularly the ground forces, are too small to implement Bush’s grand strategy. 
Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, on the other hand, believes the size of the military is adequate if it is re-organized for maximum efficiency.
He is also concerned that an increase in the size of the military will diminish funds available for advanced technology and systems.
Because Rumsfeld is the primary architect of the upcoming defense review, it is very unlikely to recommend an increase in the size of the force.
The changes underway in American defense policy reflect planning assumptions.
The strategy that emerges will be only as strong as these assumptions are accurate. 
The upcoming defense review will mandate changes based on events of the past five years, focusing especially on Iraq, Afghanistan, and other aspects of the war on terror.
The question is whether future American military missions will replicate those of the past five years. 
If not, the US might be preparing for the last war rather than the next one.
One hopes that the 2005 Defense Review will address this issue, although it is certain to answer some strategic questions and leave others open to continued debate.
In any case, the new review will serve as a roadmap for future US defense policy, thus affecting America’s partners and adversaries alike.
Will the Sun Still Rise?
TOKYO – The scale of the earthquake and tsunami that struck Japan in March was far greater than even the authorities’ worst scenarios foresaw.
Nearly six months later, the total damage remains difficult to estimate.
Social unrest and confusion, as well as radiation leaks from the Fukushima nuclear power plant, continue.
And now the country has absorbed another huge blow: another downgrade of its bond ratings. Both Moody’s and Standard &amp; Poor’s now rate Japanese bonds at only their fourth-highest level.
So what policies should be implemented in response to these economic blows?
Last year, Japan’s economy grew at a relatively healthy 3% annual rate, higher than in the United States or the European Union, owing mainly to the fiscal expansion undertaken after the collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008.
But growth in 2011 had been predicted to slow even before the earthquake.
Indeed, the economy shrank by 3.5% year on year in the first quarter.
Now, with so much fixed capital and infrastructure destroyed by the earthquake and tsunami, the economy’s productive capacity has fallen by an estimated 2% of GDP.
But that may not be a bad thing: Prior to the earthquake, Japan had a demand-supply gap of approximately 5% of GDP.
While reducing this gap to 3% of GDP has led to higher prices, this is exactly what Japan needs after years of persistent deflation.
Meanwhile, higher public spending on capital investment and other special procurements will boost domestic demand.
The Hanshin earthquake in 1995 destroyed capital stock worth 2% of GDP.
This time, the loss is estimated at 3.4% of GDP, implying a larger increase in domestic demand if the right public policies are pursued.
On the downside, confidence among consumers and investors alike has taken a hit, mainly owing to fears about radiation leakages and power shortages.
According to the Japan Center for Economic Research, power-supply disruptions could negatively affect the Japanese economy for the next three years.
If the Tokyo metropolitan area’s power supply were to decrease by 10% this year, for example, Japan’s GDP would fall by 2%.
Soon after the disaster, the government announced that reconstruction demand and higher prices would bring about relatively rapid economic recovery.
I think this view is too optimistic, because I suspect that the government wants to finance its new expenditure with a tax hike.
Moreover, the extremely sharp contraction in first-quarter GDP may indicate that the disaster’s negative impact on the economy was more significant than expected.
Indeed, the economy is expected to have shrunk by another 2.6% year on year in the second quarter, with growth set to resume only in July-September.
And, contrary to the government’s outlook, the start of economic recovery could be delayed until the end of this year, with medium-term annual growth reaching 1.5- 2%.
A key question has been the disaster’s impact on global supply chains.
According to Japan’s Ministry of Economy, Trade, and Industry, which surveyed firms roughly a month after the earthquake, more than 60% of production sites in affected areas had already recovered as of April 15.
Almost 30% expected to recover by the summer, and the remaining 10% foresaw normal operations after the autumn.
But the impact of even a small number of disruptions to supply chains can be highly significant, particularly for the Asia-Pacific region.
Consider Renesas Electronics, a medium-size company, with ¥150 billion ($1.9 billion) in annual sales, which accounts for more than half of worldwide production of essential micro-computing components for automobiles.
Partly as a result of the damage at Renesas, Toyota’s capacity-utilization rate dropped to 50% at the beginning of May.
Likewise, the chemical manufacturer Kureha (¥130 billion in annual sales) has a 70% share of the global market for adhesive materials for lithium-ion batteries – a small but essential component of cell phones.
Nokia in Finland, for example, imports 12% of its cell-phone components from Japan, and thus could be indirectly affected by the disaster.
As a result, more companies are likely to create and implement business continuity plans.
Indeed, “BCP” is set to become a key term in the region’s economic discourse.
Using BCPs to determine alternative producers means that regional economies will be integrated in a new form, with companies establishing cooperative relationships even with their competitors.
Unfortunately, Japan’s public officials appear incapable of similar flexibility.
The disaster confirmed the traditional view of Japan as a country that combines a dynamic private sector with an anemic public sector and central administration.
The government’s mistakes in so-called “risk communication” regarding the Fukushima nuclear plant, and its slowness in getting necessary aid to people displaced by the disaster, have once again put the stereotype on full display.
In terms of international relations, however, the disaster could improve Japan’s bilateral ties with influential countries.
For example, Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao and South Korean President Lee Myung-bak met with outgoing Japanese Prime Minister Naoto Kan in Fukushima, near the damaged plant –&nbsp;helping to ease neighboring countries’ concerns about radiation leakage.
Moreover, Japan’s relations with the US, which had suffered since the Democratic Party of Japan came to power two years ago, appear to have emerged from the disaster stronger than ever.
Japan’s Self-Defense Forces played an important role in rescue and restoration activities, with about half of its 200,000 personnel dispatched to the damaged area.
While this severely weakened Japan’s defenses, the US ensured East Asia’s security by deploying an aircraft carrier and cruisers, and American forces also searched for missing victims together with the JSDF.
But Japan’s neighbors expect rapid reconstruction and normalization, and for that, stronger political leadership is needed.
The earthquake and tsunami have confronted Japan with a profound crisis – but also with a rare opportunity to undertake the comprehensive reforms that the country has postponed for far too long.
Will the US-Japan Alliance Survive?
CAMBRIDGE – Next year marks the 50th anniversary of the United States-Japan Security Treaty, a central feature of stability in East Asia for half a century.
But now, with the Japanese experiencing a period of domestic political uncertainty, and North Korea’s nuclear tests and missile launches increasing their anxiety, will Japan reverse its long-standing decision not to seek a national nuclear-deterrent capability?
Is the US-Japan alliance coming to an end? 
In the early 1990’s, many Americans regarded Japan as an economic threat.
Some people – in both countries – viewed the security alliance as a Cold War relic to be discarded.
These trends were reversed by the Clinton administration’s 1995 “East Asia Strategy Report.”
In 1996, the Clinton-Hashimoto Declaration stated that the US-Japan security alliance was the foundation for stability that would allow growing prosperity in post-Cold War East Asia.
That approach has continued on a bipartisan basis in the US, and polls show that it retains broad acceptance in Japan.
Most close observers of the relationship agree that the US-Japan alliance is in much better shape today than 15 years ago.
Nonetheless, the alliance faces three major challenges in a new external environment.
One is North Korea, whose recent behavior has been clever and deceptive.
The North Koreans have violated their agreements, knowing that China, the country with the greatest potential leverage, is most concerned about regime collapse in North Korea, and thus the threat of chaos on its borders.
Japan officially endorses the objective of a non-nuclear world, but it relies on America’s extended nuclear deterrent, and wants to avoid being subject to nuclear blackmail from North Korea (or China).
The Japanese fear that the credibility of American extended deterrence will be weakened if the US decreases its nuclear forces to parity with China.  
It is a mistake, however, to believe that extended deterrence depends on parity in numbers of nuclear weapons.
Rather, it depends on a combination of capability and credibility.
During the Cold War, the US was able to defend Berlin because our promise to do so was made credible by the NATO alliance and the presence of American troops, whose lives would be on the line in the event of a Soviet attack.
Indeed, the best guarantee of American extended deterrence over Japan remains the presence of nearly 50,000 American troops (which Japan helps to maintain with generous host-nation support).
Credibility is also enhanced by joint projects such as the development of regional ballistic missile defense.
Equally important are American actions that show the high priority that the US gives to the alliance, and its guarantees not to engage in what Japan fears will be “Japan-passing” in its relations with Asia.
That is why it was so important that US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s first trip was to Asia, and her first stop in Japan.
It is also why it is mistaken to speak of a formal G-2 with China, rather than multilateral cooperation.
A second challenge for Japan is the dramatic rise of China’s economy.
Although an important trade partner, China’s growing power makes Japan nervous.
When re-negotiating the US-Japan security alliance in the 1990’s, Japanese leaders sometimes privately asked me if the US would desert Japan in favor of China.
I responded then (and today) that there is little prospect of such a reversal, for two reasons.
First, China poses a potential threat, whereas Japan does not.
Second, the US shares democratic values with Japan, and China is not a democracy.
Moreover, China’s internal evolution remains uncertain.
While Chinese are more free today than at any time in their history, China’s political evolution has lagged behind its economic progress.
Unlike India, China has not solved the problem of political participation.
There is always a residual danger that China will embrace nationalism to ward off domestic problems.
At the same time, it is in the interest of the US, Japan, and China that China’s rise be peaceful and harmonious (in the words of Chinese leaders).
Treat China as an enemy, and you guarantee enmity.
That is why the strategy of integration, plus a hedge against uncertainty, makes sense for both the US and Japan.
Indeed, there are strong grounds for the US, Japan, and China to engage in areas of trilateral and other regional cooperation.
Third, the US-Japan alliance will have to face a new set of transnational challenges to our vital interests, such as pandemics, terrorism, and human outflows from failed states.
Chief among these challenges is the threat posed by global warming, with China having surpassed the US as the leading producer of carbon-dioxide emissions (though not in per capita terms).
Fortunately, this is an area that plays to Japan’s strengths.
Although some Japanese complain about the unequal nature of the alliance’s security components, owing to the limits that Japan has accepted on the use of force, in these new areas, Japan is a stronger partner.
Japan’s overseas development assistance in places ranging from Africa to Afghanistan, its participation in global health projects, its support of the United Nations, its naval participation in anti-piracy operations, and its research and development on energy efficiency place it at the forefront in dealing with the new transnational challenges.
Given today’s agenda, there is enormous potential for an equal partnership, working with others, in the provision of global public goods that will benefit the US, Japan, and the rest of the world.
That is why I remain optimistic about the future of the US-Japan alliance.
Renminbi Rising?
SHANGHAI – China is increasingly debating whether or not the renminbi should be internationalized, possibly joining the US dollar and the euro as an international vehicle currency (IVC) – that is, a currency that other countries use to denominate the prices of their traded goods and international loans.
Related to this is a debate about whether Shanghai can become a first-tier international financial center (1-IFC) like London and New York.
Financial history can help to answer these questions.
First, a city can become a 1-IFC only if its national currency is an IVC.
But, as London’s status shows, a longtime 1-IFC can retain its position in the international financial system even if its currency is no longer an IVC.
Second, the transaction cost of using a foreign currency as a medium of exchange is inversely proportional to the extent to which that currency is used globally.
Similar economies of scale characterize foreign investors’ use of a particular international financial center.
As a result, there cannot be more than three or four IVCs and 1-IFCs.
Third, a country’s financial sector must be both open, with no capital-flow restrictions, and sophisticated, with a wide range of instruments and institutions.
It must also be safe, with a central bank maintaining economic stability, prudential regulators keeping fraud and speculation in check, macro-prudential authorities displaying adequate financial fire-fighting capabilities, and a legal system that is predictable, transparent, and fair.
Last – and most important – successful convergence to IVC and 1-IFC status requires the national economy to be strong relative to other economies for a substantial period of time.
The United Kingdom occupied a position of global economic leadership for more than a century.
In 1914, the US/UK GDP ratio was 2.1, but the US dollar was not an IVC, suggesting that America’s relative economic strength was inadequate.
A decade later, in 1924, the ratio was 3.2 and rising – and the US dollar had eclipsed the British pound as the most important IVC.
Relative economic strength explains why the Japanese yen failed to develop into an IVC, and why Tokyo – whose financial markets satisfied the relevant requirements – failed to become a 1-IFC.
With its GDP reaching only about 60% of America’s at its peak in 1991, Japan never attained the critical mass required to induce foreigners to use the yen to lower transaction costs.
Determining the future international status of the renminbi and Shanghai must begin with a calculation of China’s expected relative economic strength vis-à-vis the US under two plausible scenarios.
In the first scenario, China becomes caught in a middle-income trap, with per capita GDP stuck at 30% of America’s – an outcome that has characterized Latin America’s five largest economies since at least 1960, and Malaysia since 1994.
This would put China’s economic strength relative to the US at 1.1 – well below the necessary ratio.
In the second, more favorable scenario, China’s per capita GDP would reach 80% of America’s – higher than the 70% average rate for the five largest Western European countries since 1960 – and its economic strength relative to the US would amount to roughly 2.8.
This would make the renminbi eligible for IVC status and enable Shanghai to choose whether to become a 1-IFC.
But China’s economy still would not be strong enough relative to the US for natural market forces to ensure the renminbi’s international success.
Given this, the Chinese government would have to implement decisive measures to encourage international traders and creditors to price their transactions in renminbi.
Specifically, China would have to use its market power to promote pricing in renminbi for relevant manufactured exports and raw-material imports, and encourage renminbi denomination of foreign financial assets that China purchases (which the country’s status as a net creditor should facilitate).
But there are serious pitfalls to avoid in this process.
As the Asian financial crisis of 1997-1998 demonstrated, capital-account liberalization could lead to financial meltdowns – a danger that opponents of internationalizing the renminbi often cite.
But these risks do not outweigh the potential benefits of financial openness, and they can be minimized with effective monitoring and regulation, including requirements for large capital buffers and low leverage ratios, together with strong crisis-response mechanisms, like a resolution trust corporation.
In fact, effective financial-monitoring and prudential-regulation systems do not have to precede opening the capital account.
On the contrary, developing and enacting financial regulation must be a gradual process, shaped by both existing knowledge and firsthand experience.
After all, no financial market is either completely open or completely closed forever; the degree of openness at a given moment depends on policy choices.
The recent establishment of the Shanghai Free Trade Zone will allow for the emergence of an offshore international financial center that offers real-world training to China’s regulators.
This will give them the tools they need to recognize the signs of a developing crisis, defuse the threat, and efficiently handle the recapitalization and reorganization of failed financial institutions.
China’s pursuit of an IVC and a 1-IFC city would serve not only its own interests.
Allowing the renminbi to help meet global demand for international reserves and risk diversification would also strengthen global financial stability.
There is little time to waste in internationalizing the renminbi.
Given the limited number of currencies that can serve as IVCs, the failure of the renminbi to achieve IVC status before, say, the Indian rupee, the Russian ruble, or the Brazilian real could mean that the renminbi is denied IVC status – and that Shanghai fails to achieve 1-IFC status – for generations, if not forever.
Winners and Losers in the Post-9/11 Era
September 11, 2001, is one of those dates that mark a transformation in world politics.
Just as the fall of the Berlin Wall on November 9, 1989, signified the Cold War’s end, al-Qaeda’s attack on the United States opened a new epoch.
A non-governmental group killed more Americans that day than the government of Japan did with its surprise attack on another transformative date, December 7, 1941.
While the jihadi terrorist movement had been growing for a decade, 9/11 was the turning point.
Five years into this new era, how should we characterize it?
Some believe that 9/11 ushered in a “clash of civilizations” between Islam vs. the West.
Indeed, that is probably what Osama bin Laden had in mind.
Terrorism is a form of theater.
Extremists kill innocent people in order to dramatize their message in a way that shocks and horrifies their intended audience.
They also rely on what Clark McCauley and others have called “jujitsu politics,” in which a smaller fighter uses the strength of the larger opponent to defeat him.
In that sense, bin Laden hoped that the US would be lured into a bloody war in Afghanistan, similar to the Soviet intervention two decades earlier, which had created such a fertile recruiting ground for jihadists.
But the Americans used a modest amount of force to remove the Taliban government, avoided disproportionate civilian casualties, and were able to create an indigenous political framework.
While far from perfect, the first round in the fight went to the US.