Perhaps the risk that a Greek debt restructuring would cause a financial meltdown was always minimal, and quiescent markets were to be expected.
But, in that case, why all the fuss?
The answer should be clear by now: interest-group politics and policy elites’ worldview.
Even if the risk to the financial system was minimal, the impact on banks and bondholders was substantial.
They stood to lose billions, and many financial-sector employees stood to lose their jobs.
Not surprisingly, leading bankers lobbied against debt restructuring, both behind closed doors and publicly.
For example, the Institute for International Finance, a preeminent Washington, DC-based lobbying group for large banks, consistently argues: bail us out, or else face the consequences.
But, just as important as their storyline is their political power, which has risen greatly in recent years – to the point that all major policymakers in the US and Europe cater to banks’ fortunes even when there are no wider implications for the economy.
Even now, many of the losses that bankers should have faced are being shouldered by the public sector, including through various forms of direct support and the extraordinary and risky actions of the European Central Bank.
The extent of subsidies in this sector is stunning and, under current policies, will only increase over time – thereby primarily supporting the lifestyles of the top 1% of people in very rich countries.
The Greek default has turned out to be the proverbial dog that didn’t bark.
The lesson for Europe –&nbsp;and for the US – is clear: it is time to stop listening to what banks say, and start focusing on what they do.
We must re-evaluate the distorted political economy of the financial sector, before the excessive power of the few imposes even larger costs on everyone else.
Capturing the ECB
NEW YORK – Nothing illustrates better the political crosscurrents, special interests, and shortsighted economics now at play in Europe than the debate over the restructuring of Greece’s sovereign debt.
Germany insists on a deep restructuring – at least a 50% “haircut” for bondholders – whereas the European Central Bank insists that any debt restructuring must be voluntary.
In the old days – think of the 1980’s Latin American debt crisis – one could get creditors, mostly large banks, in a small room, and hammer out a deal, aided by some cajoling, or even arm-twisting, by governments and regulators eager for things to go smoothly.
But, with the advent of debt securitization, creditors have become far more numerous, and include hedge funds and other investors over whom regulators and governments have little sway.
Moreover, “innovation” in financial markets has made it possible for securities owners to be insured, meaning that they have a seat at the table, but no “skin in the game.”
They do have interests: they want to collect on their insurance, and that means that the restructuring must be a “credit event” –&#160;tantamount to a default.
The ECB’s insistence on “voluntary” restructuring – that is, avoidance of a credit event –&#160;has placed the two sides at loggerheads.
The irony is that the regulators have allowed the creation of this dysfunctional system.&#160;
The ECB’s stance is peculiar.
One would have hoped that the banks might have managed the default risk on the bonds in their portfolios by buying insurance.
And, if they bought insurance, a regulator concerned with systemic stability would want to be sure that the insurer pays in the event of a loss.
But the ECB wants the banks to suffer a 50% loss on their bond holdings, without insurance “benefits” having to be paid.
There are three explanations for the ECB’s position, none of which speaks well for the institution and its regulatory and supervisory conduct.
The first explanation is that the banks have not, in fact, bought insurance, and some have taken speculative positions.
The second is that the ECB knows that the financial system lacks transparency – and knows that investors know that they cannot gauge the impact of an involuntary default, which could cause credit markets to freeze, reprising the aftermath of Lehman Brothers’ collapse in September 2008.
Finally, the ECB may be trying to protect the few banks that have written the insurance.
None of these explanations is an adequate excuse for the ECB’s opposition to deep involuntary restructuring of Greece’s debt.
The ECB should have insisted on more transparency – indeed, that should have been one of the main lessons of 2008.
Regulators should not have allowed the banks to speculate as they did; if anything, they should have required them to buy insurance – and then insisted on restructuring in a way that ensured that the insurance paid off.
There is, moreover, little evidence that a deep involuntary restructuring would be any more traumatic than a deep voluntary restructuring.
By insisting on its voluntariness, the ECB may be trying to ensure that the restructuring is not deep; but, in that case, it is putting the banks’ interests before that of Greece, for which a deep restructuring is essential if it is to emerge from the crisis.
In fact, the ECB may be putting the interests of the few banks that have written credit-default swaps before those of Greece, Europe’s taxpayers, and creditors who acted prudently and bought insurance.
The final oddity of the ECB’s stance concerns democratic governance.
Deciding whether a credit event has occurred is left to a secret committee of the International Swaps and Derivatives Association, an industry group that has a vested interest in the outcome.
If news reports are correct, some members of the committee have been using their position to promote more accommodative negotiating positions.
But it seems unconscionable that the ECB would delegate to a secret committee of self-interested market participants the right to determine what is an acceptable debt restructuring.
The one argument that seems – at least superficially – to put the public interest first is that an involuntary restructuring might lead to financial contagion, with large eurozone economies like Italy, Spain, and even France facing a sharp, and perhaps prohibitive, rise in borrowing costs.
But that begs the question: why should an involuntary restructuring lead to worse contagion than a voluntary restructuring of comparable depth?
If the banking system were well regulated, with banks holding sovereign debt having purchased insurance, an involuntary restructuring should perturb financial markets less.
Of course, it might be argued that if Greece gets away with an involuntary restructuring, others would be tempted to try it as well.
Financial markets, worried about this, would immediately raise interest rates on other at-risk eurozone countries, large and small.
But the riskiest countries already have been shut out of financial markets, so the possibility of a panic reaction is of limited consequence.
Of course, others might be tempted to imitate Greece if Greece were indeed better off restructuring than not doing so.
That is true, but everyone already knows it.
The ECB’s behavior should not be surprising: as we have seen elsewhere, institutions that are not democratically accountable tend to be captured by special interests.
That was true before 2008; unfortunately for Europe –&#160;and for the global economy – the problem has not been adequately addressed since then.
The Sustainability Revolution in Finance
STOCKHOLM – A quiet revolution is taking place in the financial industry.
According to the United Nations Environment Programme, sustainable development is increasingly being integrated into financial decision-making.
The European Union has been rather passive so far in this transformation, but financial regulators in a number of countries are leading the charge.
France recently introduced the world’s first mandatory climate disclosure requirements for institutional investors.
Norway is divesting its sovereign wealth fund from coal.
South Africa has embedded sustainable development into listing requirements on its stock exchange.
Likewise, Brazil’s banking regulations now require accounting for environmental risk.
And the Swedish government is pushing an ambitious sustainability agenda featuring a series of proposals aimed at improving information for investors and determining which climate-related risks regulators and financial firms must address.
Private industry is also moving rapidly.
The world’s largest asset manager, Blackrock, is launching a fossil-fuel-free index, and Axa, one of the world's largest insurance companies, has pledged to divest from coal.
Meanwhile, the divestment movement is snowballing, with faith-based communities, municipalities, celebrities, trade unions, universities, and institutional investors all pledging to unload their fossil-fuel assets.
Altogether, institutions worth more than $2.6 trillion have committed to divest from fossil fuels.
The revolution may be quiet, but it is getting louder.
Fossil-fuel companies are increasingly being delegitimized; their current business model is irreconcilable with a climate-conscious investment portfolio.
At the same time, investors are starting to understand that paying attention to climate risk is an integral part of a sound investment strategy that seeks to minimize risk and help to promote financial stability.
Axa’s CEO Henri de Castries has endorsed such motives, stating that divesting from coal helps remove risk from investment portfolios and contributes to building a more sustainable society.
Bank of England Governor Mark Carney has been particularly frank in highlighting the dangers that climate change poses to financial markets.
In a speech at Lloyd’s of London this September, he cautioned that a delayed transition to limit global warming to 2º Celsius would increase risks to financial stability.
A range of institutions has echoed his warning.
Meanwhile, McKinsey and the Carbon Trust have estimated that 30-40% of the value of fossil-fuel companies could be endangered because of a so-called “carbon bubble,” an overvaluation of fossil-fuel reserves.
According to the International Energy Agency, two-thirds of these reserves must be kept in the ground if the world is to avoid runaway climate change, which implies that companies may not be able to exploit their full economic potential.
Given that the European financial sector has invested more than €1 trillion ($1.1 trillion) in fossil-fuel assets, the EU is particularly at risk of a carbon bubble.
The issue has become serious enough that European Central Bank President Mario Draghi has asked the European Systemic Risk Board to investigate it.
Financial regulators in Sweden, Germany, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom are all studying the impact of climate change on financial markets.
The G-20 has also asked the Basel-based Financial Stability Board to convene a public-private inquiry into the carbon bubble.
Last September, European Commissioner Jonathan Hill published his long-awaited Capital Markets Union proposal.
But while his call for more integrated and diversified capital markets in the EU is admirable, his proposal lacks both a roadmap for the integration of sustainable development into the financial system and a strategy for addressing the carbon bubble.
The European Parliament and the European Council have the opportunity to improve Hill’s proposal.
The parliament has already established an informal cross-party grouping, called the Carbon Group, which aims to tackle the carbon bubble and advance sustainable finance.
And within the Council, a range of countries, most notably Sweden and France, are working for greater integration of sustainability metrics into financial markets.
A range of institutions are starting to embrace sustainable development considerations in their financial decision-making.
Policymakers – especially in the EU – have a responsibility to advance such forward-looking thinking and to protect the global economy from climate-induced financial distress.
A Carbon Price-and-Rebate Plan
PARIS – So far, international climate talks have failed to find a mechanism that will successfully reduce global greenhouse-gas emissions.
The 1997 Kyoto Protocol attempted to use a system of tradable quotas to establish a price on carbon-dioxide emissions, but foundered after the United States and several emerging countries refused to join.
The 2009 Copenhagen Climate Change Conference introduced a pledge-and-review process, in which countries unilaterally decided how much they would cut.
As a result, the US and several emerging economies made commitments to reduce emissions for the first time.
But this system, too, is badly flawed.
What it does not do is resolve the classical free-rider problem or guarantee reductions in developing countries.
Indeed, some countries may have been encouraged to do less than they otherwise would have in order to maintain a strong negotiating position.
As world leaders meet in Paris from November 30 to December 11 for the United Nations Conference on Climate Change, they will have a new opportunity to forge an effective agreement.
To encourage governments to act in concert, it is essential to work toward a system of carbon pricing that is both straightforward and transparent.
We propose a carbon “price-and-rebate” mechanism, which simultaneously sets a price on emissions above a certain threshold and defines how the revenues raised should be used.
Studies ahead of the Paris conference suggest that international cooperation could allow for rapid reduction of greenhouse gases.
They also highlight the knock-on benefits that taking quick action on climate change could have, including reduction of local pollution, greater energy and food security, and faster innovation.
To accelerate the move toward a low-carbon economy, an international agreement must be applicable to all countries; include a common and consistent system for monitoring, reporting, and verification; and provide strong economic incentives at a global scale.
Our price-and-rebate mechanism is inspired by the “bonus/malus” scheme in France, in which buyers of new cars are taxed or given a bonus depending on the vehicle’s CO2 emissions.
In our system, a country exceeding the worldwide average for per capita emissions would pay a specified amount on every ton of CO2 (or its equivalent) above a set threshold.
Countries with lower-than-average emissions would be compensated for polluting less.
This system would initially benefit countries with the lowest per capita emissions, meaning that most of the funds would flow towards the least-developed countries.
Once it is fully operational, the price-and-rebate mechanism would encourage all countries to reduce their per capita emissions, thereby reducing the gap between payments and rebates.
The ideal carbon price would depend on the objectives of the agreement.
A price of $1-2 per ton would generate $14-28 billion, enough to fund the deployment of the monitoring, review, and verification process in developing countries.
The Copenhagen Accord included a commitment by rich countries to spend $100 billion a year after 2020 to help underdeveloped countries mitigate and adapt to climate change.
A rate of $7-$8 per ton would generate enough revenue to deliver on this promise, with the money flowing to countries with low per capita emissions.
Of that $100 billion, a little over $60 billion would come from Western countries and Japan, and just under $20 billion would come from hydrocarbon-exporting countries (Russia and Saudi Arabia in particular) and high-growth Asian economies (including China and Korea).
The introduction of a price-and-rebate system would thus redistribute funds among countries in conformity with the principle of “common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities.”
A price-and-rebate system would be both efficient and fair.
Every citizen in the world would have the same right to emit greenhouse gas, and every country would face the same incentives at the margin to reduce emissions.
The main obstacle to be overcome in establishing such a system will be to convince donor countries’ governments to pay for their carbon emissions.
This cost will be modest relative to the size of their economies, and any successful climate-change agreement will require similar commitments.
If rich countries are unable to agree to pay even a modest price for carbon, the talks in Paris will surely be judged a failure.
The Path to Carbon Pricing
WASHINGTON, DC – In just six weeks, world leaders will meet in Paris to negotiate a new global climate-change agreement.
To date, 150 countries have submitted plans detailing how they will move their economies along a more resilient low-carbon trajectory.
These plans represent the first generation of investments to be made in order to build a competitive future without the dangerous levels of carbon-dioxide emissions that are now driving global warming.
The transition to a cleaner future will require both government action and the right incentives for the private sector.
At the center should be a strong public policy that puts a price on carbon pollution.
Placing a higher price on carbon-based fuels, electricity, and industrial activities will create incentives for the use of cleaner fuels, save energy, and promote a shift to greener investments.
Measures such as carbon taxes and fees, emissions-trading programs and other pricing mechanisms, and removal of inefficient subsidies can give businesses and households the certainty and predictability they need to make long-term investments in climate-smart development.
At the International Monetary Fund, the focus is on reforming its member countries’ fiscal systems in order to raise more revenue from taxes on carbon-intensive fuels and less revenue from other taxes that are detrimental to economic performance, such as taxes on labor and capital.
Pricing carbon can be about smarter, more efficient tax systems, rather than higher taxes.
Carbon taxes should be applied comprehensively to emissions from fossil fuels.
The price must be high enough to achieve ambitious environmental goals, in alignment with national circumstances, and it must be stable, in order to encourage businesses and households to invest in clean technologies.
Administering carbon taxes is straightforward and can build on existing road fuel taxes, which are well established in most countries.
Carbon pricing will be in many countries’ best interests, owing to the many domestic environmental benefits.
For example, burning cleaner fuels helps to reduce outdoor air pollution, which, according to the World Health Organization, currently causes about 3.7 million premature deaths a year.
It is vitally important to address the impact of energy-price reforms on vulnerable groups in every society.
So these reforms will need to be accompanied by adjustments to fiscal systems and safety nets, among other things, to ensure that the poor are not harmed.
The World Bank Group is supporting countries and businesses as they develop climate-friendly public policies, invest in carbon markets, and explore financial innovations to ease into low-carbon transitions.
The Group is leveraging its experience and global reach for learning and knowledge exchange through programs like the Partnership for Market Readiness.
From that experience, we have developed, alongside the OECD, initial principles to help guide and inspire future carbon-pricing schemes.
By drawing on these principles, countries, regions, states, and businesses can move faster to tackle the climate challenge confronting us all.
The principles are based on fairness; alignment of policies and objectives; stability and predictability; transparency; efficiency and cost-effectiveness; and reliability and environmental integrity.
To help achieve our climate objectives, we need to promote dialogue about the necessary policy measures before and beyond the climate-change conference in Paris.
That is why we are announcing a “Carbon Pricing Panel,” which will bring together heads of state, city and state leaders, and representatives of top companies to urge countries and businesses around the world to put a price on carbon.
These leaders have taken steps to price carbon pollution and catalyze greener investment in their own countries and regions.
They include German Chancellor Angela Merkel, Chilean President Michelle Bachelet, French President François Hollande, Ethiopian Prime Minister Hailemariam Desalegn, Philippines President Benigno Aquino III, Mexican President Enrique Peña Nieto, Governor Jerry Brown of California, and Mayor Eduardo Paes of Rio de Janeiro.
Carbon pricing policies are already being implemented by some 40 national governments, including that of China, the world’s largest emitter, and 23 cities, states, and regions that are putting a price on carbon.
Many other governments also are reforming energy prices, and more than 400 companies report using a voluntary, internal carbon price.
That makes sense.
Top companies must effectively manage exposure to climate risk in order to generate higher profits and ensure more stable earnings.
All of these actions are welcome; but we view them as being only initial steps.
Together with the leaders of the Carbon Pricing Panel, we call on governments to seize the moment – for the sake of the planet and future generations – to put a price on carbon pollution that reflects the environmental damage it causes.
We stand ready to support governments that act.
The longer we wait, the costlier and more difficult it will be for us – and our children and grandchildren – to protect the planet.
Care-Giving and the Moral Impoverishment of Medicine
CAMBRIDGE – Care-giving is understood by economists as a “burden,” by clinical psychologists as a “coping process,” by health-services researchers in terms of health-care costs, and by physicians as a matter of clinical competency.
But, for many people, care-giving is a foundational component of moral experience.
It is a practice of acknowledgement, empathic imagination, witnessing, responsibility, solidarity, and the most concrete forms of assistance.
It is this moral aspect that makes care-givers, and at times even care-receivers, feel more “present” – and thus more fully human.
But, aside from skilled nursing, rehabilitation efforts by occupational and physical therapists, and the practical assistance of social workers and home health aides, care-giving, especially for victims of health catastrophes and end-stage conditions, has relatively little to do with the contemporary practice of medicine.
To illustrate this point, I draw on my personal experience as the care-giver for my wife, who suffers from a severe neurodegenerative disorder that has impaired her memory and motor functions, restricting her independence.
I wake her up in the morning, assist her in toileting, bathing, and dressing, make us breakfast, and help her feed herself.
I assist her in walking, placing her in a chair, and getting into our car.
I am with her nearly all the time to protect her from injuring herself, because she can neither see nor navigate safely on the street or in our own home.
It is disturbing to witness the deterioration of a once elegant, intellectually lively, and highly independent companion of more than four decades.
But our emotional reactions, from frustration and anger to sadness, have been cushioned and sublimated by our work, the long rhythm of our days together, and, above all, by the support of family and close friends.
That concern and responsibility for us is as much a part of care-giving as all the mundane practices I have listed, and amounts to moral solidarity with our struggle.
I give you this personal sketch because it is the best I can do to illustrate what care-giving entails, and why it is so crucial to everyone’s life – and to the human condition more generally.
Care-giving, as illustrated by our case, includes what happens when hope and consolation are abandoned, when theodicy ends, and when all there is to do is to be present with the sufferer, sharing his or her suffering by simply – and usually silently – being there.
In medical schools, however, the curriculum in both the basic science and clinical apprenticeship years places the greatest emphasis on understanding the biology of disease processes and high-technology treatments.
The illness experience gets less and less pedagogic attention as the student progresses from classroom to inpatient ward and clinic.
In the broader system of healthcare, students can readily discern that medicine largely leaves the practical and emotional tasks of care-giving to nurses, social workers, and the patient and his or her network of support.
The structure of service delivery and the funding of health services work to discourage professionals from the art of care-giving, and can, in fact, undermine the practitioner’s efforts.
The result is moral impoverishment of the practice of medicine.
For medical anthropologists, people everywhere live in the flow of interpersonal interactions in local worlds – social networks, families, institutions, and communities.
That is to say, experience, viewed as the flow of words, movements, and emotions between us, is not only local, but also inherently moral, because living our lives is about animating and enacting values.
For patients and families faced with health catastrophes and serious chronic medical conditions, the experience of suffering is not just a personal one, but is strongly influenced by cultural and historical changes in the processes that contribute to moral life being distinctive in different eras and societies.
Faced with a threat of pain, disfigurement, loss of function, and serious disability, individuals and families reframe the experience of suffering within their local moral world by remaking meanings, emotions, and values via ethical, religious, and aesthetic activities.
Doctors are no different from laypersons in drawing on personal and cultural resources –involving imagination, responsibility, sensibility, insight, and communication – to accomplish their care-giving.
And what they engage in is an amalgam of ethical, aesthetic, religious, and practical action.
The physician’s art – now so circumscribed by bureaucratic, political, and economic forces – turns on both the professionalization of these inherently human resources and the impact of their routine use on the doctor’s own moral life.
To prepare for a career of care-giving, medical students and young doctors clearly require something besides scientific and technological training.
Indeed, current professional education can even be seen as enabling the physician as a technical expert, while disabling him or her as a care-giver.
To overcome this trend, we must incorporate the humanities into medical training as a means of rekindling and deepening those human experiences of imagination and commitment that are essential for care-giving, and resisting the bureaucratization of values and emotional responses that causes failure in the physician’s art.
In essence, the practitioner must come to feel that the art of care-giving is as much at stake as the science and technology of diagnosis and treatment.
In my view, what is needed is reform of the very culture of contemporary biomedicine.
We must train students and practitioners in critical self-reflection on that which limits their care-giving; in strategies and techniques aimed at opening a space for the moral acts of care-giving; and in the most concrete and practical acts of assistance, so that they never forget what care-giving actually means.
The Road to Car Safety
TOKYO – The automobile – long a symbol of freedom, status, and success – is at a crossroads.
For more than a century, cars have enabled billions of people to travel farther, faster, and more efficiently than ever before.
They have helped power the world’s great economies and shaped our modern social and cultural landscape.
But all of this has come at a price: accidents, congestion, pollution, and an uneasy dependence on oil, among other costs.
Our challenge, therefore, is to boost the benefits and reduce (and eventually eliminate) the harm done by our cars, so that the future of motor travel is clean, efficient, safe, and accessible to all.
For our industry to remain an instrument of progress, we must therefore work closely with our peers from other industries and government in three major areas: safety, the environment, and affordability.
Road safety is a grave concern.
More than 3,000 people die in auto-related accidents every day.
Lower-income countries account for only half of all vehicles on the road but suffer more than 90% of the fatalities.
India has four times fewer cars than France, though it suffers 20 times more road-related deaths – that is, 80 times more accidents per car.
But safety is improving.
In Europe, even as the number of vehicles has doubled, the number of road deaths has been halved.
One reason for this is the introduction of technologies such as anti-lock brakes, airbags, and electronic stability control.
Technologies now in development could even eliminate auto-related fatalities altogether.
One such innovation is autonomous driving.
Renault and Nissan are currently working on complementary technologies that can predict, detect, and prevent collisions.
By reducing the stresses of driving in heavy traffic and unfamiliar locations, this technology promises greater protection for both drivers and pedestrians.
It is especially valuable to people with restricted mobility, such as elderly or disabled drivers.
But such breakthrough technologies are not simply invented and then implemented – they need government support in the form of a coherent set of laws and regulations covering their use.
Policymakers must therefore be involved at an early development stage if we are to reach the goal of “zero fatality” roads within our lifetimes.
The auto industry can also make a vital contribution to the environment.
Fifteen years ago, the Renault-Nissan Alliance evaluated the environmental impact of its vehicles over their life cycle.
The study examined the effect of our raw-material usage; the impact of car exhaust on public health, especially in congested urban areas; and the contribution to overall greenhouse-gas emissions – 23% of which come from the auto industry worldwide.
As a result of that evaluation, the Alliance invested more than €4 billion ($5.5 billion) in zero-emission technologies.
Today, ours is the only auto group that mass-produces a full line of zero-emission cars and light commercial vehicles.
Renault and Nissan together have sold more than 100,000 such vehicles worldwide – more than all of the other major carmakers combined.
The broader task is to integrate these vehicles into a more efficient and cleaner power grid – for example, by replacing aging coal-fired power plants with hydroelectric power.
Moreover, local and national governments should work with the automobile industry to integrate zero-emission vehicles into national transport infrastructure.
If this is achieved, we believe it will be possible for cars to have zero impact on the environment in the foreseeable future.
Greater health and safety, however, should not (and need not) come at the expense of developing countries, whose citizens want the fruits of prosperity that developed countries’ citizens have long enjoyed.
In 1999, Brazil, Russia, India, and China accounted for a mere 8% of vehicle sales worldwide; by 2012, their combined sales had reached a staggering 35% of the global total.
And this proportion is sure to rise.
One reason for this extraordinary growth is that carmakers have developed more affordable cars for a new, cost-conscious middle class.
The Alliance’s CMF-A platform, created and manufactured in India, will pave the way for many more affordable vehicles throughout the developing world.
These advances are at the forefront of a growing trend toward “frugal innovation” that is increasingly being adopted in developed markets, too.
It is hard to overestimate the impact that the automobile has had on our political, economic, social, and cultural life over the past century.
The industry’s global sales are greater than the GDP of all but the five largest economies, and it employs more than 50 million people worldwide.
Its future is bound up with that of the world economy.
The challenge now is to reinvent the car so that it remains a proud totem of freedom and safety in the decades ahead.
The Case Against Helicopter Money
MUNICH – Despite years of expansionary monetary policy, the European Central Bank has failed to push inflation back up to its target of “below but close to 2%.”
The latest measures – a zero interest rate on the ECB’s main refinancing operations, an increase in monthly asset purchases from €60 billion ($67 billion) to €80 billion, and an even lower deposit rate of -0.40% – are unlikely to change this.
That is why some economists are urging the ECB to go even further, with so-called “helicopter drops” – that is, financing private consumption by printing money.
The idea of helicopter money dates back to the monetarism debates of the 1960s.
A central bank, it was argued, never runs out of options for stimulating aggregate demand and stoking inflation, provided it is willing to resort to radical measures.
But what was once a theoretical notion now seems to be a concrete possibility.
In practice, helicopter drops would arrive in the form of lump-sum payments to households or consumption vouchers for everybody, funded exclusively by central banks.
Governments or commercial banks distributing the money would be credited with a deposit or be given cash, but no claim would be created on the left-hand side of the central bank’s balance sheet.
This type of single accounting would reduce the central bank’s equity capital, unless it realized (sold) valuation reserves on its balance sheet.
Proponents defend this approach by claiming that central banks are subject to special accounting rules that could be adjusted as needed.
The proponents of helicopter drops today include some eminent figures, including former US Federal Reserve Chair Ben Bernanke and Adair Turner, former head of the United Kingdom’s Financial Services Authority.
And while ECB President Mario Draghi has highlighted the technical, legal, and accounting obstacles that stand in the way of helicopter drops by his institution, he has not ruled them out.
The question now is: Is such an extreme step really justified?
The answer is no.
While helicopter drops are a viable policy option if deflation is spiraling downward, as it was in the late 1920s and early 1930s, that is not the case today – neither in the eurozone nor in the global economy.
True, demand growth is subdued, reflecting the lingering fallout from the global financial crisis that erupted in 2008.
Banks, firms, and households are still cleaning up their balance sheets and working off the heaps of debt they amassed during the credit boom that preceded the bust.
But they have already made significant progress, meaning that the drag on growth is set to diminish.
Consumers today are not holding back on spending because they expect goods and services to become cheaper, as one would expect during a period of deflation.
Instead, they are gradually increasing their spending, taking advantage of restored income growth and large gains in purchasing power caused by collapsing oil and commodity prices.
As a result, most advanced economies are once again producing at close to capacity.
Data on corporate profits also contradict the view that we are mired in deflation.
Price stability has not put profit margins under pressure.
On the contrary, in many advanced economies, profits are high – even reaching record levels – owing partly to lower input costs.
In this environment, distributing largesse financed by the central bank would have dangerous systemic consequences in the long run, because it would create perverse incentives for everyone involved.
Policymakers would be tempted to resort to helicopter money whenever growth was not as strong as they would like, instead of implementing difficult structural reforms that address the underlying causes of weak economic performance.
All of this would raise expectations among financial-market actors that central banks and governments would always step in to smooth out credit bubbles and mitigate their consequences, even if that meant accumulating more debt.
These actors’ risk perception would thus be distorted, and the role of risk premiums would be diminished.
Add to that the impact of the depletion of valuation reserves and the risk of negative equity –developments that could undermine the credibility of central banks and thus of currencies – and it seems clear that helicopter drops should, at least for now, remain firmly in the realm of academic debate.
The Case for UK Import Substitution
LONDON – The most dramatic economic effect of the United Kingdom’s Brexit vote has been the collapse of sterling.
Since June, the pound has fallen by 16% against a basket of currencies.
Mervyn King, the previous governor of the Bank of England, hailed the lower exchange rate as a “welcome change.”
Indeed, with Britain’s current-account deficit running at over 7% of GDP – by far the largest since data started being collected in 1955 – depreciation could be regarded as a boon.
But is it?
Economists would typically argue that the way to balance a country’s external accounts is through a fall in its currency, which would make imports more expensive and exports cheaper, causing the former to fall and the latter to rise.
Higher import prices – a net loss for the country – would be offset by the higher employment and wages generated by the more competitive position of the country’s exports.
But in order for currency depreciation to work its magic, more demand for exports must be forthcoming when the exchange rate falls (or, as economists say, the price elasticity of demand for exports must be high).
But various studies have shown that the price elasticity of demand for UK exports is low.
For example, a recent paper by Francesco Aiello, Graziella Bonanno, and Alessia Via of the European Trade Study Group finds that “the long-run level of exports appears to be unrelated to the real exchange rate for the UK.”
This means that British consumers and producers will have to bear the entire brunt of devaluation: their import consumption will be rationed through a sharp rise in price inflation, with no offsetting gain for exports. This is by no means merely a theoretical proposition.
In 2008-09, when the rest of the world was on the verge of deflation, the UK was enduring an inflationary recession, with GDP contracting at a top rate of 6.1% annually, while inflation reached some 5.1%.
This occurred because sterling fell more than 21%, peak to trough, from 2007 to 2008.
Moreover, although the current-account deficit narrowed to around 1.7% of GDP in 2011, the improvement was only temporary.
After 2011, the current account deficit started to widen once more, even though the pound never clawed back its losses.
In economics jargon, the UK seems to be suffering from an extreme variant of the Houthakker-Magee effect – named after two economists who discovered in 1969 that price elasticities for imports and exports could diverge substantially, giving rise to a permanent tendency toward current-account imbalance.
The reason appears to be the massive contraction of the UK manufacturing sector – from around 28% of gross value added in 1978 to less than 10% today.
As the economist Nicholas Kaldor pointed out long ago, because manufacturing has higher returns to scale than services, manufacturing exporters tend to beat service exporters.
In addition, structural reforms since the mid-1990s have ensured that British exporters are deeply integrated within global supply chains.
As a result, many of Britain’s exports require imported inputs; so when sterling depreciates and import prices rise, the knock-on effect on export prices renders them less competitive.
The most recent OECD data show that the import content of UK exports is around 23%, compared to around 15% for US and Japanese exports.
For now, the UK is relying on capital inflows into the City of London to limit sterling’s fall.
But, as the exchange-rate collapse of 2008 showed, this source of foreign demand for sterling is highly unstable.
When the worm inevitably turns and these flows reverse, both sterling and exports will take another hit.
The worst-case scenario would involve a sharp fall in the value of sterling, followed by sticky inflation that reinforced the rise in British export prices, fueling further currency depreciation.
This doom loop would stop only when British consumers suffered a fall in real income of a magnitude not typically seen outside developing countries.
The more likely outcome is a sort of slow rotting effect, with periodic depreciations gradually driving down living standards for all who earn their living in sterling.
What is to be done?
Only rapid government action to substitute goods currently imported with domestically produced goods will do the trick.
The classic solution is import controls. But other measures that are less damaging to trade rules and international amity are available.
The national investment bank which the Labour Party is now advocating could be given a mandate to invest in industries with a high import substitution potential.
An alternative would be to subsidize such industries directly from the Exchequer, with subsidies tied to the quality-adjusted price of the import being substituted.
As the domestically produced goods became competitive with the foreign goods, the subsidies would gradually be removed and the industry allowed stand on its own two feet.
Ideally, the British government should aim to bring down imports as a percentage of GDP from the current high of around 30% to pre-1974 levels of around 20%.
This may prove too ambitious, and the UK may have to settle for somewhere around 25% of GDP.
But if something is not done, Britain risks permanent impairment of prosperity.
A depressed economy can be reflated, and an inflationary economy can be depressed.
But losing access to crucial foreign markets as a result of currency movements outside the country’s control is largely irreversible.
Cash Aid for Africa
STOCKHOLM – Europe has made an ambitious commitment to scale up its aid to Africa, and Africa’s challenges call for that greater engagement.
But boosting aid to countries that are already aid-dependent requires clearer delivery mechanisms and a degree of budgetary predictability.
But a theoretical doubling of African aid by 2010 − with the possibility of even more after that − offers a huge opportunity to combat poverty.
So tackling any obstacles that could inhibit the effective application of these additional resources is a priority.
While Africa’s needs are relatively well known, there are challenges in scaling up aid to tackle them.
This reflects such problems as macroeconomic management, aid-dependency syndromes, absorption capacity, transaction costs, and − related to all of it − the risk of decreasing returns as aid levels rise.
Given the current aid-to-GDP ratios in sub-Saharan Africa − with approximately half of countries yielding ratios of above 10% even before future increases in aid are taken into account − these challenges must be taken seriously.
Donors and their partners agree on a way forward that could, in theory, tackle these challenges.
The agreement is contained in the so-called Paris Agenda, which defines principles of ownership, alignment, and harmonization.
It calls for the improved predictability of aid flows, with budget support and program-based aid as the preferred means of delivering support.
It is an agenda for improved partnerships, reduced transaction costs, and increased efficiency.
It is when the Paris Agenda leaves theory and confronts reality that problems emerge.
Budget support suffers from low credibility, not only among donor taxpayers, but also among citizens in recipient countries.
While it assumes predictable financial flows, such predictability can be spurious.
After all, neither donor countries nor their partners are exempt from such problems as corruption, political crises, armed conflicts, human rights abuses, vested interests, or international power politics.
As a result, placing so many eggs in one basket leaves the business of aid provision looking increasingly risky.
Furthermore, budget support that’s linked to national poverty-reduction strategies also rests on the questionable assumption that the political economy of a partner country works to the benefit of the poorest.
Politics on the donor side is no less complicated, with growing aid budgets often viewed by taxpayers as excessive at a time when the anti-aid lobby is becoming more vocal.
When donors finance 50% or more of a country's national budget, they may sometimes find intervention unavoidable − donors certainly have the power to intervene.
That could mean more conditions being placed on aid, not fewer − even if the rhetoric sometimes appears to suggest the opposite.
Would dispensing aid by making cash transfers directly to the poorest work better?
Experimental schemes have been implemented in Latin America in which child allowances are conditional on school attendance and vaccination.
Cash aid has sometimes replaced food aid in humanitarian crisis situations, and there have been targeted social protection schemes in Zambia, as well as incipient welfare schemes for the elderly in India, South Africa, and Lesotho.
The results so far are very promising.
Poor people spend money reasonably effectively on investment as well as on consumption.
Food and other basic goods are bought – benefiting the local economy – nutrition improves, and kids attend school for longer.
An unconditional child grant scheme in South Africa − with mothers as recipients − even demonstrated the impact in centimeters, because the height-for-age index among children improved in relation to control groups.
Affordability does not appear to be a big hurdle.
Assume, for example, that an annual universal grant of $50 is given to all children below 10 years of age in Mozambique, Malawi, and Zambia − covering roughly 10 million children.
These are three low-income countries with HIV prevalence rates of roughly 15%.
Further assuming a relatively generous 20% administration overhead, the total cost of the scheme would be approximately $600 million – equivalent to a fifth of the reported aid flow to these countries in 2004 and to 3.5-4% of their combined GDP.
It would certainly be costly, but not out of reach if African aid is doubled.
For cash-transfer schemes to work, they must be regular, predictable, and long term.
But, while donors and their taxpayers might be willing to make long-term commitments for such a purpose, there is likely to be rather less appetite for making commitments which would seem to be never-ending.
A formula for burden sharing would be needed that gradually increases domestic financing.
But under no circumstances should these schemes be established as purely donor-driven mechanisms that bypass local budgets and institutions.
Partner countries must be ready to invest in their institutions and develop their own vision of how they want to organize their welfare systems.
Would African partners want this?
Maybe.
In any case, the cash-transfer debate is no longer limited to those in northern development circles.
It has now reached the agenda of some African governments and the African Union.
Catalyzing Consumption and Balancing Growth
WASHINGTON , DC – China has weathered the Great Recession well.
The world now waits to see if last year’s impressive domestic demand growth can be sustained, and if China can, in the words of Prime Minister Wen Jiabao, “give full play to the leading role of…consumer demand in driving economic growth.”
The Chinese consumer has been held back for too long, and now must be put front and center in China’s growth model.
China’s government is already moving ahead on multiple fronts to attain this goal as was clear from announcements at this week’s National People’s Congress.
Of the many factors that have decreased the share of consumption in China’s economy, declining household disposable income has been central.
That, in turn, has reflected the fall in labor income as a share of the economy, owing in part to structural changes that have moved workers out of agriculture (where the labor share of income is high) and into manufacturing (where capital commands a larger share of income).
Concurrent with diminishing labor income, government-imposed ceilings on bank deposits – the primary savings vehicle for most households – have held down household capital income.
This fall in income has been magnified by rising household savings rates, driven by insufficient insurance for health care and old age, the high cost of education, growing income inequality, and demographic trends.
So what to do?
Recently, I attended an IMF-organized workshop in Beijing that brought together Chinese officials, academics, international analysts, and IMF staff to discuss how best to catalyze household consumption in China.
Participants emphasized that changes would be needed in multiple areas, including improving the system of taxation and social insurance, further developing housing and the service economy, and eliminating a range of relative price distortions.
One key idea was to lighten the tax burden on labor . Taking into account the personal-income tax and various social contributions, taxation of labor income in China is too high . To be sure, taxes are needed to finance social spending, but revenue sources other than taxes on labor income could do the job.
China could usefully explore shifting part of the burden from labor toward property, capital gains, and inheritance taxes.
Larger dividends paid to the budget from the highly profitable state-enterprise sector could also provide an alternative source of funds.
Another route to improve consumption could be to offer households greater support . The global crisis has prompted China’s government to push ahead with its social-reform program.
Important improvements have been made over the past year to expand the pension system’s coverage, move toward universal health care, and provide public funding for basic education.
But more can be done to speed up the existing reform package, find ways to develop full coverage for catastrophic health events, and develop government-backed financing of tertiary education.
Fixing the housing market could also help spur consumption .
Distortions in the real-estate market are a powerful motivation for saving, particularly among young people who struggle to meet the high down-payment needed to buy a first home.
Part of the high cost of housing arises from an underdeveloped financial system, which makes housing one of the few alternatives to bank deposits as a store of value.
Property or capital-gains taxes could help curb demand for housing as an investment vehicle.
In addition, a comprehensive nationwide housing policy is urgently needed to ensure that housing remains affordable, particularly for those on limited incomes.
Related to this is the need for improvements in the overall financial system .
By developing markets for private pensions, commercial health insurance, and annuities, China could complement expanded government provision of social insurance and weaken the incentives that underlie high precautionary saving.
But spurring faster growth in services is a complex undertaking. Entry barriers, particularly in service industries dominated by state-owned oligopolies, need to be lowered.
Puerto Rico in Crisis
WASHINGTON, DC – Puerto Rico ought to be the jewel of the Caribbean. It is not.
Tourism has been stagnant for decades, even as travelers have flocked to other Caribbean destinations.
European firms doing business in North and South America locate their corporate headquarters in Miami, Panama City, and elsewhere, with almost none choosing Puerto Rico.
Puerto Ricans who are not US government employees do not pay federal income tax, and the island’s bonds are “triple tax-exempt” (free of federal, state, and local taxes).
But there are also disadvantages to this arrangement.
For example, Puerto Rico is subject to the Jones Act, which requires using very costly US-built ships and crews for all sea transport to and from the mainland.
The island must also comply with the federally mandated minimum wage, despite an income level about half that of the poorest US state.
And municipalities cannot benefit from Chapter 9 of the US bankruptcy code.
Puerto Rico’s current troubles trace their origin to the gradual withdrawal, starting in 1996, of earlier exemptions from US corporate taxes for companies located on the island.
Capital-intensive companies, especially pharmaceutical firms, began leaving.
Puerto Rico’s economy recorded little growth after 1996, and real (inflation-adjusted) GDP has been falling for the past decade.
Many Puerto Ricans, unable to find jobs on the island, have migrated to the mainland, with the population and labor force estimated to be shrinking at a rate of 1.5% this year.
Moreover, Puerto Rico’s labor force participation rate is under 40%, compared to 62% on the mainland.
There is plenty of blame to go around for these failures. Puerto Rico and the US government each bear responsibility.
Successive Puerto Rican governments thought that the island’s economy was in “recession” and attempted to spur activity by increasing government spending.
Low interest rates meant that deficits could be financed by floating bonds.
Debt mounted, and markets are now almost entirely closed to more.
Despite efforts to cut expenditures and boost tax receipts, current and prospective obligations (including pension liabilities) far exceed any feasible increase in government revenues.
Given the ease with which Puerto Ricans move to the mainland, raising taxes is unlikely to increase revenues.
The US government also is culpable.
The inapplicability of Chapter 9 makes orderly debt restructuring very difficult.
Moreover, Puerto Rico is covered by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and must pay accordingly, even though the island’s doctors are compensated at a lower rate than those on the mainland (and the Puerto Rican government must bear much of the cost). The same is true of some other welfare payments.
Low labor force participation is a result of the relatively low productivity of Puerto Rico’s unskilled workers.
Companies cannot compete with firms that pay much lower wage rates on neighboring islands.
A rule of thumb is that a minimum wage that is above 55% of the median wage will impede job creation (and economic growth); Puerto Rico’s minimum wage is 77% of the median, owing to the federal mandate.
A family of three with one wage earner at the minimum wage can take home about $1,100 per month, while it could get about $1,700 on welfare.
No surprise, then, that people either leave the island or go on welfare and work in the informal economy.
Overcoming Puerto Rico’s crisis will require restoring growth, implementing a sustainable fiscal policy, and debt restructuring.
Accomplishing the first of these would, together with reduction of excessive government expenditures, help to achieve the second.
For the Puerto Rican authorities, this means making the island friendlier to business, including by removing onerous labor-market regulations.
Meanwhile, the US government could exempt Puerto Rico from the Jones Act, extend to it Chapter 9 bankruptcy coverage, and align the island’s welfare and labor requirements with its productivity level.
Each of these policy actions requires political will.
Puerto Rico’s governor, Alejandro García Padilla, has appointed a working group to produce a five-year program to restore growth and fiscal sustainability.
Bills to make Puerto Rico eligible for Chapter 9 are being introduced in Congress.
These and other measures now under consideration promise to improve Puerto Rico’s economic prospects. But they will require concerted and determined action on all fronts.
Puerto Rico is not Greece; successive governors of the island have introduced budgets they thought were balanced, only to find that inadequate growth led to lower revenues and higher expenditures than had been projected.
But it is a US territory. The US government should do its part to improve the island’s prospects.
Can Minsk 2.0 Save Ukraine?
KYIV – The new ceasefire agreement for Ukraine was signed in Minsk almost one year to the day after Russian troops – their faces masked, their military insignias removed – invaded Crimea.
In the interim, thousands of Ukrainians have been killed, and hundreds of thousands more have been turned into refugees in their own country.
Russian President Vladimir Putin, determined to restore by force the sphere of influence once held by the Russian/Soviet empire, has shredded the rules that have ensured peace in Europe – indeed, in much of the world – for three generations.
While Russia was launching its bid to subordinate Ukraine, I was in prison, with scant hope of ever regaining my freedom.
The regime of former President Viktor Yanukovych was dancing to the Kremlin's tune, and my confinement ended only because of the courage of the millions of Ukrainians who demanded its ouster.
Yet my freedom has left a bitter aftertaste, because my imprisonment ended only as the war against my country began.
Now, after a year of savagery, sabotage, and mendacity on a scale unseen since Nazi rule in Europe, the leaders of France, Germany, Russia, and Ukraine have agreed on a new road map to peace for our country.
I must hope against hope that the agreement reached in Minsk, unlike the accord signed there in September 2014, succeeds.
The people of Donbas, still bombarded and besieged by Russian troops and their local accomplices, deserve a return to normalcy.
Equally important, our prisoners of war and hostages deserve to be returned to their families.
An early test of the extent of the Kremlin's commitment to the Minsk agreement should be whether it frees Nadiya Savchenko, Ukraine's first woman fighter pilot.
Savchenko has been on a hunger strike in Russia for more than two months to protest her patently illegal incarceration on charges even more ludicrous than those for which I was imprisoned.
Of course I hope that the new agreement will last, finally bringing peace to Ukraine.
But such an outcome is unlikely, given that the agreement lacks any enforcement mechanism, such as the automatic eviction of Russia from the SWIFT financial transfer system should it renege on any aspect of the agreement.
Simply trusting the Kremlin's “goodwill" would be reckless.
Ukraine and its partners need to develop a clear strategy and action plan, in case the latest Minsk agreement is torpedoed.
This should include the provision of defensive lethal assistance to Ukrainian forces; after all, strength deters and weakness provokes.
More broadly, despite the highly charged situation in our country, Ukraine deserves a clear road map out of its current security “grey zone" and toward a Euro-Atlantic future.
We have already paid a high price for our European ambitions; we should not be turned away now.
Moreover, if Ukraine's partners are serious about upholding the rule of law, charges should be filed against Kremlin leaders at the International Criminal Court in The Hague for the numerous war crimes and crimes against humanity that its forces have committed in Ukraine.
Since its invasion of Crimea a year ago, Russia has continuously and gravely violated the United Nations Charter, numerous international treaties, and international humanitarian norms.
We in Ukraine have learned much about ourselves – and about Russia and Europe – during this year of savagery.
We have found in our country's suffering a new and unbreakable national unity, as well as a new determination to embrace root-and-branch reform of our economy, government, and society, because our very independence, not just our European future, depends on it.
If we do not reform, we will be enslaved.
But the earthquake that Russia triggered in Ukraine has also exposed dangerous fault lines across Europe.
Putin has found in Ukraine the perfect tool with which to confound and divide the West.
And his political credo is simple: what he can divide, he can rule.
Indeed, over the past year, we in Ukraine often have watched in disbelief as Europe struggled to confront so clear an act of aggression.
Without the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 over rebel-held territory (an act that killed all 298 people aboard), it seems doubtful that the United States and the European Union would ever have agreed on the current program of economic sanctions imposed on Russia.
The first fault line that Russia has exposed can be found among Europe's former Soviet bloc countries.
Some, like Poland and the Baltic states, have consistently denounced Russia's actions and have demanded a firm response.
But, elsewhere in the region, leaders were quick to excuse Russia's invasion and annexation of Crimea, or to argue that Russia is simply too powerful to confront.
Appeasement, it seems, is alive and well in countries that should know better.
And then there has been the creation of something akin to a political fifth column across Europe.
The continent's Euroskeptic political parties, on both the left and the right, are holding up Putin's authoritarian nationalism as a model for the type of illiberal regime they would seek to establish should the EU dissolve.
In fact, the Kremlin is financing many of these parties.
Lenin once said that capitalists would sell the ropes with which they would be hanged.
Today, European governments appear willing to allow Putin to buy the votes with which he will destroy the EU.
There are other Kremlin supporters as well, including corporate leaders who want to return to business as usual with Russia, and academic apologists for the Soviet Union who, 25 years after its collapse, see a chance for vindication.
And, with public opinion polls revealing that a significant minority of Europeans are falling in line with Putin's rhetoric, his strategy of dividing the EU and NATO seems to be making real headway.
Let us be clear.
What happens in Ukraine – not the financial standoff with Greece – will be the ultimate test of whether European and transatlantic unity endure.
The fault lines extending from Ukraine are undermining the fundamental values that have underpinned Europe's postwar peace and prosperity.
Failure to defend those values in Ukraine will cause them to unravel far beyond our borders.
A West that is divided in this crisis cannot stand. It is time to act.
The interwar Depression led to the disintegration of liberal economic and political values.  In Germany in 2009 not only was there was no swing to political extremism of the right: there was no sign of any support for a radical right.  In the elections for regional parliaments, the small radical right parties (which have never been a feature of national politics) simply disappeared. 
It is a party with no coherent program, but rather a compendium of popular and nationalist slogans.
A social market economy, rather than unbridled market capitalism; an export economy built on a large and technically innovative manufacturing base; a large network of small and medium sized enterprise, often family-owned, that is open to the global economy; a sense of environmental responsibility; and a suspicion of financially driven Anglo-Saxon style globalization and corporate capitalism.  Indeed the sense that Germany had the opportunity to show off the unique strengths of the “German model” was a key to Merkel’s appeal, and she repeatedly noted what a tough line she had taken against the position of banks.
Censor and Sensibility
Most Western journalists fight back when governments threaten their ability to gather the information they need.
Some have gone to jail to protect the identities of anonymous sources and whistleblowers, or have sued governments that deny them access to crucial documents.
Alas, many journalists seem far more willing to fight over their right to gather news than to battle for their right to publish and broadcast the results of their reporting freely.
Indeed, Western journalists and news organizations seem to accept as a fact of life censorship within countries that routinely control the media.
Acquiescing to such censorship might have been necessary when printing presses, delivery trucks, news kiosks, or transmission towers were the only way to get printed publications or broadcast programs to news consumers.
But Internet publishing offers a new – and potentially lucrative – opportunity for the distribution of uncensored information.
Such freedom is not automatic, because even the Internet’s inherent openness can be largely defeated by assiduous government filtering and surveillance.
However, in recent years, sustained research into countermeasures against such third-party interference in Internet communications has begun to add a new factor.
The bulk of this research has not been conducted in university labs or corporate R&amp;D facilities, but spontaneously by teenagers, who use it to share copyrighted music with one another without paying for it.
Western media outlets have covered this story with great interest, yet apparently without realizing that these peer-to-peer technologies have the potential to de-censor the news for more people in countries like China, where any online content that runs counter to the Chinese Communist Party’s current line risks falling victim to the “Great Firewall” of censorship.
Peer-to-peer technologies make filtering more difficult, because they put nearly any consumer of information into the process of transmitting it.
For example, without endangering those in China, news organizations could conclude deals with other companies to ensure that uncensored reports are echoed from one free server to the next, thereby defying China to filter the entire Internet if it wishes to eliminate content.
Of course, news organizations operate as businesses, and defying powerful governments can be a bad business strategy.
That is why there has been so little rebellion, or even remonstration, among media companies when authoritarian governments threaten journalists, editors, and publishers.
It also explains why journalists in those countries have so often bent over backwards to apologize for individual transgressions, rather than stand in defiance.
But news organizations could reach many more people if they worked to circumvent Internet filtering instead of passively relying on those inside the firewall to figure out how to reach beyond blocked sites on their own.
Doing so might even make good business sense.
Building a creative digital distribution system that eludes government censors would help news organizations establish and enlarge their markets.
Indeed, it is not implausible that when a government’s repressive policies diminish, or end through regime change, media outlets that were present and government-approved will fare poorly vis-à-vis offshore counterparts that stayed away and conveyed the truth.
If news outlets in physically remote open societies meet consumers in countries like China halfway, the benefits for both the Chinese and the bottom line could be enormous.
Along with the enterprising teenagers who built Napster, academics like Lorrie Faith Cranor at Carnegie Mellon mapped out the shape of potential new networks with lofty names like “Publius,” through which unpopular views could be circulated outside of easy governmental control.
A team of computer scientists at Stanford and elsewhere created a project called “LOCKSS,” which retains decentralized mirrored copies of documents, and detects corruption or forgery among them, to preserve the integrity of our written histories forever.
Those who consider themselves members of the global free press should collectively strive to construct similar networks over which news and reporting can run free and be available to anyone with an Internet connection.
Building such a network would be far cheaper than constructing even a single new printing plant – and it would be far more effective.
We should consider the front pages of every free nation’s newspapers as a precious set of documents, to be replicated and shared openly throughout the world, especially in countries where heavy state censorship exists.
Thanks to the Internet, the risks in realizing these new distribution networks are really only business risks – and thus are quantifiable and manageable.
They pale in comparison to the risks taken by dissidents in closed societies.
Putting those front pages on a filtered Web site should be only a beginning.
It’s time find a way to circulate those front pages everywhere.
It makes good political sense; it could make good business sense as well.
Eastern Europe’s 25 Years of Transition
WASHINGTON, DC – What a difference 25 years can make.
In 1989, Central and Eastern Europe embarked upon a historic transformation, from authoritarian communism to democratic capitalism.
With memories of the old system already beginning to fade, it seems fitting to look back at the region’s achievements, review the lessons learned, and examine the challenges ahead.
It would be a mistake to assume that the success of the region’s transformation was inevitable.
At the close of the Cold War, Central and Eastern Europe’s economies were burdened by pervasive state ownership and concentrated investments in heavy industry.
Fiscal and monetary policies had focused on boosting industrial growth, without regard to macroeconomic balance, resulting in chronically excessive demand and widespread shortages.
To make matters worse, most of the region – Czechoslovakia being a notable exception – was plagued by unsustainable external debt and soaring inflation.
Meanwhile, few economists or policymakers had the background needed to tackle the complex tasks ahead.
Such was the scale of the necessary transition that neither modern macroeconomics, nor the International Monetary Fund’s nearly 50 years of experience, offered much guidance.
The challenges to be overcome were daunting, and many thought it would be impossible.
Instead, four key ingredients contributed to successful transitions.
First, courageous politicians and policymakers took on the challenge of designing crucial reforms and explaining their consequences to a public that was understandably wary.
They understood the historic nature of the task and embraced the challenge.
Second, the reform strategies focused squarely on the essential: the liberalization of prices to reflect scarcity and facilitate the allocation of resources; stabilization of finances to end shortages and inflation; and privatization of state-owned companies and assets in order to improve corporate governance and performance.
Countries that implemented these policies generally made the quickest and most complete progress.
Third, the allure of rejoining Europe after years of isolation, together with the European Union’s commitment to enlargement, provided a gravitational pull – and a legislative template – that helped policymakers justify and implement difficult reforms.
Unpopular laws sometimes brought down governments, but the ultimate litmus test for any new policy remained: “Will it lead us back to Europe?”
Finally, external support helped the region’s heavily indebted countries face the twin tasks of implementing structural reforms and coping with financial instability.
Financing from the IMF, the World Bank, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, and bilateral lenders, along with debt relief from official and commercial bank creditors, helped relieve the pressure.
Technical assistance, capacity building, and support for privatization – of banks, in particular – further smoothed the way.
Overall, the progress has been impressive.
Several Central European countries have achieved per capita GDP levels (measured in terms of purchasing power parity) that place them on the lower rungs of the eurozone’s income ladder.
Standards of living in the region have improved dramatically – even if full convergence with Western Europe is far from achieved.
Unsurprisingly, however, the picture is far from rosy everywhere.