But I believe that corruption is not the main reason that the profession missed the crisis.
Most economists have very little interaction with the corporate world, and these “unbiased” economists were no better at forecasting the crisis.
I would argue that three factors largely explain our collective failure: specialization, the difficulty of forecasting, and the disengagement of much of the profession from the real world.
Like medicine, economics has become highly compartmentalized – macroeconomists typically do not pay attention to what financial economists or real-estate economists study, and vice versa.
Yet, to see the crisis coming would have required someone who knew about each of these areas – just as it takes a good general practitioner to recognize an exotic disease.
Because the profession rewards only careful, well-supported, but necessarily narrow analysis, few economists try to span sub-fields.
Even if they did, they would shy away from forecasting.
The main advantage that academic economists have over professional forecasters may be their greater awareness of established relationships between factors.
What is hardest to forecast, though, are turning points – when the old relationships break down.
While there may be some factors that signal turning points – a run-up in short-term leverage and asset prices, for example, often presages a bust – they are not infallible predictors of trouble to come.
The meager professional rewards for breadth, coupled with the inaccuracy and reputational risk associated with forecasting, leads to disengagement for most academics. And it may well be that academic economists have little to say about short-term economic movements, so that forecasting, with all its errors, is best left to professional forecasters.
The danger is that disengagement from short-term developments leads academic economists to ignore medium-term trends that they can address.
If so, the true reason why academics missed the crisis could be far more mundane than inadequate models, ideological blindness, or corruption, and thus far more worrisome; many simply were not paying attention!
Malala’s Revolution
ISLAMABAD – The men who attempted to kill 14-year-old Malala Yousafzai on October 9 knew what she represented.
Her active involvement since the age of eleven in campaigning for the rights of girls in her region to be educated was well known.
Malala’s efforts, while applauded by the West and some segments of Pakistani society, were deeply resented by the obscurantist forces that go by the name of the Taliban, which in Pakistan calls itself Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan.
Their choice of name is an ironic one, for Taliban, an Arabic word, means those seeking to be educated, whereas the Taliban’s principal aim is to keep Muslim societies backward so that they can be persuaded to adopt a seventh-century version of Islam.
Education, particularly of women, stands in the way of achieving this goal.
But the attack on Malala will, most likely, have an effect that is opposite to that intended by those who carried it out.
Several religious leaders joined the chorus of condemnation that followed the attack on Malala.
In a sign of unity, a council of Sunni Muslim scholars in the eastern city of Lahore issued a fatwa, signed by 50 clerics, saying that the justifications cited by the girl’s attackers were “deviant” and had no basis in Islamic law.
The Taliban seem to have been taken aback by the public and media reaction to the attack.
Dawn, Pakistan’s largest-circulation English-language newspaper, reported that Hakimullah Mehsud, the Pakistani Taliban’s leader, had ordered his foot soldiers to target media organizations in Karachi, Lahore, Rawalpindi, and Islamabad in response.
Several TV channels had been extremely critical of the Taliban’s assaults on Pakistani society.
The extremists wanted to silence the majority that was waking up to the existential threat that radical Islam poses to their country.
There is a widespread belief that Pakistani women are doing poorly when it comes to obtaining education.
That impression is correct to some extent.
The overall literacy rate for women is undoubtedly low – much lower than that for men.
But male education and literacy in Pakistan is not very high, either.
Although Pakistan is a signatory to the United Nations Millennium Development Goals, which include attainment of universal literacy for both boys and girls by 2015, the country is far from achieving the target, with literacy rates of 70% for boys and only 45% for girls in 2010.
That said, over the 17-year period from 1993 to 2010, the number of girls enrolled in primary education increased from 3.7 million to 8.3 million.
This implies a rate of growth of 6.7% a year, about 2.5 times the rate of increase in the number of girls entering the primary-school age cohort.
But, even with this growth rate, girls still accounted for just 44.3% of the total number of enrolled students in 2010.
It is in higher education that Pakistani women have made extraordinary progress in recent years.
Their share of total college enrollment has increased from 36% to 57% over the last couple of decades, rising from less than 15,000 in 1993 to 436,000 in 2010.
The proportion of women receiving higher education is approaching the 60% mark, owing to an impressive 28% annual rate of growth in their enrollment numbers in 2010, up from a 20% increase in 1993.
Although a very large number of girls drop out after primary school, the number completing higher education is now large.
This year, roughly 750,000 women will graduate from Pakistan’s institutions of higher learning.
If the current rate of growth is maintained, by 2015 the number of women completing higher education could exceed 1.5 million a year.
Had Malala died, she eventually would have been forgotten – another victim of the war that the extremists are waging in Pakistan. Her death would have added just one more individual to the tens of thousands who have already been killed in terrorist attacks across the country.
Malala’s survival – and possibly even full recovery – provides a vibrant symbol for a troubled country.
She will begin to be identified with the change that is already underway.
It is not often recognized that women in Pakistan – at least those of a certain class – are receiving the kind of education that enables them to enter the modern sectors of the economy or to become entrepreneurs.
In education, numbers make a revolution.
The extremists understand that all too well.
A Talking Cure for Syria
LONDON – The proposal by the United States and Russia to hold a diplomatic conference to end the carnage in Syria deserves a less skeptical reaction than it has received.
While it will be difficult to get all of the relevant parties to the table in Geneva any time soon, much less to ensure an outcome that will stick, diplomacy is the only game left.
As much as one might wish otherwise, every other policy option canvassed so far is wrong in principle, nonviable in practice, unlikely to be effective, or bound to increase rather than diminish suffering.
After two years of civil war, with no decisive military victory by either side in sight, the situation could not be more desperate.
According to current United Nations estimates, more than 80,000 Syrians are dead, and 6.8 million – one-third of the country’s population – need urgent humanitarian assistance.
Some 4.25 million are displaced internally, and more than 1.5 million have fled the country, sheltering as refugees mainly in Lebanon, Jordan, and Turkey.
The strain on Syria’s neighbors is immense, and the conflict is inexorably seeping into the wider region.
Both government and rebel forces have committed atrocity crimes.
Many more are feared as violence among the main sectarian groups escalates.
Continued international paralysis is indefensible.
Inaction would ignite fires throughout the Middle East, and would violate the international community’s now-accepted responsibility to protect, through timely and decisive collective action, populations at risk of genocide, ethnic cleansing, and other major crimes against humanity and war crimes.
That principle, unanimously agreed by the UN General Assembly in 2005, has been successfully invoked elsewhere, including in support of diplomatic intervention in Kenya in 2008.
It also underpinned Security Council-mandated military interventions in Libya and Cote d’Ivoire in 2011 and, more recently, in Mali.
But how can it be applied to the mess now in Syria?
The most immediate need, about which there should be little controversy, is massive humanitarian assistance.
Delivery problems abound in the war zones, but not everywhere.
Yet international donors are dragging their feet both in meeting existing commitments and in making new ones.
And all the aid in the world won’t stop the killing.
It is too late now for non-military tools of coercion to have much effect, although Security Council threats of International Criminal Court prosecution for atrocity crimes – including any use of chemical weapons – must remain on the table .
But what of the military-response options still strongly favored by many policymakers and pundits?
The trouble is that every tray in this toolkit, too, is empty.
Direct military intervention to overthrow Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s regime would never win Security Council approval, and has no volunteers anyway among capable military powers – albeit in most cases because of the political and military risks involved, rather than the legal indefensibility of acting outside the UN Charter.
A less partisan intervention – pouring in troops and airpower to separate the warring parties forcibly – also has no takers, no likely UN authority, and only marginal hope of causing less harm than it would be intended to avoid.
There are many more enthusiasts for a more calibrated military intervention, designed to establish one or more no-fly zones, and maybe safe havens and humanitarian corridors on the ground.
In the early days of the crisis, it was argued that, given the strength of the regime’s air defenses and ground forces, even these limited objectives could not be achieved without fighting an all-out war – and thus causing a net increase in human suffering.
With most of the country now ablaze, this argument is less convincing.
But it remains the case that there are no obvious takers for a military role, partly because of the scale, difficulty, and risk of the commitment required, and partly because of the likely political and legal costs, given the minimal prospect of Security Council endorsement.
The United Kingdom and France are pressing hard for indirect military intervention: supplying arms to the rebel side, in their view, would be a low-cost, low-risk, potentially high-return option.
And the European Union has now lifted its ban.
But the US is rightly cautious.
A troubling proportion of the opposition forces are Islamic extremists, and there is no guarantee that weapons deliveries will stay out of their hands.
More broadly, increases in the supply of weapons funneled to rebel forces by Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and others have correlated with surges in the civilian death toll, suggesting that they cost more lives than they save – and with no evident strategic gains.
The Assad regime, with its own external supporters, seems likely to have no difficulty matching any new hardware thrown at it.
If the rationale for arming the opposition is not so much to win the war as to weaken the government’s resistance to negotiation, it is arguable that the elements of a “hurting stalemate” are already in place, with more weapons likely to produce nothing but more fighting and more casualties.
The pressure that has always mattered most for the Assad regime is that capable of being applied by Russia.
What is new, and encouraging, about the events of the last month is that Russia has found enough common ground with the US – in their mutual anxiety about the rising influence of radical Islam in an increasingly fragmented and volatile region – to be prepared at last to do some squeezing.
Painful concessions will be required from both sides if the Geneva conference is even to convene, let alone reach agreement on a cease-fire and transitional administration.
It is encouraging that the US, following talks between Secretary of State John Kerry and Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov, seems prepared to accept a role for senior Assad regime members in any settlement, and that constructive proposals are starting to emerge from at least some opposition quarters.
Compromise can be anathema for purists, but it has always been the stuff of which peace is made.
It has never been more necessary than it is now in Syria.
The Limits of Twitter Diplomacy
DENVER – Twentieth-century American statecraft produced Dean Acheson, Henry Kissinger, Richard Holbrooke, and many others who balanced the power of the United States with its responsibilities to develop key relationships, solve problems, and build international structures.
“Twenty-first-century statecraft,” we have been told repeatedly, promises to go further and deliver more, for now US diplomats – and those of other countries – can use Twitter, Facebook, and other social media.
With so many international problems today, diplomacy does need to combine the old-fashioned statecraft of the twentieth century with the new tools that budding technologies have provided.
But tools alone cannot solve or build anything.
And yet the new tools are everywhere.
It is hard to find a US ambassador in any part of the world who has not embraced the challenge of mastering these communication technologies.
Most have a Twitter or Facebook account, or post frequently on YouTube, in order to keep the public in the countries where they serve (and at home) informed of their daily activities, or occasionally their thinking about an issue or even their mood.
The State Department estimates that its employees are in direct communication with more than 15 million people worldwide.
Incredibly enough, more than 330,000 people “like” the personality-challenged department’s Facebook page.
This generation of American diplomats is fast overcoming a reputation for being remote, emotionally distant figures.
To be fair, in the past, an ambassador had few opportunities to connect with the host country’s population, apart from the occasional newspaper or television interview, or a photo of a meeting with a host country official or waiting on an airport’s tarmac for a visitor from Washington, DC.
Now, as America’s tweeting diplomats have shown, there is no shortage of such opportunities.
Time constraints are not an issue.
Most US embassies ensure a constant stream of tweets by relying on public-diplomacy officers to get the word out about what the ambassador is doing day by day, even hour by hour.
Many ambassadors have built mass followings in electronic terms, and generate numerous “likes” as they go about their daily routines of meetings and ribbon cuttings.
All fun stuff.
But have social media really made for better diplomats or helped solve difficult problems?
If so, why are there so many unmitigated and unmediated crises around the world – Syria’s civil war, the carnage in Egypt, and deteriorating US-Russian relations, to name just a few.
The much-ballyhooed twenty-first-century statecraft, it seems, is really not up to the job.
Advocates accurately point out that social media are a tool that is ignored at one’s peril.
But what is urgently needed today is an understanding that diplomacy is not only about shouting from the rooftops and communicating with the general public.
It is about working on relationships one at a time.
Above all, it is about keeping the door open to deal with unsavory governments.
Governments, even terrible ones, comprise the people who lead a country.
Maybe they shouldn’t be in power; maybe the people demonstrating in the streets should be.
But, in the here and now, these relationships need to be maintained in order to help polarized societies make progress toward overcoming their divisions.
The US ambassador to Egypt, Anne W. Patterson, was excoriated in the media – especially in social media, which have no international boundaries (and often no manners) – for her courageous efforts to keep the door open for dialogue with the Muslim Brotherhood government.
She did what any good – and, in her case, superb – diplomat should do: maintain relations with both sides and try to find a way forward.
Indeed, the Muslim Brotherhood government and the secular opposition both complained about America’s relationship with the other.
That is the hot seat where American diplomacy belongs.
With all due respect to “eDiplomacy,” this type of private, traditional communication remains the heart and soul of the business.
Similarly, Secretary of State John Kerry has launched a courageous effort to revive the Israel-Palestine peace process.
Given the dearth of public information about his strategy, it is clear that he is not an avid practitioner of twenty-first-century statecraft – that is, he does not think out loud.
And yet he got the parties together by developing trust, which is the coin of the realm for an effective diplomat.
It is perhaps a little unfair to contrast these efforts to what the US did in Syria.
In an effort to stay ahead of intense media expectations (and reflecting a misunderstanding according to which Syria would be just another Tunisia), President Barack Obama’s administration essentially severed America’s relationship with Bashar al-Assad’s regime by publicly embracing the disparate opposition and calling for Assad’s immediate removal.
The US did not offer any clear indication of what it thought should follow such an outcome, apart from some kind of election process, which in a largely sectarian conflict like Syria’s would amount to nothing more than an elaborate census.
Lo and behold, political leaders, especially tough and terrible ones like Assad, tend not to embrace a process whose stated purpose is to eliminate them.
US diplomats – indeed, all countries’ diplomats – might want to consider that, rather than chasing record numbers of social media “followers,” they should be building trust on all sides in conflict-prone societies and looking for more leaders willing to take chances for peace.
When the shooting has stopped and the sides are talking, diplomats can tweet to their hearts’ content.
Why Do Economies Stop Growing?
MILAN – Over the years, advanced and developing countries have experimented, sometimes deliberately and frequently inadvertently, with a variety of approaches to growth.
Unfortunately, many of these strategies have turned out to have built-in limitations or decelerators – what one might call elements of unsustainability.
And avoiding serious damage and difficult recoveries requires us to get a lot better at recognizing these self-limiting growth patterns early on.
Here are some of the items in a growing library of decelerating growth models.
In developing countries, import substitution as a way to jump-start economic diversification can work for a while; but, over time, as productivity growth lags and comparative advantage is over-ridden, growth grinds to a halt.
Small, open economies are naturally somewhat specialized, which leaves them vulnerable to shocks and volatility.
But, in terms of growth and living standards, the cost of economic diversification, when implemented by protecting domestic industries from foreign competition, eventually outweighs the benefits.
It is better to allow specialization, and build effective social safety nets and support systems to protect people and families during economic transitions.
Such “structural flexibility” is better adapted to enabling the broad changes that rapidly evolving technological and global economic forces require.
Mismanagement of natural-resource wealth underpins an especially potent self-limiting pattern of growth and development.
If invested in infrastructure, education, and external financial assets, natural-resource revenues can accelerate growth. But, too often, such revenues distort economic incentives, which come to favor rent-seeking and interfere with the diversification that is essential for growth.
More recently, many advanced countries have discovered a “new” set of growth models with built-in structural limitations: excessive private or public consumption, or both, usually accompanied and enabled by rising debt and inflated asset prices, and a corresponding decline in investment.
This approach appears to work until domestic aggregate demand can no longer sustain growth and employment, at which point it ends in either gradual stagnation or a violent financial and economic crisis.
(In fact, many developing countries have learned this the hard way, but the lessons seem not to have crossed over to advanced countries.)
But the opposite of the excessive-consumption model – excessive reliance on investment to generate aggregate demand – is also a self-limiting growth pattern.
When the private and social returns of investment diminish too much, growth cannot be sustained indefinitely, even though rising investment rates can sustain aggregate demand for a while.
Altering this growth pattern is a significant part of the challenge that China now faces.
Rising inequality in either opportunity or outcomes (and often both) also poses threats to the sustainability of growth patterns.
While people in a wide range of countries accept some degree of market-determined income variation, based on differential talents and personal preferences, there are limits.
When they are breached, the typical result is a sense of unfairness, followed by resistance and, ultimately, political choices that address the inequality, though sometimes in counter-productive, growth-impeding ways.
Perhaps the largest long-run sustainability issue concerns the adequacy of the global economy’s natural-resource base: output will more than triple over the coming two or three decades, as high-growth developing economies’ four billion people converge toward advanced-country income levels and consumption patterns.
Existing economic-development strategies will require significant adaption to accommodate this kind of growth.
Some adaptation will occur naturally, as rising energy and other commodity prices generate incentives to economize or seek alternatives.
But the un-priced environmental externalities – global warming and water depletion, for example – will require serious attention, not myopic, reactive mindsets and approaches.&nbsp;
All of these self-limiting growth patterns tend to have three things in common.
First, in one or several dimensions, some part of the economy’s base of tangible, intangible, and natural-resource assets is being run down.
I would include social cohesion as part of the asset base: it is the one that is depreciated by excessive inequality.
Measurement issues play an important role here.
It is easier to run down something that is partly invisible because it is not regularly or effectively measured.
Expanded measurement of the dimensions of economic, social, and environmental performance is necessary to broaden awareness of sustainability issues. &nbsp;
Second, unidentified self-limiting growth patterns produce very bad results.
Expectations come to exceed reality, and resetting the system to a sustainable growth pattern is difficult.
After all, past investment shortfalls have to be made up and future-oriented investments undertaken simultaneously – a double burden that must be borne by the current generation.
An inability to resolve the distributional and fairness problem can produce gridlock, paralysis, and prolonged stagnation.
Finally, many of these flawed growth patterns involve fiscal distress.
Contrary to the prevailing wisdom nowadays, some degree of Keynesian demand management in the transition to a more sustainable growth pattern is not in conflict with restoring fiscal balance over a sensible time period.
On the contrary, applied both individually and together, fiscal stimulus and consolidation are necessary parts of the adjustment process.
But they are not sufficient.
The crucial missing pieces are a shift in the structure of accessible aggregate demand and restoration of those parts of the economy’s asset base that have been run down, implying the need for structural change and investment.
Why Does Angela Merkel Hesitate?
MUNICH – “Where is Angela?” is the question The Economist asked when Nicolas Sarkozy, Gordon Brown, and José Manuel Barroso met to prepare a European economic stimulus plan without Chancellor Merkel being present.
Indeed, Germany is currently the spoiler in the competition to provide billions to prevent a breakdown of the world economy.
Why is Germany so hesitant when it comes to economic stimulus programs?
One popular theory is that, given the supply-side orientation of German economists, there is little sympathy for Keynesian, demand-oriented prescriptions.
But no German economist has come out against an economic stimulus program, and many favor one.
Whereas Keynesian theory has largely disappeared from economic textbooks in the United States, it continues to be taught everywhere in Germany.
German economists, in contrast to their American colleagues, never abandoned Keynesian policies as a means to combat demand deficits.
Moreover, German politicians rarely heed the advice of German economists.
A second hypothesis is closer to the truth: the decline of economic activity in Germany thus far has not been as strong as in other countries.
Germany did not have a real-estate bubble that threatened to burst, as did Great Britain, Ireland, Spain, and France.
Germany has only been indirectly affected – by the decline in worldwide demand for German products – which explains an important timing difference in the business cycle.
Whereas unemployment in the US has been rising for one and a half years, Germany currently is enjoying its lowest unemployment rate in 16 years.
The German construction industry and retailing are still stable, as the latest survey of the Ifo Institute shows, and the whole world is profiting from this stability, as Germany is the second largest importer of goods and services after the US.
While US imports are declining sharply, German imports are holding up –without any economic stimulus plan.
This is why many Germans wonder whether the foreign criticism is fair.
To be sure, the world recession will hit Germany with full force.
The Ifo Institute has forecast that GDP will contract by 2.2% in 2009.
But the contraction will be primarily because of declining exports, a large portion of which consists of investment goods, as well as the drop in domestic equipment investment.
These are areas where there is not much that the state can do to help.
It can cut taxes to stimulate consumption and it can invest in construction, but these sectors currently need little help, except perhaps for the automobile industry.
This could, of course, quickly change.
When the second-round effects hit the domestic sector in the course of 2009, a stimulus program will be needed.
From the German perspective, the best timing for such a program would be the autumn of next year.
If the money is spent now, the economy in some sectors could overheat, helping no one.
Paul Krugman, who has aimed massive criticism at Germany’s government, should keep this in mind.
Krugman is an excellent economist.
He is right in principle in demanding a major economic stimulus package from the German government that goes beyond the €35 billion already planned.
But he should not ignore the time lags between the American and the German economic cycles.
Germany should prepare its economic stimulus program now and implement it when the time comes.
A third hypothesis to explain Germany’s hesitancy is suspicion of the European Union’s redistribution machinery.
When Sarkozy and other EU leaders demand Germany’s participation in an economic stimulus and rescue package, one reason is that they expect Germany to again bear the lion’s share of the costs.
For example, of the €5 billion extension of the Cohesion Funds approved by the European Parliament in December 2007, Germany received nothing, but it bears 20% of the costs.
Germans have always been enthusiastic proponents of the EU, not least because they hoped that a European identity would help compensate for their damaged national identity.
So, whenever it came to restructuring the EU, they always accepted a level of influence that was small relative to their country’s size.
Although Germany’s share of the EU population is 17%, it receives 13% of the voting rights in the EU Parliament.
Its share in the more important Council of Ministers is only 8%, the same as that of the French, whose population share is 13%.
Former French President Jacques Chirac did not hesitate to justify this imbalance with a reference to World War II, which the Germans accepted.
But their enthusiasm has limits.
After all, aside from political under-representation, Germany’s annual contribution to the EU budget (most recently €7.4 billion) makes the country by far the largest net contributor.
Germany finances 20% of the EU budget but receives only 12% of EU spending.
Willingness could be exhausted if the EU budget is further expanded without reducing Germany’s net contribution and narrowing the gap between its financing and voting rights.
For these reasons, German reservations also extend to the European economic government that Sarkozy advocates, and that, again, would be financed more than proportionately with German money.
Sarkozy regards an EU economic government as a way to preserve his leadership in the EU beyond France’s Council presidency, which is now ending.
Although the Czech Republic will assume the EU presidency in January, this has not prevented the French President from convening a new EU summit under Sarkozy’s leadership in the first half of 2009.
This affront will put not only Czech tolerance to the test, but also that of Merkel.
In the end, she will probably give in to Sarkozy’s wishes in order to avoid endangering her chances of re-election in September because of a conflict with the French.
But she will surely do so with clenched fists.
Why Do Smart People Live Longer?
EDINBURGH – People with higher intelligence test scores in childhood and early adulthood tend to live longer.
This result has been found among people from Australia, Denmark, England and Wales, Scotland, Sweden, and the United States.
In fact, it has been found within every population that has been studied.
Indeed, the impact of intelligence on mortality rivals well-known risk factors for illness and death, such as high blood pressure, being overweight, high blood glucose, and high cholesterol.
Its effect is almost as important as that of smoking.
Differences in human intelligence have environmental and genetic causes.
An intelligence test score in early life is partly a record of what the environment has wrought on the brain and the rest of the body up to that time.
Babies who have lower birth weights, for example, are more prone to chronic illnesses later in life.
They also have, on average, slightly lower intelligence.
But tests of whether birth weight might explain some of the link between intelligence and mortality have found no connection.
Parents’ occupations are also related to their child’s intelligence and later risk of illness: children from more privileged backgrounds tend to have higher intelligence and better health, and to live longer.
However, there is no convincing evidence that parental background explains the link between higher intelligence and longer life.
Other researchers have viewed intelligence test scores as possibly more than just an indicator of an efficient brain.
After all, the brain is just one organ of the body, so people whose brains work well in early life may also have other organs and systems that are more efficient than others’.
But this “system integrity” idea is somewhat vague and difficult to test.
The best we have done to date has been to examine whether people’s reaction speeds are related to intelligence and to mortality.
They are.
Reaction-time tests involve little thinking, and merely ask people to respond as fast as they can to simple stimuli.
People who react faster have, on average, higher intelligence scores and live longer.
But we need to think of better measures of the body’s integrity to test this idea more fully.
A third potential explanation is that intelligence is about good decision-making.
Every day, as we live our lives, we make decisions about our health: what, when, and how much to eat; how much exercise to take; how to look after ourselves if we have an illness; and so forth.
Therefore, the reason that intelligence and death are linked might be that people with higher intelligence in childhood make better decisions about health, and have healthier behaviors.
As adults, they tend to have better diets, exercise more, gain less weight, have fewer hangovers, and so on.
So far, so good.
But we do not yet have the full story.
There have not been any studies with data on childhood intelligence, lots of subsequent data on adult health behaviors, and then a long-term follow-up for deaths.
And only such a study could tell us whether it is these healthy behaviors that explain the link between intelligence and death.
A fourth type of explanation is that people with higher intelligence in childhood tend to attain better educational qualifications, work in more professional jobs, have higher incomes, and live in more affluent areas.
These variables are related to living longer, too.
So, perhaps that’s it: higher intelligence buys people into safer and more health-friendly environments.
Certainly, in some studies, social class in adulthood seems to explain a lot of the link between intelligence and death.
The problem is that this “explanation” is statistical.
We are still not sure whether, say, education and occupation “explain” the effect of intelligence on health, or whether they are, in effect, merely surrogate measures of intelligence.
Researchers have also searched for clues about the intelligence-mortality link in specific types of death.
This has been revealing.
Lower intelligence in early life is associated with a greater likelihood of dying from, for example, cardiovascular disease, accidents, suicide, and homicide.
The evidence for cancer is less certain.
As we have come across these specific findings, we have realized that each link might need a different explanation.
Finally, we know that how intelligent we are and how long we shall live are caused by both environmental and genetic influences.
There are experimental designs, using twins, that can find out the extent to which intelligence and mortality are linked because they share environmental and genetic influences.
Among the most informative exercises we can undertake in cognitive epidemiology is to obtain a large group of twins on whom there is data on early-life intelligence and who were tracked for a long time to find out who had died.
We haven’t yet come across a large enough group of twins with such data.
Finding one is a priority.
The ultimate aim of this research is to find out what intelligent people have and do that enables them to live longer.
Once we know that, we will be able to share and apply that knowledge with the aim of achieving optimal health for all.
Growth Out of Time
CAMBRIDGE – Robert Gordon of Northwestern University is a distinguished economist whose work in macroeconomics and studies of long-term economic growth have properly earned him high regard.
So his recent exercise in speculative future history, which asks whether economic growth in the United States has come to an end, has attracted much favorable attention.
But a basic flaw in Gordon’s argument is immediately apparent – and becomes glaringly so on closer examination.
Gordon distinguishes three Industrial Revolutions that have driven economic growth and improved living standards since the eighteenth century: IR #1 (“steam, railroads”), whose defining inventions date from 1750 to 1830; IR #2 (“electricity, internal combustion engine, running water, indoor toilets, communications, entertainment, chemicals, petroleum”), whose defining inventions date from 1870 to 1900; and IR #3 (“computers, the web, mobile phones”), dating from 1960.
The core of his article contrasts the transformational impact of IR #1 and, especially, IR #2 on per capita GDP and the quality of life with the relatively trivial consequences of IR #3.
The vulnerability of Gordon’s argument is his shortened time horizon for IR #3.
Consider the following four sentences in his paper:
·&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; “Both the first two revolutions required about 100 years for their full effects to percolate through the economy.”
·&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; “At a minimum, it took 150 years for IR #1 to have its full range of effects.”
·&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; “The inventions of IR #2 were so important…that they took a full 100 years to have their main effect.”
·&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; “…[T]he productivity impact of IR #3 evaporated after only eight years, compared to the 81 years (1891-1972) required for the benefits of IR #2 to have their full impact…”
The last sentence is crucial: Gordon cuts off IR #3 circa 2005 – that is, 45 years from its onset, but less than half the time allowed for IR #1 and IR #2 to run their respective courses.
To take a salient example from the prior industrial revolutions, this is as if the impact of the railroads on the US economy were to be measured as of 1873, 45 years after construction began on America’s first line, the Baltimore &amp; Ohio.
In 1873, the retailer Montgomery Ward was just a year old, and the first Sears Roebuck catalogue was still 20 years away.
Together, these companies invented mail order as the “killer app” of the railroad age, creating a continental market for consumer goods, with all of the economies of scale that followed.
Or, to take another example, what if we stopped measuring the economic impact of electrification only 45 years after the first generating plant, Thomas Edison’s Pearl Street Station, became operational in 1882?
At that point, America’s manufacturing industries were just discovering the benefits of flexible (re)configuration, which enabled distribution of generated electric power, while America’s home-appliance industry was in its infancy.
Gordon asserts that “the era of computers replacing human labor was largely over” during the past decade.
Innovation in information and communications technology (ICT) focused first on electronic commerce, “itself largely completed by 2005.”
After that, “labor-saving innovation” took a back seat to “a succession of entertainment and communication devices that do the same things as we could do before, but now in smaller and more convenient packages.”
In thus truncating and trivializing the ongoing ICT revolution, Gordon misses two fundamental processes.
First, and most evident, the rise of e-commerce is far from over.
In the US, the most advanced country in this respect, e-commerce has just reached 10% of total retail spending, and is continuing to grow at double-digit rates through the slow recovery from the Great Recession.
At the same time, something much more significant is happening beneath the economic surface.
From the early days of the computer revolution, researchers and popularizers envisioned “artificial intelligence” as the ultimate killer app (literally, in the case of the computer HAL in the film 2001: A Space Odyssey).
Decades of frustration are now yielding to success: the application of sophisticated statistical techniques to the accelerating accumulation of unprecedented quantities of so-called Big Data that the Internet simultaneously generates and captures.
For proof of artificial intelligent “life,” consider the “virtual assistants” populating smart phones, beginning – but just beginning – with Apple’s Siri.
The next wave of IR #3’s consequences can be discerned in systems that capture the intention behind a search request and couple it to a completed transaction, and in the application of predictive analytics to industrial supply chains and service provisioning.
If these innovations’ prospective impact on productivity and GDP growth cannot be quantified, well, that is the way it is with future history.
Flawed as Gordon’s reading of IR #3 is, his concluding concern for the future of innovation in the US is well founded.
Of the assorted “headwinds” that he cites, the enormous increase in inequality and the plateau reached in educational attainment represent threats that differentiate America’s position from that of other advanced countries.
But Gordon ignores the greatest threat to continued US global leadership in innovation: the delegitimation over the past generation of the state’s role as an economic actor.
As I illustrate and analyze at length in my new book, Doing Capitalism in the Innovation Economy: Markets, Speculation and the State, the state has become central to the Innovation Economy’s dynamics.
It funds the upstream research that generates discovery and invention; supports the creation of new networks, from canals to the Internet; and serves as a creative customer for innovative products, as it did during the computer revolution’s nascence.
The state must also preserve continuity in the market economy when the speculative bubble that has funded its transformation bursts.
And here, too, Gordon disappoints.
The only reference to government in his paper is not even to this stabilizing role. Rather, it is to the asserted headwind represented by the very debt incurred to prevent the global financial crisis of 2008 from triggering a second Great Depression.
The Truth About Sovereignty
CAMBRIDGE – In the French parliament’s recent debate on Europe’s new fiscal treaty, the country’s Socialist government vehemently denied that ratification of the treaty would undermine French sovereignty.
It places “not one constraint on the level of public spending,” Jean-Marc Ayrault, the prime minister, asserted.
“Budget sovereignty remains in the parliament of the French Republic.”
As Ayrault was trying to reassure his skeptical colleagues, including many members of his own party, European Commissioner for Competition Joaquin Almunia was delivering a similar message to his fellow social democrats in Brussels.
To succeed, he argued, Europe must prove wrong those who believe there is a conflict between globalization and sovereignty.
Nobody likes to give up national sovereignty, least of all, it seems, politicians on the left.
Yet, by denying the obvious fact that the eurozone’s viability depends on substantial restraints on sovereignty, Europe’s leaders are misleading their voters, delaying the Europeanization of democratic politics, and raising the political and economic costs of the ultimate reckoning.
The eurozone aspires to full economic integration, which entails the elimination of transaction costs that impede cross-border commerce and finance.
Obviously, it requires that governments renounce direct restrictions on trade and capital flows.
But it also requires that they harmonize their domestic rules and regulations –&nbsp;such as product-safety standards and bank regulations – with those of other member states in order to ensure they do not act as indirect trade barriers.
And governments must forswear changes in these policies, lest the uncertainty itself act as a transaction cost.
This was all implicit in the European Union’s single-market initiative.
The eurozone went one step further, aiming through monetary unification to eradicate fully the transaction costs associated with national currencies and exchange-rate risk.
Simply put, the European integration project has hinged on restrictions on national sovereignty.
If its future is now in doubt, it is because sovereignty stands in the way once again.
In a true economic union, underpinned by union-wide political institutions, the financial problems of Greece, Spain, and the others would not have blown up to their current proportions, threatening the existence of the union itself.
Consider the United States.
No one even keeps track of, say, Florida’s current-account deficit with the rest of the country, although we can safely guess that it is huge (since the state is home to many retirees living off benefits that come from elsewhere).
When Florida’s state government goes bankrupt, Florida’s banks continue to operate normally, because they are under federal rather than state jurisdiction.
When Florida’s banks go belly-up, state finances are insulated, because the banks are ultimately the responsibility of federal institutions.
When Florida’s workers become unemployed, they get unemployment checks from Washington, DC.
And when Florida’s voters are disenchanted about the economy, they do not riot outside the state capital; they put pressure on their representatives in Congress to push for changes in federal policies.
Nobody would argue that US states have an abundance of sovereignty.
The relationship between sovereignty and democracy is also misunderstood.
Not all restrictions on the exercise of sovereign power are undemocratic.
Political scientists talk about “democratic delegation” – the idea that a sovereign might want to tie its hands (through international commitments or delegation to autonomous agencies) in order to achieve better outcomes.
The delegation of monetary policy to an independent central bank is the archetypal example: in the service of price stability, daily management of monetary policy is insulated from politics.
Even if selective limitations on sovereignty may enhance democratic performance, there is no guarantee that all limitations implied by market integration would do so.
In domestic politics, delegation is carefully calibrated and restricted to a few areas where the issues tend to be highly technical and partisan differences are not large.
A truly democracy-enhancing globalization would respect these boundaries.
It would impose only those limits that are consistent with democratic delegation, possibly along with a limited number of procedural norms (such as transparency, accountability, representativeness, use of scientific evidence, etc.) that enhance democratic deliberation at home.
As the American example illustrates, it is possible to give up on sovereignty –&nbsp;as Florida, Texas, California, and the other US states have done –&nbsp;without giving up on democracy.
But combining market integration with democracy requires the creation of supranational political institutions that are representative and accountable.
The conflict between democracy and globalization becomes acute when globalization restricts the domestic articulation of policy preferences without a compensating expansion of democratic space at the regional/global level.
Europe is already on the wrong side of this boundary, as the political unrest in Spain and Greece indicates.
That is where my political trilemma begins to bite: We cannot have globalization, democracy, and national sovereignty simultaneously.
We must choose two among the three.
If European leaders want to maintain democracy, they must make a choice between political union and economic disintegration.
They must either explicitly renounce economic sovereignty or actively put it to use for the benefit of their citizens.
The first would entail coming clean with their own electorates and building democratic space above the level of the nation-state.
The second would mean giving up on monetary union in order to be able to deploy national monetary and fiscal policies in the service of longer-term recovery.
The longer this choice is postponed, the greater the economic and political cost that ultimately will have to be paid.
Economic Policy’s Narrative Imperative
WASHINGTON, DC – The best advice I received when taking up policymaking responsibilities in Turkey more than a decade ago was to take “a lot of time and care to develop and communicate the ‘narrative’ to support the policy program that you want to succeed.”
The more that economic policy is subject to public debate – that is, the more democracy there is – the more important such policy narratives are.
The crisis faced by the European Union and the eurozone is a telling example of the need for a narrative that explains public policy and generates political support for it.
A successful narrative can be neither too complicated nor simplistic.
It must capture the imagination, address the public’s anxieties, and generate realistic hope.
Voters often sense cheap populism.
European Central Bank President Mario Draghi provided such a narrative to the financial markets last July.
He said that the ECB would do everything necessary to prevent the disintegration of the euro, adding simply: “Believe me, it will be enough.”
With that sentence, Draghi eliminated the perceived re-denomination tail risk that was highest in the case of Greece, but that was driving up borrowing costs in Spain, Italy, and Portugal as well.
It was not a populist message, because the ECB does indeed have the firepower to buy enough sovereign bonds on the secondary market to put a ceiling on interest rates, at least for many months.
Central bankers, more generally, are typically able to provide short- or medium-term narratives to financial markets.
US Federal Reserve Board Chairman Ben Bernanke provided his own by pledging that US short-term interest rates would remain very low, and the Bank of Japan’s new chairman, Haruhiko Kuroda, has just provided another by saying that he will double the money supply so that inflation reaches 2%.
While central bankers can provide such narratives to financial markets, it is political leaders who must provide the overall socioeconomic messages that encourage long-term real investment, electoral support for reform, and hope for the future.
Central bank alchemy, to borrow a term from the US journalist Neil Irwin’s new book, has its limits.
Europe, in particular, needs a narrative of long-term hope that will trigger a real recovery.
France is coming closer to the danger zone, and even Germany’s annual GDP growth is falling well below 1% per year.
In the meantime, the easing of sovereign interest-rate spreads provides little comfort to the growing army of unemployed in southern Europe, where youth unemployment has reached dramatic heights – close to 60% in Greece and Spain, and almost 40% in Italy.
The narrative should address three essential questions.
How can the European model of strong social solidarity and security be reformed, but endure?
How can economic growth be revived and sustained throughout the EU?
And how can Europe’s institutions function with enhanced legitimacy to accommodate countries that share the euro and others that retain their national currencies?
For starters, a revolution is required in the organization of work, learning, and leisure.
Social solidarity, essential to European identity, can and must include longer work lives, but also more work-sharing, adult learning, and shorter average work weeks (particularly close to retirement).
Such flexibility requires the consent of all: employees must adjust to changing requirements; employers must re-organize their enterprises to allow more work-sharing, work from home, and learning intervals; and governments must overhaul taxes, income support, and regulation to promote a “flex-solidarity revolution” that encourages personal choice and responsibility, while remaining committed to social cohesion.
This can lead to a better future for all, with citizens gaining better access to adult education, having more free time to pursue personal interests, and remaining productive and occupationally engaged far longer into their healthy lives.
Europe does not need Asia’s rates of economic growth.
It can secure decent jobs and prosperity, with a sustained annual growth rate of around 2%.
To achieve that, German voters should be told not that their country’s resources will forever flow to Spain, but that their wages can rise at twice the rate of the recent past without risking inflation or a current-account deficit, because Germany has the world’s largest external surplus.
Service-sector industries throughout the EU must be opened up.
The countries with stronger fiscal positions should take the lead in a major pan-European skill-upgrading program.
The number of pan-European scholarships should be doubled.
School programs everywhere should aim to educate trilingual citizens.
Moreover, a full European banking union with shared resources for resolution should be created without further delay.
The European Investment Bank, which received a significant capital increase in 2012, should add a large investment-support program for medium-size enterprises to its current operations, with a subsidy financed from the European budget to encourage first-time job takers for a limited period.
Jobs and training for young people must be the centerpiece for the new growth pact, and projects must move ahead in “crisis mode,” rather than according to business as usual.
Finally, while monetary union obviously requires greater sharing of sovereignty, there should also be a “greater Europe” that includes the United Kingdom and others.
This implies two-tier institutions that can accommodate both types of countries: the “euro-ins” and those that prefer to preserve their monetary sovereignty in a larger Europe built around a vibrant single market and common democratic values.
These interconnected visions can and must be realized if Europe is to thrive again.
Together, they form a compelling narrative that European leaders must begin to articulate.
Why Eurobonds are Un-American
BRUSSELS – The emerging consensus in Europe nowadays is that only “debt mutualization” in the form of Eurobonds can resolve the euro crisis, with advocates frequently citing the early United States, when Alexander Hamilton, President George Washington’s treasury secretary, successfully pressed the new federal government to assume the Revolutionary War debts of America’s states.
But a closer look reveals that this early US experience provides neither a useful analogy nor an encouraging precedent for Eurobonds.
First, taking over a stock of existing state debt at the federal level is very different from allowing individual member states to issue bonds with “joint and several” liability underwritten by all member states collectively.
Hamilton did not have to worry about moral hazard, because the federal government did not guarantee any new debt incurred by the states.
Second, it is seldom mentioned that US federal debt at the time (around $40 million) was much larger than that of the states (about $18 million).
Thus, assuming state debt was not central to the success of post-war financial stabilization in the new country; rather, it was a natural corollary of the fact that most of the debt had been incurred fighting for a common cause.
Moreover, the most efficient sources of government revenues at the time were tariffs and taxes collected at the external border.
Even from an efficiency point of view, it made sense to have the federal government service public debt.
Federal assumption of the states’ war debts also yielded an advantage in terms of economic development: once states no longer had any debt, they had no need to raise any revenues through direct taxation, which might have impeded the growth of America’s internal market.
Indeed, after the federal government assumed the states’ debt (already a small part of the total), state revenues fell by 80-90%.
The states then became for some time fiscally irrelevant.
Finally, the key to the success of financial stabilization was a profound restructuring.
Hamilton estimated that the federal government could raise enough revenues to pay approximately 4% interest on the total amount of debt to be serviced – significantly less than the 6% yield on the existing obligations.
Holders of both state and federal bonds were thus offered a basket of long-dated bonds, some with an interest rate of 3%, and others with 6 % (with a ten-year grace period).
The basket was designed in such a way as to result in an average debt-service cost of 4%.
In modern terms, the “net present value” of the total debt (federal and state) was reduced by about one-half if one were to apply the usual exit yield of 9%.
Moreover, the new federal bonds’ very long maturities meant that there was no rollover risk.
It would have been very dangerous to expose the federal government to this danger, given that the operation was rightly perceived at the outset as extremely risky.
For the country’s first few years, debt service swallowed more than 80% of all federal revenues.
The slightest negative shock could have bankrupted the new federal government.
Fortunately, the opposite happened: federal revenues tripled under the impact of a rapid post-war reconstruction boom, and continued to grow rapidly, aided by the country’s ability to remain neutral while wars ravaged the European continent.
By contrast, growth prospects in Europe today are rather dim, and interest payments, even for Greece or Italy, account for less than 20% of total revenues.
The real problem is the rollover of existing debt in a stagnating economy.
For example, Italy will soon have a balanced budget in structural terms, but must still face the problem of refinancing old debt as it matures each year.
Assuaging doubt about the sustainability of public debt in the eurozone would thus probably require a deep restructuring as well.
The eurozone crisis could certainly be resolved if all existing public debt were transformed into 20-year Eurobonds with a yield of 3%, and a five-year grace period on debt service.
One can easily anticipate the impact that this would have on financial markets.
More interesting in view of the current situation in the eurozone is what followed roughly a half-century after Hamilton acted.
In the 1830’s and 1840’s, a number of states had over-invested in the leading transport technology of the time –&nbsp;canals.
When the canal-building boom ended, eight states and the Territory of Florida (accounting for about 10% of the entire US population at the time) were unable to service their debt and defaulted on their, mostly British, loans.
British bankers threatened that they would never again invest in these untrustworthy Americans.
They could point to the precedent set by Hamilton, and had probably invested on the implicit understanding that, if necessary, the federal government would bail out the states again.
But, despite foreign creditors’ threats, the federal government did not come to the rescue.
The bailout request did not succeed because it could not muster a simple majority of the states (represented by the Senate) and the population (represented by the House of Representatives) under the normal decision-making procedure (the “Community method,” in European Union jargon).
The defaults proved to be costly.
The 1840’s were a period of slow growth, and continued pressure from foreign creditors forced most of the official debtors to resume payments after a while.
Default was not an easy way out, and all US states (with the exception of Vermont) have since embraced balanced-budget amendments to their constitutions as a way to shore up their fiscal credibility.
Are EU members prepared to take a similar step?
Europe’s Asian Pivot
CAMBRIDGE/OXFORD – The Obama administration’s so-called “pivot to Asia” is the most important strategic shift that the United States has undertaken since the end of the Cold War – and it has profound implications for Europe.
But Europe’s leaders have largely ignored or misunderstood its significance, and thus have failed to seize the opportunity that it represents.
For example, some in Europe believe that America’s interest in Asia is a recent development.
But, as President Barack Obama put it in 2011, “The US has been, and always will be, a Pacific nation.”
The shift is aimed at ensuring that the US plays “a larger and long-term role in shaping this region,” where it has long helped to maintain stability and contributed to unprecedented economic growth.
Given this, America’s pivot should be viewed more as a consolidation of established policies than as an abrupt, short-term change.
The policy’s scope is also widely misunderstood.
While the policy does include a rebalancing of America’s military posture in Asia – by 2020, the US Navy will deploy more of its forces, including six of its 11 carrier groups, to the Pacific Ocean – it covers the entire spectrum of diplomacy, economics, development, culture, and inter-societal relations.
This comprehensive approach is evident in Obama’s choice of destination for the first overseas trip of his second term.
By visiting Myanmar, Thailand, and Cambodia, Obama reinforced earlier efforts to strengthen diplomatic and economic engagement with the Asia-Pacific region.
Furthermore, America officially joined the East Asia Summit in 2011, easing concerns in the region about China’s increasingly aggressive posture in the South China Sea.
Likewise, America’s proposed Trans-Pacific Partnership and offers of economic engagement to Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) countries are the latest initiatives underscoring its determination to strengthen its economic ties in the region.
Such efforts to safeguard regional stability will ultimately benefit Europe, for which Asia has become an increasingly important trading partner.
Given the rising risk of conflict in Asia – owing to a toxic combination of rapid GDP growth, an arms race, historical resentments, rampant chauvinism, territorial disputes, and a lack of effective institutional arrangements for conflict resolution – Europe should welcome a stronger US presence in the region.
At the same time, Europe’s leaders must recognize that, by increasing its engagement in Asia, the US is not turning away from its European partners.
On the contrary, as US Vice President Joe Biden said in February, Europe remains “the cornerstone of [US] engagement with the rest of the world.”
US leaders are well aware of the geopolitical factors that make Europe their most important and reliable ally.
Its proximity to the Middle East and Africa – where the European Union and its member countries are the most important aid donors, trading partners, and security actors – will ensure the partnership’s continued relevance, as will the common values and deep economic integration that underpin transatlantic relations.
But the rebalancing does have strategic implications for Europe.
America’s military presence in Europe will be gradually reduced, as will its willingness to take the lead in international crises – even those affecting Europe’s interests.
As a result, while the US will continue to provide intelligence, air support, and ammunition on a case-by-case basis, as it did recently in Libya and Mali, Europe will increasingly have to act first and alone.
If Europe is to overcome its current financial constraints and acquire the military capacity and level of coordination needed to fulfill its new role, it must pool and share its resources more effectively.
Furthermore, whether on a bilateral basis, through NATO, or through the EU, France’s insistence on military sovereignty must be reconciled with Germany’s culture of excessive military restraint.
Failure to share resources and coordinate policy would seriously undermine Europe’s security interests.
The US rebalancing will also create an opportunity for Europe to play a greater role in an increasingly important region.
By joining the US in the rebalancing process and supporting relations with China that are built on cooperation rather than containment, the EU would contribute to global stability, while spreading European values.
To this end, the EU can leverage its position as a leading trading partner, investor, and aid donor; it can also contribute at leaders’ summits, such as the Asia-Europe Meeting and the ASEAN Regional Forum.
The Obama administration seems to understand the potential benefits of such a “joint rebalancing,” with the EU-US statement on the Asia-Pacific region issued last July suggesting a move toward policy coordination.
But, in pursuing such harmonization, Europeans should recognize that their Asia strategy – which has so far focused on commerce and, to a lesser degree, on the rule of law and human rights – will have to take on a security dimension.
Indeed, if conflicts in Asia become more virulent, Europe cannot expect the US to shoulder the burden of maintaining regional stability alone.
While this does not necessarily imply a military role for Europe in Asia (although participation in peacekeeping missions should not be excluded), it does mean a more forceful diplomatic posture in support of mediation and multilateralism.
A joint rebalancing would help to fortify all facets of the EU-US relationship, possibly catalyzing progress on the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership.
It would also strengthen the largest economies’ rule-making capacity vis-à-vis the emerging economies, most notably China, in maintaining a liberal economic order.
In short, a common approach toward Asia would reinvigorate the transatlantic relationship at just the right time, and would guarantee that, despite having suffered from internal disagreements in the last decade, the EU-US partnership remains the cornerstone of a peaceful and prosperous world order.
Why Fair Trade?
LONDON – Historically, the term “fair trade” has meant many things.
The Fair Trade League was founded in Britain in 1881 to restrict imports from foreign countries.
In the United States, businesses and labor unions use “fair trade” laws to construct what economist Joseph Stiglitz calls “barbed-wire barriers to imports.”
These so called “anti-dumping” laws allow a company that suspects a foreign rival of selling a product below cost to request that the government impose special tariffs to protect it from “unfair” competition.
Such dark protectionist thoughts are far from the minds of the benevolent organizers of the United Kingdom’s annual “Fairtrade Fortnight,” during which I just bought two bars of fair-trade chocolate and a jar of fair-trade chunky peanut butter.
Their worthy aim is to raise the price paid to developing-country farmers for their produce by excluding the inflated profits of the middlemen on whom they depend for getting their goods to distant markets.
Fair-trade products like cocoa, coffee, tea, and bananas do not compete with domestic European production, and therefore do not have a protectionist motive.
This is how it works: In exchange for being paid a guaranteed price and meeting “agreed labor and environmental standards” (minimum wages, no pesticides), poor-country farming cooperatives receive a FAIRTRADE mark for their products, issued by the FAIRTRADE Labeling Organization.
This certification enables supermarkets and other retailers to sell the products at a premium.
Third-world farmers get a boost to their income, while first-world consumers get to feel virtuous: a marriage made in heaven.
The fair-trade movement, launched in the 1980’s, has been growing rapidly.
In a notable breakthrough in 1997, the British House of Commons decided to serve only fair-trade coffee.
By the end of 2007, more than 600 producers’ organizations, representing 1.4 million farmers in 58 countries, were selling fair-trade products.
Today, a quarter of all bananas in UK supermarkets are sold under a FAIRTRADE mark.
But FAIRTRADE-labeled products still represent a very small share – typically less than 1% – of global sales of cocoa, tea, coffee, etc.
The economic rationale for guaranteed prices is well known: stabilizing the prices of primary products, which are subject to sharp fluctuations, stabilizes their producers’ incomes.
This argument inspired proposals – most famously by John Maynard Keynes in 1942 – to create “buffer stocks” for the main commodities, which would take supply off the market when prices fell, and add to supply when prices rose.
Keynes’s proposal never made it into the Bretton Woods Agreement of 1944, and, while buffer-stock schemes re-surfaced in the 1970’s, they, too, went nowhere.
Left-wing economists like Raúl Prebisch, moreover, later advanced the theory of “declining terms of trade” for primary products: their prices’ long-run tendency to fall relative to the prices of manufactured goods.
This tendency seemed to be at work from the mid-1980’s, as commodity producers experienced a persistent decline in prices.
In addition, price fluctuations throughout that decade were huge, with dire effects on sub-Saharan African and other developing countries that were largely dependent on commodities for export earnings.
Since then, however, the price decline has been reversed.
Food commodity prices have increased by 150% since 2001.
This has raised farm producers’ income independently of the fair-trade movement’s efforts.
The “declining terms of trade” argument has collapsed.
But primary-product prices remain much more volatile than the prices of manufactured goods and services, causing large fluctuations in producers’ incomes.
This exaggerates the effects of booms and busts.
So the issue of price stabilization has not gone away.
It is difficult to see how the fair-trade movement can contribute much to solving this problem, because the only serious policy for stabilizing producers’ incomes is to control supply. But that is beyond the scope of fair trade.
The target of all versions of fair trade is “free trade,” and the most damaging attacks on FAIRTRADE have come from free traders.
In Unfair Trade, a pamphlet published in 2008 by the Adam Smith Institute, Mark Sidwell argues that FAIRTRADE keeps uncompetitive farmers on the land, holding back diversification and mechanization.
According to Sidwell, the FAIRTRADE scheme turns developing countries into low-profit, labor-intensive agrarian ghettos, denying future generations the chance of a better life.
This is without considering the effect that FAIRTRADE has on the poorest people in these countries – not farmers but casual laborers – who are excluded from the scheme by its expensive regulations and labor standards.
In other words, FAIRTRADE protects farmers against their rivals and against agricultural laborers.
Consumers, Sidwell argues, are also being duped.
Only a tiny proportion – as little as 1% – of the premium that we pay for a FAIRTRADE chocolate bar will ever make it to cocoa producers.
Nor is FAIRTRADE necessarily a guarantee of quality: because producers get a minimum price for fair-trade goods, they sell the best of their crop on the open market.
But, despite its shaky economics, the fair-trade movement should not be despised.
While cynics say that its only achievement is to make consumers feel better about their purchases – rather like buying indulgences in the old Catholic Church – this is to sell fair trade short.
In fact, the movement represents a spark of protest against mindless consumerism, grass-roots resistance against an impersonal logic, and an expression of communal activism.
That justification will not convince economists, who prefer a dryer sort of reasoning.