Today, that endowment is roughly equal to that of Harvard University and spread over 15 universities.
The effect has been staggering: aerospace manufacturing has almost disappeared from California, but is booming in Texas.
Telecom research centers and consortia have flocked to Texas, even from the Canadian telecommunications giant Nortel.
Although manufacturing in the US is in crisis, Texas has one of the strongest manufacturing economies in the world.
There is no reason that the same outcome could not be achieved in the Middle East.
First, however, the Islamic world must rediscover and embrace its proud heritage.
­A New European Growth Agenda
BRUSSELS – Austerity alone cannot solve Europe's economic and financial crisis.
Growth and jobs need to be promoted with equal zeal.
European Union leaders now recognize this: kick-starting growth in 2012 was high on the agenda at the European Council’s meeting on January 30.
But the big question remains: How?
The need for immediate action is clear.
The eurozone’s economy contracted in the last three months of 2011; even Germany’s shrank.
The new year is looking grim.
France is flat-lining (as is Britain).
Italy and Spain have sunk into deep recession.
Greece is in its fifth year of a slump.
And eurozone unemployment is at record highs, with nearly one in two young people jobless in Spain and Greece.
The economic headwinds are formidable: fiscal austerity, high interest rates outside AAA-rated countries, credit cutting by banks, deleveraging households, weak private-sector investment, and declining exports as the global slowdown undermines demand.
Until growth resumes, any tentative financial stabilization will be extremely fragile.
Recession will hit banks’ and governments’ already-weak balance sheets, increasing pressure for faster deleveraging.
But, while gradual adjustment is essential, faster and deeper cuts are largely self-defeating: big reductions in private credit and government spending will cause a sharper slowdown – and thus a vicious downward spiral.
A big new push for growth is therefore vital.
So far, the growth agenda has consisted largely of structural reforms, which are essential for boosting future productivity and flexibility.
The crisis does provide a political opportunity for bold moves on this front in many countries; but structural reforms generally will not generate growth and jobs immediately (one exception is permitting shops to open longer).
On the contrary, a shakeout of less productive jobs, for example, would at first raise unemployment, increase government outlays, and reduce private spending.
And, because demand is depressed, credit is in short supply, and barriers to enterprise are often high, it will take longer than usual for businesses to create more productive jobs.
In short, structural reforms alone cannot be relied upon to stimulate growth in 2012.
Instead, the immediate focus needs to be on boosting investment and exports in economies with a current-account deficit – such as France, Italy, and Spain (and the United Kingdom) – and stimulating consumption in surplus countries such as Germany and the Netherlands.
The European Central Bank has acted decisively to prop up European banks; now it needs to support the real economy, too.
While official interest rates are only 1%, solvent sovereigns such as Spain pay more than 5% to borrow for ten years, while creditworthy businesses in Italy can borrow only at punitive rates, if at all.
So the ECB should do more to unblock the transmission mechanism for monetary policy; the European Banking Authority should discourage excessive deleveraging by insisting that banks raise specific capital amounts rather than hit a uniform 9% ratio; and, where necessary, national governments should provide guarantees for bank lending to small and medium-size businesses.
While improving access to finance is vital, governments also need to do more to boost investment.
They should prioritize measures to make it easier to start a business, lift barriers to venture capital, and introduce temporary 100% capital allowances to encourage businesses to bring forward investment.
At the EU level, the (callable) capital of the European Investment Bank should be greatly increased, as European Commission President José Manuel Barroso suggested in his State of the Union speech last September, so that the EIB can finance a big wave of pan-European investment, notably in infrastructure.
Boosting exports is also essential.
Deficit countries need to become more competitive, increasing productivity while cutting costs.
A more competitive currency would be welcome: just as the sterling’s collapse since 2008 has lifted UK exports, a weaker euro would help Mediterranean economies regain competitiveness for price-sensitive exports.
A fiscal devaluation – slashing payroll taxes and replacing the revenues with a higher VAT – would also help.
Surplus countries, too, must do their part, which is in their own interest.
Just as China needs to allow the renminbi to rise, so Germany – whose current-account surplus exceeds China's both as a share of GDP and in absolute terms – needs a higher real exchange rate.
That means that Germans need to earn higher wages, commensurate with their increased productivity, so that they can afford more Greek and Spanish holidays.
If businesses will not oblige, an income-tax cut would do the trick.
That brings us to fiscal policy.
Governments that cannot borrow cheaply (or at all) from markets have no option but to tighten their belts.
But they should pursue smart consolidation rather than unthinking austerity.
So they should maintain investment in skills and infrastructure, while cutting subsidies and transfer payments.
They should also legislate now for future reforms, notably to encourage people to work longer.
Last but not least, governments that can borrow at unprecedentedly low rates – 0% in real terms over 10 years in the case of Germany – must play their role in supporting demand.
Would it be really be so difficult to see VAT coming down ahead of the German election next year?
A New Holy Alliance?
LONDON &#45;&#45; The recent meeting in the Vatican of the “Custodian of The Holy Places,” King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia, and Pope Benedict XVI was a seminal event, particularly as it comes at a time when radical Muslims are decrying the role of “crusaders” in Middle East politics.
It was also the clearest sign yet of a rising “Holy Alliance” among the world’s conservative leaders.
For the key audience for this meeting of Muslim king and Roman Catholic Pontiff was not their followers, but another conservative leader, President George W. Bush.
The first “Holy Alliance” was a creation of Austria’s Prince Metternich following the Napoleonic wars.
It was an attempt to preserve the peace (and the security of the relatively weak Austrian Empire) through a coalition of victors upholding shared values.
Metternich’s “Holy Alliance” was the one original political idea to emerge from Napoleon’s defeat.
Behind its exalted name lay an innovation of great diplomatic significance: the introduction of an element of calculated moral restraint into international relations.
The vested interests that the Alliance members – Austria, Prussia, and Russia – had in the survival of their domestic institutions led each to seek to avoid conflicts that, in the past, they would have pursued as a matter of course.
Metternich’s system worked through much of the nineteenth century, because it protected a genuine balance of power between countries that shared common values.
But what “common values” do King, Pope, and American President share?
That such a meeting took place is a sign that both Pope and King believed that there was something to achieve.
Indeed, Abdullah, who believes himself to be the paramount leader of the Muslim world, is the first Saudi king to initiate a meeting with a leader of the Christian faith.
The two men met, seemingly as equals, not to express the common values of conservatism, but to confirm and promote their authority to uphold traditional values.
Both agreed that reform must be slow, cautious and that it must never undermine established institutions, especially religion and the patriarchal family.
Abdullah sought the meeting because he believes that the world since 2001 has divided the fraternity of conservatives.
Until then, he and Bush shared a common worldview, emphasizing the importance of religion, the traditional family (as both countries understood it), social discipline, and the state’s role in supporting these institutions.
But Bush, following the terrorist attacks of 2001, turned his back on conservatism.  He sought to radically reinvent the Middle East, not only by overthrowing the Taliban regime in Afghanistan and Saddam Hussein’s regime in Iraq, but also through his strident calls for democratization.
American radicalism, however, resulted in increasing tensions between religious communities in the Middle East, and the rise of radical Iran with its bid for regional hegemony.
Since 2001, Christian minorities have been targeted throughout the region, including even Lebanon’s Maronite Christian community.
And in Iraq, Sunni Muslims feel under siege from the country’s majority and now ruling Shia.
Here is where the Holy Alliance concept of moral restraint comes in.
Abdullah, perhaps earlier than most others, understood that some code of restraint was needed if the entire region was not to descend into a war of all against all.
Moreover, Abdullah understands that his wobbly regime will only be able to withstand the radical gales that are now blowing if it can forge the type of stability-seeking alliance that Metternich built.
The King, like Metternich and the Austrian Kaisers, understands de Tocqueville’s dictum that the most dangerous moment for a regime is when it starts to reform.
Having begun, ever so carefully, to politically open his country, the King knows that he needs regional peace and a lowering of Islamic holy rage.
The problem is that Abdullah cannot rely on his domestic conservative allies to give him the time that the Kingdom needs.
The Wahhabi religious establishment, the Saudi state’s hidden co-rulers, could very well obstruct Abdullah’s attempts at regional religious reconciliation.
Members of the religious police remain adamant that the country’s Christian guests must continue to live according to strict Wahhabi rules of behavior.
While the Wahhabis could yet be bribed again with oil money, the sect’s power-hungry judges eagerly await the next beheading, stoning, or lashing in Riyadh’s public square.
Thus, uniting the forces of status quo conservatism, even if some of those conservatives are Christian, is the only viable diplomatic strategy open to Saudi Arabia.
For conservative rulers usually fall when they fail to grasp their own vulnerability, especially when the revolutionary challenge is cloaked in conservative garb.
After all, few political systems can defend against those, like Saudi Arabia’s Islamic radicals, who claim that they can preserve the system and its religious values more effectively than the current rulers. 
Only an alliance of conservative leaders and powers (including a retreat by America from diplomatic radicalism), Abdullah believes, can restore some stability to the Middle East.
A Glimmer of Hope in Iran
BERLIN – No one could have reckoned with Hassan Rowhani’s victory in Iran’s presidential election.
Even Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei was probably more than a little surprised by Rowhani’s first-round victory, following a campaign that began with eight candidates.
As a result, the negotiations with Iran over its nuclear program, as well as the civil war in Syria, may well take on a new dynamic.
But that is how it is in the Middle East: you never know what lies around the corner.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of the launch, at the foreign-minister level, of negotiations between Iran and the European triumvirate of Germany, France, and the United Kingdom on Iran’s nuclear program.
I was there, representing Germany; so was Rowhani, who led the Iranian delegation.
The talks have continued until today – in an expanded format that includes Germany and the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council (the P5+1) – without any tangible results.
Now Rowhani returns to the risky business of Iran’s nuclear program, though this time as President.
What can we – and he – expect?
Based on my personal experience, Rowhani is a polite and open character.
Unlike outgoing President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, he surrounds himself with very skillful and experienced diplomats.
But there should be no doubt that he is a man of the regime – a realist and moderate member of the Islamic Republic’s political elite – not a representative of the opposition.
And, of course, he backs Iran’s nuclear program.
If Rowhani wants to succeed in office, he will have to keep his promise to improve Iranians’ living conditions without endangering the Islamic Republic in the process.
That will not be easy; in fact, it could amount to trying to square a circle.
The economic improvement that voters demanded in electing Rowhani can almost certainly be achieved only if Western and international sanctions are lifted.
But an end to international sanctions presupposes a breakthrough in the nuclear negotiations.
It may also presuppose at least a temporary settlement of the main regional conflicts.
The Middle East has changed dramatically in the last ten years.
America has reduced its involvement, having withdrawn its troops from Iraq and winding down its engagement in Afghanistan by next year.
At the same time, we are witnessing the dissolution of the old Middle East created by France and Britain after World War I, when Europe’s two great colonial powers created territorial mandates in Palestine, Syria (including present-day Lebanon), Transjordan, and Iraq.
A new regional order is not yet discernible, which points to a future fraught with risk and possible chaos.
As Iran seeks to assert its influence and interests, as well as those of its Shia allies, its dispute with the Security Council over its nuclear program has become closely tied to its regional ambitions.
After all, the prospect of a nuclear-armed Iran would most likely exacerbate violent conflict and a nuclear arms race in the region.
As a result, both issues may well have to be addressed successfully prior to any move to lift the sanctions.
Iran and its international interlocutors should learn from the past and manage expectations accordingly.
There will not be any quick solutions (if, indeed, there are any solutions at all), given the parties’ diametrically opposed interests, their respective domestic and alliance-related obstacles, and a profound lack of trust on all sides.
Moreover, aside from negotiating with the P5+1, Iran would be well advised to launch direct negotiations with the United States.
It will also most likely have to improve its relations with Saudi Arabia and the Gulf states, and change its behavior toward Israel, if a positive result is to be achieved.
Similarly, the West will have to understand that the Islamic Republic is not a monolithic dictatorship.
The regime has multiple coexisting power centers, which influence and limit each other’s decisions.
The office of the president is just one power center.
The same applies to the Supreme Leader, who, despite his title, is not an absolute ruler.
Iran has tried two political approaches in the last ten years: a reformist model, under President Mohamed Khatami, and hardline radicalism, under Ahmadinejad.
Both approaches failed.
The reformers could not overcome conservative opposition, while the radicals could not defeat the domestic economic realities wrought by their foreign and nuclear policies.
Rowhani must seek a path that does not cost him the support of the majority of the regime’s power centers, yet that also allows him to fulfill the mandate he received from voters.
At home, too, massive distrust will further complicate an inherently difficult task.
In America and the West, many will probably regard Rowhani as the friendly face of the Islamic Republic, whereas Ahmadinejad was its true – because more radical – embodiment.
Many Iranians, in turn, regard Obama as the friendly face of a US that still seeks regime change in their country, whereas his predecessor, George W. Bush, was America’s more honest – because more radical – representative.
Both perceptions distort reality, though both contain a kernel of truth.
Despite these perceptions – or perhaps precisely because of them – Rowhani’s presidency offers an unexpected opportunity for both the nuclear negotiations and a political solution in Syria.
Iran’s participation in an international peace conference is an absolute necessity, if only to test Rowhani’s seriousness.
During the Afghanistan conference in Bonn in 2001, Iran behaved in a pragmatic, results-oriented way – an approach that went completely unrewarded by the US.
As for the nuclear negotiations, the P5+1 will focus on objective guarantees that leave Iran no path toward military use of its nuclear capabilities.
For Iran, the focal point of its efforts will be recognition of its right to civilian use of nuclear energy, in keeping with the provisions of the Non-Proliferation Treaty and its protocols.
Both issues sound simpler than they are: the devil is in the details, and the details leave ample scope for disagreement over the definition, monitoring, and enforcement of terms.
Again, maintaining realistic expectations must be paramount.
A successful outcome in the nuclear negotiations and resolution or even containment of the main regional conflicts will be difficult to achieve.
But it would be the height of irresponsibility not to seize the unexpected opportunity created by Rowhani’s election with all the strength, good faith, and creativity we can muster.
A Second Chance for European Reform
MUNICH – The European Central Bank has managed to calm the markets with its promise of unlimited purchases of eurozone government bonds, because it effectively assured bondholders that the taxpayers and pensioners of the eurozone’s still-sound economies would, if necessary, shoulder the repayment burden.
Although the ECB left open how this would be carried out, its commitment whetted investors’ appetite, reduced interest-rate spreads in the eurozone, and made it possible to reduce the funding of crisis-stricken economies through the printing press (Target credit).
This respite offers an ideal opportunity to push forward with reforms.
Greek Prime Minister Antonis Samaras must convince his countrymen that he is serious about implementing them.
Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy and Portuguese Finance Minister Vitor Gaspar deserve more support for their plans.
And one can only hope that Italy’s caretaker prime minister, Mario Monti, contests the next general election.
All of these leaders understand what must be done.
France, by contrast, does not appear to have noticed the writing on the wall.
President François Hollande wants to solve his country’s problems with growth programs.
But when politicians say “growth,” they mean “borrowing.”
That is the last thing that France needs.
France’s debt/GDP ratio is already around 90%; even if its 2013 budget deficit does not exceed 3.5% of GDP, its debt/GDP ratio will have climbed to 93% by the end of the year.
The government’s GDP share, at 56%, is the highest in the eurozone and second highest among all developed countries.
It is not only film actors like Gérard Depardieu who are leaving the country to escape its high taxes; industry is fleeing as well.
France’s once-proud carmakers are fighting for survival.
Indeed, France’s manufacturing industry has shrunk to barely 9% of GDP, less than Britain’s manufacturing share (10%) and less than half of Germany’s (20%).
Its current account is sliding into an ever-deeper deficit hole.
Unemployment is rising to record levels.
France’s basic problem, like that of the countries most affected by the crisis, is that the wave of cheap credit that the euro’s introduction made possible fueled an inflationary bubble that robbed it of its competitiveness.
Goldman Sachs has calculated that France must become 20% cheaper to service its debt on a sustainable basis.
The same is true of Spain, while Italy would have to become 10-15% cheaper and Greece and Portugal would need domestic prices to fall 30% and 35%, respectively.
The OECD purchasing-power statistics paint a similar picture, with Greece needing to depreciate by 39% and Portugal by 32% just to reach the price level prevailing in Turkey.
But, so far, virtually nothing has been done in this respect.
Worse, some of the troubled countries’ inflation rates are still running higher than those of their trading partners.
Eurozone politicians tend to believe that it is possible to regain competitiveness by carrying out reforms, undertaking infrastructure projects, and improving productivity, but without reducing domestic prices.
That is a fallacy, because such steps improve competitiveness only in the same measure as they reduce domestic prices vis-à-vis eurozone competitors.
There is no way around a reduction in relative domestic prices as long as these countries remain in the currency union: either they deflate, or their trading partners inflate faster.
There is no easy or socially comfortable way to accomplish this.
In some cases, such a course can be so perilous that it should not be wished upon any society.
The gap is simply too large between what is needed to restore competitiveness and what citizens can stomach if they remain part of the monetary union.
In order to become cheaper, a country’s inflation rate must stay below that of its competitors, but that can be accomplished only through an economic slump.
The more trade unions defend existing wage structures, and the lower productivity growth is, the longer the slump will be.
Spain and France would need a ten-year slump, with annual inflation 2% lower than that of their competitors, to regain their competitiveness.
For Italy, the path toward competitiveness is shorter, but for Portugal and Greece it is substantially longer – perhaps too long.
Italy, France, and Spain should be able to regain competitiveness in the eurozone within a foreseeable period of time.
After all, Germany cut its prices relative to its eurozone trading partners by 22% from 1995, when the euro was definitively announced, to 2008, when the global financial crisis erupted.
Ten years ago, Germany was like France is today – the sick man of Europe.
It suffered from increasing unemployment and a lack of investment.
Most of its savings were being invested abroad, and its domestic net investment share was among the lowest of all OECD countries.
Under growing pressure to act, Gerhard Schröder’s Social Democratic government decided in 2003 to deprive millions of Germans of their second-tier unemployment insurance, thus paving the way for the creation of a low-wage sector, in turn reducing the rate of inflation.
Unfortunately, thus far, there is no sign that the crisis countries, above all France, are ready to bite the bullet.
The longer they cling to a belief in magic formulas, the longer the euro crisis will be with us.
A New Science
An unusual meeting of scientists took place in Paris this summer, when scientists gathered to brainstorm about the need for a new science, one that could be as revolutionary as Einstein’s insights were a century ago.
Most scientists assume that the basics of science are known.
After all, today’s models work.
But an emerging group of scientists points to phenomena that current theories do not address well.
These problems are exceedingly common and artfully avoided because the science that would account for them just doesn’t exist.
This missing science would describe processes, and how entire systems evolve.
Individual scientific disciplines are understood fairly well.
Physics, at least the physics we encounter as ordinary humans, is well mapped.
Chemistry and biochemistry are similarly solid -- there are some things we don’t understand about the body, but it is believed that the basic machinery of how cells and molecules interact is known.
Slightly apart from these are the new social sciences, which deal with humans and societies.
In each of these areas -- physics, biochemistry and social science -- the theories are mature and largely uncontroversial.
Each discipline has its own language and its own separate machinery.
Rarely is a scientist an expert in more than one area, because the worlds and languages are so different.
This means that we can’t answer complex questions that depend on more than one field. Consider the brain, for example.
This complex organ is composed of molecules that interact using the principles of physics. That information moves according to the laws of electricity.
There is also a system of specialized cells, and these interact, exchanging chemicals that also convey information.
The interaction between two brains adds another level: here, information is exchanged by means of languages, signs and ideas.
Information is at work on each level and comfortable theories explain how the separate ones operate.
But information is being exchanged between the levels as well.
There is no science that explains this, even at the most rudimentary level.
To cope with this deficiency, some scientists have tried to reinvent the tools of one level in order to apply them to another.
This leads to such things as a “language” at the level of cells and “energy” behind organized societies.
Sometimes the transplant works well enough, but it does not address the central problem: What is the nature of the information conveyed between each level, and how is it conveyed?
As it happens, nearly every system in the world is composed of such layers.
A similarly embarrassing lack of understanding about how the whole system works exists in every case.
The group of interdisciplinary scientists that met in Paris is loosely affiliated under the banner “Foundations of Information Science.”
They have been working in a distributed collaboration for eight years and come from a range of countries and specialties.
As well as scientists from the relevant disciplines, art theorists, psychiatrists, language experts and philosophers are beginning to participate in the discussion.
Most of the group is banking on the “transplant” strategy, in which the basic science of one layer is placed in another, tweaked and supplemented in order to be functional.
Others think that a whole new approach is required.
They assume that many scientific conventions are accidents of history and new abstractions can be devised.
If the FIS group is lucky, there will also be some radical input from thinkers that do not presently have access to first world infrastructure.
Independent thinking is an underestimated factor.
Nearly all the activities collected under the banner of “science” have developed institutional tendencies that are similar to their economic counterparts.
It is usually assumed that developing economies need to build resources that emulate those in the developed world, but this could actually stifle the most creative thinking.
Many scientific disciples are going through a revolution, and a lot of those ideas -- sometimes revolutionary ideas -- are bubbling up from labs and research centers that are unaffiliated with large institutions.
Twenty years of the most advanced thinking for mathematical algorithms came from a Soviet empire starved of computing power.
The cleverest, most literally earth-shattering notions of physics for two generations came not from the expected powerhouses of the day, but from Budapest.
Iran has a tradition of architectural design that has revealed key insights to cognitive scientists.
Today, some of the most radical new ideas in second generation artificial intelligence (so-called “autonomous agents”) are incubating in Prague.
The most creative breakthroughs became famous events.
When Einstein added new abstractions to the language of physics, the identity of space and time changed.
The FIS meeting in July was the unheralded beginning of an attempt to remodel the universe in such a way.
The group identified the gaps that need explanation. They will expand their pool of thinkers to include scientists from necessarily innovative regions.
Following this, they will identify which problems might be solved if this new science is developed. Or if you wish, discovered.
A New Sino-American Relationship?
NEW YORK – The Strategic and Economic Dialogue between the United States and China has now ended with the establishment of a felicitous new atmosphere between the two countries. But how can this “love-in” be made concrete?
The most logical and potentially fruitful area of collaboration is climate change.
Here, the two US government officials best equipped to lead are Secretary of Energy Steven Chu and Secretary of Commerce Gary Locke.
Chu is a former Berkeley and Stanford professor of physics and head of the Lawrence Berkeley National Lab, while Locke is a former Washington State governor and a long-time supporter of US-China commercial exchanges.
Each packs the kind of soft, utilitarian powers of persuasion that Chinese leaders are most willing to embrace: academic degrees from prestigious universities, advanced scientific and technological knowledge, high office, and a Nobel Prize. (Chu is one of five ethnic Chinese to have won a Nobel, although no winner has yet come from the PRC, a fact that gnaws at Chinese pride.)
China’s press was abuzz over Chu and Locke, the first ethnic Chinese men to become US Cabinet Secretaries.
Most major Chinese papers ran Chu’s photo on the front page, with Beijing Business Today running a cautionary headline: “Don’t Mistake the Visiting American Ministers as Relatives!”
The paper went on to warn that, “In their own hearts, we are afraid that Chu and Locke put their priorities in exactly the opposite order.”
When Chu gave speeches on energy and climate change at Tsinghua University, China’s most elite institution for science and engineering (where his parents had been students), and then at Tianjin University (where his grandfather was once President), he was received with enormous enthusiasm, overflow crowds, and standing ovations.
So, the Chinese ended up embracing Chu and Locke in contradictory ways: as high-ranking representatives of the US government and as compatriots with whom they share the common bond of Chinese-ness.
Both Chu and Locke are aware that the US and China are now the world’s largest emitters of greenhouse gases, and that, if there is any hope of remedying global climate change, the two countries must quickly find a way to collaborate.
For, although the US has drawn strength from the ideal of a “melting pot” – and President Barack Obama’s cabinet does represent a new high-water mark for diversity – Americans have often shown a xenophobic distrust of immigrants who have drawn too close to power.
Especially in the case of Chinese, fears of divided national loyalties and “fifth columns” have been strong.
One need only recall the recent case of Wen Ho Lee, the Los Alamos National Laboratory scientist who was unjustly accused of spying, to be reminded of how yin and yang are America’s feelings about minority members in sensitive positions.
There is a second obstruction as well: the US Congress refuses to face up realistically to the climate challenge, because China, as a developing country, is not obliged to accept compulsory carbon limits.
Then, because the US refuses to take responsibility for its cumulative and per capita greenhouse-gas emissions – which are, respectively, roughly four and three times greater than China’s – the Chinese leadership refuses to make concessions.
A standoff ensues, which is where we are now.
China recently demanded that the US reduce its emissions by 40% from its 1990 baseline levels and subsidize emission reduction efforts in China and other developing countries to the tune of .05-1% of America’s GDP.
But the recently House-passed Waxman-Markey bill proposes that the US only cut emissions by 3.6% of 1990 baseline levels.
So it is still far from clear what will actually work to bring about an understanding between the US and China that produces real results.
Moreover, with India poking Secretary of State Hillary Clinton in the eye over her climate-change entreaties, the world could easily see an even more unified and unyielding bloc emerge among developing countries.
The next moment to watch is Obama’s trip to China in November.
Here, if all the expressions of good feeling cannot be made concrete, an incomparable opportunity to recast Sino-US relations around the issue of climate change will have been lost.
A New Start for Non-Proliferation
VIENNA – US President Barack Obama has injected fresh momentum into efforts – stalled for a decade – to bring about nuclear disarmament.
He has committed himself to the vision of a world free of nuclear weapons and acknowledges the link between nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament by the nuclear-weapon states.
Obama has pledged to revitalize the 1970 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), which aims to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons.
The non-proliferation regime, of which the NPT is the cornerstone, is in disarray. The main problems are easily identified.
First, the five main nuclear-weapon states have not taken seriously their NPT obligation to work for nuclear disarmament.
Instead, they have insisted that nuclear weapons are essential for their security and continued to modernize their nuclear arsenals.
This naturally robs them of the moral authority to persuade others not to acquire nuclear weapons, which continue to be perceived as a source of power and influence, and an insurance policy against attack.
Second, as we have seen in the case of North Korea, there is nothing to stop countries that sign the Treaty from simply walking out after declaring that “extraordinary events” have jeopardized their supreme interests.
Third, the International Atomic Energy Agency, which is supposed to police the non-proliferation system, is shamefully underfunded.
When it comes to determining whether or not a country is conducting a covert nuclear weapons program, IAEA inspectors often have their hands tied, either because they lack the legal authority to gain access to all the locations they consider necessary, or because the IAEA’s analytical laboratories are outdated, or because the Agency does not have adequate access to satellite imagery.
Fourth, export controls have failed to prevent the spread of sensitive nuclear technology, not least due to the sophisticated efforts of clandestine networks like the one run by Pakistani nuclear scientist A.Q. Khan.
Nine countries already have nuclear weapons, and it would be naive to presume that others, particularly in regions of conflict, will not try to get hold of them.
In addition, a number of countries with nuclear energy programs have the capability, if they choose, to manufacture nuclear weapons within a matter of months if their security perceptions change, because they have mastered the critical technology – uranium enrichment and plutonium reprocessing.
If more countries take this path, it could prove to be the Achilles’ heel of non-proliferation.
Fifth, the international community, spearheaded by the United Nations Security Council, has more often than not been paralyzed in the face of challenges to international security and ineffectual in responding to suspected cases of nuclear proliferation.
These issues will not be resolved overnight.
But there is much that can be done relatively quickly.
The United States and Russia have started negotiations on deep cuts in their nuclear arsenals, which together account for 95% of the world’s 27,000 warheads.
Other key steps include bringing into force the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty; negotiating a verifiable treaty to end production of fissile material for use in weapons; radically improving the physical security of nuclear and radioactive materials, which is vital to prevent them from falling into the hands of terrorists; and strengthening the IAEA.
Last month, I proposed a key measure to strengthen non-proliferation to the IAEA’s Board of Governors – establishing an IAEA bank of low-enriched uranium (LEU) to guarantee supplies to countries that need nuclear fuel for their power reactors.
LEU cannot be used to make weapons.
Some such mechanism will be essential in the coming decades as more and more countries introduce nuclear energy.
My proposal is to create a physical stockpile of LEU at the disposal of the IAEA as a last-resort reserve for countries with nuclear power programs that face a supply disruption for non-commercial reasons.
This would give countries confidence that they can count on reliable supplies of fuel to run their nuclear power plants, and therefore do not need to develop their own uranium-enrichment or plutonium-reprocessing capability.
This could help to avoid a repeat of Iran’s experiences after its 1979 revolution, when contracts for fuel and technology for its planned nuclear power program were not honored.
Thirty years later, some of the consequences are still being felt.
The LEU would be available to countries in need on the basis of non-political and non-discriminatory criteria.
It would be accessible at market prices to all states in compliance with their nuclear safeguards obligations.
No state would be required to give up the right to develop its own fuel cycle.
The money needed to launch an LEU bank is in place, thanks primarily to a non-governmental organization – the Nuclear Threat Initiative – and initial funding from Warren Buffett.
But this can only be a first step. It should be followed by an agreement that all new enrichment and reprocessing activities will be placed exclusively under multinational control, and that all existing such facilities will be converted from national to multinational control.
This is a bold idea, but bold ideas are needed now more than ever.
The opportunity to put the nuclear fuel cycle under multinational control was missed 60 years ago because of the Cold War.
The spread of nuclear technology and the growing risk of nuclear terrorism make it imperative that we get it right this time.
A New-State Solution for Israel and Palestine
PRINCETON – Imagine a two-state solution in Israel and Palestine in which Palestinians would have the right of return; Israelis could settle wherever they could purchase land in the West Bank; and Jerusalem need not be divided.
This is not a fanciful vision, but a creative and eminently sensible reinvention of twenty-first century statehood.
And US President Barack Obama’s just-completed visit to Israel provides an opportunity to explore genuinely new thinking.
Ever since Bill Clinton nearly succeeded in brokering a comprehensive settlement in 2000, the mantra among supporters of the Israeli-Palestinian peace process has been that, while a solution exists, Israeli and Palestinian leaders who are willing to reach it do not.
For all the dire warnings that the window for a two-state solution is rapidly closing (or has already closed), it is the solution itself that is the problem.
In 2008, a Princeton University graduate student in philosophy named Russell Nieli gave a talk at the Princeton Center for Jewish Life that was so well received that he later expanded it into an article for the US-based magazine Tikkun, founded by Rabbi Michael Lerner.
The article, “Toward a Permanent Palestinian/Israeli Peace – the Case for Two-State Condominialism,” was published with the express aim of stimulating “productive thinking among a younger generation of Jews and Arabs not bound by the restricted vision and failed policies of the past.”
“Two-state condominialism” is as visionary as the name is clunky.
The core idea is that Israelis and Palestinians would be citizens of two separate states and thus would identify with two separate political authorities.
Palestine would be defined as a state of the Palestinian people, and Israel as a Jewish state.
Under “condominialism,” however, both Palestinians and Jews “would be granted the right to settle anywhere within the territory of either of the two states, the two states thus forming a single, binational settlement community.”
Think about that for a minute.
As Nieli describes it, Palestinians “would have the right to settle anywhere within Israel just as Jews would have the right to settle anywhere within the territory of the Palestinian state.
Regardless of which of the two states they lived in, all Palestinians would be citizens of the Palestinian state, all Jews citizens of Israel.”
Each state would have the authority and the obligation to provide for the economic, cultural, religious, and welfare needs of its citizens living in the other state’s territory.
These would be extraterritorial rights and responsibilities, just as the United States, for example, provides for its large numbers of expatriates, such as civilian dependents of US military personnel based abroad.
To make this work, the borders of each state would first have to be defined – presumably on the basis of the 1967 borders, with mutually agreed territorial swaps.
Israeli Arabs would then be required to transfer their citizenship, national identity, and national voting rights – but not their residence – to the new Palestinian state.
They would have a permanent right to live in Israel and would retain the benefits to which they are currently entitled as Israeli citizens, but they would now vote as citizens of Palestine.
All other Palestinians living in Israel would have rights and benefits only under Palestinian law.
Condominialism recognizes the reality of the deep interconnectedness of Israeli settlers in the West Bank with the rest of Israel –&#160;through roads, water supplies, electricity grids, administrative structures, and economic relationships (just as Israeli and Palestinian parts of Jerusalem are interdependent).
Instead of trying to separate and recreate all of these structures and relationships, it makes far more sense to build on them in ways that benefit both states’ peoples and economies.
And, in a world in which many citizens spend an increasing proportion of their time in virtual space, de facto condominialism is already happening.
In the 1950’s, after four decades of war across Europe, the idea of a European Union in which member states’ citizens could live and work freely across national borders while retaining their political allegiance and cultural identity seemed equally far-fetched.
(Indeed, the name of the political process by which the EU was to be constructed, “neo-functionalism,” was every bit as abstract and cumbersome as “two-state condominialism.”)
Yet French and German statesmen summoned the vision and the will to launch a bold experiment, one that has evolved into a single economy of 500 million people.
Why shouldn’t another site of ancient enmities be the source of a new conception of statehood?
Interestingly, many young people in the 1950’s, like my Belgian mother, ardently supported the vision of a new Europe.
Today’s young Israelis and Palestinians pride themselves on their entrepreneurialism, with all the risk and vision that starting something new entails.
Supporting and contributing to an innovative political start-up would be their generation’s defining act.
A New US Agenda for Latin America
MEXICO CITY – For the next American president, fixing the international mess inherited from the Bush administration will be no simple task.
While Latin America will not be a priority for either an Obama or McCain administration, continuing the United States’ neglect of the last seven years is no longer viable.
Two distinct political/diplomatic challenges stand out: Cuba’s imminent transition or succession crisis, and the continuing ascent of the region’s “two lefts,” one represented by Venezuela’s President Hugo Chávez and the other by Brazil’s increasingly influential President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva.
The next US administration will only prove successful if it grasps that Latin America is living through a moment that combines the best and worst aspects of its history: the fastest economic growth since the 1970’s, with poverty and inequality diminishing, and more democratic and respectful of human rights than ever before, but becoming more politically polarized.
In Cuba, Fidel Castro’s eventual passing from the scene represents an immense challenge.
The US cannot continue with the failed policies of the past half-century.
Demanding a full-fledged democratic transition as a pre-condition for normalizing US-Cuban relations is both unrealistic and unpalatable to Latin America.
Yet the US cannot set aside the question of democracy and human rights in Cuba while it awaits the departure of Fidel’s brother, Raúl.
Realpolitik and fear of another exodus of Cuban refugees across the Florida Straits may tempt the US to pursue a “Chinese” or “Vietnamese” solution to Cuba: normalizing diplomatic relations in exchange for economic reform, while leaving the question of internal political change until later.
But the US should not succumb to this temptation.
The US, Canada, Europe, and Latin America have constructed a regional legal framework, which must not be abandoned, to defend democratic rule and human rights in the hemisphere.
Cuba needs to return to the regional concert of powers, but it must accept this concert’s rules.
Holding free and fair elections may not be the primary issue, but nor are they issues that should be shelved in the interests of stability and expediency.
Elections must instead be part of a comprehensive process of normalization: they should neither be a deal-breaker nor a non-issue.
While the US should lift its trade embargo as soon as Cuba’s transition begins, everything else should be conditional on Cuba initiating a process of resolving all outstanding issues.
But Cuba is just part of what might be called Latin America’s “left” problem.
Indeed, much has been written recently about the ascent of the left in Latin America over the past decade.
In fact, there are two lefts in the region: a modern, democratic, globalized and market-friendly left, found in Chile, Brazil, Uruguay, parts of Central America, and, up to a point, in Peru; and a retrograde, populist, authoritarian, statist, and anti-American left, found in Mexico, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Cuba, Ecuador, Bolivia, Venezuela, and, to a lesser extent, in Argentina, Colombia, and Paraguay.
Some of these “lefts” are in power; some, as in Mexico in its last, disputed presidential election, barely missed conquering it, but may still do so.
Over the past two years, it has become increasingly evident that the “modern” or “soft” left is, all in all, governing well.
The other left has proved to be more extreme and erratic than many anticipated.
The former feels no urge to “export” its “model,” whereas the latter has a strategy and the means to do so.
The retrograde left today can realize Che Guevara’s old dream: not “one, two, many Vietnams,” but “one, two, many Venezuelas,” winning power by the ballot and then conserving and concentrating it through constitutional changes and the creation of armed militias and monolithic parties.
It can finance all of this with the support of Venezuela’s state oil company, implementing social policies that are misguided over the long term but seductive in the short run, especially when carried out by Cuban doctors, teachers, and instructors.
Herein lies a dilemma for the next US president: how to address the clear rift between the two lefts in a way that improves US-Latin American relations, fortifies the modern left, and weakens the retrograde left without resorting to the failed interventionist policies of the past.
The best, strictly Latin America-focused steps, are self-evident, if not easily achievable.
They require strengthening those governments of the modern left, or those of the center or center-right threatened by the old-fashioned left, and simultaneously making it clear to the latter that there is a price to be paid for violating the basic tenets of democracy, respect for human rights, and the rule of law.
Turning its back in the face of such challenges is no longer a viable American option.
Aside from areas of particular concern (oil, arms, guerrillas, drugs), the US needs Latin America dearly nowadays because resistance to it is springing up everywhere, and with greater virulence than at any time since World War II’s end.
The next US president must reinvigorate a relationship that is ready to be substantially transformed for the first time since Franklin Roosevelt’s Good Neighbor Policy of seven decades ago.
A New Year of Global Conflict
DAVOS – In today’s world, identifying and managing hotspots is not simply a matter of pulling out a map, spotting the wildfires, and empowering diplomats to douse the flames.
To understand today’s major conflicts and confrontations, we must recognize important ways in which global political conditions enable them.
Conflicts are much more likely to arise or persist when those with the means to prevent or end them cannot or will not do so.
Unfortunately, this will be borne out in 2013.
In the United States, barring a foreign-policy crisis that directly threatens national security, President Barack Obama’s administration will focus most of its time, energy, and political capital on debt reduction and other domestic priorities.
In Europe, officials will continue their struggle to restore confidence in the eurozone.
And, in China, though the demands of economic growth and job creation will force the country’s new leaders to develop new ties to other regions, they are far too preoccupied with the complexities of economic reform to assume unnecessary costs and risks outside Asia.
That is why the world’s fires will burn longer and hotter this year.
This does not mean that the world’s powers will not inflict damage of their own.
Today, these governments are more likely to use drones and special forces to strike at their perceived enemies.
The world has grown used to US drone strikes in Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Yemen, but recent news reports suggest that China and Japan are also investing in unmanned aircraft – in part to enhance their leverage in disputes over islands in the East China Sea.
By lowering the costs and risks of attack, these technological innovations make military action more likely.
Perhaps the lowest-cost way to undermine rivals and attack enemies is to launch attacks in cyberspace.
That is why so many deep-pocketed governments – and some that are not so rich – are investing heavily in the technology and skills needed to enhance this capability.
This form of warfare is especially worrisome for two reasons.
First, unlike the structure of Cold War-era “mutually assured destruction,” cyber weapons offer those who use them an opportunity to strike anonymously.
Second, constant changes in technology ensure that no government can know how much damage its cyber-weapons can do or how well its deterrence will work until they use them.
As a result, governments now probe one another’s defenses every day, increasing the risk of accidental hostilities.
If John Kerry and Chuck Hagel are confirmed as US secretaries of state and defense, respectively, the Obama administration will feature two prominent skeptics of military intervention.
But high levels of US investment in drones, cyber-tools, and other unconventional weaponry will most likely be maintained.
These technological advances create the backdrop for the competition and rivalries roiling the two most important geopolitical hotspots.
In the Middle East, US and European officials will continue to resist deeper involvement in regional turmoil this year, leaving local powers – Turkey, Iran, and Saudi Arabia – to vie for influence.
Confrontations between moderates and militants, and between Sunni and Shia factions, are playing out in several North African and Middle Eastern countries.
US officials have reason to believe that, over time, they will be able to worry less about the region and its problems.
According to current projections, technological innovations in unconventional energy will allow the US to meet more than 80% of its oil demand from sources in North and South America by 2020.
China, on the other hand, is set to become more dependent on Middle Eastern output.
Meanwhile, East Asia will remain a potential trouble spot in 2013.
Many of China’s neighbors fear that its ongoing economic and military expansion poses a growing threat to their interests and independence, and are reaching out to the US to diversify their security partnerships and hedge their bets on China’s benign intentions.
The US, eager to boost its economy’s longer-term prospects by engaging new trade partners in the world’s fastest-growing region, is shifting resources to Asia – though US (and European) policymakers would be wise to move forward with a transatlantic free-trade agreement as well.
There is a growing risk that the new Chinese leadership will interpret a heavier US presence in the region as an attempt to contain China’s rise and stunt its growth.
We have already seen a series of worrisome confrontations in the region, pitting China against Vietnam and the Philippines in the South China Sea, and against Japan in the East China Sea.
While these disputes are unlikely to provoke military hostilities this year, the use of drones and cyber weapons remains a real threat.
The greatest risk for 2013 is large-scale economic conflict in Asia, which would not only harm the countries directly involved, but would also undermine global recovery.
The first shots in this battle have already been fired.
Last summer, disputes over a string of contested islands in the East China Sea led to a furious exchange of charges between China and Japan, the world’s second- and third-largest economies, respectively.
The two sides were never in danger of going to war, but Chinese officials allowed nationalist protests to develop into boycotts of Japanese products and acts of vandalism against Japanese companies.
Japan’s automobile exports to China fell 44.5%, and China’s imports from Japan fell nearly 10% – all in just one month.
That was a tough hit for a struggling Japanese economy.
It is also a clear warning to the rest of us that a fight need not involve troops, tanks, and rockets to exact a heavy price.
A New Year\u0027s Resolution
It is time for New Year's resolutions, and this year's are obvious.
When the millennium opened, world leaders pledged to seek peace, the end of poverty, and a cleaner environment.
Since then, the world has seen countless acts of violence, terrorism, famine, and environmental degradation.
In 2005, we can begin to change direction.
Knowledge, scientific advance, travel, and global communications give us many opportunities to find solutions for the world's great problems.
When a new disease called SARS hit China last year, the World Health Organization coordinated the actions of dozens of governments, and the crisis was quickly brought under control, at least for now.
When Bill Gates donated $1 billion to bring vaccines to poor children, he made it possible to protect tens of millions of young people from preventable diseases.
When an agricultural research unit called the World Agroforestry Center discovered that a certain tree could help African farmers grow more food, they introduced a new and valuable approach to overcoming Africa's chronic food crisis.
Unfortunately, such examples of international cooperation are as rare as they are impressive.
With our knowledge, science, and technology, the horrendous living conditions of the world's poorest people could be dramatically improved. Millions of people could be spared malaria, HIV/AIDS, hunger, and life in slums.
The problem is not that we lack good solutions. The problem is that we fail to cooperate globally to put those solutions into practice.
United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan has honored me by making me his Special Adviser on the Millennium Development Goals and asking me to lead a group of scholars and development experts in identifying practical steps to reach the goals by the target date in 2015.
This effort, known as the UN Millennium Project, will issue its report to Secretary-General Annan on January 17, 2005.
Our study, Investing in Development: A Practical Plan to Achieve the Millennium Development Goals , will be available for free around the world at www.unmillenniumproject.org .
What we learned is easily summarized.
For every major problem - hunger, illiteracy, malnutrition, malaria, AIDS, drought, and so forth - there are practical solutions that are proven and affordable.
These investments, in turn, would strengthen the private sector and economic growth.
Yet they require global partnership between the rich and poor countries of the world.
Most importantly, the world's richest countries need to do much more to help the poorest countries make use of modern science and technology to solve these great problems.
The US, for example, currently spends around $450 billion each year on its military, but less than $15 billion to help the world's poorest countries fight disease, educate their children, and protect the environment.
This is a mistake, because military approaches alone cannot make America safe.
Only shared prosperity can truly make the planet secure.
The US should be investing much more in peaceful economic development.
Germany, Japan, and several other rich countries are also doing much less than they should - and much less than they promised the poor countries that they would do.
In 2002, all donor countries committed to "make concrete efforts" to reach 0.7% of national income in development aid to poor countries.
Germany, Japan, and the US, among others, remain far below this commitment.
The year 2005 will offer many opportunities for citizens around the world to insist that their leaders keep their Millennium promises.
After our report is issued in January, Secretary-General Kofi Annan will issue a report to the world in the spring, identifying the practical steps that should be taken this year.
Around the same time, an important commission on Africa will issue a report to United Kingdom Prime Minister Tony Blair.
Then, in July, the UK will host the annual G-8 Summit of the rich countries.
Blair has promised that he will make the fight against poverty and long-term climate change the two priorities of the summit.
In September, the world's leaders will reconvene at the UN to decide on their actions during the coming decade.
The rich and powerful nations often declare their leadership in the world.
The US claims that it helps the world fight poverty, but instead spends its money on weapons.
Germany and Japan say that they want a permanent seat on the UN Security Council, but neither has yet followed through on its own pledges to help the world's poorest people.
The world's poorest countries will ask themselves why they should vote for Germany and Japan to have permanent seats on the Security Council if they can't keep their promises.
Nothing would be wiser for the world's rich countries than to fulfill their pledges to the world's poor, hungry and disease-ridden peoples.
Therein lies the path to sustained peace.
2005 is the year that words can become reality, and that the world can begin to fulfill its hopes for our new millennium. Let us make our leaders aware that we aspire to shared peace and prosperity.
Let us pledge that the rich and powerful should take real actions to help the poor, the weak, and the suffering.
In Defense of Angela Merkel
PARIS – The recent cover of Der Spiegel showing German Chancellor Angela Merkel in front of the Acropolis surrounded by Nazi officers serves an important purpose: it finally poses, in a way that cannot be evaded, the question of Germanophobia in Europe.
The abuse of Germany has dragged on for quite some time.
Demonstrations in Cyprus in March 2013 included banners bearing caricatures of Merkel done up as Adolf Hitler.
In Valencia at around the same time, on the occasion of the annual Fallas celebration, there was Merkel as an evil headmistress delivering to the head of the Spanish government and his ministers “The Ten Commandments of Angela the Exterminator.”
She ended up being burned in effigy in the flames of the bonfires of St. Joseph.
Two months later, in Portugal, similar parades featured the same Hitlerized Merkel caricatures, borne by howling demonstrators dressed in mourning clothes and decrying the German leader’s “policy of massacring the poor.”
And, naturally, there was Greece, where the phenomenon reached its apogee during the near-riots of October 2012, in which the world was treated to the spectacle of Nazi and German flags flown together – and then burned – together before the Acropolis in scenes that presaged the Der Spiegel cover.
In Italy, the right-wing daily newspaper Il Giornale had no scruples about devoting its headline for August 3, 2012, to the emergence of the “Fourth Reich.”
Likewise, conspiracy websites in the countries of northern Europe claim that Germany’s eagerness to support Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko against Russian President Vladimir Putin is a reenactment of Hitler’s subjugation of Ukraine.
Then there is France, where the game seems to be to see who can come out on top in populist denunciations of the new and detestable “German empire.”
From the extreme right, National Front leader Marine Le Pen chides Merkel for the “suffering” that she is imposing on the peoples of Europe.
From the opposite extreme, we have the Left Party’s Jean-Luc Mélenchon thundering against Merkel’s “austerity” policy and inviting her to “shut up.”
The problem with this Germanophobia is not simply that it is stupid, or that it is yet another symptom of the decomposition, before our eyes, of the noble European project of integration and ever-closer union.
No, the problem with today’s Germanophobia is that, contrary to what the sorcerer’s apprentices who stoke it would have us believe, their behavior is not a sign of their opposition to the true fascism that lies on the horizon, but rather of their allegiance – and even contribution – to it. Why?
There are several reasons.
For starters, to oppose Germany’s social, economic, and foreign policies by equating Merkel with Hitler is to banalize Hitler.
However legitimate disagreement with those policies may be, Germany is one of the continent’s most scrupulous and exemplary democracies.
To say that it resembles in any way the Nazi regime – which in Europe still stands for the destruction of democracy (indeed, civilization itself) – is to exonerate that regime, and to reassure and encourage today’s neo-fascists, allowing them, whether intentionally or not, to reenter the public debate.
What is more (and this is key), those keenest to discredit Merkel just happen to be the same people who do not hesitate to waltz with Viennese neo-Nazis or to form an alliance, as in Athens, with the leaders of a genuinely extremist party.
All of the clamor raised around a Germany that has supposedly “reunited with its demons” masks the voice of fascistic parties – from Greece’s Golden Dawn to Hungary’s Jobbik, Slovakia’s SNS, Belgium’s Vlaams Belang, and Bulgaria’s Ataka – that are in the process of establishing themselves in Europe.
It should also be noted that Merkel is a woman, and that hatred for women – the disdain in which they, right alongside the Jews, were regarded by the racist theoreticians of the 1920s and 1930s – has been an essential dimension of every expression of fascism.
Likewise, the slogans slung about in Valencia in October 2012 – with demonstrators urged to chant at the chancellor’s effigy, “You will love money above all else” and “You will honor the banks and the Bank” – had the unmistakably foul odor of the old mantras about “the golden calf” and the “cosmopolitan plutocracy.”
People have finally come to understand that anti-Americanism, born on the extreme right and fed, in Germany, for example, by the philosophy of Martin Heidegger and his acolytes, is a fixture of fascism.
It is now time for us to understand that the same is true of Germanophobia.
In France, it appeared with the French anti-Semitic novelist and activist Maurice Barrès, who saw in the philosophy of Immanuel Kant a vehicle for the “Jewification” of European minds.
It triumphed with Charles Maurras’ Action Française and its protracted war with “Jewish and Germanic abstractions.”
And it culminated with the red-brown cells that, even today, on sites that I prefer not to mention, offer “grub” and a “hideout” for persons willing to “bump off” the “bosses” on the chancellor’s “payroll.”
The history of ideas has its logic, reason, and folly, its unconscious and its trajectory.
It is both futile and dangerous to deny any of them.
That is why, today, it is critically important, in the face of a dark force that is rising, swelling, and unfurling in Europe, to defend Angela Merkel.
Angela Merkel Meets the World
At long last, Angela Merkel is Germany’s new – and first woman – Chancellor.
Although continuity will remain the hallmark of foreign policy, Germany’s international engagement under Merkel will sound and feel different from that under Gerhard Schroeder’s leadership.
Schroeder came to power seven years ago representing a new generation whose formative experience was not the Cold War, European integration, and transatlantic friendship, but German unification and the restoration of national sovereignty.
For him and the team that took over after Helmut Kohl’s 16-year reign, Germany had become a normal country, no different from other European heavyweights like France or Britain.
Indeed, one of Schroeder’s first major foreign-policy experiences was the EU summit of 1999, where the leaders of France and Britain played rough with the newcomer from Berlin.
The lesson that Schroeder drew was to insist that Germany could no longer be taken for granted and would demand a role commensurate to its size and weight.
Self-assertion became the watchword of German foreign policy.
Thus, when Schroeder claimed special circumstances for Germany’s failure to meet the budgetary ceilings of the European Union’s Stability and Growth Pact, he seemed to be arguing that the restrictions should apply only to smaller countries, not to the big players.
When he rightly opposed America’s war against Iraq, the pride of standing up to the world's only superpower was palpable.
When he established a close personal and political relationship with Russian President Vladimir Putin, he signaled to the world – and to the EU’s sensitive new Eastern European members – that Germany’s foreign policy would no longer be constrained by the past.
In fairness, it should be acknowledged that it was under Schroeder that Germany shed hesitations to deploy soldiers abroad.
His support for international crisis missions in Kosovo, Bosnia, or Afghanistan required considerable political courage and made Germany one of the major contributors to international stability efforts.
To have removed the issue from domestic ideological controversy ranks as a major achievement of Schroeder’s tenure.
But it was also meant to convey that Germany had grown up into a proper international power.
With Merkel, the substance of Germany’s foreign policy will change little, but the assertive style will be muted.
American leaders will welcome her election as proof that the estrangement in bilateral relations is over.
But that alienation already largely ended earlier this year, when the Bush administration realized that allies are good to have and that Germany is an important one.
Merkel will reintroduce the warmth that has been missing under Schroeder, but she will not become America’s yes-woman.
Nor will she abandon special relations with Russia, to which every German chancellor since Adenauer has attached major importance.
But she has already made clear that Germany’s neighbors to the East will have no reason not feel bypassed.
She may even want to confirm that message by making her first official trip abroad not to Paris but to Warsaw or Vilnius.
On the European project, she is as committed to integration as her predecessors have been.
She will continue to emphasize close relations with France because there is no alternative; Britain, absent from the euro zone and the Schengen border regime, remains the odd man-in of the EU.
But there will be no new initiatives on integration until leaders in the countries that rejected the Constitutional Treaty are ready for a new try.
Then Merkel will be in a key position to add weight to a new effort for moving the EU forward.
She will continue to favor the eventual admission of the Balkan states, but she has left no doubt of her opposition to full membership for Turkey, which is the major substantive change from the Schroeder era (although her government will not block the start of negotiations in early October).
In fact, there is very little Merkel has to do after her election to make her mark on foreign policy; the visible change of style will suffice, at least at first.
In any case, she will have her hands full pushing through the economic reforms for which she will be elected and which are her top priority.
There are indications that Germany is finally emerging from years of economic stagnation, not least thanks to the reforms started under Schroeder.
At home, Merkel can hope to reap the rewards.
Abroad, Merkel has no need to demonstrate that Germany is a big country in Europe; her partners are fully aware of this.
But it is also more than just a normal country: Germany remains central to holding together the two international institutions that will continue to assure its well-being, the European Union and the Atlantic alliance.
There are some indications that Merkel is more aware of this then Schroeder was.
One can only hope that this recognition will serve as her guidepost when tough decisions must be made and changes in style alone will not be enough.
Angela Merkel’s Vision Thing
CAMBRIDGE – As Europe struggles to save the euro, the chorus of complaints about weak leadership in the world’s major economies grows louder.
Many have singled out German Chancellor Angela Merkel for failing to promote a vision of Europe similar to that of her predecessor and mentor, Helmut Kohl.
Are the critics right?
Part of what effective leaders do is communicate a vision that gives meaning to policies and inspires others to support these policies (and those who propose them).
It is one of the ways in which leaders help to create shared objectives and energize common action.
Usually, such a vision provides a scenario for the future that is meant to encourage change, though it may also portray the status quo – or the past – as attractive, thereby encouraging resistance to change.
Either way, without a vision, it is difficult to lead others anywhere.