When medical expenses constituted only a small percentage of income, as was typically the case 50 years ago, an egalitarian approach to healthcare was a small extravagance.
The direct and indirect costs were relatively minor and affordable.
But as health expenses start taking up a third of national income, healthcare socialism starts becoming just plain Marxism: to each according to his needs.
Even China’s authoritarian capitalism will someday feel the pressure, as its rural populations, who currently have little access to doctors or hospitals, eventually explode with discontent.
One often hears about rising healthcare costs in the context of future government budget projections, with old-age health costs expected to dominate growth in government expenditures in coming years.
But a careful look at the projections by, say, the US Congressional Budget Office, show that the aging of our societies is only a part of the problem, and not the larger part.
The real issue is whether societies are willing to provide elderly people with equal access to ever newer and improved medical techniques.
A change on the horizon that will exacerbate current frictions is the growing importance of individualized health care.
For most of modern history, relatively inexpensive public health precautions, such as providing clean drinking water and routine vaccinations, have been the main factor pushing up life expectancy.
Public health measures have trumped the importance of individual care.
But today, the balance is shifting.
Heart operations are already a major factor in extending life in many rich countries.
Sophisticated X-ray diagnostic techniques such as CT scans make it possible to detect many cancers at a treatable stage.
Under-60 patients are becoming more important as newer artificial joints prove their capacity to withstand more active lifestyles.
At $6,000, the average cost of a hip replacement is only a thousandth the cost of what it supposedly took to implant a bionic arm, eye, and two legs on the fictional “The Six Million Dollar Man” in the popular mid-1970’s TV show.
Of course, hip replacement patients don’t get super-human speed, strength, and vision – at least not yet.
If Tour de France officials think they have big problems now with steroids, just wait ten years.
In principle, greater use of market mechanisms to allocate health care can slow or even temporarily reverse the rise in healthcare costs.
But improved efficiency has its limits.
Ultimately, the evidence suggests that societies spend ever-larger fractions of their income on health over time, in contrast to food expenditures, for example, which fall as countries become wealthier.
Spending pressures, in turn, lead to acceleration of innovation.
This raises long-term well being all around, but exacerbates short-term inequalities and frictions.
I am not arguing against healthcare capitalism, but warning that support will become fragile, far more so than for, say, globalization nowadays.
Most countries rely far too much on command and control, and provide far too few incentives for patients and providers to make efficient choices.
Nevertheless, it remains to be seen whether healthcare pressures will ultimately cause the current trend towards free (and freer) market capitalism to reverse, with a very large chunk of the economy reverting to a more socialist system.
Some societies might decide that it is better to be red than dead.
Better than Basel
ROME – The Basel Accords – meant to protect depositors and the public in general from bad banking practices – exacerbated the downward economic spiral triggered by the financial crisis of 2008.
Throughout the crisis, as business confidence evaporated, banks were forced to sell assets and cut lending in order to maintain capital requirements stipulated by the Accords.
This lending squeeze resulted in a sharp drop in GDP and employment, while the sharp sell-off in assets ensured further declines.
My recent study with Jacopo Carmassi, Time to Set Banking Regulation Right, shows that by permitting excessive leverage and risk-taking by large international banks – in some cases allowing banks to accumulate total liabilities up to 40, or even 50, times their equity capital – the Basel banking rules not only enabled, but, ironically, intensified the crisis.
After the crisis, world leaders and central bankers overhauled banking regulations, first and foremost by rectifying the Basel prudential rules.
Unfortunately, the new Basel III Accord and the ensuing EU Capital Requirements Directive have failed to correct the two main shortcomings of international prudential rules – namely, their reliance on banks’ risk-management models for the calculation of capital requirements, and the lack of supervisory accountability.
The latest example highlighting this flaw is Dexia, the Belgian-French banking group that failed in 2011 – just after passing the European Banking Authority’s stress test with flying colors.
The stunning opacity of solvency ratios encouraged regulators to turn a blind eye to banks’ excessive risk-taking.
The problem is that the Basel capital rules – whether Basel I, II, or III – are of no help in separating the weak banks from the sound ones.
Indeed, more often than not, the banks that failed or had to be rescued in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis had solvency ratios higher than those of banks that remained standing without assistance.
Compounding the problem, the diversity in banks’ capital ratios also indicates a dramatic distortion of the international playing field, as increasingly competitive conditions in financial markets have led to national discretion in applying the rules.
Meanwhile, the opacity of capital indicators has made market discipline impossible to impose.
Thus, large banks are likely to continue to hold too little capital and to take excessive risks, raising the prospect of renewed bouts of financial instability.
In order to overcome these shortcomings in international banking regulations, three remedies are needed.
First, capital requirements should be set as a straightforward ratio of common equity to total assets, thereby abandoning all reference to banks’ own risk-management models.
The new capital ratio should be raised to 7-10% of total assets in order to dampen risk-taking by bankers and minimize the real economic impact of large-scale deleveraging following a loss of confidence in the banking system.
Second, new capital ratios with multiple and decreasing capital thresholds, which trigger increasingly intrusive corrective action, should serve as the basis for a new system of mandated supervisory action.
Supervisors should be bound by a presumption that they will act.
They could argue that action is not necessary in a specific case, but they would have to do so publicly, thus becoming accountable for their inaction.
In order to eradicate moral hazard, the system must have a resolution procedure to close banks when their capital falls below a minimum threshold.
Finally, solvency rules should be complemented by an obligation that banks issue a substantial amount of non-collateralized debt – on the order of 100% of their capital – that is convertible into equity.
These debentures should be designed to create a strong incentive for bank managers and shareholders to issue equity rather than suffer conversion.
These three measures, if applied to all banks, would eliminate the need for special rules governing liquidity or funding (which would remain open to supervisory review, but not to binding constraints). There would also be no need for special restrictions on banking activities and operations.
The most remarkable feature of the policy deliberations on prudential banking rules so far has been their delegation to the Basel Committee of Banking Supervisors and the banks themselves, both of which have a vested interest in preserving the existing system.
Governments and parliaments have an obligation to launch a thorough review of the Basel rules, and to demand revisions that align them with the public interest.
Betting the House
Homeowners around the world effectively gamble on home prices.
Their risks today are often big due to real estate bubbles in such glamour cities as London, Paris, Madrid, Rome, Istanbul, Moscow, Shanghai, Hangzhou, Sydney, Melbourne, Vancouver, Los Angeles, Las Vegas, Boston, New York, Washington, D.C., and Miami. Those bubbles may keep expanding, or may burst, leaving many homeowners mired in debt.
The risk to home prices in the aftermath of a bubble is real and substantial.
In the last cycle of real estate busts, real (inflation-corrected) home prices fell 46% in London in 1988-95, 41% in Los Angeles in 1989-1997, 43% in Paris in 1991-98, 67% in Moscow in 1993-97, and 38% in Shanghai in 1995-1999.
All of these drops were eventually reversed, and all of these markets have boomed recently.
But this does not guarantee that future drops will have a similar outcome.
On the contrary, the future real value of our homes is fundamentally uncertain.
Most homeowners are not gambling for pleasure.
They are just buying real estate because they need it.
But, because they do nothing to protect themselves against their real estate price risks, they are unwitting gamblers.
In fact, home buyers in most countries do nothing to protect themselves – short of selling their homes – because there is nothing to be done.
A market for real estate derivatives that can help balance these risks is only just beginning to appear.
Well-developed markets for real estate derivatives would allow homeowners to kick the gambling habit.
A liquid, cash-settled futures market that is based on an index of home prices in a city would enable a homeowner living there to sell in a futures market to protect himself.
If home prices fall sharply in that city, the drop in the value of the home would be offset by an increase in the value of the futures contract.
That is how advanced risk management works, as financial professionals know.
But the tools needed to hedge such risks should be made available to everyone.
Attempts to set up derivatives markets for real estate have -- so far -- all met with only limited success.
In May 2003, Goldman, Sachs & Co. began offering cash-settled covered warrants on house prices in the United Kingdom, based on the Halifax House Price Index and traded on the London Stock Exchange.
In October 2004, Hedgestreet.com began offering “hedgelets” on real estate prices in US cities – contracts that pay out if the rate of increase in home prices based on the OFHEO Home Price Index falls within a pre-specified range.
My former student Allan Weiss and I have been campaigning since 1990 for better risk management institutions for real estate.
In 1999, we co-founded a firm, Macro Securities Research, LLC, to promote the development of such institutions, working with the American Stock Exchange to create securities that would allow people to manage real estate as well as other risks.
These will be long-term securities that pay regular dividends, like stocks, whose value is tied – either positively or negatively ­– to a real estate price index.
Early this month, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange announced that it will also work with us to explore the development of futures markets in US metropolitan-area home prices.
We hope to facilitate the creation of such markets in other countries as well.
Because even many financially sophisticated homeowners will find direct participation in derivative markets too daunting, the next stage in the development of real estate risk management will be to create suitable retail products.
For example, the derivative markets should create an environment that encourages insurers to develop home equity insurance, which insures homeowners not just against a bust but also against drops in the market value of the home.
Such insurance ­should be attractive to homeowners if it is offered as an add-on to their existing insurance policies.
Derivatives markets for real estate should also facilitate the creation of mortgage loans that help homeowners manage risks by, say, reducing the amount owed if a home’s value drops.
Such products should appeal to homebuyers when the mortgage is first issued.
Insurance companies and mortgage companies ought to be willing to offer such products if they can hedge the home-price risks in liquid derivative markets.
Creating these retail products will require time, experimentation, and some real innovation.
Over the next decade, we might expect that a broad spectrum of insurance, lending, and securities companies will become involved.
As these retail products start to take shape, they will spur increased activity in the derivative markets.
As the new risk-management industry develops, its components will gradually boost each other.
These developments offer hope that current and future homeowners will be spared the agony of worrying about the vicissitudes of the real estate market.
They will be able to leave the game of real estate speculation to professionals and rest assured about the value that they have accumulated in their homes.
That is good news, because there is a pretty strong chance that we are going to see major price declines in a number of cities around the globe in the next few years, and these price declines will cause real pain to many homeowners.
But if the momentum toward better risk management continues, it will be the last real estate cycle in which homeowners are unable to protect themselves.
Betting With the House’s Money
Many people have been asking why the dollar hasn’t crashed yet.
Will the United States ever face a bill for the string of massive trade deficits that it has been running for more than a decade?
Including interest payments on past deficits, the tab for 2006 alone was over $800 billion dollars – roughly 6.5% of US gross national product.
Even more staggeringly, US borrowing now soaks up more than two-thirds of the combined excess savings of all the surplus countries in the world, including China, Japan, Germany, and the OPEC states.
Foreigners are hardly reaping great returns on investing in the US.
On the contrary, they typically get significantly lower returns than Americans get on their investments abroad.
In an era in which stock and housing prices are soaring, the central banks of Japan and China are holding almost two trillion dollars worth of low-interest bonds.
A very large share of these are US treasury bonds and mortgages.
This enormous subsidy to American taxpayers is, in many ways, the world’s largest foreign aid program.
If America’s competitive position is so weak, what magic is holding up the dollar?
Most sober analysts have long been projecting a steady trend decline in the dollar against the currencies of America’s trading partners, especially in Asia and emerging markets.
So why hasn’t more adjustment taken place already?
The first answer, of course, is that the trade-weighted dollar has fallen – by more than 15% in real terms since its peak in early 2002.
Yet the US deficits have persisted, and even risen, since then.
The real driving force has been two-fold.
First and foremost, America’s government and consumers have been engaged in a never-ending consumption binge.
On the consumer side, this is quite understandable.
With over 80% home ownership, the epic boom in housing prices of the last ten years has spread deep into the American middle class.
Equity holdings are somewhat more concentrated, but many middle class Americans have still benefited indirectly through their pension funds.
Overall, after almost 25 years of stunning prosperity, punctuated by only two mild recessions, most Americans feel pretty confident about their economic situation.
Unemployment is at a cyclical low, and the economy appears to be less volatile than at any point in modern history.
So it is not surprising that private consumption continues to hold up even as US economic growth has shifted into lower gear.
People have enjoyed such huge capital gains over the past decade that most feel like gamblers on a long winning streak.
By now, they see themselves as playing with the house’s (or their houses’) money.
It is less easy to rationalize why the US government is continuing to run budget deficits despite a cyclical boom.
When a fiscally responsible government launches a war, it typically cuts back on other domestic expenditures and raises taxes.
The Bush administration did the opposite.
It may not be good economics, but the strategy proved to be good politics, for a time.
Unfortunately, it is unlikely the new Democratic majority in Congress will do much about it.
Of course, it takes two to tango.
In order for the US economy to run deficits with the world, other countries must be willing to spin off a counterbalancing supply of savings.
Ben Bernanke, the US Federal Reserve chairman, once famously pinned the whole US current account deficit on a “global savings glut.”
But it would be more accurate to say that there is global investment shortfall, with investment trending downwards despite the upward trend in global growth.
This investment shortfall is due to many factors, but perhaps the main one is that there are substantial medium-term institutional roadblocks to investment in many developing countries, where long-term returns now seem to be by far the highest.
The net result is that money is being parked temporarily in low-yield investments in the US, although this cannot be the long-run trend.
What then is future of the dollar?
As long as the status quo persists, with strong global growth and stunning macroeconomic stability, the US can continue to borrow and run trade deficits without immediate consequence.
Over time, the dollar will still decline, but perhaps by no more than a couple of percent per year.
Nevertheless, it is not hard to imagine scenarios in which the dollar collapses.
Nuclear terrorism, a slowdown in China, or a sharp escalation of violence in the Middle East could all blow the lid off the current economic dynamic.
In principle, one can also think of scenarios in which the dollar shoots up, but overall these seem less likely.
In sum, the fact that the US trade balance has defied gravity for so many years has made it possible for the dollar to do so, too.
But some day, the US may well have to pay the bill for its spendthrift ways.
When that day arrives, Americans had better pray that their creditors will be as happy to accept dollars as they are now.
Beware of Smiling Bears
WARSAW – Remember the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA), aimed at enshrining “commonly-shared values” between Russia and the European Community? Signed in 1994 during the hopeful early days of Russia’s first-ever democracy, the PCA was bolstered in 1999 by the creation of the European Union’s Common Security Defense Policy (CSDP).
Both sides often refer to this desire to forge closer relations as a “strategic partnership.”
But as French President Nicolas Sarkozy and German Chancellor Angela Merkel meet Russian President Dmitri Medvedev in Deauville, it would be wise to recognize that the Kremlin appears to be changing the terms of this nascent relationship.
In the wake of Russia’s apparent departure from democratization during Vladimir Putin’s presidency, and of the wars in Chechnya and Georgia, the EU has adopted increasingly cautious language, sounding less optimistic about the prospects of a real partnership.
Kosachev and others do not believe that the EU is committed to serious talks on “hard” security, a Russian imperative – and with good reason.
How to deal with Russia on security issues – particularly on energy security – is one of the most divisive issues facing the EU.
Despite their commitment to speak to Russia with one voice, various EU countries negotiate with Russia bilaterally whenever possible (especially over lucrative business contracts), congregating under the EU umbrella only when necessary.
That gives Russia great scope to play one country against another.
Russia, meanwhile, harbors deep disappointment with the West for its actions after communism’s collapse. During the Gorbachev era, it was assumed that the West would stick to the essence of its Cold War containment policies.
Russians expected that, once their country was seen to be no longer confrontational and expansionist, it would be treated as a legitimate partner, not as a defeated enemy.
It would retain its status alongside the United States’ on the world stage, its territorial integrity would be unquestioned, and it would be left to manage its domestic affairs without outside interference or criticism.
Growing resentment toward the West has reinforced Russian leaders’ enduring penchant for the concepts of “Great Powers” and “spheres of influence,” and the belief that international relations is a zero-sum game, in which others’ gain is Russia’s loss.
Thus, they cannot accept that more robust multilateral institutions, confidence, cooperation, and interdependence could assure international security.
On the contrary, Russia’s loss of superpower status is completely unacceptable.
Economic growth during the Putin years, combined with the defeat of Georgia – which was regarded in Russia as the beginning of a great political comeback – provided the confidence needed to embrace efforts to re-model the transatlantic security architecture.
Medvedev’s proposed transatlantic security treaty would enshrine the principle of avoiding external force to resolve national disputes, which would rule out international intervention in the conflicts affecting the northern Caucasus, including Chechnya.
The status quo would be reinforced further by the principle that no country may increase its security to the detriment of another. But it is unclear who decides what is detrimental.
Worse, the freedom to join military treaties, stipulated in the Helsinki Accords of 1975 and in other major international agreements like the Charter of Paris for a New Europe or the Charter for European Security, is ominously omitted. The expansion of military alliances, such as NATO, would be declared a threatening measure.
Europe should react to this Russian proposal, first, by acknowledging that Russia has a critical role to play in transatlantic security, and that it should be treated not only with caution, but also with respect.
Third, the idea implicit in Medvedev’s plan – that Russia should have veto power over all security-related decisions of NATO or the EU – must be rejected.
Given that Russia’s own new military doctrine presents NATO as a potential threat, its leaders can logically claim that NATO enlargement undermines Russian security.
But no treaty should be signed so long as the sincerity of Russia’s commitment to the norms of international behavior remains in doubt.
Beyond Fukushima
VIENNA – Nuclear power has become safer since the devastating accident one year ago at Fukushima, Japan.
It will become safer still in the coming years, provided that governments, plant operators, and regulators do not drop their guard.
The accident at Fukushima resulted from an earthquake and tsunami of unprecedented severity.
But, as the Japanese authorities have acknowledged, human and organizational failings played an important part, too.
For example, Japan’s nuclear regulatory authority was not sufficiently independent, and oversight of the plant operator, TEPCO, was weak.
At the Fukushima site, the backup power supply, essential for maintaining vital safety functions such as cooling the reactors and spent fuel rods, was not properly protected.
Training to respond to severe accidents was inadequate.
There was a lack of integrated emergency-response capability at the site and nationally.
Human and organizational failings are not unique to Japan.
Fukushima was a wake-up call for all countries that use nuclear power.
It prompted serious soul-searching and recognition that safety can never be taken for granted anywhere.
Key causes of the accident have been identified.
Indeed, governments, regulators, and plant operators around the world have begun learning the right lessons.
A robust international nuclear safety action plan is being implemented.
As a result, the likelihood of another disaster on the scale of Fukushima has been reduced.
What, exactly, has changed?
Perhaps most importantly, the worst-case assumptions for safety planning have been radically revised.
At Fukushima, the reactors withstood a magnitude 9.0 earthquake – far more powerful than they were designed to tolerate.
But the plant was not designed to withstand the 14-meter-high tsunami waves that swept over its protective sea wall less than an hour later.
In the aftermath of Fukushima, defenses against multiple severe natural disasters, including earthquakes and tsunamis, are being strengthened at nuclear facilities all over the world.
Measures are being taken to improve preparedness for prolonged power outages, protect backup power sources, and ensure the availability of water for cooling even under severe accident conditions.
Global nuclear safety standards are being reviewed.
National and international emergency-response capabilities are being upgraded.
Plant operators and national regulators are being scrutinized more critically.
Countries are opening their plants to more –amp#160;and more thorough – international safety reviews.
Despite the accident, global use of nuclear power looks set to grow steadily in the next 20 years, although at a slower rate than previously forecast.
The reasons for this have not changed: rising demand for energy, alongside concerns about climate change, volatile fossil-fuel prices, and the security of energy supplies.
It will be difficult for the world to achieve the twin goals of ensuring sustainable energy supplies and curbing greenhouse gases unless nuclear power remains an important part of the global energy mix.
The International Atomic Energy Agency expects at least 90 additional nuclear-power reactors to join the 437 now in operation globally by 2030.
Although some countries abandoned or scaled back their nuclear energy plans after Fukushima, major users of nuclear power, such as China, India, and Russia, are going forward with ambitious expansion plans.
Many other countries, mainly in the developing world, are considering introducing nuclear power.
Nuclear safety is of the utmost importance to both established users and newcomers.
It matters to countries that have decided to phase out nuclear power, because their plants will continue to operate for decades and will need to be decommissioned, with nuclear waste stored safely.
And it matters to countries that are firmly opposed to nuclear power, as many of them have neighbors with nuclear-power plants.
Countries planning new nuclear-power programs must recognize that achieving their goals is a challenging, long-term undertaking.
They need to invest considerable time and money in training scientists and engineers, establishing genuinely independent, well-funded regulators, and putting in place the necessary technical infrastructure.
Some countries still have shortcomings in this regard.
Nonetheless, contrary to popular perception, nuclear power has a good overall safety record.
New reactors being built today incorporate significantly enhanced safety features, both active and passive, compared to the Fukushima generation of reactors.
But, in order to regain and maintain public confidence, governments, regulators, and operators must be transparent about the benefits and risks of nuclear power – and honest when things go wrong.
The fact that an accident such as Fukushima was possible in Japan, one of the world’s most advanced industrial countries, is a reminder that, when it comes to nuclear safety, nothing can be taken for granted.
Complacency can be deadly.
The safety improvements seen in the past 12 months can only be a start.
We must not slip back into a “business as usual” approach as Fukushima recedes from memory.
Beyond Pandemics
NEW YORK – The World Health Organization has now officially declared the H1N1 flu virus to be a global pandemic.
Governments, international organizations, and people around the world are rightly focused on fighting it.
The speed with which the H1N1 virus has spread to almost every continent highlights our mutual interdependence.
Nowadays, the impact of disease in one country is ultimately felt by all.
Any effective response, therefore, must be grounded in a sense of global solidarity and enlightened self-interest.
We must recognize, yet again, that we are all in this together.
When a new disease sweeps the world, access to vaccines and anti-viral medicines cannot be limited to those who can pay for them.
Wealthy nations cannot hope to remain healthy if poorer nations do not.
Virus samples and information must be shared openly and quickly.
Governments and major pharmaceutical companies must be sure that poorer nations receive the medical supplies they need.
Even as we cope with today’s challenge, however, we must look ahead.
Beyond this pandemic, there almost certainly lurks another down the road – potentially far more serious.
The same principles of solidarity must guide us as we mobilize to meet the other health challenges that afflict the world populations, and the poorest in particular.
Around the world, one woman dies every minute in childbirth.
More than a billion people continue to suffer from neglected tropical diseases – often easy to prevent and easy to control.
Just as we once eliminated smallpox, so can we eliminate others.
It also bears remembering that 60% of the world’s population dies of non-communicable illnesses such as cancer or heart disease.
That is why, in speaking about development and the stability of nations, we place such emphasis on health, particularly of the most vulnerable, and why, at a time of multiple crises, we will take up the issue of health this week in New York.
Continuing to invest in global health makes sense both in terms of lives and dollars saved.
Healthy people are more productive.
They take fewer days off work.
They live longer, go further in school, and tend to bear fewer and more prosperous children as they invest more in the children they do have.
Studies have shown that investments in health care can yield a six-fold economic return.
To offer but one example: the global impact of maternal and newborn deaths has been estimated at US$15 billion a year in lost productivity.
And yet, when hard times hit, spending on health is often among the first things to be cut.
During past recessions, especially in developing economies, the best care has tended to go to the wealthy; the poor, too often, have been left to fend for themselves.
But the social and economic health of any society depends on the physical health of all its members.
When governments cut back on primary health care for their poorer citizens, the entire society ultimately pays a high price.
Today, large parts of Africa, Latin America, and Asia have still not recovered from mistakes made during previous economic downturns.
Nothing is more important than investing in maternal health.
In the poorest countries, especially, women make up the fabric of society.
Disproportionately, they farm the land, carry the water, raise and educate the children, and care for the sick.
Investing in maternal health should thus be a high priority.
Yet, of all the Millennium Development Goals, maternal health is the slowest to be achieved.
As a result, worldwide mortality rates in 2005 were 400 maternal deaths per 100,000 live births – barely changed since 1990.
In Africa, the ratio is 900 per 100,000.
The harsh reality behind these figures is this: mothers, very often young, are dying for lack of what most of us take for granted in the twenty-first century – access to affordable health care.
Maternal health care is also a barometer of how well a health system functions.
If women have access to hospitals and clinics, they are less likely to die in childbirth.
These hospitals and clinics in turn reduce the burden of illness and deaths from other causes as well.
Failure to mobilize the resources and muster the political will to put an end to this senseless tragedy would be unforgivable.
We have made progress on so many other fronts.
We are within a few years of ending deaths from malaria.
Mass immunization has largely eliminated polio.
Thanks to new programs of oral rehydration and improved water and sanitation, we have seen marked gains in treating dysentery and other parasitic diseases, contributing to a 27% decline between 1990 and 2007 in mortality rates for children under five.
Yes, the world faces its first influenza pandemic in more than 40 years.
We must remain on guard against changes in the virus.
We must also be prepared for potentially different impacts in parts of the world where malnutrition, HIV/AIDS, and other serious health conditions are prevalent.
In short, we must remain vigilant and continue actively to manage this pandemic.
At the same time, the pandemic reminds us that we need to think and act beyond it.
Only by doing so can we truly protect our people, our countries, our economy, and our global society.
Beyond Revolutionary Disillusion
PRAGUE - All revolutions, in the end, turn from euphoria to disillusion.
In a revolutionary atmosphere of solidarity and self-sacrifice, people tend to think that when their victory is complete, paradise on Earth is inevitable.
Of course, paradise never comes, and – naturally - disappointment follows.
That seems to be the case in Ukraine today, as its people prepare to vote for a new parliament little more than a year after their successful Orange Revolution.
Post-revolutionary disillusion, especially after the revolutions against communism - and in Ukraine's case revolution against post-communism - is rooted in psychology.
New circumstances imposed new challenges for most people.
Formerly, the state decided everything, and many people, particularly in the middle and older generation, began to see freedom as a burden, because it entailed continuous decision-making.
I have sometimes compared this psychological ennui to my own post-prison situation: for years I yearned for freedom, but, when finally released, I had to make decisions all the time.
Confronted suddenly with many options every day, one starts to feel a headache, and sometimes unconsciously wants to return to prison.
This depression is probably inevitable.
But, on a societal scale, it is eventually overcome, as new generations grow up.
Indeed, 15 years after the disintegration of Soviet Union, a new catharsis seems underway, and Ukraine’s Orange Revolution was part of that.
As Ukraine so clearly shows, the process of self-liberation from communism was, by definition, associated with a gigantic privatization.
Naturally, members of the old establishment, with their inside knowledge and connections, gained much of the privatized property.
This "inevitable" process poisoned political life and the media, which led to a strange state of limited freedom and a mafia-like environment.
The shadings differed from country to country in the post-communist world, but the new generations rising in these societies now seem to be fed up with it.
Ukraine’s Orange Revolution, as well as Georgia’s Rose Revolution, seems to confirm this.
While revolutions in the late 1980’s and early 1990’s were directed against totalitarian communist regimes, nowadays they aim to get rid of this mafia-type post-communism.
But to make the change irreversible, a truly independent and incorruptible judiciary is essential.
Too often in politically connected cases, suspicions and charges of wrongdoing are not pursued to an unambiguous conclusion.
This is understandable: the communist justice system was manipulated to serve the regime, and thousands of judges cannot be replaced overnight.
Although it is clear that a return to the old Soviet Union is not possible, some blame Russian influence for the disillusion in Ukraine.
Yes, there are some alarming elements in Russian policy, mostly because Russia has never really known where it begins and where it ends.
It either owned or dominated many other nations, and now it is only with grudging reluctance dealing with the loss of them all.
Some of Russian President Vladimir Putin’s statements seem to recall the Soviet era with nostalgia.
Indeed, he recently called the disintegration of the Soviet Union a tragic mistake.
But Soviet nostalgia has far more to do with Russia’s traditional Great Power ambitions than with communism.
Russia, I believe, should clearly say – and the international community should clearly say to Russia – that it has defined borders that will not be questioned, because disputed borders lie at the core of most conflicts and wars.
On the other hand, I don’t want to demonize Putin.
He may lower oil prices for someone close to him, like Belarus’ dictator Alexander Lukashenko, and insist on a market price for someone else, but that’s basically all he can do.
I don't envision any serious conflict beyond that.
The promise of Western integration is one reason that conflict seems impossible, for it is a question of geography as much as shared values and culture.
Ukraine belongs to a united European political entity; the values that Ukraine endorses and that are embedded in its history are European to the core.
The Czech experience shows that implementing all of the European Union’s norms so as to be ready to qualify for membership takes some time.
But in principle, Ukraine can succeed as well.
Much the same is true for Ukraine and NATO.
Partnerships based on shared rules, standards, and values are the heartbeat of modern security.
Moreover, NATO in a way defines the sphere of a civilization, which of course doesn’t mean that NATO’s community is better than any other.
But it’s a community that is good to belong to – provided that people want it and that it makes historical sense for them.
NATO membership carries obligations, because situations may arise – and we have already experienced them – when NATO follows a United Nations appeal and conducts an out-of-area military intervention where, for example, genocide is being committed.
In other words, NATO membership, like EU membership, comes at a price.
However, I think that the advantages far outweigh any possible disadvantages.
It is up to Ukrainians to decide this for themselves and thus to overcome post-revolutionary disillusion.
Beyond the Death Penalty Debate
China’s decision to execute the head of its drug regulatory agency has rekindled international debate about capital punishment.
It is an age-old question, one that harks back to Plato, who in his “Laws” saw the need to punish by death those who commit egregious crimes.
Supporters of capital punishment usually put forward three arguments to justify state-sanctioned killing of those who take the life of another.
First, there is the old law of “an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth.”
In the words of Immanuel Kant, not some Texas governor, no other “penalty is capable of satisfying justice.”
Then there is a utilitarian argument: capital punishment deters many criminals from murder.
Furthermore, killing murderers prevents recidivism: if released from prison, they might kill again.
The third argument is also utilitarian, although of a lower quality: the state saves money by killing murderers instead of keeping them in prison for life at the expense of the community.
Abolitionists respond with two ethical arguments.
First, in a modern democracy, punishment must be not only retributive, but should also try to rehabilitate the criminal in order to enable him to live in society with other human beings.
But, while this is a compelling argument, those who know modern prisons recognize that many inmates are not susceptible to improvement – a fact that cannot be attributed only to conditions of detention.
The second ethical argument is based on the commandment “thou shalt not kill” which also enjoins the state from killing.
But this argument is undermined by the fact that the state can resort to lethal force to prevent serious crimes, or to fight a war or rebellion.
Opponents of the death penalty also rely on utilitarian arguments.
The death penalty is irreversible.
If a convict turns out to be innocent, his execution cannot be undone.
Moreover, abolitionists assail the deterrent effect of the death penalty.
Thucydides, in recounting the Athenians’ discussion of what penalty to impose on the rebellious Mytilenians, noted that “the death penalty has been laid down for many offenses, yet people still take risks when they feel sufficiently confident; it is impossible for human nature, once seriously set upon a certain course, to be prevented from following that course by the force of law or by any other means of intimidation whatsoever.”
Criminologists have shown, statistically, that in US states where convicts are executed, serious crimes have not diminished.
Other criminologists argue that this finding, if well-founded, should then apply to any criminal law: every day, criminal prohibitions are infringed; yet if we did not have such prohibitions, crimes would be even more rampant.
In their view, capital punishment serves at least to restrain the homicidal leanings of human beings.
So the death penalty debate boils down to an exchange of conflicting ethical and utilitarian views.
But we should not sit idly by and refrain from taking sides.
I, for one, believe that the death penalty radically negates the doctrine of human rights, which is founded on respect for life and the dignity of human beings.
But, whether or not you oppose the death penalty, two lessons can be drawn from the debate.
First, the fight for human dignity and respect for life, as with any struggle for human rights, is set in motion and tenaciously pursued by members of civil society, by individuals more than by states.
It was a representative of the Age of Reason, Cesare Beccaria, who first advocated in 1764, in a few pages of a seminal booklet, the abolition of capital punishment.
Indeed, it is thanks to a few thinkers and activists that states have gradually moved away from age-old tenets.
As Tommaso Campanella, a great philosopher who spent much time in prison and was tortured because of his ideas, wrote a few centuries ago, “history is changed first by the tongue and then by the sword.”
Nowadays, it is associations such as Amnesty International and Hands Off Cain that push states to abolish capital punishment.
The second lesson is that the death penalty debate should not absorb all our attention.
If we intend to abolish the gallows, we should also fight for the prevention of crime and against the inhumanity of many prisons.
After all, what is the point of suggesting imprisonment as an alternative to electrocution, if inmates are subjected to inhuman and degrading treatment?
How can we ignore that a high number of inmates commit suicide – self-inflicted capital punishment – to escape the inhumanity of their imprisonment?
How can we ignore that many states today kill not only through legal punishment, but also by murdering and massacring in international or civil wars, or by allowing starvation?
In short, opposition to the death penalty cannot be an end in itself, for it is only one element of a more general fight for human dignity.
Beyond the Gaza Ceasefire
TEL AVIV – Finally, the long-sought truce between Israel and Hamas in the Gaza Strip has become a reality.
Reaching this uneasy state has not been easy.
For months, wise and responsible people had exhorted Israel to accept the ceasefire that the Hamas leadership in Gaza had proposed. But Israel’s government, using all kinds of pretexts, stubbornly resisted.
“A truce would weaken Palestinian President Abu Mazen,” officials claimed, as if the construction of new Israeli settlements in East Jerusalem and the refusal to dismantle previous illegal ones had not already weakened him.
Or they argued that “Hamas does not recognize the state of Israel,” as if other ceasefire agreements with the Arab states and the PLO in the last 60 years had been based on recognition of Israel, rather than on a simple ethical principle that has guided Israel for many years, namely to gain, for us and our enemies, a pause in hostilities.
In the end, however, logic prevailed over escapism and hesitation, a ceasefire was signed, and we can only regret all the time that was lost and the unnecessary suffering on both sides.
In this war, which has been going on for nearly a century, it is important to keep one principle in mind: the Palestinians are Israel’s neighbors and will live side by side with Israelis forever.
Because of this simple fact, the military considerations are very different from those in a conflict between countries that are distant from each other.
Memories of spilled blood, be it Israeli or Palestinian, remain vivid in the hearts of both peoples.
An immediate break in the hostilities is therefore more important than a chimerical long-term “capitulation.”
The launch of five Qassam rockets into Israel five days after the signing of the truce suggests its precariousness.
So can it last and evolve into something durable?
Opponents of the truce predict, – indeed, wish – that it will be short-lived.
But even skeptics nourish many hopes.
To be sure, if this new truce is merely technical, if efforts are not made to stabilize and consolidate it, it could become just one another in a long string of bitter episodes.
But all who had feared a “great Israeli offensive” in Gaza should make every effort to strengthen the truce and create a climate for relaxing tensions that could, with time, lead to a peace agreement with the Palestinian Authority.
So what should be done to bring this about?
Above all, border crossings between Israel and the Palestinian territories should be reopened for the sick, for students, and for families whose members were separated by the blockade.
Second, a generous (and, with time, growing) quota should be set for Palestinian laborers to work in Israel – indeed, they must be allowed to work in the very agricultural centers around Gaza which were the most affected by the rocket attacks.
Palestinians working in Israel are good for both sides, and better than the foreigners who come from distant lands and live an isolated life in Israel, solitary and under constant threat of expulsion.
Palestinian workers, who go back home every night, do not become alienated from their normal life.
Future workers from Gaza, having a moral right to earn their living in Israel, will become natural supporters of the maintenance of the truce.
Furthermore, past industrial projects that fell victim to the hostilities should be revived and made more legitimate in the eyes of Hamas through the participation of the Arab state.
The killing by Israel of Hamas terrorists in the West Bank should also be stopped – or at least limited as much as possible – and the Palestinian Authority should be permitted to deal with them in their own way.
Above all, we must assure that the armistice has its own dynamic.
In a state of war, people get used to the status quo and cannot imagine anything else. But when tensions relax, the idea of taking up arms again becomes painful and unsupportable inasmuch as it means a return to the familiar and terrible experience of suffering.
So this truce must be seen not as a piece of paper with some legal significance, but as a young plant that needs to be tended to, watered, nursed, and protected, so that it grows into a strong and robust tree that cannot be uprooted with an occasional Qassam rocket or a stray grenade.
Beyond the Gender Gap
Last Spring, The Economist trumpeted “womanpower” as 
 the
 driving force for the world economy.
But if Europe’s economy is to become more competitive and innovative, it is not enough that women enter the labor market in droves.
To reap the full fruits of women’s talents, they must be in more top jobs, too, both in the public and private sector.
Women in Western Europe have long since bridged the education gap with their male peers.
Women not only outnumber men at universities; they also outperform them, most notably in math, physics, and information science.
But female students’ academic achievements have not increased women’s presence in top jobs.
In Europe, the percent of women on corporate boards remains in single digits, as is true of the top ranks of government and academia.
While in the United States almost one out of five corporate officers are women, in mainland Europe the female to male ratio on company boards is one to twenty or worse.
The situation is only slightly better in science.
To cover the costs of aging and maintain its position as an economic power, Europe must increase overall labor participation considerably.
Not only can and must fathers assume a greater role in child rearing; a large part of homemaking is perfectly suitable to be met by the market.
As economists Ronald Schettkat and Richard Freeman have pointed out, career women do not necessarily work more hours per week than women with part-time jobs or stay-at-home moms.
Instead, they tend to outsource activities like grocery shopping, cooking, and cleaning.
If women in Europe work more hours in better quality jobs, it will stimulate demand for service jobs like cleaning and child care, thus reducing unemployment among low-skilled workers.
Moreover, the increased supply of high-quality female labor will not incur additional healthcare and pension costs, unlike labor immigration.
Women use those benefits anyway, whether they are stay-at-home moms or perform paid work outside the home.
Because people live longer and procreate less, raising and caring for children requires less of a parent’s life than it used to.
Women should be able to aspire to top jobs without squandering their fertility, and their success would encourage women in lower-ranking positions, because female managers tend to implement more gender-conscious hiring policies and serve as strong role models.
Obstacles to the professional advancement of educated women in Europe is rooted in corporate culture, gender biases, and stereotyping, rather than outright discrimination.
Group dynamics prevent company boards that consist solely of males from including women, even if members individually would support such a decision.
Moreover, those women who do reach higher-ranking positions are susceptible to a visibility-vulnerability spiral, owing to their minority status.
As long as women are perceived to be the weaker sex, men and women alike will project their own feelings of vulnerability onto the female candidate.
Such exclusionary group dynamics can be overcome only by attaining a critical mass of women in high-ranking positions.
The benefits of doing so would be enormous.
Studies show that companies with more women in senior management are more profitable than those with few women at the top.
Diversified management means better management.
Including more women in top positions, both in the public and private sector, changes decision-making processes fundamentally, because women tend to play down the importance of formalities and communicate directly, thereby overcoming organizational blockages.
A decisive pro-women strategy would thus create new momentum for Europe, allowing it to compete with the United States and Asia.
At the start of this year, Norway enacted legislation that requires that both sexes be represented by at least 40% on all corporate boards.
Companies that do not meet the new gender rules, which also apply to the public sector – risk being dissolved by court order.
Spain’s prime minister, José Zapatero, recently proposed similar standards for gender balance in business and politics.
Norway has set an excellent example – one that all of Europe should follow as the best way to transcend the culture of gender bias and stereotyping that is still prevalent in many companies and institutions.
But women, too, must adjust.
The reality is that top jobs require more than two workdays a week, and they do not coincide with school hours.
Assuming the responsibilities that have long belonged to men requires that women let go of the tasks that have prevented them from advancing beyond low-ranking positions. 
Beyond the Two-State Solution
NEW HAVEN – As the turmoil in the Middle East worsens, the fate of the Palestinians seems to have been put on the diplomatic back burner.
Indeed, the two-state solution has been on life-support since Israel’s 2014 Operation Protective Edge in Gaza, despite US Secretary of State John Kerry’s heroic efforts to revive it.
Many in the region, and elsewhere, now believe that it is dead.
But that raises a new problem.
With statehood seemingly out of reach, it will be only a matter of time before large numbers of Palestinians begin demanding the right to vote in Israeli elections.
That fight will be intense.
Israelis embraced the idea of two states for so long partly to keep Palestinian enfranchisement off the table.
How can the emerging order become more inclusive and legitimate?
Elements of a constructive way forward are hiding in plain sight.
Shortly after Israel signed its 1994 peace treaty with Jordan, then-Foreign Minister Shimon Peres proposed a cross-border joint economic zone to solidify the agreement. This became the Jordan Gateway Industrial Park (JGIP), a 346-acre special economic zone (SEZ) occupying the Israeli and Jordanian banks of the Jordan River near Haifa.
Championed by Israeli industrialist Shlomi Fogel, the JGIP has recently experienced marked growth.
Israel’s government contributed $34 million in 2013. Jordan, which has largely directed the project since 2001, provides ongoing fiscal support.
As with SEZs elsewhere around the world, the industries in the park are exempt from taxes and tariffs and enjoy other economic benefits.
This model should be expanded to include special political zones (SPZs) that erode divisions between Israelis and Palestinians.
SPZs could be created along the borders between Israel and the West Bank and Gaza. They should be more fully integrated than the JGIP, which depends on outside labor.
People in the SPZs would effectively constitute themselves as microcosms of a new order.
SPZ businesses could be owned by Israelis, Palestinians, or jointly, and workers would come from both sides of the divide.
But everyone would have to live in the SPZ, in which they would receive ownership shares and governance roles that would grow in proportion to the length of their tenure.
SPZs should enjoy high degrees of political autonomy from the Israeli government and the Palestinian Authority.
Residential infrastructure, from schools to municipal services and medical facilities, would be built in the zones, making them substantially self-sufficient.
Day-to-day governance would be left to residents, who would have an economic interest in the SPZ’s vitality, as well as incentives to sustain integrated binational communities.
Co-Op City, the largest residential complex in the United States, is a suggestive model.
Directed by a community-based corporation, Co-Op City contains schools, stores, and private law enforcement.
Such common-interest housing developments (CIDs) have grown in the US in recent years. Part of the attraction is enhanced participation.
In the Middle East, such arrangements could foster new forms of inter-ethnic cooperation.
Security would be a major concern.
Initially, SPZ perimeters would have checkpoints like those for crossing into the West Bank and Gaza.
But people would not need to come and go on a daily basis, an albatross that has bedeviled cross-border SEZs until now.
Autonomous forces, similar to those employed by CIDs and university campuses, would maintain internal order.
This differs from the JGIP, where Israel and Jordan maintain control over their respective spheres on either side of the Jordan River.
SPZs should be located near transportation on both sides of the border, but away from religious shrines, settlements, and strategically important military installations.
Possible sites include the once-planned Khaddourie industrial park between Tulkarem in the West Bank and Herzliya, and the Karni Industrial Zone outside Gaza City.
The idea need not be sold to electorates or extremists to go forward. Nor need it uproot people.
SPZs will be attractive to those who are hungry for constructive alternatives to the prevailing political stagnation and the inexorable, demography-driven drift toward Israeli apartheid.
Those who move into SPZs would be actively committed to making them work.
If the early SPZs succeed, there will be pressure to create others.
Indeed, cross-border SPZs might eventually be replicated within the occupied territories and in Israel proper, including cities like Ramallah and Tel Aviv.
Much will depend on the communities that the residents create. But outsiders can help.
As with the JGIP, SPZs would provide opportunities for investors from the region and beyond to contribute to, and profit from, peace.
They would receive local tax breaks, and maybe also support from their own governments.
The US could take the lead, as it has done with SEZs in Egypt and Jordan.
Governments and philanthropists could provide seed grants.
As with the JGIP, the goal should be to model best practices that others will want to imitate.
There are already serious players poised to become SPZ entrepreneurs.
Fogel belongs to Breaking the Impasse (BTI), a group of prominent Palestinian and Israeli business leaders committed to advancing peace.
Established by Palestinian magnate Munib al-Masri and Israeli tech billionaire Yossi Vardi in July 2012, BTI has some 300 members, whose companies account for at least 30% of Israeli and Palestinian GDP.
In other words, they have the influence and resources to instigate a first wave of SPZs.
The first SPZs must demonstrate that a marriage of economics and politics can induce collaboration that would not be possible otherwise.
Israel’s government and the Palestinian Authority must play facilitating roles.
But they will mostly be in the back seat of a venture driven by entrepreneurs, external friends of regional peace, and – most important – the individual Palestinians and Israelis who make the sweat-equity commitment to become a new kind of pioneer for peace.
If they succeed, the death of the two-state solution might prove to be a blessing in disguise.
Big Brother Google?
MOSCOW – “Google violates its ‘don’t be evil’ motto.”
To Google’s credit, if you Google that sentence, you can find reference to a debate on that claim that I took part in recently.
As it happens, I have a complex relationship with Google.
I have fed at its trough many times – as a personal guest; as an advisory board member of Stop Badware, an NGO it sponsors; and as a speaker at its events.
I also sit on the board of 23andMe, co-founded by the wife of Google co-founder Sergey Brin. 
But I also sit on the boards of Yandex in Russia, one of a small number of companies around the world who beat Google in their local markets, and of WPP, a worldwide advertising/marketing company famous for its rivalry with Google.
Finally, I’m suspicious of concentrations of power of any kind.
So I welcomed the chance to clarify my thinking.
I took the con side of the debate: Google does not violate its motto.
However, I do think there is a danger that someday it could.
The danger lies in the concentration of information – arguably a concentration of power – that Google represents.
Google doesn’t merely point users to existing information on the Web; it also collects information that it doesn’t share about its users’ behavior.
If you can use patterns in Google searches to track flu outbreaks and predict a movie’s commercial prospects, can you also use it to forecast market movements or even revolutions?
Even if Google uses personal information only for their benefit (whatever that means), it represents an attractive target for governments.
In fact, Google generally fights government requests for personal information.
(It was Yahoo, not Google, that gave personal information to China’s government, which then jailed a blogger.)
Google has become a de facto gatekeeper of information, to the extent that if your site is not highly ranked by Google, you are like the tree falling in the forest with no one to hear it.
It doesn’t matter that people seeking information are free to bypass Google and use other tools; they don’t. 
So how does information equal power?
The active power that information provides is typically the threat of exposure.
Such information gives you power primarily in a secretive, opaque world where access to information is limited. 
But generally, the free flow of information reduces the concentration of power.
So, rather than suppressing or regulating the information that Google uncovers, we are better off making it more freely available.
A Google that is accountable to its users – searchers, advertisers, investors, and governments – is likely to be a better outfit that does more good in today’s relatively open market.
In short, there is no regulatory system that I trust more than the current messy world of conflicting interests.
Whatever short-term temptations it faces – to manipulate its search results, use private information, or throw its weight around – Google, it is clear, could lose a lot by succumbing to them in a world where its every move is watched.
Meanwhile, Google is not merely avoiding evil; it actively fights against it.  
For example, Google fights censorship – by doing, not by shouting.
Rather than stand on the sidelines and proclaim censorship evil, it is picking its way through the landmines in China – competing with a politically well-connected rival and politely letting its users know that they aren’t always getting the whole picture.
In short, Google is changing expectations about what people can know – even in the United States, where formal censorship is absent, but government obfuscation, opaque corporations, and the like are not.
Moreover, in countries where Google is criticized for blocking access to information, it points out the information’s absence when something is blocked – letting people know that it exists but that they can’t have access to it.
On the other hand, every time someone in China Googles something and gets an answer – a product’s good and bad points, the details about someone the government does not like – he must wonder, “Why can’t I get this kind of information about everything?”
With Google, people start to expect answers about everything .
A little transparency inevitably leads to more.
Rather than demand an end to censorship now – an impossible dream – Google is working to make that happen by eroding government control over information.
Moreover, from a purely practical point of view, Google makes the world more efficient.
Buyers and sellers can find one another, schoolchildren can find information needed for their homework, and sick people can find health information.
The real threat of evil, I think, lies in the temptations of “international governance” – say, a sinister multilateral government body called the World Information Center.
Nice as it sounds, the reality is likely to be ridden with bureaucracy, susceptible to control by the worst of the world’s governments rather than its best ones, and incapable of innovation.  
Take, for example, ICANN, the body that sets policy for the Domain Name System.
I was its founding chairman, and I don’t think anyone considers it a success.
Its saving grace is that it is widely considered illegitimate and therefore has little power.
By contrast, Google is effective at what it does, and therefore has the legitimacy of results.