The 1951 United Nations Convention on Refugees recognized a right of asylum for those unable to return to their country of origin owing to a “well founded” fear of persecution.
In practice, however, it has never been simple to distinguish between economic and political migrants, because political persecution usually includes economic restrictions.
The Jews fleeing pogroms in Eastern Europe at the end of the nineteenth century, or Hitler’s Germany in the 1930s, were both economic and political migrants.
So were the East African Asians forced out of Uganda in the 1960s.
But the number of those identified as political refugees with a right of asylum was much smaller than those whose chief motive was to improve their economic lot.
This reflected the relatively settled political conditions of the world of the 1950s.
Back then, the countries from which refugees are now escaping were under colonial or quasi-colonial rule, while homegrown dictatorships then emerged to preserve order in the old empires’ successor states.
It was the collapse of these brutal systems in the wake of the United States-led invasion of Iraq in 2003 and the Arab Spring of 2011 that created the current refugee crisis.
The refugees’ flight from Syria and other war-ravaged countries comes up against legal regimes that are poorly adapted to cope with it.
The European Union severely restricts labor from non-member countries, but allows free movement of labor within its single market.
This is justified by the fiction that the citizens of EU countries are members of a single polity.
The right of Greeks to work in Germany is no different from that of Parisians to work in Marseilles.
But the EU is an incomplete state – one that may never be completed.
An obvious indicator of this is that it lacks a fiscal-transfer mechanism to reduce the pressure of emigration from poor to rich areas.
In the absence of this, it is assumed that free economic migration within the EU will produce little net movement of populations.
The implicit model is that of the “guest worker” who comes and goes; in practice, a sizeable share of economic migrants from poorer parts of Europe stay in their country of destination, fueling an increase in support for anti-immigrant parties.
The asylum system is totally unprepared to deal with the new generation of refugees, who are ineligible under the existing framework, because they are fleeing not from specific acts of persecution, but from the disintegration of their states.
They can be provided “humanitarian protection” or be granted “discretionary leave to remain” for a short period; but then they can be deported as illegal immigrants.
So what is to be done?
Temporary residence status, in Europe or outside, would be reasonable if a rapid return to normalcy in the refugees’ countries of origin was a realistic prospect.
In Syria, for example, it is not: Although politicians and commentators talk about stemming the flood at the source, no peace plan is in sight.
The US and Russia back different sides.
The West cannot accept the possibility that the Assad dictatorship, however brutal, may be the least bad option on offer.
So the civil war will continue, the number of refugees in transit camps will increase, and more of them will risk their lives to enter leaky Fortress Europe.
Jean-Claude Juncker, the president of the European Commission, has proposed distributing 160,000 of the refugees currently in Europe across the EU’s 28 member states.
Germany is prepared to take far more.
Indeed, Chancellor Angela Merkel has bravely asserted “the fundamental right to asylum for the politically persecuted with no upper limit; and that goes for refugees who come to us from the hell of civil war.”
But other European leaders, faced with the rise of extremist, anti-immigrant parties, have not endorsed Merkel’s view; and the refugees still have to get to Germany through countries like Hungary, which are erecting walls and other border defenses to keep them out.
The truth is that the West cannot or will not absorb refugees in the numbers needed; and it has no solution to the problem of failed states.
This means that, apart from doling out humanitarian aid to those in refugee camps, it has no policy.
Unless and until that changes, the tragedy can only deepen.
The Limits of the German Promised Land
MUNICH – Migrants seeking to escape poverty and war are flowing into Europe by the hundreds of thousands.
They are still mostly being welcomed, but the capacity of the reception centers is fast reaching its limits.
To staunch the flow of migrants over the Balkan route, Hungary has imposed controls on its borders – and was promptly followed by Germany, Austria, Slovakia, Croatia, Slovenia, the Czech Republic, the Netherlands, and Poland.
Germany is the migrants’ most favored destination.
So far this year, half of all asylum applications in the European Union have been filed there, although the country accounts for only 16% of the EU’s population.
By September, Germany had probably received some 400,000 applications or more, with the dramatic increase in migration flows since summer and before the reinstatement of border controls expected to push the number of asylum-seekers to 800,000 this year.
Moreover, regular immigration to Germany could again reach the 400,000 mark, as in 2014.
The total would represent net immigration of 1.5% of the resident population – an extremely high proportion by historical and international standards.
The reason for the migrants’ strong preference for Germany is that the country, together with Sweden, has Europe’s most liberal asylum system and allocates particularly high levels of funding to accommodate the newcomers.
Between €1,000 ($1,120) and €1,200 per person per month is being transferred to the municipalities to cover the costs of accommodating them.
The value of the benefits that the immigrants receive in Germany is a multiple of the wages they can earn in their home countries (if they manage to find a job there at all).
The Dublin Regulation, according to which the first EU country that a migrant reaches is obliged to register and process the migrant’s application, has long been disregarded.
Greece and Italy are simply waving the refugees on.
Germany accepted, with much fanfare, a large number of unregistered refugees from Hungary and offered them a warm welcome.
This decision arguably tempted so many more refugees from the Arab countries that soon thereafter Germany was forced to impose border controls.
What the German government had not reckoned with is that every refugee who manages to make it to Germany immediately texts the good news back to the home country, fueling a fresh wave of migrants.
The UN refugee camps in the countries surrounding Syria are thus being gradually relocated to Germany.
Only a fraction of asylum-seekers’ applications are ultimately approved, because most applicants are not politically persecuted but simply economic migrants.
In the first half of 2015, for instance, only about one-quarter of applicants came from Syria and Iraq, a significant proportion of whom had already found shelter in the UN camps in or around those countries.
But the proportion of Syrian refugees subsequently ballooned quickly, in part because the news spread that Germany approves most Syrian applications.
If an application is successful, a refugee has the right to bring along his or her family members as well.
Frequently, Arab families send their minors to Germany in the not-unjustified hope that they will obtain the right for other family members to follow later.
Germany will have to deal with the consequences of this refugee wave for years to come.
In order to distribute the burden more equitably, Germany tried to have a European quota system instituted to allocate applicants among the EU’s member countries.
But Germany’s EU partners rejected this as “moral imperialism.”
Germany thus failed to have a system adopted that would have provided it with some relief.
Instead, a quickly convened summit has now agreed on a limited quota system that will cover barely 120,000 people, aimed at providing relief to Hungary, Italy, and Greece; it will bring a further 31,000 refugees to Germany.
In order to avert chaos, Germany has no choice but to impose restrictions.
Among the most urgently needed steps is to develop the capacity to distinguish quickly – and ideally at the border – between refugees (who face political persecution) and economic migrants.
Germany’s Federal Office for Migration and Refugees could set up border outposts to clear baseless asylum claims and send the rejected applicants, in accordance with the Dublin Regulation, back to the first safe country they reached.
This would allow Germany to concentrate on the task at hand: providing those granted refugee status the schooling and language lessons they will need to allow them to find employment as quickly as possible.
Connectivity and the Modern Refugee
GENEVA – They were fresh off the boat, the group of refugees I met this time last year.
They had fled their homes in Syria, traveled halfway across Turkey, and placed their lives in the hands of a gang of people smugglers promising to get them to Europe.
Despite all that they had endured, one of them told me, upon landing on the Greek island of Lesbos, that they had panicked only once during that perilous voyage: when their mobile phone signal disappeared.
That signal, however weak, had been the refugees’ only link to the outside world.
When it vanished – when they truly had no way to contact family, friends, or anyone who could help them – they were gripped by a sense of isolation and fear more intense than they had ever experienced.
It is a feeling no one should have to endure ever again.
For most people in the industrialized world – and everyone at this year’s World Economic Forum Annual Meeting in Davos – connectivity is a fact of life.
We have mobile phones, tablets, and computers, all linked to superfast – and accelerating – broadband networks.
Add to that an ever-increasing number of social-media platforms, and we are always in contact with one another.
Information flows so freely and relentlessly, in fact, that we tend to worry more about overload than scarcity.
For refugees, life is very different.
Globally, refugees are 50% less likely than the general population to have an Internet-enabled phone, and 29% of refugee households have no phone at all.
Though 90% of refugees located in urban environments live in places with 2G or 3G coverage, about a fifth of those living in rural areas have no connectivity at all.
This is a big deal.
For refugees, connectivity is not a luxury, but a lifeline – one that has become all the more important at a time when sentiment in many host countries is turning against them (even as plenty of grassroots movements and communities remain eager to help).
In some cases, technology can do what hostile politicians and reluctant governments will not: give refugees a chance to rebuild their lives.
Connectivity means, at the most fundamental level, being able to remain in contact with family members left behind, some of whom may still be at risk of violence or persecution.
Connectivity also provides access to important and up-to-date information about new threats, such as disease outbreaks or the spread of conflict, or the availability of necessities like food and water, clothing, shelter, and health care.
In the longer term, connectivity can support online education and training that equips refugees for the workforce.
It can help them find employment, and link them with legal or other crucial services.
And it can enable them to communicate more easily with organizations like the United Nations Refugee Agency (UNHCR), telling us what they need most, what we’re getting right, and where we need to make changes.
In a world of unlimited data, there is little stopping us from providing refugees with this lifesaving connectivity.
If we are smart about how we design digital aid systems, we will have the opportunity to broaden our partnerships to hundreds, if not thousands, of organizations worldwide that are willing to help refugees.
Realizing this potential requires overcoming two key challenges.
First, we must figure out how to improve connectivity for refugees today.
Second, we must position ourselves to use technology more effectively tomorrow.
Overcoming these challenges will require, first and foremost, that governments improve access, including by investing in the necessary digital infrastructure.
It will also require contributions from the private sector, particularly telecommunications providers, which can lend their technological expertise, global reach, and spending power to help ensure access to affordable phones and computers, inexpensive data plans, and training in digital literacy.
Success on these fronts will require using microwave links, satellite dishes, unused television spectrum, drones, and balloons to improve wireless Internet access and capabilities in locations containing many refugees.
Because the vast majority of today’s refugees are in developing countries, improved connectivity would carry far-reaching benefits for the host communities.
In 2014, my colleagues encountered a young Syrian man called Hany, who had fled the city of Homs with his family and found refuge in a camp in Lebanon’s Beka’a Valley.
A poet, rapper, and photographer, Hany was such a force of nature that it took my colleagues a while to realize he had a serious eye condition and could see only a few inches in front of his face.
His mobile phone was utterly essential.
It enabled him to learn English, take his first photographs, and call for help when he needed it.
That same phone rang one day with the news that the city of Regina, Canada, was to be his new home.
As he put it, “my phone is my little world.”
For refugees like Hany, staying connected is not only a matter of survival; it also provides a route to self-reliance and independence, boosting their own wellbeing and enabling them to contribute to the communities that host them.
Last year, the World Economic Forum launched a program called Internet For All.
We must ensure that “All” includes refugees.
Regime Change in the Arab World
Four years into a disastrous military adventure in Iraq and with the global war on terror against ill-defined forces of darkness still inconclusive, the collapse of America’s grand strategy has exposed how ill-conceived was its simplistic recipe for democratic change in the Arab world.
The paradox is that America might be winning the war for Arab democracy, even if by default, but cannot reap the benefits, simply because the emerging pattern of Islamic pluralistic politics does not coincide with the West’s brand of secular liberal democracy.
The US retreated from its democratic designs once it realized that Arab democracy is not being identified with the liberal secular opposition, a political force that practically does not exist in the Arab world, but with Islamic radicals that are seek to repudiate America’s policies and the cause of reconciliation with Israel.
That this should be so has of course much to do with America’s traditional policy of sustaining the Arab world’s pro-Western dictators.
But the notion that the genii of democratization can now be squeezed back into the bottle is a self-serving fantasy.
The move of mainstream Islamists, like the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, the Islamic Action Front in Jordan, Hamas in Palestine, the Renaissance Party in Tunisia, or the Party of Justice and Development in Morocco, away from jihadism to political participation started well before America’s democracy promotion campaign, and is not an attempt to please the West.
It is a genuine response to the needs and demands of their supporters.
Extinguishing Arab democracy, as President Mubarak of Egypt is now trying to do through his recent ban on political parties that are based on religion, will bring neither stability nor peace to the Middle East.
It will only exacerbate the rage of the masses at the West’s hypocrisy, now expressed in a form of democratic charlatanry.
The stability of those Arab regimes that are not sustained by a democratic consensus is bound to be fragile and misleading.
Just as Islamic democracy is the natural reaction to Arab secular autocracy and to the West’s collaboration with it, so will the destruction of political Islam usher in even more extreme options with movements like Hamas going back to social work and terror, and with al-Qaeda making inroads into Islamic societies.
Both the West and the Arab rulers need to realize that the tense equation between the incumbent regimes and political Islam is not necessarily a zero-sum game.
This has been learned the hard way by Algerian President Bouteflika who, through his Charter for Peace and National Reconciliation of February 2006, brought an end to a long and bloody civil war, the origins of which lay in the violent cancellation by the military of the Islamist Front’s (FIS) electoral victory in 1991.
It is in this context that the historic compromise between the religious (Hamas) and the secular (Fatah) to form a national unity government for Palestine might have established a new paradigm for the future of regime change in the Arab world.
The concept of national unity governments might, indeed, be the formula that makes it possible to hold together the political families in the Arab world.
King Muhammad VI of Morocco has already indicated that the Crown would consider a “historic compromise” with the Islamists should they, as predicted, win the elections in June 2007.
Such compromises may be the only way to stem the slide to civil war, and possibly also co-opt the Islamists into a settlement with Israel and a rapprochement to the West.
Engaging political Islam will need to be the central part of any successful strategy for the Middle East.
Instead of sticking to doomsday prophecies or to categorical perspectives that prevent an understanding of the complex fabric of Islamic movements, the West needs to keep the pressure on the incumbent regimes to stop circumventing political reform.
As Algeria in the 1990’s showed, exclusion of the Islamists is a recipe for disaster, while inclusion can breed moderation.
The practical necessities of politics are bound to dilute ideological purity.
The Mecca agreement that brought forth the unity government in Palestine will inevitably temper Hamas’ radicalism, just as the regime’s avoidance in Jordan of an “Egyptian solution” to the Islamist challenge allowed the Islamic Action Front to contain within the movement many who would have been otherwise drawn into the jihadist orbit.
The challenge is not how to destroy Islamic movements, but how to turn them away from revolutionary to reformist politics by granting them legitimate political space.
Global Zero at Ground Zero
MADRID – Since its launch in December 2008, Global Zero, the vision of a world without nuclear weapons, has run up against some formidable challenges.
One is related to the readiness of the two major nuclear powers, Russia and the United States, to move from the stockpile reductions to which they agreed in the New START treaty to complete elimination of their nuclear arsenals.
Others concern smaller nuclear powers’ willingness to go along, and whether reliable inspection, verification, and enforcement systems can be put in place.
But these issues are not the real problem.
Although Russia and the US possess roughly 90% of the world’s nuclear warheads, their nuclear capabilities are less of a threat than is the danger of proliferation.
It is this fear of a fast-growing number of nuclear-armed states, not the fine balancing of the US and Russian nuclear arsenals, that the case for Global Zero must address.
Indeed, addressing the underlying security concerns that fuel nuclear competition in regional trouble spots is more important to the credibility of Global Zero’s goal of “a world without nuclear weapons” than is encouraging exemplary behavior by the two major nuclear powers.
After all, North Korea, India, Pakistan, Iran, and Israel might not be particularly impressed by a reduction in the US and Russian nuclear-weapons stockpiles from gross overkill to merely mild overkill.
There is a stark lack of synchrony between the (admittedly qualified) improvement in the two major nuclear powers’ bilateral relations and conditions in volatile regions around the world.
This gap is bound to affect negatively the processes of nuclear disarmament that are now being envisaged, for these states’ flirtation with nuclear weapons is not just a quest for prestige or status; it is an attempt to counter the conventional superiority of hostile neighbors – or, as with Iran and North Korea, of the US itself.
Consider Pakistan, for which repeated defeat at the hands of its sworn enemy, India, in conventional wars has been the catalyst for its readiness “to eat grass,” as Zulfikar Ali Bhutto famously put it, in order to counter India’s conventional superiority and nuclear capabilities.
Today, Pakistan possesses more nuclear warheads than India does.
To get to zero in this region, the conflict over Kashmir must be resolved, and India must cease being perceived by Pakistan as a threat.
Ironically, the Russian case is no different from that of Pakistan, Iran, or North Korea.
Notwithstanding the undeniable progress so far in Russia-US nuclear talks, the task of minimization, let alone elimination, of nuclear weapons by the Russians will depend on a willingness to address the Kremlin’s key security concern: its conventional military inferiority vis-à-vis the West.
Meanwhile, Israel’s genuine, if arguably exaggerated, existential anxiety helps to explain its strategy of nuclear opacity.
The prevailing perception in Israel is that of being surrounded by formidable non-nuclear threats, and dangerously weakened by the poor capacity of the state’s domestic front to sustain a long conventional war.
A country that in the summer of 2006 had to send a million of its citizens to underground shelters to escape massive ballistic warfare conducted by a non-state agent, Hezbollah, now faces an “Islamic Awakening” that it cannot fully fathom, and, with it, an ominous worsening of its strategic environment.
Nor can Israel ignore the Middle East’s infamy as the only region in the world where chemical and biological weapons have been used since World War II.
Iraq used them against Iran in the 1980’s, Egypt in Yemen in the 1960’s, and Iraq against its own Kurds.
But the cause of nuclear disarmament could advance in December, when the conference for the establishment of a “Middle East Free of Nuclear Weapons and all other Weapons of mass Destruction” will be held in Helsinki (with, one hopes, all states in the region, including Israel and Iran, in attendance).
But the initiative must avoid unworkable shortcuts.
For example, the Arab position, which addresses Israel’s nuclear status outside the region’s broader security context, is the best recipe for failure.
Instead, the conference needs to begin a dialogue among all stakeholders about their underlying security concerns.
The lesson for the Middle East in the mutual reduction of nuclear stockpiles by the US and Russia is that genuine disarmament is impossible unless preceded by an improvement in inter-state relations.
This is also the lesson of the other five world regions – Latin America, the South Pacific, Southeast Asia, Central Asia, and Africa – that have adopted treaties establishing zones free of nuclear weapons.
Israel needs to understand that its nuclear strategy cannot be sustained forever, and that Iran’s challenge to its supposed nuclear monopoly is not an obsession exclusive to the Iranian leadership.
A Middle East free of nuclear weapons certainly is preferable to a region with two or more nuclear-weapons states.
But the Arab countries should assume that, unless and until they normalize their relations with Israel, effective engagement with it on such vital issues will remain impossible.
Peace and regional de-nuclearization must go hand in hand.
Israel’s then-prime minister, Shimon Peres, was not exactly opaque when he declared in December 1995 that, if given peace, Israel “would give up the atom.”
But the current incumbent, Binyamin Netanyahu, cannot have it both ways, conditioning nuclear disarmament on peace while doing everything he can to stall the peace process.
The Muddled Case for Trade Agreements
PRINCETON – With global trade negotiations deadlocked for years, regional agreements – long a dormant route to trade liberalization – are back with a vengeance.
The United States is at the center of two mega-deals that could shape the future path of world trade.
The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) is further along, and involves 11 countries, besides the US, that collectively produce as much as 40% of global output; but China, crucially, is not among them.
The Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) with the European Union has an even more ambitious reach, promising to join two giant regions that together account for half of world trade.
Trade agreements have long stopped being the province of experts and technocrats. So it is not surprising that both initiatives have generated significant and heated public discussion.
The perspectives of proponents and opponents are so polarized that it is hard not to be utterly confused about the likely consequences.
To appreciate what is at stake, we have to understand that these deals are motivated by a mix of objectives – some benign, others less so from a global perspective.
On the economic front, the trade agreements’ defenders tend to talk with both sides of their mouth.
Reducing trade barriers is said to promote economic efficiency and specialization; but it is also supposed to increase exports and create jobs by increasing access to trade partners’ markets.
The first of these is the conventional comparative-advantage argument for trade liberalization; the second is a mercantilist argument.
The goals advanced by these arguments are mutually contradictory.
From the standpoint of comparative advantage, gains from trade arise from imports; exports are what a country has to give up in order to afford them.
These gains accrue to all countries, as long as trade expands in a balanced fashion.
Trade agreements do not create jobs; they simply reallocate them across industries.
In the mercantilist worldview, by contrast, exports are good and imports are bad.
Countries that expand their net exports gain; all others lose.
Trade agreements can create jobs, but only to the extent that they destroy jobs in other countries.
Either argument for trade agreements is thus inconsistent with their advocates’ key claim that such deals will simultaneously create jobs and be mutually beneficial.
Strangely, supporters of the TPP and TTIP simultaneously rely on both arguments.
On the political front, proponents argue that TPP and TTIP will enshrine good, liberal rules for world trade.
Lower barriers and greater transparency in regulation are generally good things. But here, too, the reality is much more complex.
For the US, a great attraction of the TPP is that it will enforce tighter intellectual-property rules on other countries.
Such rules tend to have an uncertain impact on innovation while generating substantial rents for US patent and copyright holders.
In the TTIP, the reduction of so-called non-tariff barriers to trade between the US and Europe will almost certainly restrict the space for domestic regulatory action.
Even if regulatory harmonization does not create a race to the bottom, the interests of investors and exporters will cast a longer shadow than before over social and environmental goals.
Perhaps most worrisome are the Investor-State Dispute Settlement (ISDS) provisions of the two agreements.
These provisions establish a separate judicial track, outside a country’s own legal system, that allows firms to sue governments for apparent violations under trade treaties.
Proponents defend ISDS by saying that it will not have much consequence for countries, such as the US, where there is good rule of law, and that it will promote investment in countries, such as Vietnam, where there is not.
In that case, it is unclear why ISDS provisions are needed for the TTIP, which covers the advanced economies of North America and Europe.
In all of these areas, the TPP and TTIP seem to be about corporate capture, not liberalism.
One of the most important, and equally ambiguous, objectives of these agreements relates to a subject that will not make any appearance in the texts: China.
Both the US and Europe would like China to play the trade game by their rules.
Negotiating these rules without China’s participation can be viewed as part of a strategy aimed at eventually coaxing China into a liberal global system.
But this approach can also be considered a way to isolate China and erect discriminating barriers against it in lucrative markets.
Finally, what especially grates on the agreements’ critics is the secrecy of the negotiations.
The draft texts are not open to public scrutiny, and the few outsiders who are allowed access to them are prohibited from divulging the contents.
The stated goal of this policy is to facilitate negotiations.
But, as US Senator Elizabeth Warren has put it, this gets it exactly backwards: If transparency would make it harder to sell the final product to the public, it raises serious questions about the desirability of what is being negotiated.
It does make sense to subject the final text to an up-or-down legislative vote without allowing amendments.
But this can be done while making draft texts public.
The time for secrecy is past, if it ever existed.
In the end, there is much uncertainty about these trade agreements’ economic and political consequences, and considerable room for concern.
Proponents only discredit themselves by deriding the skeptics as protectionists.
Open, informed debate about specific provisions is exactly what is called for.
And that is possible only if the negotiating texts are opened to public scrutiny.
Europe’s Irrelevant Austerity Debate
BRUSSELS – The most visible symptom of the crisis in the eurozone has been the high and variable risk premiums that its peripheral countries now must pay on their public debt.
Moreover, an influential paper by the American economists Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff suggests that economic growth falls sharply when a country’s public debt rises above 90% of GDP.
So the policy prescription for solving the crisis seems simple: austerity.
Fiscal deficits must be cut to reduce debt levels.
But the debate about austerity and the cost of high public-debt levels misses a key point: Public debt owed to foreigners is different from debt owed to residents.
Foreigners cannot vote for the higher taxes or lower expenditure needed to service the debt.
Moreover, in the case of domestic debt, a higher interest rate or risk premium merely leads to more redistribution within the country (from taxpayers to bondholders).
By contrast, in the case of debt owed to foreigners, higher interest rates lead to a welfare loss for the country as a whole, because the government must transfer resources abroad, which usually requires a combination of exchange-rate depreciation and a reduction in domestic expenditure.
This distinction between foreign and domestic debt is particularly important in the context of the euro crisis, because eurozone countries cannot devalue to increase exports if this is required to service foreign debt.
And the evidence confirms that the euro crisis is not really about sovereign debt, but about foreign debt.
Indeed, only those countries that were running large current-account deficits before the crisis were affected by it.
The case of Belgium is particularly instructive, because the risk premium on Belgian sovereign debt has remained modest throughout most of the euro crisis, although the country’s debt/GDP ratio is above the eurozone average, at around 100%, and it went without a government for more than a year.
An even starker example of the crucial difference between foreign and domestic debt is provided by Japan, which has by far the highest debt/GDP ratio among OECD countries.
So far, the country has not experienced a debt crisis, and interest rates remain exceptionally low, at around 1%.
The reason is obvious: Japan has run sizeable current-account surpluses for decades, giving it more than sufficient domestic savings to absorb all of its public debt at home.
What does this imply for Europe’s austerity debate?
If foreign debt matters more than public debt, the key variable requiring adjustment is the external deficit, not the fiscal deficit.
A country that has a balanced current account does not need any additional foreign capital.
That is why risk premiums are continuing to fall in the eurozone, despite high political uncertainty in Italy and continuing large fiscal deficits elsewhere.
The peripheral countries’ external deficits are falling rapidly, thus diminishing the need for foreign financing.
The debate about austerity and the high cost of public debt is thus misleading on two accounts.
First, it has often been pointed out that austerity can be self-defeating, because a reduction in the fiscal deficit can lead in the short run to an increase in the debt/GDP ratio if both the debt level and the multiplier are large.
But austerity can never be self-defeating for the external adjustment.
On the contrary, the larger the fall in domestic demand in response to a cut in government expenditure, the more imports will fall and the stronger the improvement in the current account – and thus ultimately the reduction in the risk premium – will be.
Italy’s experience is enlightening: the large tax increases implemented by former Prime Minister Mario Monti’s technocratic government in 2012 had a higher-than-expected impact on demand.
The economy is contracting so much that the debt/GDP ratio is actually increasing, and the actual deficit is improving only marginally, because government revenues are falling along with GDP.
But a side effect of the fall in GDP is a strong decline in imports – and thus a strong improvement in the current account, which is why the risk premium continues to fall, despite the political turmoil unleashed by the country’s inconclusive recent election.
Second, if foreign debt is the real problem, the escalating debate about the Reinhart/Rogoff results is irrelevant for the euro crisis.
Countries that have their own currency, like the United Kingdom – and especially the United States, which can borrow from foreigners in dollars – do not face a direct financing constraint.
For these countries, it matters whether history suggests that there is a strong threshold effect once public debt exceeds 90% of GDP.
But the eurozone’s peripheral countries simply did not have a choice: they had to reduce their deficits, because the foreign capital on which their economies were so dependent was no longer available.
But the reverse is also true: as soon as the current account swings to surplus, the pressure from financial markets abates.
This is likely to happen soon.
At this point, peripheral countries will regain their fiscal sovereignty – and will be able to ignore Reinhart and Rogoff’s warning at their own risk.
Reinventing Europe’s Financial Markets
FRANKFURT – Despite great progress in integrating the European Union’s financial markets, barriers remain in key areas: retail services, bank mergers and acquisitions, and tax harmonization, to name but a few.
Completing a single financial market would boost economic growth and prosperity in every member state.
It would also broaden consumer choice, open a host of new investment opportunities, strengthen the EU banking sector, and make Europe a center for financial innovation.
What will the single European financial market of the future look like?
First, there needs to be a level playing field within the EU.
Second, consolidation of Europe’s banking sector must be extended, with all protectionist barriers or other obstacles to mergers and acquisitions eliminated.
Third, the European market place should be fully integrated into the global network of financial centers, particularly those in the United States and Asia. 
The EU’s Financial Services Action Plan, launched in 1999 and implemented in stages, focused mainly on securities markets.
For example, according to surveys by the European Commission, more than 10% of European banking and insurance customers would like to use foreign products and services.
But only 5% of customers currently have an account with a foreign bank. 
The figures for credit cards are even lower – only around 3% of Europeans have a card from a non-domestic provider.
Just 3% make any private provision for retirement with a foreign bank, and only 1% of retail customers take out a mortgage in another EU country. 
The reasons for this are clear.
There are undoubtedly “natural” barriers, such as language and national mentalities, which cannot be overcome swiftly.
But there are also big “man-made” barriers, particularly those created by different national legislation in the fields of investor and consumer protection.
These regulations differ widely.
What information requirements must banks comply with?
What formalities must customers complete if they want to open an account in another EU country?
For example, if there is no standard way to determine taxable income, or offset losses, it is hard for firms – including banks – to sell their products in other member states or to optimize their cross-border corporate structures.
Despite such headaches, significant progress toward a single financial market is being made.
The technical conditions required for the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) have been met.
Customers can, for the first time, make all their euro payments as safely, efficiently, and conveniently as they do at home.
The payment products they use are based on uniform pan-European procedures.
An efficient European financial market also needs centralization of supervisory competences.
Convergence of national regulations should be accelerated, and closer cooperation between national authorities should become a priority.
Otherwise, national authorities will be unable to respond properly to cross-border developments.
Ultimately, the aim should be to create a single institution responsible for supervising large banks that operate across the EU, with national regulators responsible only for domestic banks.
Here, the European System of Central Banks could serve as a model.
Centralized financial supervision would avoid the need for banks to duplicate reports to different authorities, allow financial rules and supervisory practices to be harmonized, and eliminate distortions to competition.
The remaining barriers to cross-border mergers and acquisitions also need to be removed so that EU banks can grow big enough to compete globally.
Although direct legal obstacles have been eliminated in Europe, indirect obstacles such as taxation – which can make a merger unprofitable – persist.
Some national governments have their part to play, too.
Germany illustrates the problems that are created when a country’s banking sector is largely bypassed by the global trend toward consolidation.
When measured against the size of its national economy, most German banks remain too small, trailing their international rivals in terms of both market capitalization and total assets.
Germany needs three or four big banks to take their place among Europe’s market leaders and be at the forefront of the consolidation process.
In other countries, policymakers set the course for banking modernization years ago and have reinforced competition since then – to the benefit of customers and banks alike.
While much has already been accomplished, it is time to finish the job.
Reinventing the European Dream
PRINCETON – The euro crisis and Queen Elizabeth’s recent Jubilee seem to have nothing in common.
In fact, together they impart an important lesson: the power of a positive narrative – and the impossibility of winning without one.
Commenting on the Jubilee’s river pageant and horse parade, historian Simon Schama talked to the BBC about “little boats and big ideas.”
The biggest idea was that Britain’s monarchy serves to connect the country’s past to its future in ways that transcend the pettiness and ugliness of quotidian politics.
The heritage of kings and queens stretching back across more than a millennium – the enduring symbolism of crowns and coaches, and the literal embodiment of the English and now the British state – binds Britons together in a common journey.
Cynics might call this the old bread-and-circuses routine.
But the point is to fix eyes and hearts on a narrative of hope and purpose – to uplift, rather than distract, the public.
Are Greeks, Spaniards, Portuguese, and other Europeans really supposed to embrace an austerity program imposed on them because prevailing wisdom in Germany and other northern countries considers them profligate and lazy?
Those are fighting words, creating resentment and division just when unity and burden-sharing are most needed.
Greece, in particular, now needs a way to connect its past with its future, but no monarch is forthcoming.
And, as the cradle of the world’s first democracy, Greece needs other symbols of national renewal than scepters and robes.
It is through Homer that virtually all Western readers first encounter the Mediterranean world: its islands and shores and peoples knit together by diplomacy, trade, marriage, oil, wine, and long ships.
Greece could once again be a pillar of such a world, using its current crisis to craft a new future.
That vision is more plausible than one might think.
Natural-gas fields in the Eastern Mediterranean are estimated to hold up to 122 trillion cubic feet, enough to supply the entire world for a year.
More gas and large oil fields lie off the Greek coast in the Aegean and Ionian Seas, enough to transform the finances of Greece and the entire region.
Israel and Cyprus are planning joint exploration; Israel and Greece are discussing a pipeline; Turkey and Lebanon are prospecting; and Egypt is planning to license exploration.
But politics, as always, intervenes.
All countries involved have maritime disputes and political disagreements.
The Turks are working with Northern Cyprus, whose independence only they recognize, and regularly make threatening noises about Israel’s drilling with the Greek Cypriot government of the Republic of Cyprus.
The Greek Cypriots regularly hold the EU hostage over any dealings with Turkey, as has Greece.
The Turks will not let Cypriot ships into their harbors and have not been on speaking terms with the Israelis since nine Turkish citizens were killed on a ship that sought to breach Israel’s blockade of Gaza.
Lebanon and Israel do not have diplomatic relations.
In short, the riches, jobs, and development that would flow to all countries in the region from responsible energy exploitation may well be blocked by the insistence of each on getting what it regards as its fair share and denying access to its enemies.
The vision of a Mediterranean Energy Community thus seems destined to remain a pipedream.
Yet July will bring the 60th anniversary of the ratification of the Treaty of Paris, which established the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) among France, Germany, Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg only six years after the end of World War II.
During the previous 70 years, Germany and France had fought each other in three devastating wars, the last two of which ruined Europe’s economies and decimated its population.
These countries’ mutual hatred and suspicion was no less bitter and deep-seated than that afflicting the Eastern Mediterranean.
Yet French Foreign Minister Robert Schuman, with the assistance of his counselor Jean Monnet, announced a plan for the ECSC in 1950, only five years after German troops had left Paris, with the aim of making “war not only unthinkable but materially impossible.”
Schuman proposed putting Franco-German coal and steel production under a common High Authority, thereby preventing the two sides from using the raw materials of war against each other, and powering a common industrial economy.
The ECSC became the core of today’s European Union.
The EU today is on the ropes, but only a few concrete steps by European leaders might open the door to similarly bold diplomacy that could restore EU and Mediterranean economies and transform the energy politics of Europe and Asia.
If the European Parliament and the European Council were to take steps to make direct EU trade with northern Cyprus subject to qualified majority voting rather than consensus (and hence veto by Cyprus), the EU would be able to begin trading with northern Cyprus, and Turkey could begin trading with Cyprus as a whole.
These steps could lead in turn to a Turkish, Cypriot, and Greek energy partnership that would provide positive incentives for Turkish-Israeli reconciliation.
The Schuman Plan took two years to crystalize and a decade to implement.
But it gave war-torn and desperately poor Europeans a positive vision of a new future, something that Greece and Cyprus, not to mention Middle Eastern and North African countries, desperately need.
Europe’s leaders will not surmount this crisis by pounding their citizens with bleak demands for austerity.
They must take concrete steps, with Greece as a full and equal partner, to create a vision of real rewards from a rejuvenated EU.
The EU does not have a Queen Elizabeth.
What it needs is another Schuman and Monnet.
Reinvigorate the Rich to Help the Poor
WASHINGTON, DC – For the third time in five years, the world’s poorest countries are at risk of being hit by a crisis not of their making – a prospective downturn brought on by financial turmoil in the world’s most advanced economies.
Having gone through the food and fuel shock of 2007-2008 and the global financial crisis that followed, low-income countries may now face even larger disruptions in 2012.
And, given the interdependence of today’s globalized world, poor countries’ distress will invariably have unwelcome consequences for everyone, rich and poor alike.
At the height of the global crisis in 2009, many low-income countries experienced a slowdown in growth marked by falling exports, lower remittances from expatriate workers, and subdued foreign investment.
The social consequences were severe: the World Bank estimates that an additional 64&nbsp;million people were left in extreme poverty by the end of 2010.
Yet it could have been much worse.
Thanks to greatly improved policy performance over the previous decade, low-income countries entered the crisis far better positioned to withstand shocks than in the past.
They had smaller fiscal and current-account deficits, lower inflation, larger international reserves, and – thanks in part to debt relief – lower debt burdens.
As a result, most countries were able to maintain or even increase spending, despite lower revenues, and allow fiscal deficits to widen.
This propped up economic growth, while also boosting outlays for critical investments and social programs needed to lessen the hardships faced by the poorest people.
The downturn was also relatively short-lived, partly as a result of the greater openness to world trade that lower-income countries have embraced over the past decade.
But these countries are still highly vulnerable.
Many have not had sufficient time to rebuild the policy buffers that served them so well.
There is less ammunition left in the fiscal arsenal, current-account deficits have widened, reserves have declined, and debt levels have risen significantly in some countries.
Moreover, with the advanced economies facing budgetary pressures, foreign aid may be severely constrained for some time to come.
Under these circumstances, it is by no means certain that low-income countries will have access to additional concessional financing.
As a result, a new global downturn would hit low-income countries hard.
Simulations by the International Monetary Fund suggest that a decline in global growth of 1.5 percentage points could, owing to its impact on trade and financial flows, generate a $27 billion gap in additional external financing in 2012 alone.
That would also push 23 million more people – most of them in Sub-Saharan Africa and Asia – into poverty.
What can countries do to help themselves?
The scope for fiscal stimulus is more limited than in 2009, but countries with sufficient fiscal room and available financing should maintain spending levels and preserve critical social and infrastructure programs.
Countries with moderate inflation could be more assertive with monetary and exchange-rate policy.
A key priority for 2012 and subsequent years must be to build increased resilience against shocks.
Low-income countries should boost their revenue bases to reduce reliance on external financing, while improving the efficiency of spending.
In particular, improving the scope and targeting of social safety nets would go a long way toward protecting the poorest in the event of a further global downturn.
Several countries, including Armenia, Burkina Faso, Sierra Leone, Ghana, and Kenya, have already made successful strides in this direction, using means-tested food-voucher programs, maternal and family benefits, school-based social services, and conditional cash-transfer schemes targeting the most vulnerable groups, such as orphans.
Over the longer term, low-income countries would benefit from diversifying their economies and avoiding over-dependence on a few products and trading partners.
More diversified economies are also likely to deliver more inclusive growth – growth that creates jobs for more people, and that distributes its benefits more widely.
In order to boost long-term growth prospects and productivity, low-income countries will also need to meet huge infrastructure needs, especially in the area of electricity generation and transportation.
What can we do to help?
The IMF is ready to assist with policy advice, financial support, and technical assistance.
We have boosted our concessional lending capacity to $17&nbsp;billion through 2014, and doubled the amounts countries can draw.
We have also cut interest rates on all concessional lending to zero through 2012.
We have made our lending instruments more flexible, so that financial support can reach our members quickly, leaving sufficient room for high-priority spending to support growth and protect the most vulnerable.
Ultimately, the best way that the international community can help the low-income countries is for the advanced economies to get their houses in order and restore strong and sustainable global growth.
That will help to ensure that low-income countries remain on track to consolidate and extend the impressive achievements of the last decade.
Oki-Now-What?
OSAKA – Japan’s alliance with the United States is widely viewed as a crucial counterweight to China’s hegemonic ambitions, which pose significant threats to Asian security.
But, although the United States and Japan are conducting joint naval exercises in the East China Sea in order to signal to China that it should tone down its actions over the disputed Senkaku Islands, all is not well with the alliance.
Controversy over the deployment by the US Marines of 12 tilt-rotor V-22 Osprey aircraft to the Futenma Air Base on Okinawa has contributed to the alliance’s decay.
The hybrid aircraft – which combine a helicopter’s ability to take off and land vertically with the range, loading capacity, fuel efficiency, and speed of a turboprop airplane – are instrumental to deter possible Chinese or North Korean aggression in the area.
Yet the plans have fueled the most persistent anti-American protests on Okinawa in decades, owing to safety concerns.
Indeed, the aircraft’s accident-plagued record includes six fatalities since 2007 and two crashes this year.
Given that Futenma is located in a densely-populated urban area that includes more than 100 schools, hospitals, and shops, critics contend that the Osprey would endanger the lives of thousands of island residents.
But the level of outrage over the Osprey deployment is not proportionate to the threat – especially given the aircraft’s benefits.
This disparity between fact and perception reflects the root cause of the decay in the bilateral alliance: neither country fully appreciates the ongoing need for the alliance, or the political costs that it must bear for the sake of security.
In the view of Okinawans, they have been unfairly burdened since 1945 by the concentration of American forces on the island, which has resulted in fatal aircraft crashes and crimes against residents by US troops, including the brutal rape of a 12-year-old Japanese girl by three US servicemen in 1995.
In fact, just last month, two US sailors were indicted for raping a Japanese woman.
In this context, just one fatal Osprey crash could trigger powerful anti-US sentiment on a strategically important island.
While the Japanese government has backed the Osprey deployment, it has failed to allay residents’ anger.
Okinawans were already furious that the Democratic Party of Japan-led government broke its pledge to relocate the Futenma Air Base.
But, with Japan’s political system mired in a protracted transition under a dysfunctional two-party regime, recent governments have been unstable and weak, unable to satisfy either side’s demands.
Indeed, while the current government has acceded to US deployment plans, it has also attempted to appease Okinawans by conducting its own inquiries into recent accidents (which ultimately supported the Pentagon’s findings of pilot error) and insisting that it will persuade the US government to respect their needs.
In so doing, it has cast the US military as the villain – a move that could eventually hollow out American support for the alliance.
A new approach to alliance management is essential to revive public support for the partnership on both sides of the Pacific.
Citizens must be reminded that US forward deployment in Okinawa – with financial support from Japan –enables both countries to project power across the region.
To decouple concerns about the Osprey from the issue of crimes by US military personnel, bilateral agreements for criminal jurisdiction must be revised.
While the bilateral Status of Forces Agreement does not have to be amended per se, given that its key stipulations closely resemble those of its NATO counterpart, crucial details set under the auspices of the bilateral security pact curtail the scope of Japanese jurisdiction over US forces stationed in Japan.
As a result, felonious servicemen have largely escaped justice.
This arrangement – a legacy of the post-war US-led occupation, which was underpinned by a victor-loser mentality – must be changed to make the alliance sustainable.
Moreover, it is crucial to emphasize appropriate risk-taking.
After all, the Osprey’s safety risks are insignificant relative to the security threat posed by, say, a North Korean missile or Chinese aggression in the area, especially the nearby Senkaku Islands.
While the Osprey’s safety risks should be limited as much as possible – for example, by restricting flight routes, flights in “helicopter” mode, and training airspace – Okinawans must understand that the Osprey deployment is part of the price of the US security guarantee.
Nevertheless, the US should conduct a comprehensive review of force posture and access to air bases, centered on rotational deployment between Guam and Okinawa and dispersed access to auxiliary air bases and civilian airports across the greater Okinawa area.
This approach not only makes operational sense, but it also will lessen the burden on Futenma, without requiring that a replacement facility be constructed – which would incite controversy of its own.
Finally, Okinawans should be offered compensation to offset the opportunity costs of forced coexistence with US forces.
Specifically, the Japanese government should subsidize community development on Okinawa – at least until the security environment changes.
If mishandled, the Osprey issue could cause serious damage to the US-Japan alliance.
In order to confront mounting security challenges in Asia, American and Japanese leaders must acknowledge the partnership’s value – and reinvigorate public support for it.
Bangladesh’s Quest for Justice
NEW DELHI – The sea of humanity besieging the Shahbag area in the Bangladeshi capital, Dhaka, for the last two months, has had an unusual demand – unusual, at least, for the Indian subcontinent.
The demonstrators have been clamoring for justice for the victims of the genocidal massacres of 1971 that led to the former East Pakistan’s secession from Pakistan.
The demonstrations have been spontaneous, disorganized, and chaotic, but also impassioned and remarkably peaceful.
Many of the several thousand demonstrators at Shahbag are too young to have had personal experience of the killings that marked the Pakistani Army’s brutal, and ultimately unsuccessful, attempt to suppress the fledgling independence movement.
But they are animated by an ideal – the profound conviction that complicity in mass murder should not go unpunished, and that justice is essential for Bangladeshi society’s four-decade-old wounds to heal fully.
What is curious about this development is that the subcontinent has preferred to forget the monstrous injustices that have scarred its recent history.
A million people lost their lives in the savagery of the subcontinent’s partition into India and Pakistan, and 13 million more were displaced, most forcibly.
But not one person was ever charged with a crime, much less tried and punished.
An estimated million more were massacred in Bangladesh in 1971, and only this year have some of the perpetrators’ local allies been tried.
Almost every year, somewhere on the subcontinent, riots, often politically instigated, claim dozens – sometimes hundreds and occasionally thousands – of lives in the name of religion, sect, or ethnicity.
Again, investigations are conducted and reports are written, but no one is ever brought before the bar of justice.
To paraphrase Stalin: The intentional killing of one person is murder, but that of a hundred, a thousand, or a million is merely a grim statistic.
The idealism of Bangladesh’s young demonstrators, however, points to a new development.
The outpouring of emotion evident at Shahbag was provoked by a decision of an international criminal tribunal convened by the government.
The tribunal, which tries cases of war crimes and crimes against humanity, found a prominent member of Bangladesh’s largest Islamist political party, Jamaat-e-Islami, guilty of complicity in the killings of 300 people, but gave him a relatively light sentence of 15 years in prison (prosecutors had sought the death penalty).
By demanding severe punishment for those guilty of war crimes – not the Pakistani Army, long gone, but their local collaborators in groups like Jamaat-e-Islami, Al Badar, Al Shams, and the Razakar irregulars – the protesters are also implicitly describing the society in which they wish to live: secular, pluralist, and democratic.
These words are enshrined in Bangladesh’s constitution, which simultaneously declares the Republic to be an Islamic State.
While some see no contradiction, the fact that many of the collaborators who killed secular and pro-democracy Bengalis in 1971 claimed to be doing so in the name of Islam points to an evident tension.
If any proof of this clash of values were needed, it came in the form of a hugely impressive counter-demonstration against the Shahbag movement led by activists of the fundamentalist Islamic movement Hifazat-e-Islam, which occupied the capital’s Motijheel area.
Unlike the Shahbag events, the counter-demonstration was well-planned and organized, and conveyed the stark message that there was an alternative point of view in this overwhelmingly Muslim country.
The male, bearded, skull-cap-wearing protesters shouted in unison their agreement with speakers who denounced the International Crimes Tribunal.
Their supporters include activists of the Harkat-ul-Jihad-Al-Islami-Bangladesh, which has fought alongside the Taliban and Al Qaeda in Afghanistan.
The debate between religious fundamentalism and secular democracy is not a new one on the subcontinent.
But the issue of justice for the crimes of 1971 has brought the divide into sharp relief.
The Shahbag protesters reject Islamic extremists’ influence in Bangladesh, and even call for organizations like Jamaat-e-Islami to be banned, while Hifazat-e-Islam and its supporters want the country’s liberal forces repressed, secularist bloggers arrested, and strict Islamism imposed on Bangladeshi society.
The young people at Shahbag are mainly urban, educated, and middle class; Hifazat derives its support mainly from the rural poor.
Traditional versus modern, urban versus rural, intellectuals versus the peasantry: these divisions are the stuff of political cliché.
But, all too often, clichés become established because they are true.
The Bangladeshi government’s sympathies are closer to the Shahbag protesters than to the Hifazat counter-demonstrators.
But it must navigate a difficult path, because both points of view have significant public support.
The authorities have even taken steps to appease the Islamists by arresting four bloggers for their posts.
But the government remains resolute in its support for the international tribunal.
The irony is that true religion is never incompatible with justice.
But when justice is sought for the crimes of those who claim to be acting in the name of religion, the terms of the debate change.
The issue then becomes one that has been avoided in Bangladesh for too long: whether claiming to act according to the requirements of piety provides an exemption for murder.
The outcome of the standoff in Dhaka should provide an answer in Bangladesh, and its implications could reverberate far and wide.
Remembering and Forgetting Zhao Ziyang
So, at last former Chinese Premier and Communist Party General Secretary Zhao Ziyang has died. But the political agenda that he espoused while in office passed away long ago, on May 19, 1989, when he appeared in Tiananmen Square just before dawn to beg tearfully for the forgiveness of protesters.
“I am very sorry,” he said to startled onlookers.
“I have come too late.”
After that, he existed more as an historical chimera than as a real person.
When his bizarre and unscheduled appearance in the square was broadcast on Central Chinese Television the next morning – during one of the last days of uncensored media coverage – people across China were stunned by this fleeting moment of all-too-human, official anguish.
After all, Party leaders rarely evince their personal feelings in public, much less transgress the Party line as brazenly as Zhao did.
Such individualism fit neither Leninist nor traditional Chinese proscriptions for behavior by a high official.
As the crackdown following those heady weeks of free expression and assembly came to its apocalyptic end on the night of June 3-4, Zhao vanished, sucked down the Party’s memory hole into which so many other leaders have vanished since China’s “socialist liberation.”
To the discredit of the democratic world, hardly any head of state remonstrated on Zhao’s behalf, minimally demanding that some accounting be made for his illegal and immoral incarceration.
Instead, Zhao was allowed to remain in suspended animation, under house arrest, conveniently forgotten like some cryogenically frozen celebrity with no hope of resurrection.
Zhao was not killed, but allowed to live in an old Beijing courtyard house with his family.
He was let out from time to time, but under guard like a zoo animal, to go to some spa or to play solitary holes of golf, one of the many manifestations of “bourgeois liberalization” that his reform efforts allowed to leak through China’s once hermetic seal.
Chinese have long since used the deaths of defrocked leaders as occasions to let out sentiments that can find no expression through the normal political process.
During the winter of 1976, when Premier Zhou Enlai (viewed as a relative liberal in the Maoist hierarchy) died, tens of thousands of people spontaneously flooded Tiananmen Square, giving the Party a tremendous fright.
It was, of course, the death of former Party chief Hu Yaobang, a liberal like Zhao, which set off the protests in 1989.
Whether Zhao’s supporters will express themselves in a similar fashion is uncertain.
The events of 1989 remain so sensitive, and Tiananmen Square so securely guarded, that it is hard to imagine a protest happening there soon.
At the same time, China seems so drugged on business nowadays that it is hard to imagine many people marching for a cause that would do nothing for their bottom line.
It’s almost as if the Communist Party had turned Marx on his head, replacing religion with profit as the new “opium of the masses.”
Few outside of the lumpen classes of unemployed workers and dispossessed peasants seem to have any gusto for political protest.
By contrast, Zhao embodied a chapter in Chinese history when to be a reformer meant to take on not only the economy, but every aspect of life.
Before becoming Premier and Party chief, he experimented with everything from the de-collectivization of agriculture and separation of the Party from business to laws guaranteeing the rights of journalists and greater openness toward the outside world for ordinary people.
He was even the first Chinese leader to wear a suit and tie rather than a Mao habit when traveling abroad, as well as the first to hold an open press conference.
Although Zhao was no visionary, no Vaclav Havel or Lech Walesa, and not even anti-communist, his agenda in the mid-1980’s embraced the economy, politics, culture, media, and society, and it led to one of the most open and intellectually rich periods of Chinese history.
It was a tragic paradox that the political movement that so peacefully swept China in 1989 ended up arresting the process of broad-based, evolutionary reform to which Zhao consecrated his life.
So chastened by the trauma of June 4 was the Party leadership that, for several years afterwards, it was unclear if any reform would survive.
Then, in 1992, Deng Xiaoping set in motion one of the most rapid and total marketizations of a society in history, catalyzing China’s spectacular rise as an economic superpower.
Zhao Ziyang’s death reminds us not only of how unjustly he was treated, but of how lopsided China’s reforms have been.
For China’s “miracle” to truly become miraculous, Party leaders could do worse than study the record of a man whose legacy they now seem eager to push into oblivion.
Remembering Gaza
LONDON – Government is all about statistics, but life is about people.
That disjunction explains a lot about the cynicism and disaffection with politics that characterizes much of the world nowadays.
And, while domestic problems may seem intractable, distance increases the confusion and fatigue induced by seemingly intractable international problems.
As usual, the people who suffer are those who most need the world’s attention.
This is notably true of the 1.5 million people crowded into the Gaza strip, locked between Israel, Egypt, and the Mediterranean Sea.
The West has already isolated Gaza’s Hamas-controlled government.
This week, the US Congress will discuss cutting off aid to the West Bank-based Palestinian Authority.
But this is a time for more international engagement with the Palestinian people, not less.
The statistics say that 80% of Gaza’s population is dependent on UN food aid.
The youth unemployment rate is 65%.
The Web site of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs has a comprehensive database that shows how many trucks, containing different kinds of supplies, have been allowed in by the Israeli authorities.
The situation of the people – or rather the fight about their situation – is periodically in the news, most recently when violence broke the otherwise reasonably effective ceasefire in August.
But Gaza has become the land that time – and the wider international community – forgot.
It is for this reason that I took up the offer from Save the Children to visit the Gaza Strip last week.
I had not been able to visit while serving in government for security reasons.
Barbers, clothes shops, fruit stalls. And a good deal of traffic – with new cars smuggled in through tunnels beneath the “Philadelphi Route” that runs along the Egyptian border.
But real life is also traumatic and limited.
We saw buildings – not just the former Hamas headquarters – still in rubble.
Houses are riddled with bullet holes.
There is no electricity for up to eight hours a day.
Shortages of schools and teachers have pushed class sizes to 50 or 60, and the school day is restricted to a few hours to allow for two or even three shifts.
The consequences of war are encountered everywhere, nowhere more so than for those caught in the crossfire.
We met the niece and son of a farmer caught in the “buffer zone” between the Israeli border and Gaza.
She had lost an eye and he a hand to Israeli shells in the war of 2008-2009.
Save the Children, obviously, is most concerned about the 53% of Gaza population that is under 18.
The statistics say 10% of children are “stunted” – so undernourished before the age of two that they never grow to their full potential.
We saw what Save the Children is trying to do about it, at a nutrition center serving mothers and children in Gaza City. The needs are basic: promoting breastfeeding, food supplies for young children, and medical attention for mothers.
But not all those who need help are coming to get it, so Save the Children funds outreach workers to encourage families to use the services.
There is remarkable work being done to create opportunities, as well as to prevent catastrophe.
The Qattan Center for the Child is a privately funded library – and drama, computer, and youth center – that would grace any British community.
The director told me it is dedicated to the credo of “building people not buildings.”
The center is a true oasis.
The situation surrounding such oases represents the ultimate failure of politics.
After the war ended in January 2009, the international community was preoccupied with opening up Gaza.
Nearly three years later, there is only stalemate – to match the wider stalemate in the search for a Palestinian state that can live alongside Israel.
The responsibility lies, first and foremost, with Israel.
The UN’s Gaza peace resolution (which Britain authored) calls on the Israeli government to open up the supply lines, but this has been heeded only in small part.
That is why the tunnels do such a roaring trade, which Hamas taxes to fund its activities.
The Israeli government would retort that the parallel call in the resolution for a halt to the flow of arms into Gaza also has not been heeded.
That is true, too.
Yet the international pressure is muted.
The focus has shifted.