The UK has decided to take action before any Europe-wide solution is agreed.
We British are still members of the European Union (at least for the time being), but sometimes our politicians forget that.
Sometimes they simply lose patience with the difficulty of agreeing on changes in negotiations that involve 28 countries, which seems especially true of financial reform, given that many of these countries are not home to systemically important banks and probably never will be.
But EU institutions have not been entirely inactive.
The European Commission asked an eminent-persons group, chaired by Erkki Liikanen, the head of the Finnish central bank, to examine this issue on a European scale.
The group’s report, published in October 2012, came to a similar conclusion as the Vickers Commission concerning the danger of brigading retail and investment banking activities in the same legal entity, and recommended separating the two.
The proposal mirrors the UK plan – the investment-banking and trading arms, not the retail side, would be ring-fenced – but the end point would be quite similar.
But the European Banking Federation has dug in its heels, describing the recommendations as “completely unnecessary.”
The European Commission asked for comments, and its formal position is that it is considering them along with the reports.
That consideration may take some time; indeed, it may never end.
Germany’s government seems to have little appetite for breaking up Deutsche Bank, and the French have taken a leaf from the British book and implemented their own reform.
The French plan looks more like a Gallic version of the Volcker rule than Vickers “à la française.”
It is far less rigorous than the banks feared, given President François Hollande’s fiery rhetoric in his electoral campaign last year, in which he anathematized the financial sector as the true “enemy.”
So we now have a global plan, of sorts, supplemented by various home-grown solutions in the US, the UK, and France, with the possibility of a European plan that would also differ from the others.
In testimony to the UK Parliament, Volcker gently observed that “Internationalizing some of the basic regulations [would make] a level playing field.
It is obviously not ideal that the US has the Volcker rule and [the UK has] Vickers…”
He was surely right, but “too big to fail” is another area in which the initial post-crisis enthusiasm for global solutions has failed.
The unfortunate result is an uneven playing field, with incentives for banks to relocate operations, whether geographically or in terms of legal entities.
That is not the outcome that the G-20 – or anyone else – sought back in 2009.
The Banks that Ate the Economy
LONDON – Bank of England Governor Mark Carney surprised his audience at a conference late last year by speculating that banking assets in London could grow to more than nine times Britain’s GDP by 2050.
His forecast represented a simple extrapolation of two trends: continued financial deepening worldwide (that is, faster growth of financial assets than of the real economy), and London’s maintenance of its share of the global financial business.
These may be reasonable assumptions, but the estimate was deeply unsettling to many.
Hosting a huge financial center, with outsize domestic banks, can be costly to taxpayers.
In Iceland and Ireland, banks outgrew their governments’ ability to support them when needed.
The result was disastrous.
Quite apart from the potential bailout costs, some argue that financial hypertrophy harms the real economy by syphoning off talent and resources that could better be deployed elsewhere.
But Carney argues that, on the contrary, the rest of the British economy benefits from having a global financial center in its midst.
“Being at the heart of the global financial system,” he said, “broadens the investment opportunities for the institutions that look after British savings, and reinforces the ability of UK manufacturing and creative industries to compete globally.”
That is certainly the assumption on which the London market has been built and the line that successive governments have peddled.
But it is coming under fire.
Andy Haldane, one of the lieutenants Carney inherited at the BoE, has questioned the financial sector’s economic contribution, pointing to “its ability to both invigorate and incapacitate large parts of the non-financial economy.”
He argues (in a speech revealingly entitled “The Contribution of the Financial Sector: Miracle or Mirage?”) that the financial sector’s reported contribution to GDP has been significantly overrated.
Two recent papers raise further doubts.
In “The Growth of Modern Finance,” Robin Greenwood and David Scharfstein of Harvard Business School show that the share of finance in US GDP almost doubled between 1980 and 2006, just before the onset of the financial crisis, from 4.9% to 8.3%.
The two main factors driving that increase were the expansion of credit and the rapid rise in resources devoted to asset management (associated, not coincidentally, with the exponential growth in financial-sector incomes).
Greenwood and Scharfstein argue that increased financialization was a mixed blessing.
There may have been more savings opportunities for households and more diverse funding sources for firms, but the added value of asset-management activity was illusory.
Much of it involved costly churning of portfolios, while increased leverage implied fragility for the financial system as a whole and imposed severe social costs as over-exposed households subsequently went bankrupt.
Stephen G. Cecchetti and Enisse Kharroubi of the Bank for International Settlements – the central banks’ central bank – go further.
They argue that rapid financial-sector growth reduces productivity growth in other sectors.
Using a sample of 20 developed countries, they find a negative correlation between the financial sector’s share of GDP and the health of the real economy.
The reasons for this relationship are not easy to establish definitively, and the authors’ conclusions are controversial.
But it is clear that financial firms compete with others for resources, and especially for skilled labor.
Physicists or engineers with doctorates can choose to develop complex mathematical models of market movements for investment banks or hedge funds, where they are known colloquially as “rocket scientists.”
Or they could use their talents to design, say, real rockets.
Cecchetti and Kharroubi find evidence that it is indeed research-intensive firms that suffer most when finance is booming.
These companies find it harder to recruit skilled graduates when financial firms can pay higher salaries.
And we are not just talking about the so-called “quants.”
In the years before the 2008 financial crisis, more than a third of Harvard MBAs, and a similar proportion of graduates of the London School of Economics, went to work for financial firms.
(Some might cynically say that keeping MBAs and economists out of real businesses is a blessing, but I doubt that that is really true.)
The authors find another intriguing effect, too.
Periods of rapid growth in lending are often associated with construction booms, partly because real-estate assets are relatively easy to post as collateral for loans.
But the rate of productivity growth in construction is low, and the value of many credit-fueled projects subsequently turns out to be low or negative.
So, should Britons look forward with enthusiasm to the future sketched by Carney?
Aspiring derivatives traders certainly will be more confident of their career prospects.
And other parts of the economy that provide services to the financial sector – Porsche dealers and strip clubs, for example – will be similarly encouraged.
But if finance continues to take a disproportionate number of the best and the brightest, there could be little British manufacturing left by 2050, and even fewer hi-tech firms than today.
Japan’s corporate zombies were at the epicenter of its first “lost decade” in the 1990’s.
Sclerotic companies were put on life-support credit lines by their zaibatsu – like banking partners – delaying their inevitable failure and perpetuating inefficiencies and disincentives that resulted in a post-bubble collapse in Japanese productivity growth.
Similarly, the crisis of 2008-2009 led to zombie-creating bailouts in the West.
From Wall Street to AIG to Detroit, the US was quick to rescue corporate giants that would have failed otherwise.
Britain and Europe did the same, throwing lifelines to RBS, HBOS-Lloyds, Fortis, Hypo Real Estate, and others.
In the West, the excuse was “too big to fail.” How different is that from Japan’s mindset nearly 20 years ago?
Compassion is part of the moral fabric of any society. But a fine line separates it from the “creative destruction” that is essential to purge a post-crisis system of its excesses.
Japan crossed that line in the 1990’s, as its corporate zombies prevented the painful but necessary adjustments in its post-bubble economy. That could happen in the US if Washington continues to favor policies that condone the reckless excesses of the recent past and inhibit the deleveraging and balance-sheet repair that America’s zombie consumers now need for post-crisis healing.
Notwithstanding government life-support initiatives, US consumers seem headed for years of retrenchment.
Consumption’s share of US GDP currently stands at a sharply elevated 70%.
While that’s down from the high of 71.3% in early 2009, it remains fully four percentage points above the 66% norm that prevailed in the final quarter of the twentieth century.
Reversion to that earlier share is likely as American consumers make the transition from the insanity of the boom to the sanity required of the bust.
Japan?
I wouldn’t bet on either.
That’s where Asia fits into the equation. As an export-led region, Asia remains heavily dependent on end-market demand from consumers in the developed world.
It should start by looking in the mirror.
For developing Asia as a whole, internal private consumption currently stands at a record low of just 45% of GDP – down ten percentage points from the 55% share prevailing as recently as 2002.
It’s not as if Asian consumer demand is dormant.
But at the margin, economic growth is heavily skewed toward exports and fixed investment as the primary means of absorbing surplus labor and spreading prosperity. In a post-crisis world – impaired by America’s zombie consumers – export-led Asia is in serious need of a pro-consumption rebalancing.
Nowhere is that more evident than in China.
With private consumption having fallen to a record low of 35% of GDP in 2008 (fully ten percentage points below the Asian norm), China faces major rebalancing imperatives – all the more urgent if post-crisis consumption growth in the West remains weak.
The good news is that China appears to have arrived at a similar conclusion.
Its 12th Five-Year Plan is focused on three major pro-consumption initiatives: jobs (especially labor-intensive services); wages (underscored by accelerated urbanization); and a reduction of fear-driven precautionary saving (arising out of a broadening of the social safety net).
If China delivers on each of these three fronts – as I suspect it will – private consumption’s share of Chinese GDP could rise by as much as five percentage points between now and 2015.
That would be good news for East Asia’s other economies – namely, Japan, Korea, and Taiwan.
With relatively small populations – and a declining one in the case of Japan – these countries have no choice but to rely on exports and external demand to drive economic growth.
In all three cases, China has replaced the US as their major export market.
That shift came just in the nick of time.
If China is successful in implementing its pro-consumption agenda, the rest of Asia will be well positioned to avoid the fallout from America’s new generation of zombie consumers.
How the United States copes is a different matter altogether.
Read more from the "What Now for Global Trade?"
Focal Point
How Brazil Broke Loose
CAMBRIDGE – Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff’s visit last week to Washington, DC, offers an occasion to consider how some once-poor countries have broken out of poverty, as Brazil has.
Development institutions like the World Bank have advocated improving business law as being essential to success.
Are they right?
Such thinking goes back at least as far as Max Weber’s argument that an effective business environment requires a legal structure as predictable as a clock.
Investors, it is thought, need clear rules and effective courts.
Security of contract and strong mechanisms that protect investors are, in this view, foundational for finance, which in turn fuels economic growth.
If a potential financier is unsure of being repaid, he or she will not invest, firms will not grow, and economic development will stall.
Rules and institutions come first; real economic development follows.
But, compelling as this logic seems, Brazil’s rise does not confirm it: financial and economic growth was not preceded by – or even accompanied by – fundamental improvements in courts and contracts.
Growth is unmistakable: Brazil’s financial markets have expanded robustly, with stock-market capitalization rising from 35% of GDP in 2000 to 74% in 2010.
In the eight years prior to 2004, only six companies went public; in the eight years since, 138 have.
Last year, Brazil overtook the United Kingdom – often seen as an exemplar of contractual security – as the world’s sixth-largest economy.
And yet legal change was not central in Brazil’s success.
Brazilian courts were reputed in 2000 to handle investors’ lawsuits slowly and poorly, and they are reputed to handle them slowly and poorly today.
Even basic elements of business organization – like limiting public shareholders’ obligation for corporate debts – are said by Brazilian legal experts, such as Bruno Salama, to remain an open question, with all shareholders potentially exposed, especially in labor and tax lawsuits.
If courts are not protecting investors, is something else?
New, important stock-exchange rules have strengthened outside investors’ confidence, though only for new companies.
For legal scholars, most prominently Columbia University’s John Coffee, stock exchanges have historically been the first step toward protecting investors.
An analysis by Ronald Gilson, Henry Hansmann, and Mariana Pargendler of Brazil’s Novo Mercado – the stock exchange’s special voluntary listing segment, which provides strong protections for investors in newly listed companies – supports this view.
But stock exchanges have limits, particularly in Brazil.
In the absence of reliable courts, they cannot sue to enforce their rules.
Their only recourse is to push recalcitrant firms off the exchange.
The Novo Mercado dealt with this problem by subjecting disputes involving its newly-listed companies to arbitration.
Commercial arbitration – and courts’ obligations to enforce the arbitrators’ decisions – can assure investors, even if the courts generally do not.
But arbitration – which has yet to be deeply tested for resolving disputes on the Novo Mercado – does not seem to be the linchpin of Brazil’s recent success.
After all, its institutional innovations apply only to the new Novo Mercado-listed companies, and not to the bulk of the Brazilian economy’s big firms, which are listed on the stock exchange’s main segment, and thus remain stuck with the old rules, old institutions, and an ineffective court system.
Two other key changes, one obvious and one surprising, were more essential to Brazil’s financial development.
The obvious change is that economic-growth opportunities mushroomed, owing to greater monetary stability, disinflation, and natural-resource wealth.
Better macroeconomic policy led to faster GDP growth, which required financing and motivated some insiders to forego pernicious maneuvering that would scare away new outside investors.
Growth plausibly drove financial development as much as, or more than, institutional development did.
While public and private enforcement will need to improve if Brazil’s economy is to move to the next level, dramatic legal improvement has not underpinned Brazil’s overall financial development so far.
The second change is both less obvious and more important: the political stability that came with the election in 2002 of President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva.
The surprise here is that Lula, a former labor leader who had been on the far left, was widely opposed, if not despised, in business and financial circles.
How, then, did his victory help to fuel the financial growth of the subsequent decade?
Despite his past, Lula promised not to disrupt Brazilian corporate capitalism, running with a market-oriented vice president.
Why he did so is difficult to determine: quite plausibly, some combination of Lula’s realism, his reaction to stock-market declines attributed to his chances of being elected, and campaign donations was at work.
Once elected, Lula governed from the pragmatic left, continuing the prior administration’s core policies.
True, Brazil still has a “hard” left, and some in Lula’s own party are comfortable with, say, Cuba’s Castro brothers and Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez.
But a consensus had emerged in Brazil that a left party could neither win nor govern with hard-left ideas, and Lula’s presidency did not challenge this view.
The consensus may have reflected the success of Lula’s predecessor, Fernando Henrique Cardoso, the relative success of privatization and liberal market economies around the world, and the growth of Brazil’s middle class.
Whatever the case, for key leaders of the Brazilian left, including Rousseff, capitalism became part of the solution, not the fundamental problem.
Investors take all kinds of risks.
The biggest are not always the legal ones on which the World Bank and development agencies have focused; rather, they are the business risks of a company that fails or a polity that implodes.
If business conditions are auspicious and there is a strong consensus in favor of liberal capitalism as the polity’s core economic principle, financial markets can develop and reluctantly absorb risks stemming from the legal system’s defects.
Institutional improvements help, but they can come later.
How China Is Winning Southeast Asia
WASHINGTON, DC – With preparations for Chinese President Xi Jinping’s September visit to Washington, DC, underway, officials in both countries are predictably playing down their differences over China’s outsize territorial claims, backed by the construction of military facilities on previously uninhabited islands and atolls, in the South China Sea.
And this diplomatic de-escalation, following months of recriminations and veiled threats, suits Southeast Asian leaders just fine.
Of course, no one in Southeast Asia is ignoring China’s strategic designs.
The region’s defense spending has increased by more than 50% in the last decade, and some $60 billion has been earmarked for new weapons, especially naval hardware, over the next five years.
The white paper on military strategy that China released in May, which touted plans to expand the country’s defense perimeter, intensified neighbors’ concerns, making even more military spending likely.
Leaders in the region are now welcoming a stream of US military officials and defense manufacturers to see what America’s Asian “pivot” has to offer.
Beyond new frigates and security guarantees, however, Southeast Asian leaders have refrained from reacting too strongly to China’s offshore ambitions.
The economic facts on the ground demand prudence.
In only two decades, China has become Southeast Asian countries’ leading economic partner, boosting its influence throughout the region.
Chinese leaders’ constant effort to expand economic cooperation stands in stark contrast to America’s approach to the region.
Consider trade.
Since 2000, bilateral trade between China and the ten members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations has grown tenfold, from $32 billion to $350 billion last year, and could reach $500 billion in 2015.
As China has risen to become Southeast Asia’s largest trading partner, the US has slipped to fourth place, with only $206 billion in total trade with ASEAN last year.
Given Southeast Asia’s growing economic importance, the implications of this trend could not be weightier.
The ASEAN countries’ combined annual GDP is already $2.4 trillion and growing fast, owing to their rapidly expanding middle class, highly skilled workers, and increasingly upscale markets.
If the current trend holds, China’s trade with ASEAN could reach $1 trillion by 2020.
The picture for direct investment – the financial flows that support the construction of factories, offices, warehouses, mines, and farms – is equally striking.
From 1995 to 2003, Chinese companies invested a mere $631 million in ASEAN countries; in 2013, they invested $30 billion.
Though China remains well behind Japan, Europe, and the US on this front, it certainly has the potential to catch up, as Chinese private-equity firms increasingly look abroad.
Indeed, from agriculture to information technology, the Chinese are diversifying their stakes across the region and embedding their companies in ASEAN’s advanced and frontier economies.
China’s Southeast Asian partners cannot afford to ignore these efforts.
That is one reason why all ten ASEAN countries signed on as founding members of the China-led Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, despite US opposition.
China, which has pledged $100 billion in initial investment, has positioned the AIIB as a rival to the US-dominated World Bank, promising to help Asian countries meet their extensive infrastructure needs.
Clearly, when it comes to its role in Asia, China is thinking big.
And there is more.
At last year’s Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) meeting, regional leaders agreed to begin work toward possible adoption of a Chinese-backed free-trade pact – one that is clearly meant to push back against US President Barack Obama’s Trans-Pacific Partnership, which excludes China.
Whether or not Xi realizes his free-trade ambition, there is no denying China’s commitment to deepening its economic ties in Asia and beyond.
The country has pledged some $60 billion to its “One Belt, One Road” initiative, which entails the construction of a Silk Road Economic Belt running through Central Asia, and a Maritime Silk Road connecting China to Southeast Asia, the Indian Ocean, the Middle East, and eventually Europe.
The US, meanwhile, is struggling to cobble together a domestic consensus on trade.
To be sure, China has had its setbacks, too.
Canceled railway and hydroelectric projects in Myanmar, and riots in Vietnam over China’s move to drill for oil in disputed waters, reflect the backlash that the country’s resource hunger can generate.
But China is also certain to learn from its mistakes, and its leaders have a clear vision of where to place their long-term economic bets.
At a time when partisan divisions are undermining America’s economic leadership, China’s growing influence in Southeast Asia should raise a question: If push comes to shove in the South China Sea, will the US find allies in its corner, or will they just be holding Uncle Sam’s coat?
The HICCup Manifesto
NEW YORK – It is hard to find anyone in health care who does not believe that spending $100 now on healthy behavior – exercise and proper nutrition, counseling for pre-diabetics, risk monitoring, and so on – could yield more than $200 in reduced costs and improved outcomes later.
The numbers are fuzzy, of course, and there are plenty of methodological caveats, but there is little dispute about the desirability of such an approach.
And yet neither individuals nor communities seem to act on the basis of this knowledge.
Individuals often lack willpower or access to healthy food or convenient exercise facilities, and are surrounded by poor examples that encourage instant gratification rather than effort and restraint.
And, on a broader, institutional scale, the money spent and the money to be gained do not belong to the same pocket.
Instead of just complaining, I recently decided to create HICCup, the Health Intervention Coordinating Council, a self-appointed counseling service aimed at persuading local institutions to embrace a long-term perspective and launch a full-scale intervention in their communities.
For practical reasons, there are a few guidelines – but anyone who wants to do this without following our rules is welcome to do so.
For starters, HICCup will focus on communities of 100,000 people or fewer.
The majority of the community and its institutions must be enthusiastic.
If most community members work for just a few employers and obtain health care from just a few providers, the effort of corralling the players will be easier.
And, of course, community leaders – the mayor, city council members, and others – must work together rather than undermine one another.
So, how will this be funded?
Not by HICCup.
The trick is to capture some of what is being spent on health care already.
As a rough calculation, assume $10,000 in annual per capita health-care costs, or $1 billion per year in a community of 100,000.
(There are also all the separate costs of bad health, which are much harder to count or capture.)
That money ultimately comes from individuals and employers who pay it in taxes, insurance premiums, or direct payments, and should be intercepted somewhere between the payers and the health-care delivery system.
Instead of spending $1 billion a year, imagine spending $1.2 billion the first year, but, say, only $750 million in the fifth year.
That sounds like an attractive proposition – but someone must make the initial investment in exchange for a claim to the later savings.
(And, one way or another, the investor will need to repurpose the health-care facilities and workers to some other role, including prevention, serving outsiders, or conversion to another use entirely.)
This is where the first miracle is needed – a benevolent but ultimately profit-driven billionaire or hedge fund, or a philanthropy that sees a way to do good while earning money for future goodness.
There are a lot of billionaires out there, some with vision.
There are health-care companies that might bite, hedge funds looking for large-scale projects, and so-called social-impact bonds.
There also are large employers that might decide to work with other employers in certain communities.
All of these entities would be taking a substantial leap of faith.
But I think it is doable – especially if they work together to figure out the numbers, study the effects of small-scale healthy-living/preventive health-care efforts, and encourage one another to move forward.
Regardless, each investor must work with existing institutions – if only to access revenue streams initially and benefit from the lowered costs later on.
Although grants are a nice source of funding for demonstration projects and research, only a for-profit approach that attracts broader investment will ensure that this scheme catches on.
The funder makes a deal with whoever is responsible for the health-care costs: upfront investment in exchange for continued payment of the $1 billion yearly baseline, with the funder to keep the future savings against originally predicted costs.
But there are many smaller-scale examples, such as Oklahoma City, which lost one million pounds of collective weight in a population of about 600,000; we hope the people involved will join with HICCup to share their experiences, good and bad.
Indeed, HICCup will not choose which communities participate.
They will choose themselves.
HICCup’s role will be to advise them and help them to communicate and learn from other communities going through the same process.
We also want to be a clearinghouse for vendors of health-oriented tools, services, and programs.
There are many bargains to be struck between communities and vendors offering discounts in exchange for wholesale adoption of their tools or programs.
There is, however, one unbreakable rule: To work with HICCup, communities must collect and publish a lot of independently vetted data (without personal information, of course).
For starters, they will need benchmarks of current conditions and projected costs, and then detailed statistics on the adoption of the measures, their impact and costs, and what happens over time.
HICCup will spend a lot of time with lawyers and actuaries!
Indicators to be measured include not just rates of obesity, high blood pressure, and incidence of disease and related costs, but also absenteeism, school grades and graduation rates, employment statistics, accidents, and the like.
Although the funder keeps the reduction in health-care costs, the community gets all of the many payoffs from a healthier population – including an enhanced reputation.
It is now time to try this on a broad scale.
Five years from now, we will wonder what took us so long to get started.
So, again, who will those investors be?
How Does the Weak Dollar Affect Oil Prices?
Around the world, there is anguished hand-wringing about the high price of oil.
But if political leaders and policymakers want lower oil prices, they should be promoting policies that strengthen the dollar.
The implications of pricing oil in any single-currency are more far-reaching than most people think.
For example, some oil-producing countries ask their customers to pay in euros, but that does not mean that their oil is priced in euros.
And even if dollar prices were to be replaced by euro prices, the impact of single-currency pricing on the oil market would be the same.   
While oil-exporting countries receive revenues in dollars (or their euro equivalent), they use different currencies to import goods and services from various countries.
Any change in the exchange rate of the dollar affects the purchasing power of these countries, and therefore their real income. 
Likewise, international oil companies sell most of their oil in dollars, but they operate in various countries and pay some of their costs in local currencies.
Any change in the value of the dollar therefore affects their cost structure and profitability. In turn, it affects reinvestment in exploration, development, and maintenance.
The relationship between the value of the dollar and oil prices is very complex.
While they can feed on each other to produce a vicious cycle, their short-term relationship is distinct from their long-term relationship.
In the short-term, dollar depreciation does not affect supply and demand, but it does affect speculation and investment in oil futures markets.
As the dollar declines, commodities – including oil – attract investors.
Investing in futures becomes both a hedge against a weakening dollar and an investment vehicle that could yield substantial profit, particularly in a climate of vanishing excess oil production capacity, increasing demand, declining interest rates, a slumping real estate market, and crisis in the banking industry.
OPEC might be correct to blame American policies and speculators for higher prices.
It is also correct that if OPEC had excess capacity, it would have already used it to flush out speculators to bring oil prices down.
OPEC can regain control in one of two ways: use its “claimed” excess capacity to flush out speculators, or use its financial surpluses to overtake them.
Recourse to the latter option means that, even without excess capacity, OPEC can still be in the driver’s seat.
In the long run, however, statistical analysis of various oil industry variables indicates that a weaker dollar affects supply by reducing production, regardless of whether oil is owned and produced by national or international oil companies.
A weak dollar also affects demand by increasing consumption.
The result of a decrease in supply and an increase in demand is higher prices.
The lower dollar also reduces the purchasing power of oil exporters.
If nominal oil prices remain constant while the dollar declines, the real income of the oil-producing countries declines, resulting in less investment in additional capacity and maintenance.
The same is true of oil companies.
Consequently, oil prices increase.
Indeed, because oil prices were rising while the dollar was declining, capacity expansion by oil firms failed to meet forecasts for non-OPEC production in the last three years.
Even oil production in the United States has not matched the increase in oil prices, as rising import costs for tools and equipment – partly a reflection of the dollar’s weakness and other factors – have forced project delays and cancellations.
Of course, the lower dollar means cheaper oil in Europe, Asia, and all countries with appreciating currencies.
Oil prices hit records in the US in 2004 and 2005, but not in Europe, which partly explains why economic growth there has not been affected.
When Americans paid $120 per barrel, Europeans paid only about €76 per barrel.
Several factors have prevented high oil prices from affecting the demand for petroleum products in the US in recent years, such as increased government spending, low interest rates, tax breaks, and an increase in real incomes.
To be sure, the weaker dollar has forced some American families to spend their vacations in the US instead of Europe.
But, since many Americans use gas-guzzling SUV’s for their vacations, demand for gasoline has remained high.
Unless and until US consumption patterns change or a rebounding dollar increases oil production, Americans will bear the brunt of single-currency oil pricing.  
How Economic Superpowers Rise
Anti-Japanese riots across China have heightened tensions in Asia.
Indeed China-mania, a mixture of hopes, but mostly fears, is sweeping the world due to China’s rapid economic rise.
Should the world really be more fearful than hopeful?
Americans fear their markets being flooded by Chinese goods.
Mexico, Brazil, Central Europe, Indonesia, and even Sri Lanka are worried about competition from lower wages.
Europeans may be more cheerful, believing that the Chinese market will open not only for European engineering products and machine tools to equip the new workshop of the world, but also for luxury goods and even the tourism demanded by a new and affluent Chinese middle class.
Everyone feels that a seismic shift is under way.
Such rapid industrial rises are rare, but not unprecedented.
The most interesting analogies are Germany’s rise in the 19th century and Japan’s in the 20th.
Even prior to that time, England was the economic Wunderkind of Europe.
What had been an offshore European island with bad weather emerged as the world’s major economy, whose products, from textiles to railroad equipment, came to dominate world markets.
England was a pioneer in industrialization, and was deeply shocked by the presumption of newcomers who soon entered the same stage.
By the end of the 19th century, however, Germany, with much lower wages levels, had overtaken England in steel production, and was clearly dominant in the new technologies of electrical goods, chemicals, and dyes, as well as in many aspects of fine engineering.
But Germany also swamped world’s markets with mass consumption goods: cheaper musical instruments than the traditional makers in France or Italy could produce, and lithographic prints used for Christmas cards and seaside postcards.
Indeed, German products were omnipresent.
When an irate British writer, E.E. Williams, wrote a protest entitled “Made in Germany,” he began by recording his discomfort that the pencil he was using was a German product as well.
The ‘Made in Germany’ scare of the late 19th century foreshadowed the reaction in the United States to Japan’s industrial success in the 1960’s and 1970’s.
In particular, Americans were frightened by Japanese consumer products – televisions, which wiped out domestic production, and automobiles, which seemed so malignly efficient.
In both the German and the Japanese cases, the already-existing industrial powers complained that there was some sort of nefarious and unfair mechanism behind the newcomer’s advantages.
Such explanations included government intervention or a new sort of industrial organization, and unfair patent infringements by the new producers who copied products and then blocked off their own markets from import competition.
But the economics of the rise of industrial Germany and Japan should hold comforting lessons for us today.
The fears were misplaced, because the world benefited from cheaper and more readily available products.
Thanks to German manufacturers, pianos were no longer restricted to aristocratic salons or the professional middle class, but began appearing in respectable working-class homes.
Thanks to Japanese car producers, American manufacturers learned to produce more efficiently and competitively.
The classical liberal free-trade argument about the universal economic benefits of greater commerce and open markets proved to be unambiguously correct.
It did not matter that the catch-up countries’ economic “miracles” were produced in part by illiberal policies guided by government bureaucracies.
The outcome was an endorsement of the lessons of economic liberalism.
But changing economic balances also lead to changing political balances.
At the moment, it looks as if there is nothing to fear from China.
Like Germany in the mid-19th century, or Japan in the 1960’s, China sees many advantages in participating in the international order more or less as it is currently configured.
Can this change?
Germany certainly became assertive, owing mostly to the social pressures and tensions incited by rapid economic growth.
When it feared that it might be overtaken by the next rising economic power, the vast Russian empire, assertiveness turned into aggression.
By the early 20th century, Germans had concluded that Russia’s faster demographic growth and rapid industrialization posed a military threat.
China can already see considerable problems in the medium term.
In forty years, a demographic implosion within China, the consequence of its one-child policy, will make European and Japanese concerns about aging populations look trivial.
Before then, profound inequalities between China’s poor countryside and its dynamic industrial centers will generate tensions, which may be increased by the gender imbalance – young men greatly outnumber young women.
Combine this with a tottering authoritarian regime, and something like the pre-1914 German scenario looks realistic.
A government impressed by past national achievement, but fearful of being overtaken and deeply worried about its own legitimacy, is likely to look for an outlet in foreign policy to mobilize domestic support or ward off opposition.
So there is no need for a strategy to deal with China’s economic rise; but there is a need to lock in China’s prosperity and reduce the chances of political eruption.
Japan in the second half of the 20th century had stable politics, due in large part to a good constitution and democratic institutions.
If China is to avoid the fate of early 20th century Germany, it must bolster successful economic modernization with constitutional and political reform.
Our Children’s Economics
TOKYO – The economics profession has not had a good crisis.
Queen Elizabeth II may have expected too much when she famously asked why economists had failed to foresee the disaster, but there is a widespread sense that much of their research turned out to be irrelevant.
Worse still, much of the advice proffered by economists was of little use to policymakers seeking to limit the economic and financial fallout.
Will future generations do better?
One of the more interesting exercises in which I engaged at the recent World Economic Forum in Davos was a collective effort to imagine the contents of a Principles of Economics textbook in 2033.
There was no dearth of ideas and topics, participants argued, that existing textbooks neglected, and that should receive more attention two decades from now.
Economists working on the border of economics and psychology, for example, argued that behavioral finance, in which human foibles are brought to bear to explain the failure of the so-called efficient markets hypothesis, would be given more prominence.
Economic historians, meanwhile, argued that future textbooks would embed analysis of recent experience in the longer-term historical record.
Among other things, this would allow economists-in-training to take the evolution of economic institutions more seriously.
Development economists, for their part, argued that much more attention would be paid to randomized trials and field experiments.
Applied econometricians pointed to the growing importance of “big data” and to the likelihood that large data sets will have significantly enhanced our understanding of economic decision-making by 2033.
Overall, however, the picture was one in which the economics of 2033 differed only marginally from the economics of today.
A textbook two decades from now might be more sophisticated than this year’s edition, fully integrating contributions that today constitute the frontiers of economic research.
But it would not differ fundamentally in structure or approach from today’s economics.
The consensus, in other words, seemed to be that there would be nothing in the next 20 years as transformative as Alfred Marshall’s synthesis of the 1890’s or the revolution initiated by John Maynard Keynes in the 1930’s.
In contrast to the economics of those years, economics today is a mature, well-established discipline.
And, like any mature discipline, it advances incrementally rather than in revolutionary steps.
This presumption is almost certainly mistaken.
It reflects the same error made by scholars of technology who argue that all of the radical breakthroughs have already been made.
As this view is sometimes put, the next 20 years will see no breakthrough as revolutionary as the steam engine or the transistor.
Technological progress will be incremental rather than revolutionary.
Indeed, insofar as the increments are small, the result is likely to be slower productivity growth and a “Great Stagnation.”
In fact, the history of technology has repeatedly refuted this pessimistic view.
We can’t say what the next radical innovation will be, but centuries of human experience suggest that there will be (at least) one.
Similarly, we can’t say what the next revolution in economic analysis will be, but more than a century of modern economic thinking suggests that there will be one.
All of this suggests that the economics textbook of 2033 will look very different from the economics textbook of today.
We just can’t say how.
Indeed, one might question the very premise that, two decades from now, there will be textbooks as we know them.
Today, introductory economics is taught using a textbook in which an eminent professor authoritatively bestows the conventional wisdom on his or her (typically, his) students.
Knowledge, as encapsulated in the textbook and interpreted by the professor, is delivered from above.
This, of course, is also how newspapers traditionally delivered the news.
Editors and publishers assembled and collated stories, and the newspaper that they produced was then delivered to the subscriber’s doorstep.
But the last decade has seen a veritable revolution in the news business.
News is now assembled and disseminated via Web sites, wikis, and the comment sections of blogs.
News, in other words, is increasingly delivered from the bottom up.
Rather than relying on editors, everyone is becoming their own news curator.
Something similar is likely to happen to textbooks, especially in economics, where everyone has an opinion and first-hand experience with the subject.
Textbooks will be like wikis, with faculty adopters and students modifying text and contributing content.
There still may be a role for the author as gatekeeper; but the textbook will know longer be the font of wisdom, and its writer will no longer control the table of contents.
The outcome will be messy.
But the economics profession will also become more diverse and dynamic – and our children’s economics will be healthier as a result.
The Tyranny of Political Economy
CAMBRIDGE – There was a time when we economists steered clear of politics.
We viewed our job as describing how market economies work, when they fail, and how well-designed policies can enhance efficiency.
We analyzed trade-offs between competing objectives (say, equity versus efficiency), and prescribed policies to meet desired economic outcomes, including redistribution.
It was up to politicians to take our advice (or not), and to bureaucrats to implement it.
Then some of us became more ambitious.
Frustrated by the reality that much of our advice went unheeded (so many free-market solutions still waiting to be taken up!), we turned our analytical toolkit on the behavior of politicians and bureaucrats themselves.
We began to examine political behavior using the same conceptual framework that we use for consumer and producer decisions in a market economy.
Politicians became income-maximizing suppliers of policy favors; citizens became rent-seeking lobbies and special interests; and political systems became marketplaces in which votes and political influence are traded for economic benefits.
Thus was born the field of rational-choice political economy, and a style of theorizing that many political scientists readily emulated.
The apparent payoff was that we could now explain why politicians did so many things that violated economic rationality.
Indeed, there was no economic malfunction that the two words “vested interests” could not account for.
Why are so many industries closed off to real competition?
Because politicians are in the pockets of the incumbents who reap the rents.
Why do governments erect barriers to international trade?
Because the beneficiaries of trade protection are concentrated and politically influential, while consumers are diffuse and disorganized.
Why do political elites block reforms that would spur economic growth and development?&#160; Because growth and development would undermine their hold on political power.
Why are there financial crises?
Because banks capture the policymaking process so that they can take excessive risks at the expense of the general public.
In order to change the world, we need to understand it.
And this mode of analysis seemed to transport us to a higher level of understanding of economic and political outcomes.
But there was a deep paradox in all of this.
The more we claimed to be explaining, the less room was left for improving matters.
If politicians’ behavior is determined by the vested interests to which they are beholden, economists’ advocacy of policy reforms is bound to fall on deaf ears.
The more complete our social science, the more irrelevant our policy analysis.
This is where the analogy between human sciences and natural sciences breaks down.
Consider the relationship between science and engineering.
As scientists’ understanding of the physical laws of nature grows more sophisticated, engineers can build better bridges and buildings.
Improvements in natural science enhance, rather than impede, our ability to shape our physical environment.
The relationship between political economy and policy analysis is not at all like this.
By endogenizing politicians’ behavior, political economy disempowers policy analysts.
It is as if physicists came up with theories that explained not only natural phenomena, but also determined which bridges and buildings engineers would build.
There would then scarcely be any need for engineering schools.
If it seems to you that something is wrong with this, you are on to something.
In reality, our contemporary frameworks for political economy are replete with unstated assumptions about the system of ideas underlying the operation of political systems.
Make those assumptions explicit, and the decisive role of vested interests evaporates.
Policy design, political leadership, and human agency come back to life.
There are three ways in which ideas shape interests.
First, ideas determine how political elites define themselves and the objectives they pursue – money, honor, status, longevity in power, or simply a place in history.
These questions of identity are central to how they choose to act.
Second, ideas determine political actors’ views about how the world works.
Powerful business interests will lobby for different policies when they believe that fiscal stimulus yields only inflation than when they believe that it generates higher aggregate demand.
Revenue hungry governments will impose a lower tax when they think that it can be evaded than when they think that it cannot.
Most important from the perspective of policy analysis, ideas determine the strategies that political actors believe they can pursue.
For example, one way for elites to remain in power is to suppress all economic activity.
But another is to encourage economic development while diversifying their own economic base, establishing coalitions, fostering state-directed industrialization, or pursuing a variety of other strategies limited only by the elites’ imagination.
Expand the range of feasible strategies (which is what good policy design and leadership do), and you radically change behavior and outcomes.
Indeed, this is what explains some of the most astounding turnarounds in economic performance in recent decades, such as South Korea’s and China’s breakout growth (in the 1960’s and the late 1970’s, respectively).
In both cases, the biggest winners were “vested interests” (Korea’s business establishment and the Chinese Communist Party).
What enabled reform was not a reconfiguration of political power, but the emergence of new strategies.
Economic change often happens not when vested interests are defeated, but when different strategies are used to pursue those interests.
Political economy undoubtedly remains important.
Without a clear understanding of who gains and who loses from the status quo, it is difficult to make sense of our existing policies.
But an excessive focus on vested interests can easily divert us from the critical contribution that policy analysis and political entrepreneurship can make.
The possibilities of economic change are limited not just by the realities of political power, but also by the poverty of our ideas.
How Effective is Disaster Relief?
When disaster strikes, non-governmental organizations (NGOs) are among the first on the scene.
The United Nations estimates that there are now more than 37,000 international NGOs, with major donors relying on them more and more.
Inevitably, there are problems.
Both the Rwandan genocide of 1994 and the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami saw chaotic competition among NGOs.
Yet there have also been landmark successes.
More than 1,400 NGOs operating in 90 countries helped to get 123 countries to ratify the treaty banning landmines.
But the sheer scale of the disaster relief “industry” – plus the longer-term development efforts of NGOs – is raising serious concerns about how to measure their performance.
Flexibility allows NGOs to be innovative in ways that organizations like the UN often cannot.
But there are few international rules on what an NGO actually is, and the lack of control can lead to unpredictable consequences.
In Chad recently, the French NGO L’Arche de Zoé tried to smuggle children out of the country without obtaining permission from either parents or the government.
Among the questions being asked by NGOs, the UN, and national donors is how to prevent the recurrence of past mistakes.
The wake-up call for most NGOs came after the Rwandan genocide, when hundreds of small organizations tried to set up ad hoc operations in refugee camps in the Democratic Republic of Congo and Tanzania. Some camps turned into staging posts for armed factions.
In the ensuing chaos, more than 50,000 refugees died from cholera.
There was also mayhem following the Indian Ocean tsunami.
At one point, more than 400 NGOs were on the ground in Aceh, Indonesia, competing for resources, personnel, and funding.
Many of the lessons learned in Rwanda were forgotten or ignored as smaller NGOs with little or no experience in dealing with disasters caused much of the confusion.
The situation in Indonesia led the UN to adopt a new “cluster” system to improve coordination.
And, after a review of the Rwanda debacle, 400 NGOs and UN organizations working in 80 countries got together in the Sphere Project to develop a common humanitarian mandate and handbook of standards outlining the minimum performance required of any NGO working in a disaster zone.
As the number of post-intervention reviews increases, a rudimentary framework for evaluating the impact of NGOs has appeared.
Rather than simply looking at project inputs and outputs, the emphasis has turned towards measuring the overall impact of an operation.
The idea is to find out if the lives of the people on the receiving end were changed for the better in any sustained way.
More and more donors are also insisting that NGOs provide measurable proof that they make a difference.
That sounds fine in theory, but in practice there are drawbacks.
By demanding quantifiable results, donors may force program managers to choose easily achieved targets over less measurable actions that accord with sound humanitarian principles.
Or reporting about aid programs may be skewed to keep donor funds flowing.
The greatest danger is that humanitarian relief will be tailored to meet donors’ demands, rather than actual needs.
Until recently, the record on evaluating responses to humanitarian emergencies has been patchy at best.
CARE, as both a relief and development agency, can take a long-term approach to disasters, matching emergency relief with a rehabilitation and recovery phase.
But this is not an option for NGOs that focus only on emergency responses.
Once their allotted time is up – or their funds run out – they tend to pack up and leave.
Even for NGOs that stick around, determining their relief efforts’ impact in the middle of a crisis is difficult, if not impossible.
Emergencies are chaotic: staff and resources are stretched, the local population is very unlikely to be able to provide meaningful feedback, and pre-crisis baseline data are largely unavailable, so comparisons are complicated.
Moreover, all too often, events move too quickly to be measured accurately.
And, until recently, donors who were willing to pay for relief were less likely to finance follow-up evaluations.
As a result, emergency relief evaluations often rely on little more than guesswork and assumptions.
A 2004 report by the Humanitarian Policy Group cited a survey carried out in Ethiopia after UN agencies said that humanitarian efforts had averted widespread famine in 2000.
The claim sounded credible until the subsequent survey showed that the area’s crude mortality rate had actually risen to six times the normal base rate.
Most of the deaths were from communicable diseases, which malnourished people may well have contracted after crowding into feeding centers.
The HPG therefore recommended long-term monitoring of future humanitarian responses, and said that success or failure should be judged in a broad context rather than by a narrow focus on a specific project.
Many people who survive an earthquake or a flood, for instance, may soon face another crisis if the disaster also destroys their only means of earning a living.
New and more sophisticated analytical tools are needed to understand these long-term effects, along with sufficient training to ensure that new methods are applied properly in the field.
A recent innovation has been the Coping Strategy Index, devised by the World Food Program and CARE, which analyzes how people cope with short-term food crises while also taking into account their future vulnerability to hunger.
NGOs do the lion’s share of the world’s humanitarian work, and some mistakes are inevitable.
But as we deepen our experience of humanitarian relief and development, we must learn the lessons of the past and understand how much more there is to know.
Avoiding Algeria in Egypt
PORTO – The military coup that has overthrown Egypt’s first democratically elected president and led to the arrests of Muslim Brotherhood leaders across the country poses an enormous danger not only for Egypt’s democratic transition, but for the democratic hopes of the entire Arab world as well.
The fact that the coup was undertaken with massive popular support is a sign of the enormous difficulties faced by the Muslim Brotherhood during its first turn in power.
President Mohamed Morsi’s government struggled to address Egypt’s inherited economic and social crises in the face of the enormous public expectations created by the 2011 revolution, whose protagonists sought not only freedom, but also economic development and social justice.
Of course, the Muslim Brotherhood was also a victim of its own mistakes, particularly the failure of Morsi and his government to reach out to the secular opposition, elements of which had contributed to his election.
The Morsi government seemed incapable of understanding that a slim electoral majority is not enough, especially nowadays.
Indeed, the breadth of the opposition to Morsi reflects a major global tendency toward the empowerment of the educated and connected middle classes, whose members tend to be suspicious of political parties and demand more direct political participation.
In this sense, Egypt’s difficulties differ only in scope, not in kind, from those faced by governments in Turkey, Brazil, and even Europe.
Morsi’s Muslim Brotherhood dominated government from its first days in power.
But it also faced opposition from a variety of other, far less democratically minded, forces, including holdovers from Hosni Mubarak’s regime, who continue to wield influence in official institutions.
The judiciary, for example, dissolved the first elected legislative assembly.
Likewise, the interior minister refused to protect the Brotherhood’s headquarters from repeated attack.
Moreover, some secular intellectuals demonized the Brotherhood.
Like their Algerian counterparts – who in 1992 approved of the Algerian army’s suppression of an Islamist electoral victory, leading to years of brutal fighting that left perhaps a half-million dead – many Egyptians didn’t mind repressing Islamists.
Morsi and the Brotherhood also faced competition from Saudi-backed Salafists.
Indeed, on the night of the coup, these ultra-conservative Islamists appeared together with military leaders and the secular political leader Mohamed ElBaradei to announce Morsi’s overthrow.
The prospects for Egypt’s democratic transition have become increasingly difficult to predict, but one thing is clear: the military cannot and must not be trusted. During the period after the fall of Mubarak, when the army exercised full power, 12,000 civilians were charged in military courts, virginity tests were imposed on women (particularly those protesting against the military), demonstrators were killed, and myriad human-rights violations were committed with impunity.
Of course, it is possible for soldiers to assure a transition to democracy, as they did four decades ago in my homeland, Portugal, following their overthrow of the Salazar/Caetano dictatorship.
But the record of military-led transitions elsewhere has been poor: democracy may be proclaimed to be the coup’s raison d’être, but the transition stops there.
Moreover, in this case, the Egyptian army appears far more interested in protecting its enormous economic interests than it is in securing the benefits of a civilian government responsive to its citizens.
Trust should still be put in young Egyptians and their demands for freedom and democracy – demands that link the movement that overthrew Mubarak to the demonstrations that led to Morsi’s removal.
But the predominant goal should be to support the creation in Egypt of a pluralistic society that defends the rights of all to political participation and free and fair elections.
Today, this requires opposition to any Mubarak-style repression of the Muslim Brotherhood.
Immediately following the coup, the European Union adopted an ambivalent position toward it.
This, too, is reminiscent of Algeria in 1992, when most European governments supported the annulment of the Islamists’ electoral victory.
(Likewise, the EU refused to recognize Hamas’s electoral victory in Gaza in 2006.)
Continuing fear of political Islam in much of the West explains past support for dictatorial regimes.
Today, the EU and the US should demand the liberation of all members of the Muslim Brotherhood, including Morsi, and the integration of the Brotherhood into any political solution.
The international community should also be concerned with the coup’s regional implications.
Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s cynical declaration of support for the coup is a sign that some want to turn today’s struggle in the Arab world into a bloody contest between Islamists and secularists.
In the long term, any crackdown on the Brotherhood would lead its members and supporters –&#160;already bitterly disappointed in democracy – to reject elections entirely.
That outcome could have a very negative impact on Islamist movements elsewhere.
For many, the extremists who criticized the Brotherhood and other Islamist parties for choosing a democratic route to power will have been vindicated, and a new wave of violence in the region may begin.
Hope remains that Egypt will not become Algeria in 1992 (or Chile in 1973).
But to avoid that grim fate, it is imperative that Muslim Brotherhood members’ fundamental rights now be protected.
US President Barack Obama, who has expressed deep concern about the overthrow of Morsi, is perhaps the only leader able to mediate in such a situation and work for a consensus solution that prevents a civil war.
To achieve this, he would need to use all of the leverage at his disposal, including cutting off the massive military assistance that the US provides to Egypt’s armed forces, as he has threatened to do.
He can also use the reserve of trust that he established by reaching out to the Brotherhood during Morsi’s presidency.
But will Obama take the initiative?
His speech in Cairo in 2009 – which called for “A New Beginning” in the region – inspired many in the Arab world.
Now it is time for more than words.
How Europe Can Rescue Europe
LONDON – At their meeting in Rome last Thursday, the leaders of the eurozone’s four largest economies agreed on steps towards a banking union and a modest stimulus package to complement the European Union’s new “fiscal compact.”
Those steps are not enough.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel resisted all proposals to provide relief to Spain and Italy from the excessive risk premiums that both countries are now confronting.
As a result, the EU’s upcoming summit could turn into a fiasco, which may well prove lethal, because it would leave the rest of the eurozone without a strong enough financial firewall to protect it from the possibility of a Greek exit.
Even if a fatal calamity can be avoided, the division between creditor and debtor countries will be reinforced, and the “periphery” countries will have no chance to regain competitiveness, because the playing field is tilted against them.
This may serve Germany’s narrow self-interest, but it will create a very different Europe from the open society that fired people’s imagination and propelled European integration for decades.
It will make Germany the center of an empire and permanently subordinate the “periphery.”
That is not what Merkel or the overwhelming majority of Germans stand for.
Merkel argues that it is against the rules to use the European Central Bank to solve eurozone countries’ fiscal problems – and she is right.
ECB President Mario Draghi has said much the same.
Indeed, the upcoming summit is missing an important agenda item: a European Fiscal Authority (EFA) that, in partnership with the ECB, could do what the ECB cannot do on its own.
In particular, the EFA could establish a Debt Reduction Fund – a modified form of the European Debt Redemption Pact that was proposed by Merkel’s Council of Economic Advisers and endorsed by Germany’s Social Democrats and Greens.
In exchange for specified structural reforms in Italy and Spain, the Fund would acquire and hold a significant portion of their outstanding stock of debt.
It would finance the purchases by issuing European Treasury bills – joint and several obligations of the member countries – and pass on the benefit of cheap financing to the countries concerned.
A successor government in, say, Italy, would find it practically impossible to break any commitments undertaken by Italian Prime Minister Mario Monti’s current administration.
With practically half of Italy’s debt financed by European Treasury Bills – producing an effect similar to a reduction in the average maturity of its debt – a successor government would be all the more responsive to any punishment imposed by the EFA.
After a suitable period, the participating countries would enter into debt-reduction programs tailored in a way that does not jeopardize their growth.
This would be the prelude to the establishment of a full political union and the introduction of Eurobonds.
Of course, the issuance of European Treasury bills would require the approval of the Bundestag, but it would be in conformity with the German Constitutional Court’s requirement that any commitment approved by the Bundestag be limited in time and size.
It is not too late to turn this proposal into a political declaration that outlines not only the long-term goal of a political union, but also a road map toward a fiscal and banking union.
Guided by this declaration, the eurozone’s financial-rescue fund, the European Stability Mechanism (ESM), could immediately take over the ECB’s holdings of Greek bonds; the ECB could start accumulating Spanish and Italian bonds; and Italy and Spain could implement the structural reforms needed to qualify for the Debt Redemption Fund.
This agenda would bring immense relief to the financial markets.
Equally important, it would change Europe’s political dynamics from negative to positive.
The main obstacle is that German politicians remain mired in a “can’t do” mode.