And, in the wake of WWII, most countries erected elaborate social-welfare states in which the public sector expanded to more than 40% of national income on average.&#160;
This “mixed-economy” model was the crowning achievement of the twentieth century.
The new balance that it established between state and market set the stage for an unprecedented period of social cohesion, stability, and prosperity in the advanced economies that lasted until the mid-1970’s.&#160;
This model became frayed from the 1980’s on, and now appears to have broken down.
The reason can be expressed in one word: globalization.&#160;
The postwar mixed economy was built for and operated at the level of nation-states, and required keeping the international economy at bay.
The Bretton Woods-GATT regime entailed a “shallow” form of international economic integration that implied controls on international capital flows, which Keynes and his contemporaries had viewed as crucial for domestic economic management.
Countries were required to undertake only limited trade liberalization, with plenty of exceptions for socially sensitive sectors (agriculture, textiles, services).
This left them free to build their own versions of national capitalism, as long as they obeyed a few simple international rules.
The current crisis shows how far we have come from that model.
Financial globalization, in particular, played havoc with the old rules.
When Chinese-style capitalism met American-style capitalism, with few safety valves in place, it gave rise to an explosive mix.
There were no protective mechanisms to prevent a global liquidity glut from developing, and then, in combination with US regulatory failings, from producing a spectacular housing boom and crash.
Nor were there any international roadblocks to prevent the crisis from spreading from its epicenter.
The lesson is not that capitalism is dead. It is that we need to reinvent it for a new century in which the forces of economic globalization are much more powerful than before.
Just as Smith’s minimal capitalism was transformed into Keynes’ mixed economy, we need to contemplate a transition from the national version of the mixed economy to its global counterpart.
This means imagining a better balance between markets and their supporting institutions at the global level .
Sometimes, this will require extending institutions outward from nation states and strengthening global governance.
At other times, it will mean preventing markets from expanding beyond the reach of institutions that must remain national.
The right approach will differ across country groupings and among issue areas.
Designing the next capitalism will not be easy.
But we do have history on our side: capitalism’s saving grace is that it is almost infinitely malleable.
Coming to Grips with History
May 9th will be the mother of all celebrations in Moscow.
The victory over Nazi-Germany 60 years ago will be commemorated and the human sacrifices to this end honoured.
So far, so good.
But some nations will be missing from the party.
Two Baltic presidents have decided to stay home, because their hosts are not willing to concede that there is more to the history of WWII’s end than the victory over Hitler.
Their peoples had to face half a century of occupation because of a deal struck before the war’s onset by Hitler and Stalin, the so-called Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact of 1939 that divided Eastern Europe between Nazi-Germany and the Soviet Union.
I have to admire the third Baltic president – Vaira Vike-Freiberga from Latvia – who decided to go to Moscow, honouring what should be honoured, and speaking aloud about what should not be hidden.
By doing so she demonstrates the strong position her country has obtained as a member of NATO and the EU, and she will be the one riding the high moral ground.
It is a pity that the Russian leadership of today has chosen not to condemn the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact that damaged the development of the whole Baltic Sea region for so many years – and still is a source of political pollution threatening to poison relations between neighbors around the Baltic Sea.
I find it difficult to accept those who tend to describe the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact as only a measure to build up Soviet national security.
In the Baltic Sea Region we have a particularly difficult history to deal with, if we look at the last 90 years.
After the end of WWI and the old order – “Die Welt von Gestern” – the Baltic region saw bloody revolutions, terrible civil wars, fascism, communism, genocide, occupations, oppression, terrorism, deportations – you name it, in our part of the world we have indeed had our share of all the horrors of the modern history.
When the Cold War ended, it seemed clever to say that this was “the end of History.”
But if we believe that – if we put a lid on history and leave it behind us – we run a risk that history will resurrect itself with all its horrors.
Therefore we must come to terms with history, particularly in the Baltic Sea region, where such a reckoning is a fundamental precondition for building mutual confidence and cooperation.
If you want to open “new chapters” in relations between old adversaries, you cannot simply close “old chapters” by denying or suppressing history.
Nothing good comes out of doing so – and we have seen enough of that in the past.
For too many years the Baltic Sea was a blind alley on the political map of Europe – divided by the Iron Curtain.
It was not a “Sea of Peace” – as the communist propaganda tried to describe it – it was a Sea of Threats, a sea of insecurity and lost opportunities.
To my country – Denmark – WWII’s end meant a return to freedom and democracy, and we could use the rest of the 20th century to strengthen our freedom, bolstering it with affluence.
But to the three Baltic countries the end of WWII led to half a century of occupation and lost opportunities.
We know to day the cause: the secret protocol to the Treaty of Non-aggression between the Soviet Union and Nazi-Germany, signed in 1939 – the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact – defining the spheres of interest of the two dictatorships in eastern Europe which led to the war with Finland, the occupations of the Baltic countries, the assault on and division of Poland, and probably also the occupations of Norway and Denmark.
In short, this pact with its excrescence had an enormous impact on the history of our region, right up to this day.
That it why it will continue to haunt us, continue to disturb normal relations between the countries in this region with so much unused potential, as long as we do not deal with it in a forthright manner.
Debating, recognizing, denouncing – whatever…. anything but suppressing!
You cannot build lasting future relations between countries that have each in their own way suffered so much, without coming to terms with the past.
It was not until 1989 that the existence of this protocol was officially admitted, thanks to the Glasnost-policy of Mikhail Gorbachev.
But too many people still have difficulties with acknowledging this pact for what it really was.
Such denial is in no one’s interest.
Not in the kind of Europe we still have to build – a Europe where big and small countries are assured that they share the same rights and obligations, where minorities feel safe, where basic human rights are accepted as an inextricable part of our political system, and where neighbors are regarded with respect and expectations, not fear and anxiety.
But it is no surprise that coming to terms with history can be damnably difficult.
The Danish philosopher Soren Kierkegaard put his finger on one of the more fundamental problems: “Life must be lived forwards – but can only be understood backwards”.
In order to look forward with confidence, you also have to look back – and understand what went wrong.
Every leader in Moscow May 9th should remember this.
Commercialize the SDR
BERKELEY – Zhou Xiaochuan, the governor of the People’s Bank of China, made a splash prior to the recent G-20 summit by arguing that the International Monetary Fund’s Special Drawing Rights should replace the dollar as the world’s reserve currency.
His reflections elicited nothing if not mixed reactions.
Sympathizers acknowledged the contradictions of a system in which a national unit is used internationally.
Central banks understandably seek more reserves as their economies grow.
But if those reserves mainly take the form of dollars, then their rising demand allows the United States to finance its external deficit at an artificially low cost.
In turn, this allows unsustainable imbalances to build up, leading to an inevitable crash.
Recent events have highlighted this problem – and Governor Zhou thus was right to call for a different system.
But skeptics question whether the SDR could ever replace the dollar as the world’s leading reserve currency, for the simple reason that the SDR is not a currency.
It is a composite accounting unit in which the IMF issues credits to its members.
Those credits can be converted into dollars and other currencies at the Fund, and can be used in official transactions among IMF member countries.
But they cannot be used in the other transactions in which central banks and governments engage.
They cannot be used to intervene in foreign-exchange markets, or in other transactions with market participants.
This means that the SDR is not an attractive unit for official reserves.
This would not be easy to change.
Despite the trials and tribulations of the American economy, dollar securities remain the dominant form of reserves because of the unparalleled depth and liquidity of US markets.
Central banks can buy and sell dollar securities without moving those markets.
There is also the convenience factor: dollars are widely used in a variety of other transactions.
As a result, not even the euro has seriously challenged the dollar as the dominant reserve currency.
Doing so would be even more difficult for the SDR.
But difficult does not mean impossible.
If China is serious about elevating the SDR to reserve-currency status, it should take steps to create a liquid market in SDR claims.
It could issue its own SDR-denominated bonds.
Better still, it could encourage other G-20 countries to do likewise.
They would pay a price, since investors in these bonds would initially demand a novelty premium.
But nothing is free.
That price would be an investment in a more stable international system.
Of course, an earlier attempt was made to create a commercial market in SDR-denominated claims.
Back in the 1970’s, there was some limited issuance of SDR-denominated liabilities by commercial banks and SDR-denominated bonds by corporations.
But these efforts ultimately went nowhere.
The dollar being more liquid, its first-mover advantage proved impossible to surmount.
Overcoming that advantage now would require someone to act as market-maker for private as well as official transactions and subsidize the market in its start-up phase. The obvious someone is the IMF.
The Fund could stand ready to buy and sell SDR claims to all comers, private as well as official, at narrow bid/ask spreads competitive with those for dollars.
The dollar originally acquired international currency status in the 1920’s, when the newly established Federal Reserve started buying and selling dollar acceptances, backstopping the market and enhancing its liquidity.
If the international community is serious about the SDR as an international currency, it will have to empower the IMF to do likewise.
Again, there would be a cost.
The IMF would be using real resources to subsidize the market until private market-makers saw it as attractive to provide those services at comparable cost.
The Fund’s shareholders would have to agree to incur those costs.
But, again, what is this if not an investment in a more stable global monetary system?
Transforming the SDR into a true international currency would require surmounting other obstacles.
The IMF would have to be able to issue additional SDRs in periods of shortage, as when the Fed provided dollar swaps to ensure adequate dollar liquidity in the second half of 2008.
At the moment, countries holding 85% of IMF voting power must agree before SDRs can be issued, which is no recipe for liquidity.
The IMF’s management would also have to be empowered to decide on SDR issuance, just as the Fed can decide to offer currency swaps.
For the SDR to become a true international currency, in other words, the IMF would have to become more like a global central bank and international lender of last resort.
Before the crisis, such ideas would have been dismissed out of hand.
Even now they won’t materialize overnight.
But they are the real implications of Governor Zhou’s remarks.
Why Are Commodity Prices Falling?
CAMBRIDGE – Oil prices have plummeted 40% since June – good news for oil-importing countries, but bad news for Russia, Venezuela, Nigeria, and other oil exporters.
Some attribute the price drop to the US shale-energy boom.
Others cite OPEC’s failure to agree on supply restrictions.
But that is not the whole story.
The price of iron ore is down, too.
So are gold, silver, and platinum prices.
And the same is true of sugar, cotton, and soybean prices.
In fact, most dollar commodity prices have fallen since the first half of the year.
Though a host of sector-specific factors affect the price of each commodity, the fact that the downswing is so broad – as is often the case with big price swings – suggests that macroeconomic factors are at work.
So, what macroeconomic factors could be driving down commodity prices?
Perhaps it is deflation.
But, though inflation is very low, and even negative in a few countries, something more must be going on, because commodity prices are falling relative to the overall price level.
In other words, real commodity prices are falling.
The most common explanation is the global economic slowdown, which has diminished demand for energy, minerals, and agricultural products.
Indeed, growth has slowed and GDP forecasts have been revised downward since mid-year in most countries.
But the United States is a major exception.
The American expansion seems increasingly well established, with estimated annual growth exceeding 4% over the last two quarters.
And yet it is particularly in the US that commodity prices have been falling.
The Economist’s euro-denominated Commodity Price Index, for example, has actually risen over the last year; it is only the Index in terms of dollars – which is what gets all of the attention – that is down.
That brings us to monetary policy, the importance of which as a determinant of commodity prices is often forgotten.
Monetary tightening is widely anticipated in the US, with the Federal Reserve having ended quantitative easing in October and likely to raise short-term interest rates sometime in the coming year.
This recalls a familiar historical pattern.
Falling real (inflation-adjusted) interest rates in the 1970s, 2002-2004, and 2007-2008 were accompanied by rising real commodity prices; sharp increases in US real interest rates in the 1980s sent dollar commodity prices tumbling.
There is something intuitive about the idea that when the Fed “prints money,” the money flows into commodities, among other places, and so bids their prices up – and thus that prices fall when interest rates rise.
But, what, exactly, is the causal mechanism?
In fact, there are four channels through which the real interest rate affects real commodity prices (aside from whatever effect it has via the level of economic activity).
First, high interest rates reduce the price of storable commodities by increasing the incentive for extraction today rather than tomorrow, thereby boosting the pace at which oil is pumped, gold is mined, or forests are logged.
Second, high rates also decrease firms’ desire to carry inventories (think of oil held in tanks).
Third, portfolio managers respond to a rise in interest rates by shifting out of commodity contracts (which are now an “asset class”) and into treasury bills.
Finally, high interest rates strengthen the domestic currency, thereby reducing the price of internationally traded commodities in domestic terms (even if the price has not fallen in foreign-currency terms).
US interest rates did not really rise in 2014, so most of these mechanisms are not yet directly at work.
But speculators are thinking ahead and shifting out of commodities today in anticipation of future higher interest rates in 2015; the result has been to bring next year’s price decrease forward to today.
The fourth of the channels, the exchange rate, has already been functioning.
The prospect of US monetary tightening coincides with moves by the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan toward enhanced monetary stimulus.
The result has been an appreciation of the dollar against the euro and the yen.
The euro is down 8% against the dollar since the first half of the year and the yen is down 14%.
That explains how so many commodity prices can be down in terms of dollars and up in terms of other currencies.
Fluktuasi Harga Komoditas
CAMBRIDGE – Terjadinya commodity super-cycle secara global bukanlah fenomena baru.
Meskipun beberapa rinciannya berbeda, eksportir komoditas primer cenderung memerankan kisah yang sama, dan dampak ekonomi lebih condong mengikuti pola yang familiar.
Tetapi unsur kemampuan prediksi (predictability) dalam siklus harga komoditas, ibarat jalur roller coaster, ternyata tidak membuat lika-liku dalam wahana ini lebih mudah dilalui.
Sejak akhir abad ke-18, sudah ada tujuh atau delapan booming harga komoditas non-minyak, dibandingkan dengan harga barang manufaktur. (Jumlah tepatnya tergantung pada besaran puncak (peaks) dan lembah (troughs).
Booming biasanya berlangsung 7-8 tahun, meskipun salah satu kejadian booming yang bermula di tahun 1933 berlangsung selama hampir dua dekade.
Pengecualian tersebut terjadi karena pertama Perang Dunia I dan kemudian rekonstruksi pasca-perang di Eropa dan Jepang, serta pertumbuhan ekonomi yang pesat di Amerika Serikat.
Booming yang terbaru, diawali pada tahun 2004 dan berakhir pada tahun 2011, cenderung sesuai dengan pola yang biasa.
Rendahnya harga komoditas – dengan penurunan peak-to-trough lebih dari 30% – berlangsung selama durasi yang sama, rata-rata sekitar tujuh tahun.
Kini kegagalan tersebut memasuki tahun keempatnya dan harga komoditas non-minyak (dibandingkan harga ekspor barang manufaktur) telah merosot sekitar 25%.
Booming harga komoditas biasanya berhubungan dengan peningkatan pendapatan, posisi fiskal yang menguat, apresiasi mata uang, penurunan biaya pinjaman, dan aliran masuk modal.
Risikonya ketika roller coaster ini turun tanpa kendali, krisis utang akan membuat pasar tergelincir.
Memang benar, selama penurunan harga komoditas, krisis perbankan, mata uang, dan utang negara (sovereign debt) cenderung meluas – dan penghindaran krisis menjadi topik hangat bagi pembuat kebijakan, sebagaimana diangkat dalam publikasi terbaru IMF (Dana Moneter Internasional) yakni World Economic Outlook.
Tentu bukan kebetulan bahwa jatuhnya harga komoditas, berlangsung dari akhir tahun 1970-an hingga tahun 1992, bertepatan dengan krisis utang negara selama yang terjadi selama lebih dari satu dekade di negara-negara berkembang.
Tentu saja, tidak ada kondisi downturn yang wajar.
Sebaliknya, downturn tersebut merupakan jatuhnya harga komoditas terburuk sampai saat ini, menyebabkan penurunan peak-to-trough sebesar 40%.
Bahkan yang lebih tidak lazim, downturn ini terkait dengan tiga gelombang/tahap penurunan harga, terpisah oleh jeda selama 1-2 tahun.
Tahap pertama berhubungan dengan upaya US Federal Reserve (Bank Sentral Amerika Serikat) untuk mengendalikan inflasi pada musim gugur di tahun 1979, yang menyebabkan lonjakan suku bunga internasional, memicu resesi berat di Amerika Serikat dan negara lain.
Tahap kedua, dimulai pada tahun 1985, menunjukkan kelebihan pasokan, sebab banyak eksportir komoditas secara bersamaan berupaya menambah hard currency, berulang kali di tengah krisis ekonomi.
Tahap ketiga, tahun 1989 hingga 1992, dipicu oleh pecahnya Uni Soviet, dan menyebabkan output merosot.
Jadi sekarang pertanyaannya, apakah kemunduran saat ini akan menuju ke arah yang sama, dimana kegagalan ini segera akan mengakibatkan krisis.
Jawabannya berada terutama (tapi tidak seluruhnya) di Tiongkok.
Jika economic slowdown yang dialami Tiongkok terus terjadi – umumnya seperti booming investasi yang akan terjadi dan dipicu oleh beban utang yang berlebihan (debt overhang) – maka besar kemungkinan commodity downturn akan berlanjut, karena negara lain tidak mampu merespondon terhadap rendahnya permintaan.
Pertumbuhan ekonomi Amerika Serikat kemungkinan akan melamban, seiring dengan kenaikan suku bunga yang ditetapkan Bank Sentral.
Dan pemulihan Eropa yang relatif baru akan moderat dan condong ke jasa dari domestik.
Selanjutnya, pada tahap commodity cycle ini, penurunan harga umumnya menahan downward momentum.
Di akhir booming, banyak eksportir komoditas sudah memulai proyek-proyek investasi untuk memperluas produksi.
Saat investasi tersebut membuahkan hasil, peningkatan pasokan akan menjaga tekanan perubahan harga (downward pressure on price).
Dan wajar ketika banyak pemerintah negara-negara berkembang (emerging economy) enggan melakukan defisit transaksi berjalan tinggi dan terus-menerus yang akan mengharuskan mereka mengatasi harga ekspor yang melemah dengan menaikkan volume ekspor, bahkan ketika tindakan tersebut justru semakin menurunkan harga.
Fluktuasi harga komoditas yang ibarat wahana roller-coaster ini mungkin belum berakhir.
Walaupun kita tidak tahu pasti apa yang akan terjadi, kita perlu menyiapkan diri untuk menghadapi penurunan lain – dan melakukan tindakan apapun yang bisa kita lakukan untuk mencegah keruntuhan.
Getting to Normal
BRUSSELS – A financial crisis erupts when a large volume of assets in the financial system suddenly appears to be risky and investors want to get rid of their holdings.
These assets become “toxic” – not simply risky, but carrying a risk that cannot be quantified.
Toxic assets are not traded according to a normal risk-return calculus.
Given that their risk cannot be calculated, their owners just want to sell them – sometimes at any price.
In 2007-2008, this was the case for a class of securities based on residential mortgages in the United States (RMBS, or residential mortgage-backed securities).
During the boom phase, these securities were sold as risk-free, on the assumption that US house prices could not decline, as this had never happened before in peacetime.
But this assumption was shattered when a broad-based decline in real-estate prices began in 2007 and loss rates on mortgages suddenly increased.
As a result, RMBS were found to be much riskier than anticipated.
Initially, there was little basis for re-pricing them rationally, because the event (a peacetime decline in US house prices) was unprecedented.
Moreover, banks and other financial institutions, which held large volumes of RMBS, were ill-equipped to measure the risk, and in some cases would have been bankrupted had they been forced to sell their holdings at the fire-sale prices prevailing at the height of the crisis.
The euro crisis followed a similar pattern.
Until recently, public debt was considered the ultimate safe asset.
Indeed, its risk-free status was embedded in the European Union regulatory framework, which allows banks to hold large volumes of any eurozone country’s public debt without having to put aside any capital to cover potential losses.
As with RMBS, this view that public debt was totally safe was underpinned by the “fact” that no advanced country, at least in the post-1945 era, had ever defaulted.
Investors thus assumed that they did not need to assess the credit risk of eurozone countries’ (national) public debt.
The de facto default by Greece early this year ended investors’ complacency.
The government bonds of peripheral eurozone countries thus became toxic.
Given the unprecedented nature of the Greek default, the market valuation of peripheral debt has been fluctuating widely, still searching for “fundamentals,” such as deficit or debt levels, that could explain the evolution of risk premia over time.
Moreover, many banks had so much public debt on their balance sheets that they would have been bankrupted in the event of a full-blown default.
This led to extreme instability in the eurozone’s banking system.
A financial crisis ends when the doubtful debt either has been socialized, or its valuation has stabilized, and it has migrated to investors who are solvent enough to bear the risk.
This was the case in the US.
The authorities acquired some of the “toxic” assets, which over time became easier to value, as a few years of data on mortgage delinquency rates allowed investors to find ways to measure the risk.
The market prices of most RMBS rebounded as losses due to homeowners simply abandoning their properties were much lower than had been feared at the height of the crisis.
Moreover, holdings of RMBS migrated to institutions that were able to support and manage the remaining risk.
Today, RMBS are no longer considered toxic, allowing the market to function normally again.
In the end, the US authorities even made a small profit on the assets that they had acquired at the height of the crisis.
This pattern can be only partly repeated in the eurozone, where both debt socialization and a return to normal risk assessment appear more difficult.
Limited capacity for debt socialization reflects the EU Treaty’s no-bailout clause, which bars outright mutualization at the eurozone level of (national) public debt.
Moreover, the lending capacity of the new rescue fund, the European Stability Mechanism, is capped at €700 billion ($905.6 billion), which represents only a fraction of the total public debt of the countries potentially needing financial assistance.
Only the European Central Bank could implement true socialization of national debt in the eurozone.
But EU law expressly forbids any form of ECB financing of deficits.
A return to normal risk assessment is also more difficult in Europe.
The European Council has solemnly declared that Greece’s de facto default (orchestrated through so-called “private-sector involvement”) remains an exceptional and unique case.
But the promise of a return to the status quo ante of risk-free public debt is not compatible with the continuing limits on the socialization of national debt.
Indeed, the risk has become more concentrated as banks in the periphery have increased their investment in their own countries’ bonds.
A sovereign default in Europe will never be a mere value to be plugged into some statistical risk model.
These differences imply that the return to normal market conditions will be slower in the case of the euro crisis.
Nevertheless, the crisis should abate somewhat, because the most risk-averse institutions have by now sold their holdings of peripheral countries’ sovereign debt.
Moreover, the ECB has clearly stated that it will not allow the euro to disintegrate.
That guarantee has insured investors against their biggest risk.
Egypt’s Economic Siren
NEWPORT BEACH – Facing a turbulent political situation and recurrent street protests, Egypt’s political elite would be well advised to focus on the economic implications of the current turmoil, whether they are in government or in opposition.
Doing so would lead them to recognize seven compelling reasons why a more collaborative approach to solving Egypt’s problems is in the country’s collective interest, as well as in their own individual interests.
First, if the social and political disorder persists, Egypt’s economy will end up with crippling inflation, severe balance-of-payments problems, and a budgetary crisis.
The risk of a vicious, self-reinforcing downward spiral would rise sharply.
But, rather than collapse (in the style of Asian and Latin American economies during the debt crises of old), Egypt’s economy would risk a return to stifling controls and black markets.
Economic efficiency, investment, and employment would take a significant hit, while slower growth would be accompanied by higher prices, including for basic food items.
Most segments of society would be harmed, with the poor, the unemployed, and the young suffering disproportionately.
With that, the legitimate objectives of the revolution that began on January 25, 2011 – inclusive growth, social justice, and human dignity – would prove even more elusive.
Second, no durable economic and financial solutions are possible without cooperatively addressing the country’s political quagmire.
No matter how well intentioned and gifted, technocrats cannot ensure proper policies and deliver optimal outcomes.
They need the backing of a unifying national vision, credible leadership, and citizens’ support.
Third, faced with chronic economic disorder and political instability, Egyptians increasingly lament the “hijacking” of the revolution, fueling mistrust of the country’s governing elites.
Empowered by their success in ousting former President Hosni Mubarak, and then sending the country’s armed forces back to the barracks, many are readily returning to the streets to hold leaders accountable.
Fourth, repeated street protests, combined with a weak police force, fuel small pockets of criminal activity.
Opportunistic thugs foment fear and chaos – real and perceived – that far exceed their number and power, amplifying the country’s general sense of malaise.
Fifth, external financial assistance cannot postpone the day of reckoning forever.
Emergency support from a few friendly governments has so far limited the erosion of Egypt’s foreign-currency reserves at a time of mediocre tourism earnings and growing imports of food and other basic necessities.
Facing external payments obligations, and with the currency under pressure, the government will again seek a proposed $4.8 billion loan from the International Monetary Fund and co-financing from other multilateral and bilateral sources.
But securing this financing is becoming more complicated.
Sixth, the Egyptian economy’s potential, given the proper political context, should not be underestimated.
Current conditions are keeping economic performance well below potential.
This could be addressed promptly; while eliminating inefficiencies and re-orienting institutions that were co-opted by the old system to serve the few rather than the many would increase potential output significantly.
Finally, the country’s political leaders can learn from other countries.
Egypt is not the first country to struggle in the critical revolutionary pivot from a repressive past to a better and more just future.
Nor is it the first country to combine an uncertain political transition with worrisome economic and financial conditions.
It is tempting to dismiss other countries’ experiences, particularly after Egypt’s youth-led grassroots movement delivered something that no one thought possible (toppling in just 18 days a president that had ruled with an iron fist for 30 years).
And some countries do indeed differ from Egypt to such an extent as to make potential lessons misleading.
There is no single transition country that offers a guiding light for Egypt.
But there may be a group of four countries – South Africa, Brazil, Indonesia, and Turkey – whose combined experience is relevant and would resonate among many segments of the Egyptian population when it comes to orderly economic and political transitions.
Each of the four faced what many deemed overwhelming odds.
Yet, by responding properly to their economic and political challenges, they all delivered poverty reduction, greater social justice, and expanded civil liberties.
South Africa under President Nelson Mandela illustrated the upside of channeling popular sentiment away from retribution toward national renewal.
While no single Egyptian leader can credibly convey Mandela’s message of “forgive but don’t forget,” together – working collaboratively and cooperatively – they can help to shift the country’s focus from the rear-view mirror to the road ahead.
Brazil under President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva demonstrated how basic reforms can be implemented in the context of turmoil caused by a major domestic political transition, fleeing investors, and an inhospitable global context.
In 2004-2008, Brazil, which had been perennially known as the country of the future – as in “always has been and always will be” – recorded 5.5% annual average GDP growth.
It reduced the proportion of citizens living in poverty from some 40% to under 25%.
And it improved the 100-point Gini coefficient of income inequality by a full five points.
Finally, both Indonesia (after the Asian financial crisis of 1997) and Turkey (after its 2001 crisis) are recent examples of Muslim-majority countries that decisively overcame economic mishaps while dealing with major domestic political transitions.
The longer Egypt’s current disarray persists, the more its political elites will lose the battle for the hearts and minds of a population whose basic aspirations are summed up by four well-founded demands: bread, dignity, social justice, and democracy.
But, with enlightened leadership and constructive cooperation, Egypt can overcome its current troubles.
In the past, a growing gap between what the country’s governing elites delivered and the population’s legitimate aspirations would have been addressed by imposing further repression.
The new Egypt will not allow this.
The empowerment of ordinary Egyptians has fundamentally changed things.
Egypt’s political elites do not have unlimited time, and current economic trends are making the need to act increasingly urgent.
Completing the G-20’s Agenda
NEW YORK – The near-complete collapse of financial systems worldwide has exposed fundamental weaknesses in their architecture and in how they are regulated.
In calling for measures to “guard against systemic risk,” the G-20 summit has begun the process of reconstruction by recognizing that the system in its entirety, not just individual institutions, must be regulated.
Unfortunately, the G-20 communiqué offers only more of the same prescriptions for managing systemic risk that the Financial Stability Forum (FSF), the United States Federal Reserve, and others have put forward. These proposals have focused on the problems caused by poor transparency, over-leveraging, outsized financial institutions, tax havens, bad incentives for financial bosses, and credit rating agencies’ conflicts of interest.
All of these are important, but they miss a fundamental point.
No one now denies that the past year’s sharp downswings in housing and equity prices, which followed long upswings – far above historical benchmark levels – helped to trigger and fuel the crisis.
As these downswings continue, there is a danger that they, too, may become excessive, dragging the financial system and the economy even deeper into crisis.
Containing systemic risks, therefore, requires not just ensuring transparency and managing leverage in the system, but also recognizing that these risks vary along with asset values.  If institutions that were heavily exposed had understood this, they would have raised their capital buffers during the run-up in housing and equity prices in order to protect themselves against the inevitable reversals.
But, as we now know, they did not.
One reason for this failure is that pillar 1 of the Basel II Agreement, which outlines how banks around the world should assess credit risks and determine the size of capital buffers, makes no explicit allowance for long-swing fluctuations in asset markets.
Instead, it relies on value-at-risk (VaR) measures that link risk to standard notions of short-term market volatility.
The problem here is that these measures implicitly assume that risk declines when markets are doing well: they demand less capital during calm periods and more capital during volatile periods.
In effect, the presumption is that capital losses are random, so the sharp reversals and losses that usually ensue after excessive upswings in prices are disregarded in risk calculations.
Indeed, because standard measures of the probability of default fall when the economy is doing well and rise when it is not, capital requirements based on these measures tend to be pro-cyclical.
But this increases systemic risk, rather than reducing it.
The G-20 has now called for revising the Basel II standards so that capital requirements become countercyclical, and Spain’s experience with such requirements suggests that doing so is a step in the right direction.
But such revisions of Basel II are not enough, because bank portfolios – especially those of international banks with large trading books – are vulnerable to the risks stemming from long-swing fluctuations in asset markets.
As a result, not only are countercyclical measures needed, but banks’ capital requirements should vary inversely with the boom-and-bust fluctuations in the asset markets to which they are heavily exposed.
Banks’ defenses need to be fortified during excessive upswings in asset prices so that they are able to weather the inevitable reversals.
The connection between financial risk and asset-price swings emerges from the use of a new approach – Imperfect Knowledge Economics (IKE) – to understanding risk and fluctuations in asset markets.
This approach implies that more can be done to reduce systemic risk, beyond reforming how risk is measured and capital buffers determined.
IKE acknowledges that, within a reasonable range, the market does a far better (though not perfect) job in setting prices than regulators can. But it also recognizes that price swings can become excessive, in the sense that participants may bid asset prices far from levels that are consistent with their long-term values.
History teaches that such swings are not sustainable, and that the more excessive they become, the sharper and more costly are the eventual reversals – and the graver the consequences for the financial system and the economy.
The lesson of this crisis is that excessive swings need to be dampened with a set of prudential measures.
One possible measure is to announce “guidance ranges” for asset prices, with targeted variations of margin and capital requirements, not to eliminate, but to help damp down movements outside these ranges.
The key feature of these measures is that they are applied differently depending on whether an asset is over- or undervalued relative to the guidance range.
Their aim is to discourage trading that pushes prices further away from the range and to encourage trading that helps to bring them back.
Improving the ability of financial markets to self-correct to sustainable values is the entire point of prudential regulation.
By contrast, wholesale restrictions on short-selling (and other such measures that pay no regard to whether an asset is over- or undervalued) – an option that some have suggested – could actually lead to greater instability.
Rules that are beneficial in some circumstances may become counterproductive in others.
So the idea that what the world needs now is more fixed rules will not do.
Unfortunately, contemporary economic theory, with its presumption of perfect price discovery in asset markets, has discouraged economists and policymakers from paying any attention to the role of asset-price swings in managing systemic risk.
Today’s global crisis shows that we can no longer afford to ignore this vital factor.
The Complexity of Inequality
MUNICH – Since 2013, when Thomas Piketty published his much-discussed study of the distribution of income and wealth, inequality has been at the forefront of public debate in most advanced economies, blamed for everything from slow growth and stagnating productivity to the rise of populism and the Brexit vote.
But inequality remains poorly defined, its effects highly variable, and its causes hotly debated.
Even the most basic question – how much inequality is too much – is virtually impossible to answer.
There is no “natural rate of inequality” characterizing an economy in equilibrium, a level at which policymakers can aim.
Instead, countries’ rates of inequality are measured against one another – a narrow approach that ignores everything from broader economic trends to differences in the impact of wealth inequality on populations in different social environments.
At a time when everyone seems to be complaining about inequality, wealth is, at the global level, more broadly distributed than ever.
In the last 16 years alone, the number of people who qualify for inclusion in the global middle class – at today’s level, people with net financial assets of €7,000-42,000 ($7,400-$44,600) – has more than doubled, to over one billion, or about 20% of the world population.
And it is not just the middle class that is growing.
At the end of last year, around 540 million people around the world could count themselves among the global wealthy, with net assets above €42,000.
That is some 100 million, or 25%, more than in 2000.
The key to this progress has been the success of the emerging economies, especially China.
And, indeed, many of those who have joined the high-wealth group are not from the traditional “rich” countries; on the contrary, the United States, Japan, and Western Europe now have just 66% of the world’s high-wealth households, compared with over 90% in 2000.
On the national level, inequality is rising, but only in some places.
In the emerging economies, the share of wealth owned by the middle class is increasing, indicating a drop in wealth inequality.
It is primarily in the industrialized world that inequality is on the rise, with the share of wealth held by the top 10% growing the most.
This discrepancy may be explained partly by the fact that the global financial crisis was most painful for the advanced countries, especially in Europe.
But the expansionary monetary policies that advanced-country central banks pursued after the crisis made a bad situation worse.
Those policies pushed up prices of assets – especially bonds and equities – that were held largely by wealthy households.
At the same time, they hurt middle-class savers, who typically rely on duller savings instruments like bank deposits.
With zero or, later, negative interest rates, those savers lost out.
Though median households are generally benefiting from lower borrowing costs, wealthier households are benefiting much more, thanks in part to savings on mortgage loans, which are highest relative to income for the upper middle class.
But the impact of ultra-loose monetary policy extends far beyond today’s wealth and income effects.
With advanced-country populations aging rapidly, saving for old age is more important than ever.
With very low interest rates reducing the rate of accumulation of pension assets, all but the wealthiest households will probably have to boost savings and/or reduce consumption, now and in the future.
The decline in lifetime spending will ultimately have a negative impact on growth and potentially generate social fault lines for the coming generations.
Complicating the inequality narrative further are differences across individual economies, including among those that, technically, have similar levels of inequality. Consider the disparities between the US, Denmark, and Sweden – all three of which are among the world’s most unequal societies, with respect to the distribution of wealth.
Denmark and Sweden are known for their well-developed social-welfare systems, free education, and high labor-market participation.
Moreover, Denmark took the top spot in the United Nations’ World Happiness report last year, suggesting that wealth inequality does not trouble Danes too much.
By contrast, in the US, which lacks many of the social protections provided by its northern European counterparts, inequality is very troubling indeed.
The increase in wealth inequality there over the last decade has been the most pronounced of any country.
Today, the US has the smallest middle class, holding just 22% of total net financial assets, half the average of other industrialized countries, and the highest concentration of wealth than in any other country.
As in Europe or Japan, the financial crisis and subsequent monetary policy might be a major cause for this development.
However, another factor could also be the digital revolution which, at least for the main protagonists, is increasingly turning out to be a “wealth catalyst”.
In any case, it is important to recognize that America’s situation is extraordinary.
It does not represent the state of Western capitalism.
It is the exception, not the rule.
All of this has important implications for how to tackle inequality.
Simply put, if the causes and impacts of inequality differ across countries, so should the policy prescriptions.
For some countries, such as in southern Europe, tackling unemployment is critical to enable middle- and lower-income households to save and consume.
Other countries should focus on improving the conditions for long-term savings, such as through occupational pension schemes.
Still others would do well to reduce the tax burden, in particular for low- and middle-wage earners.
There is, however, one policy prescription that would benefit many of the countries with the highest levels of inequality.
Central banks must bring down the curtain on zero and, especially, negative interest rates.
Doing so would certainly be a good start to combating rising wealth inequality.
Saving Refugees to Save Europe
NEW YORK – The refugee crisis in Europe was already pushing the European Union toward disintegration when, on June 23, it helped drive the British to vote to Brexit the EU.
The refugee crisis and the Brexit calamity that it spawned have reinforced xenophobic, nationalist movements that will seek to win a series of upcoming votes– including national elections in France, the Netherlands, and Germany in 2017, a referendum in Hungary on the EU refugee policy on October 2, and a rerun of the Austrian presidential election on December 4.
Rather than uniting to resist this threat, EU member states have become increasingly unwilling to cooperate with one another.
They pursue self-serving, beggar-thy-neighbor migration policies – such as building border fences – that further fragment the Union, seriously damage member states, and subvert global human-rights standards.
The current piecemeal response to the refugee crisis, culminating in the agreement reached earlier this year between the EU and Turkey to stem the flow of refugees from the Eastern Mediterranean, suffers from four fundamental flaws.
First, it is not truly European; the agreement with Turkey was negotiated and imposed on Europe by German Chancellor Angela Merkel.
Second, it is severely underfunded.
Third, it has transformed Greece into a de facto holding pen with inadequate facilities.
Most important, the response is not voluntary.
The EU is trying to impose quotas that many member states strenuously oppose, forcing refugees to take up residence in countries where they are not welcome and do not want to go, and returning to Turkey others who reached Europe by irregular means.
This is unfortunate, because the EU cannot survive without a comprehensive asylum and migration policy.
The current crisis is not a one-off event; it augurs a period of higher migration pressures for the foreseeable future, due to a variety of causes.
These include demographic shortfalls in Europe and a population explosion in Africa; seemingly eternal political and military conflicts in the broader region; and climate change.
The agreement with Turkey was problematic from its inception.
The very premise of the deal – that asylum-seekers can legally be returned to Turkey – is fundamentally flawed.
Turkey is not a “safe third country” for most Syrian asylum-seekers, especially since the failed coup in July.
What would a comprehensive approach look like?
Whatever its final form, it would be built on seven pillars.
First, the EU must take in a substantial number of refugees directly from front-line countries in a secure and orderly manner.
This would be far more acceptable to the public than the current disorder.
If the EU made a commitment to admit even a mere 300,000 refugees annually, most genuine asylum-seekers would view their odds of reaching their destination as good enough to deter them from seeking to reach Europe illegally – an effort that would disqualify them from legal admission.
Second, the EU must regain control of its borders.
There is little that alienates and scares publics more than scenes of chaos.
Third, the EU needs to find sufficient funds to finance a comprehensive migration policy.
It is estimated that at least €30 billion per year will be needed for a number of years, and the benefits of “surge funding” (spending a large amount of money up front, rather than the same amount over several years) are enormous.
Fourth, the EU must build common mechanisms for protecting borders, determining asylum claims, and relocating refugees.
A single European asylum process would remove the incentives for asylum shopping and rebuild trust among member states.
Fifth, a voluntary matching mechanism for relocating refugees is needed.
The EU cannot coerce member states to accept refugees they do not want, or refugees to go where they are not wanted.
A scheme like the one used by Canada could elicit and match the preferences of both refugees and receiving communities.
Sixth, the EU must offer far greater support to countries that host refugees, and it must be more generous in its approach to Africa. Instead of using development funds to serve its own needs, the EU should offer a genuine grand bargain focused on the needs of recipient countries.
This means creating jobs in refugees’ home countries, which would reduce the pressure to migrate to Europe.
The final pillar is the eventual creation of a welcoming environment for economic migrants.
Given Europe’s aging population, the benefits migration brings far outweigh the costs of integrating immigrants.
All the evidence supports the conclusion that migrants can contribute significantly to innovation and development if they are given a chance to do so.
Pursuing these seven principles, described in greater deal elsewhere, is essential in order to calm public fears, reduce chaotic flows of asylum-seekers, ensure that newcomers are fully integrated, establish mutually beneficial relations with countries in the Middle East and Africa, and meet Europe’s international humanitarian obligations.
The refugee crisis is not the only crisis Europe has to face, but it is the most pressing.
And if significant progress could be made on the refugee issue, it would make the other issues – from the continuing Greek debt crisis to the fallout from Brexit to the challenge posed by Russia – easier to tackle.
All the pieces need to fit together, and the chances of success remain slim.
But as long as there is a strategy that might succeed, everyone who wants the EU to survive should rally behind it.
The Future of Computing
ZURICH – Ever since the American computer scientist John McCarthy coined the term “Artificial Intelligence” in 1955, the public has imagined a future of sentient computers and robots that think and act like humans.
But while such a future may indeed arrive, it remains, for the moment, a distant prospect.
And yet the foreseeable frontier of computing is no less exciting.
We have entered what we at IBM call the Cognitive Era.
Breakthroughs in computing are enhancing our ability to make sense of large bodies of data, providing guidance in some of the world’s most important decisions, and potentially revolutionizing entire industries.
The term “cognitive computing” refers to systems that, rather than being explicitly programmed, are built to learn from their experiences.
By extracting useful information from unstructured data, these systems accelerate the information age, helping their users with a broad range of tasks, from identifying unique market opportunities to discovering new treatments for diseases to crafting creative solutions for cities, companies, and communities.
The Cognitive Era marks the next stage in the application of science to understand nature and advance human prosperity.
Its beginning dates to early 2011, when the cognitive computing system Watson beat two human champions on the game show “Jeopardy!”.
Since then, Watson has gone on to do much more, demonstrating how cognitive computing can use big data to tackle some of the most difficult systemic issues facing humanity.
Broadly, cognitive systems offer five core capabilities.
First, they create deeper human engagement, using data about an individual to create more fully human interactions.
Second, they scale and elevate expertise, learning from experts in various fields and making that know-how available to broad populations.
Third, they provide products, such as those connected to the Internet of Things, with the ability to sense the world around them and to learn about their users.
Fourth, they allow their operators to make sense of large amounts of data, helping manage workflows, providing context, and allowing for continuous learning, better forecasting, and improved operational effectiveness.
And, finally – perhaps most important – they allow their users to perceive patterns and opportunities that would be impossible to discover through traditional means.
Cognitive systems are inspired by the human brain, an organ that still has much to teach us.
With systems growing in size and complexity, traditional computer architecture seems to be reaching its limits, as power consumption soars and the transmission delay between components becomes increasingly burdensome.
Indeed, when it comes to energy efficiency – measured in terms of the number of computations per energy unit on “unstructured” data – the human brain performs roughly 10,000 times better than the best man-made machines.
Today, computers consume about 10% of the world’s electricity output, according to Mark Mills, CEO of the Digital Power Group.
In order to benefit fully from the Cognitive Era, we will have to be able to harness huge amounts of information; during the next 15 years, the amount of “digitally accessible” data is expected to grow by a factor of more than 1,000.
Performing the calculations necessary for using such a large amount of data will not be possible without huge strides in improving energy efficiency.
Matching the performance and efficiency of the human brain will likely require us to mimic some of its structures.
Rather than attempting to squeeze energy-intensive performance out of ever-larger chips, we can arrange computer components in a dense 3D matrix similar to a human brain, maximizing not performance, but energy efficiency.
Arranging computer chips in a 3D environment puts the various elements of the computer closer to one another.
This not only reduces the time they take to communicate; it improves energy efficiency by a factor of as much as 5,000 – potentially providing computers with efficiency close to that of a biological brain.
Already, a much denser computer built from available mobile technology and hot water cooling allows for ten times higher efficiency than a conventional system.
But man-made computers are so inefficient not only because they need to power the chips, but also because they need energy to run the air conditioners that remove the heat generated by the processors.
The human brain has a lesson to teach here as well.
Just as the brain uses sugar and blood to provide energy and cooling to its various regions, a 3D computer could use coolant fluid to deliver energy to the chips.
In addition to dissipating heat, the fluid could be used to power an electrochemical system providing power to the processors.
This, in turn, would allow for further increases in packaging density – and thus efficiency.
By adopting some of the characteristics of the human brain, computers have the potential to become far more compact, efficient, and powerful.
And this, in turn, will allow us to take full advantage of cognitive computing – providing our real brains with new sources of support, stimulus, and inspiration.
Comrade Trump and the Truth
OXFORD – When US President-elect Donald Trump takes office later this month, Americans will be more divided than they have been in years.
Never before has an American presidential inauguration been met with so many hosannas from the United States’ oldest foe, Russia, and with such nervous anguish from its closest allies.
And never before has a US president been elected with such a popular-vote deficit: 2.8 million and counting.
The leader of a government that is supposed to be of, by, and for the people has been elected by a clear minority of those people.
It is fitting that only the Kremlin shares this idea of democracy.
Of course, educated observers know that US presidential elections are not decided by the popular vote, but by the Electoral College.
The Founding Fathers created this system as a compromise between the popular vote and a vote by Congress, to balance the influence of each state.
Alexander Hamilton reckoned that the Electoral College would prevent unqualified candidates with “talents for low intrigue, and the little arts of popularity” from being elected.
This rather confirms my view that the men who drafted the US Constitution had a sense of irony.
When Trump brags that he won by a landslide, he is engaging in his characteristic “truthiness.”
He won the crucial Democratic firewall states of Michigan, Wisconsin, and Pennsylvania by only 107,000 votes – 0.09% of all votes cast across the country.
This election was not a landslide; it was a little sand blown into the great engine of American democracy by the promise to make Russia – sorry, America – “great again.”
Apparently, making America great again means pledging to remove elitist crooks from government, and then stuffing your cabinet with billionaires and Goldman Sachs alumni.
It means spurring economic growth, and then imposing a 35% tariff on imports.
And it means, among other things, promising to restore steelworkers’ and miners’ jobs, end the cosseting of minorities, deport all undocumented migrants, cut taxes and increase infrastructure spending by hundreds of billions of dollars, repeal Obamacare, eliminate or somehow renegotiate the national debt, torture militants, and target their families.
Come next year, everyone in Washington, DC, had better be nice to Trump, lest they be subjected to nasty tweets, hate mail, and online attacks.
And woe betide anyone who suggests that Russia’s malign interference in the election has anything to do with Trump’s own warmth toward Russian President Vladimir Putin.
Never mind that the CIA and FBI have concluded that Russia hacked both Democrats and Republicans, but only leaked Democrats’ emails; or that US President Barack Obama has now responded with a report detailing Russia’s involvement and sanctions against Russian intelligence agencies.
The inquiries into these weighty matters will continue after Trump’s inauguration, and you can bet that they will multiply, as leaks flood out of Washington.
Some of these may be false flags or bits of speculation, but others may be true, and possibly horrifying.
Either way, they will all be divisive, and they will weaken the US and its president.
Still, Trump will weather the storm, unless investigators can confirm complicity between his campaign and any Russian entity known to be connected to Putin.
One can only guess what the prize would be for finding such a treacherous link.
This will all be very messy, but we should perhaps be grateful that the shoe is not on the other foot.
Imagine that Trump had won the popular vote by a wide margin, but suffered a narrow defeat in the Electoral College.
Imagine if this happened alongside CIA reports that Russian intelligence agencies had hacked and leaked Trump’s campaign emails to put him at a disadvantage.
And imagine that Hillary Clinton was packing her cabinet with billionaires.
What would Trump be doing?
He would likely rally his supporters, who have been led to believe that Clinton and her husband are corrupt murderers.
Indeed, if the tables were turned, there would be ample cause to worry for the future of the US – a country that I love and have long admired.
So, what can we do in the dark days ahead?
For starters, we must not allow lies to crowd out the truth in public discourse and debate.
If social media are full of falsehoods, counter them with facts.
If co-workers are repeating fake-news headlines or ignorant, prejudiced claims, challenge them on it.
If television or radio news programs are distorting the truth, pick up the phone and tell them and their advertisers what you think.
And ask your pastors and other community leaders to roll up their sleeves and do the same.
Each of us, as citizens, must campaign for truth and against prejudice and humbug, because if we lose the truth, democracy will be next.
As Saint Augustine supposedly said, “The truth is like a lion; you don’t have to defend it.
Let it loose, and it will defend itself.”
In 2017, we must open the lion’s cage.
Confessions of a Financial Deregulator
BERKELEY – Back in the late 1990’s, in America at least, two schools of thought pushed for more financial deregulation – that is, for repealing the legal separation of investment banking from commercial banking, relaxing banks’ capital requirements, and encouraging more aggressive creation and use of derivatives.
If deregulation looks like such a bad idea now, why didn’t it then?
The first school of thought, broadly that of the United States’ Republican Party, was that financial regulation was bad because all regulation was bad.
The second, broadly that of the Democratic Party, was somewhat more complicated, and was based on four observations:
·        In the global economy’s industrial core, at least, it had then been more than 60 years since financial disruption had had more than a minor impact on overall levels of production and employment.
While modern central banks had difficulty in dealing with inflationary shocks, it had been generations since they had seen a deflationary shock that they could not handle.
·        The profits of the investment-banking oligarchy (the handful of global investment banks, including Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, and JP Morgan Chase, among others) were far in excess of what any competitive market ought to deliver, owing to these banks’ deep pockets and ability to maneuver through thickets of regulations.
·        The long-run market-return gradient – by which those with deep pockets and the patience to take on real-estate, equity, derivative, and other risks reaped outsize returns – seemed to indicate that financial markets were awful at mobilizing society’s risk-bearing capacity.
·        The poorer two-thirds of America’s population appeared to be shut out of the opportunities to borrow at reasonable interest rates and to invest at high returns that the top third – especially the rich – enjoyed.
These four observations suggested that some institutional experimentation was in order.
Depression-era restrictions on risk seemed less urgent, given the US Federal Reserve’s proven ability to build firewalls between financial distress and aggregate demand.
New ways to borrow and to spread risk seemed to have little downside.
More competition for investment-banking oligarchs from commercial bankers and insurance companies with deep pockets seemed likely to reduce the investment banking industry’s unconscionable profits.
It seemed worth trying. It wasn’t.
Analytically, we are still picking through the wreckage of this experiment.
Why were the risk controls at highly-leveraged money-center universal banks so lousy?
Why weren’t central banks and governments willing and able to step up and maintain the flow of aggregate demand as the financial crisis and its aftermath choked off private investment and consumption spending?
More questions arise from the policy response to the subsequent recession. Why, once the magnitude of the downturn became clear, weren’t governments eager to step in to return unemployment to normal levels, especially in the absence of higher inflation expectations, upward pressure on prices, or even interest-rate increases that would crowd out private investment spending?
And how has the financial industry managed to retain so much political power to block regulatory reform?
Moreover, how to restructure the financial system remains unclear.
The Glass-Steagall Act’s separation of investment from commercial banking greatly benefited the established oligarchy of investment banks, but somehow the entry of competitors from commercial banks and insurers increased financial companies’ profits further.
There were significant profit opportunities for financial intermediaries that could find spare risk-bearing capacity, carve out securities to take advantage of it, and thus take a middleman’s cut from matching risks with investors who could gain from bearing them.
But the advent of derivatives concentrated risk rather than dispersing it, for there was even more money to be made by selling risk to people who did not know how to value it – or, indeed, what risks they were bearing.
And central banks’ failure to regard their primary job to be the stabilization of nominal income – their failure not only to be good Keynesians, but even good monetarists – raises the question of whether central banking itself needs drastic reform.
Back in 1825, the Bank of England’s Governor Cornelius Buller understood that when the private sector had a sudden panic-driven spike in demand for safe and liquid financial assets, it was the Bank’s responsibility to meet that demand and so keep bankruptcy and depression at bay.
How can his successors know less than he did?
It may even be the case that we ought to return to the much more tightly regulated financial system of the first post-World War II generation.
That system served the industrial core well, at least as far as we can tell from the macroeconomic aggregates.
We know for certain that our more recent system has not.
Common Sense on Conflict Minerals
LONDON – “That diamond upon your finger, say how came it yours?” asks Shakespeare’s Cymbeline.
“Thou’lt torture me,” responds the villainous Iachimo, “to leave unspoken that which, to be spoke, would torture thee.”
The story behind certain parts of the global trade in natural resources today, whether spoken or not, is no less a source of anguish.
Natural resources should be a major contributor to development in some of the countries that need it most.
And yet, in some of world’s poorest and most fragile states, they bring just the opposite.
In many of these countries, the trade in natural resources motivates, funds, and prolongs conflict and egregious human-rights abuses.
Resources such as diamonds, gold, tungsten, tantalum, and tin are mined, smuggled, and illegally taxed by violent armed groups, and provide off-budget funding to abusive militaries and security services.
Consider just four African countries: Sudan, South Sudan, the Central African Republic, and the Democratic Republic of Congo.
Together, these resource-rich countries account for just over 13% of the population of Sub-Saharan Africa, but some 55% of the region’s internally displaced persons (and one in five worldwide) due to conflict.
But the problem is global, with similar patterns in parts of countries such as Colombia, Myanmar, and Afghanistan.
The deadly trade in conflict resources is facilitated by supply chains that feed major consumer markets, such as the European Union and the United States, with cash flowing back the other way.
Natural resources, such as tin, tantalum, tungsten, and gold – all minerals that have been linked in some parts of the world to conflict and human-rights abuses – are found in our jewelry, cars, mobile phones, games consoles, medical equipment, and countless other everyday products.
There is clear consumer demand for information that will help buyers make sure that their purchases do not implicate them in appalling abuses.
But the responsibility to reconcile global commerce with the protection of basic human rights does not fall first and foremost on consumers.