Бұл саясат жалпы сұранысты арттырады деген болжам ұзақмерзімді пайыздық мөлшерлемелерді 50 базалық пунктке дейін арттырып жіберді.
Бірақ Трамптың саясаты баға мен жалақының артуына алып келеді деген тұжырымдар оның бұл ұсынысымен қабыспайды.
Трамптың сөйлеген сөздерін тыңдап, науқан кезіндегі материалдарын оқыған адам оның инфрақұрылымға инвестицияны федералдық үкімет салады демегенін аңғарған болар.
Ол дефицитті жұмсауға негізделген Кейнс қаржылық ынталандырмасына жүгінеміз деген жоқ. Оның орнына Трамп «инфрақұрылымдағы салық жеңілдіктерінің дефицитке қатысы жоқ жүйесін» ұсынды, яғни жеке бизнесті жолдар  мен көпірлер, туннельдер мен әуежайлар және басқа нысандар құрылысы жобасын алуға ынталандыру қажеттігін айтты.
Әзірге Конгрестің мұншама ауқымды салық жеңілдіктеріне рұқсат беретін-бермейтіні белгісіз, әрине.
Солай болған күннің өзінде бизнестен бұған күткендегідей жауап болатынына еш кепілдік жоқ.
Бизнес құрылымдарының өз мүмкіндіктерін арттырып, әзірлеп сататын өнімдерін көбейте алуы үшін инвесторларға салық жеңілдіктерін беру дәстүрі бұрыннан бар, әрі ол сәтті жүзеге асып келеді. Бірақ жолдарға, көпірлер мен туннельдерге иелік еткеннен кәсіпкерлер не пайда көреді?
Тіпті әуежай сияқты нысандардан табыс табуға болады деген күннің өзінде кәсіпкерлер ұзақмерзімді баға келісімі қажет болатындығын ойлап, тартыншақтауы мүмкін.
Жиынтық сұранысты арттырудың әдісі ретінде салықты азайтуға болады деген қасаң ойдың жетегінде кет��п қалып жатамыз.
Бірақ Конгрестегі республикалықтар жеке табыс салығын жеке адамдардың салық есептерінен қазір алынып тастап жүрген шегерімдердің есебінен азайтайық деуі де мүмкін.
Республикалықтар атынан Өкілдер палатасының спикері Пол Райан ұсынған салық жоспары бойынша, қайырымдылыққа салынған қаражат пен ипотекалық несиеден басқалардың барлығынан шегерімдерді алып тастау көзделген. Бұл өзгеріс ЖІӨ-нің 1 пайызы көлемінде кіріс кіргізеді, яғни бұл жекелеген салықтардың біраз бөлігін азайтқандағы соманы жабуға жеткілікті.
Рональд Рейганның 1986 жылғы әйгілі «Салық реформасы» Актісі - халықтың қалтасына көбірек ақша салатын сұранысқа бағытталған дәстүрлі саясат емес, керісінше елді ынталандыруға, ұсынысқа бағытталған заң болатын.
Рейганның салық жоспары кейбір салық түрлерін 50 пайыздан 28 пайызға дейін түсіріп, салықты анағұрлым азайтып, ол шығындардың орнын шегерімдерді және басқа да бухгалтерлік ережелерді өзгерту есебінен жабуды көздеген. Салықтардың азаюы адамдарды жеңілдігі бар немесе салық салынбайтын табыстан гөрі салық салынатын ресми табыс табуға ынталандырды.
Егер адамдар жаңа өзгерістерге жауап бермегенде Рейганның салықты азайту жоспары ешқандай табыс түсірмес еді.
Алайда салық төлеушілер жаңа өзгерістерге жауап бергендіктен салық салғанға дейінгі табыс көлемі артып, салық көбірек жинала бастады.
Республикашылдар бақылауындағы Конгресс Рейганның ұсынысқа бағытталған саясатын Трамптың салықты азайту моделіне пайдалана алады.
Рейганның салықты азайту заңы енгізілген 30 жылдың ішінде әсіресе табысы жоғары адамдарға салынатын салық көлемі біршама өсті.
Жалақыға салынатын салықтың жоғарғы мөлшері 28 пайыздан 39,6 пайызға дейін артса, инвестициялық табыстардың кей түрлеріне 43 пайызға дейін салық салынады.
Конгрестің Бюджет кеңсесінің есебі бойынша, 1984-2013 жылдар аралығындағы 30 жыл ішінде табысы әртүрлі топтардың көбі төлейтін салық көлемі азайған, тек табысы жоғары 1 пайыз тұрғынның салығы артқан.
Нақтырақ айтсақ, табысы ең төмен отбасылар төлейтін салық 2013 жылы 3,3 пайыз болған.
Ал бұл соңғы 30 жылдағы орташа көрсеткіштен екі есе аз.
Ал табысы орта деңгейдегі үш топ 2013 жылы кірісінің 13,8 пайызын салық ретінде төлеген, ал соңғы 30 жылдағы орташа көрсеткіш 16,6 пайыз болған.
Салық төлеушілердің қалған 19 пайызының салық көлемі сәл ғана азайған.
Ал табысы ең жоғары 1 пайыздың салық көлемі 3,4 пайыздық пункте өсіп, 34 пайызға жеткен. 
Салық мөлшерінің осылайша біртіндеп өсіп бара жатқанын және салық жүктемесінің табысы ең жоғары адамдардың мойнына артылғанын ескерсек, Конгресс жоғары салық мөлшерлемелерін азайтып, табысқа қатысы жоқ салық базасын кеңейтсе, бұған еш таң қалуға болмайды.
Әзірге жиынтық сұраныстың өсуіне ешқандай негіз жоқ.
Экономика ең жоғарғы шегінде толық жұмыс істеп тұр, қазан айында жұмыссыздық 4,9 пайыз болды.
Тығыз еңбек нарығы бір жыл ішінде негізгі тұтыну бағаларының индексін (бұған азық-түлік пен энергия кірмейді) бір жыл бұрынғы 1,9 пайыздан 2,2 пайызға дейін өсіріп жіберді.
Ал өнеркәсіптегі жұмысшылардың жалақысы бағадан 2,4 пайызға жылдам ұлғайды.
Федералдық резерв сұранысты қаржылық тұрғыдан ынталандырудың ешқандай қажеттігі болмаса да желтоқсан айында пайыздық мөлшерлемені арттыру процесін бастай алады.
Trump Before Trump
BERKELEY – Understanding the political success of US President-elect Donald Trump is not easy.
There have been many glib comparisons with populist politicians of the past, from Huey Long to George Wallace.
But the most revealing comparison may be with an historical figure from another country: the British nativist firebrand Enoch Powell in the late 1960s and early 1970s.
At first glance, the comparison might seem peculiar.
Powell came from a lower-middle-class family.
He was a classical scholar of true erudition and a man of principle.
He was also a political insider, having served as Member of Parliament since 1950 and as the junior minister for housing in Prime Minister Anthony Eden’s government in 1955.
Still, the parallels with Trump are undeniable.
In his notorious 1968 “Rivers of Blood” speech, Powell, a skilled orator, broke decisively with the political mainstream.
He decried immigration and denounced the Race Relations Act of 1968, which prohibited discrimination in housing, employment, and lending.
The passage giving his controversial speech its name alluded to inner city riots in the United States and invoked Virgil: “Like the Roman, I seem to see ‘the River Tiber foaming with much blood.’”
Powell’s equivalent of Trump’s Mexican bogeyman was Indian and Pakistani immigration, which he portrayed as threatening the British way of life.
“Ordinary people,” he asserted, knew that the true number of immigrants was larger than official government figures showed.
Powell went on to advocate large-scale repatriation of immigrants to their country of origin.
The “Rivers of Blood” speech was denounced as evil by no less than The Times.
But it won Powell a dedicated following among working-class voters experiencing hard economic times, discomforted by the “invasion” of their neighborhoods by Asian and Caribbean immigrants, and prone to conflate the two phenomena.
Moreover, the parallels with Trump extend beyond hostility to immigration.
Powell was fervently pro-business.
He was a committed nationalist who rejected any and all foreign alliances that threatened Britain’s policy independence.
He implacably opposed joining the European Union (then the European Economic Community) on the grounds that doing so would compromise British identity and sovereignty.
He left the Conservative Party over the issue in 1974.
Curiously, Powell, like Trump, was also pro-Russian.
Notwithstanding his free-market principles, he appreciated the Soviet Union for its World War II sacrifices, its prideful nationalism, and as a counterbalance to other self-interested foreign powers (read: the US).
The apex of Powell’s influence was bracketed by the “Rivers of Blood,” which made him a national figure, and his defection from the Tories.
Quitting the party left him a political outcast.
Although Powell left the House of Commons once and for all only in 1987, his political influence was increasingly marginal.
Why, then, did Powell – unlike Trump – fail to scale the higher reaches of power?
And what does his failure tell us about the Trump phenomenon and the prospects for its repetition in other countries?
First, there were limits on Powell’s ability to mobilize public opinion.
He was able to attract attention mainly by delivering speeches and encouraging his followers to circulate the text.
With the exception of two tabloids, coverage by the establishment press of his “Rivers of Blood” speech ranged from skeptical to outright hostile.
And the establishment press was all there was. The 1960s and 1970s, recall, were when the BBC ruled the airwaves.
Powell had no equivalent of Twitter to spread the word, and there was no Fox News or Breitbart to create an ideological echo chamber.
Second, Powell fundamentally believed in the British parliamentary system, having grown up in it.
He was reluctant to harness his followers’ nativism and economic insecurity to build an anti-system movement that might weaken the foundations of the country’s parliamentary democracy.
Third, public dissatisfaction with British politics in Powell’s heyday was more limited than Americans’ political dissatisfaction in the age of Trump.
Even in the economically disastrous 1970s, British voters were not prepared to reject the political status quo.
Discontent and disillusion were not “accompanied by a basic questioning of British political institutions,” in the words of Powell’s biographer, Douglas Schoen.
Finally, the structure of the political system worked against a maverick like Powell.
In Britain, MPs, not the electorate, choose the prime minister.
Only in a full-blown crisis can popular opinion effectively determine who becomes leader.
This institutional arrangement creates a high barrier to populist outsiders.
Maybe, then, the ultimate lesson of the Powell-Trump comparison is that a presidential system of government, like that in the US, is not superior in terms of the checks it imposes on political extremists.
On the contrary, the opposite may be true.
The Politics of Job Polarization
WASHINGTON, DC – A core problem in the United States today – reflected in Donald Trump’s victory in the presidential election earlier this month – is that too many Americans feel helpless and insecure in the face of the job polarization that has resulted from globalization and new technology.
While highly educated people at the top of the income distribution are doing better than ever, people with only a high school education face declining incomes, living standards, and prospects for themselves and their children.
The middle class is being torn apart.
Trump won largely because he persuaded voters in Pennsylvania, Michigan, Wisconsin, and elsewhere that his policies will yield better outcomes in communities where manufacturing is declining.
In fact, his administration, backed by Republican majorities in both houses of the US Congress, will likely only make things worse for hard-pressed Americans.
The underlying problem is new technology, specifically information technology, and the way it has transformed the nature of work.
As David Autor and David Dorn have shown, many middle-skill, middle-income, middle-class jobs have disappeared.
The new jobs that have emerged are well paid for highly educated people and poorly paid for people who have only a high school education.
A leading symptom – but only a symptom – is the disappearance of well-paid factory jobs.
Employment in manufacturing fell by more than two million from 2004 to 2014, and now accounts for just over 8% of total employment – continuing a long decline since the 1950s.
This technology-driven trend has been compounded by the effects of decreased transportation and communication costs, making it cheaper to move goods over long distances.
Growing networks of sophisticated suppliers make it easier to move manufacturing activity overseas to lower-wage locations.
Many US companies have made this a significant part of their business strategy, with the resulting decline of US manufacturing going hand in hand with a decline in unionization.
When people lose a relatively high-wage and high-benefit union job, they often are reemployed at a lower wage and without the same level of benefits.
The 2008 financial crisis exacerbated income inequality and economic insecurity in part by accelerating the loss of manufacturing jobs.
Arguments that it was necessary, or even “optimal,” to skew financial support from the government toward banks and their executives are not persuasive (at least, not outside Wall Street).
Yes, well-off Americans experienced a big plunge in wealth when asset prices tanked.
But they have since benefited from robust recovery in stock prices and high-end real estate.
In this environment, with so many people insecure about their economic prospects, the push by President Barack Obama’s administration for the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) was a tone-deaf approach, at best.
The administration argued that TPP would create some good jobs – and that people who lost jobs as a result could be “compensated.” But such compensation always proves to be minimal and is widely viewed as meaningless.
That’s why Trump racked up large majorities in so many working-class bastions that had previously supported Obama.
Unfortunately, life is about to get worse for these voters.
With control of the presidency and Congress, the Republicans are likely to pursue three main economic policies. Lowering personal and corporate taxes will primarily help richer Americans.
Repeal of Obama’s signature health-care reform will have a severe impact on many lower-income people as they lose affordable insurance coverage.
And financial deregulation will mostly favor large global banks, encourage reckless risk-taking, and set the stage for another large-scale crisis.
In addition, the confrontational trade measures that Trump has proposed are likely to make the employment situation worse.
At the same time, the extent of any effective stimulus to the economy is likely to be very small.
Overheating the economy – leading to higher inflation and higher interest rates – does not typically help lower-income people (remember the 1970s).
Trump’s main substantive promise has been to bring back middle-class jobs, particularly in manufacturing.
But nothing in his policies or the broader Republican program will address the underlying issue of technological change.
And the next wave of technology, including driverless vehicles, will have a major negative impact on the incomes and opportunities of everyone who currently delivers goods or transports passengers by car.
Moreover, the rapid advance of artificial intelligence and robotics means that even if manufacturing output in the US stabilizes or ticks upwards, it will not involve anywhere near the number of middle-skill jobs that it did in the past.
Likewise, automation will erode the number of currently well-paid jobs in the service sector.
Given the role of technology in displacing workers, protectionism – tearing up trade agreements and imposing tariffs on Chinese and Mexican goods – won’t bring back high-paying manufacturing jobs, and Trump has no plan B. That means the polarization of America that brought Trump to power will only become far more severe.
From Tolstoy to Trump
LONDON – One of Leo Tolstoy’s preoccupations was the nature and limits of power.
What was it that made France so formidable an enemy, particularly of Russia?
This question was at the heart of his greatest novel, War and Peace – so much so that Tolstoy sometimes argued that his book was not a novel at all, but an inquiry into the philosophy of history.
On the limits of power, Tolstoy might have thought a bit more about what Britain’s World War II-era Field Marshal Bernard Law Montgomery later called the first law of warfare.
“Do not march on Moscow.”
Winter was a more formidable agent of reality than even the German generals who helped the Russians in their successful defense against Napoleon (a lesson of which Hitler, fortunately, took no notice).
As for the nature of power, Tolstoy was neither an economic historian nor a demographer.
When War and Peace was published in 1869, on the other side of the Bering Strait stood the United States, which had purchased Alaska from Russia only two years earlier for about two cents an acre.
America was just beginning to emerge as a world power during the surge of globalization in the last third of the nineteenth century, which coincided with the opening up of the American West.
With just 4-5% of the world’s population, America has accounted for 20-30% of world output ever since the early days of steam-ships, railways lines, and the building of Chicago.
So at the heart of a great country’s power is its economic might, both aggregate and in terms of the prosperity of its individual citizens.
China, with the world’s largest population, may challenge America’s overall wealth, but its per capita wealth is only about one-fifth that of the US.
What has made America so prosperous is the country’s ability to mobilize the natural resources of an entire continent, along with political stability and an extraordinarily rare combination of sensible government action and individual entrepreneurial innovation.
From Alexander Hamilton on, government has helped to promote and sustain economic growth.
Among the fruits of that partnership are America’s world-class research universities and the technological developments stemming from defense-related research.
Another reason for America’s success is that it has been a magnet for the best and brightest from around the world, who have contributed their own talents and energy to the melting pot of America’s narrative.
And that process continues.
Demographers predict that the US is the only large developed country that will experience a significant increase in population in the first half of the twenty-first century.
Whereas most of the world’s population increase will occur in its poorest countries, America’s multilingual, multiracial, and multinational population of 320 million will probably increase by around 100 million.
Fidelity to America’s motto, e pluribus unum (“out of many, one”), has made the country one of the greatest success stories in world history.
Given all this, Donald Trump’s presidential candidacy embodies dangerous fantasy at every level.
For one thing, erecting walls to protect America from the world, as he advocates, could not work.
More important, who would want it to work?
While America’s population rises, Russia’s sinks like a stone.
How many people would prefer to live in Moscow than in New York?
Trump’s agenda speaks to the big lie at the heart of the populism now roiling both America and Europe.
We want our sovereignty back, people shout.
We want to control our own lives and our own borders.
In Britain, which in June will hold a referendum on withdrawal from the European Union, these sentiments are crudely stirred by anti-EU ministers who lie about the extent to which an allegedly dictatorial regime in Brussels interferes with the discharge of their official duties.
And too many are easily deluded into believing that there is a simple solution to Europe’s migration crisis.
Build walls.
Send them all home.
Stop the world, we want to get off.
The truth is that the pressure on Europe’s frontiers will continue, especially if more poor states to the south and east break down.
Europeans can address this major problem of our generation only by working together to craft coherent foreign, security, economic-development, and immigration strategies, not by dismissing our neighbors and their policies.
We must tackle the problem at its sources, by rebuilding failed states and giving their populations a reason to stay at home.
Neither America nor Europe should abandon their policies to the populists’ dangerous virtual reality.
Theirs is not the world we live in or a world we should want to live in.
It is a fictional world, but with none of the bearing on our problems that attracts generation after generation of readers to Tolstoy’s work.
Republicans Ride the Trump Tiger
CAMBRIDGE – During a typical week in late May, Donald J. Trump, the presumptive Republican nominee for the US presidency, grabbed headlines yet again.
He declared a popular former president to be a “rapist,” flipped his position on one policy after another, bragged that his running mate could be “anyone” who supported him, and told the National Rifle Association that Hillary Clinton, the likely Democratic nominee, would “release violent criminals from jail.”
Perhaps most worrisome from a global perspective, just hours after an EgyptAir plane crashed into the Mediterranean, and long before any certain facts were known, Trump began stating his own conclusions about what had happened and denouncing American “weakness” in the face of terrorism.
Virtually all efforts to prevent Trump’s nomination have ended, and establishment Republicans are moving steadily to reconcile themselves with their party’s capture by an uncouth, narcissistic, unprepared, and mercurial bully.
“You’re better off riding the beast than trying to ignore it,” explained a former GOP Senate aide.
Many certainly did try to ignore it.
No sooner had Trump announced last summer that he would seek the Republican nomination than pundits and political scientists started to find compelling reasons to dismiss his bid.
I was less certain, because I assessed Trump’s emergence and prospects against the backdrop of my ongoing research on the US political right.
Back in 2010 and 2011, Vanessa Williamson and I studied the popular and elite forces that gave rise to the Tea Party and helped pull the Republican Party further rightward.
More recently, I have worked with Alexander Hertel-Fernandez and other researchers to decipher shifts in organized conservative politics.
Such shifts include the rising influence of Charles and David Koch, billionaire brothers whose network of think tanks and advocacy organizations has encouraged an ultra-free-market economic agenda among Republican candidates and officeholders at state and national levels.
Pulled in different directions by plutocratic funders and angry nativist populists, the GOP became ripe for a Trump-style hostile takeover.
Starting early in Barack Obama’s presidency, as Tea Party populists took center stage, Trump became popular, because he championed efforts to delegitimize America’s first black president.
An April 2011 opinion poll found Trump leading all GOP presidential contenders for 2012, with especially strong backing from Republicans who firmly believed that Obama, as Trump insisted, had not been born in the United States, as the US Constitution requires.
Trump did not run in 2012, but grassroots Tea Partiers were already focused on illegal immigration and hatred of Obama.
Over the course of that year’s presidential primaries, at least half of GOP voters repeatedly tried to find an alternative to the eventual Republican nominee, Mitt Romney, but could not coalesce around a viable contender.
GOP leaders’ failure to stop Obama in 2012 and roll back his initiatives intensified populist Republicans’ anger at their own party.
By the beginning of the 2016 presidential cycle, it seemed clear that many would seek a unifying “anti-establishment” candidate.
In an effort to capture this voter rebellion, Senator Ted Cruz of Texas repeatedly bucked GOP congressional leaders.
But the media-savvy Trump blindsided Cruz and all other contenders.
Starting in the summer of 2015, he embraced extremist rhetoric appealing to nativism, Islamophobia, and anger at GOP elites.
Media outlets provided as much as $2 billion worth of free coverage, helping him grab and hold leads in polls and most primaries.
Trump’s core supporters are wrongly thought to be displaced and economically insecure blue-collar workers.
In fact, his voters’ average annual income, about $72,000, is well above the US median of $56,000.
His supporters resemble the Tea Partiers: overwhelmingly older, male, middle class, and white.
They report anxieties about the economy – as most Republicans do – but what sets them apart is disbelief in Obama’s legitimacy, anger about immigration, and resentment over America’s supposed national decline.
Trump supporters are more likely than other Republicans to hold negative stereotypes about blacks and Latinos.
And it seems quite likely that, as we found for Tea Partiers in 2011, Trump backers approve of social-welfare benefits that go to “real Americans” like themselves, while opposing public spending on minorities and low-income people.
Trump’s agenda thus resembles that of many European populist parties: a mix of anti-immigrant toughness, economic patriotism, and social benefits for native-born citizens.
But no major US party has offered such a program, and even now GOP leaders and major funders, having moved the party further toward the free-market right during the Obama years, oppose it.
In Congress and state legislatures, Republicans hew to generally unpopular extreme positions – tax cuts for the rich, evisceration of business regulations, lower social spending, and curbs on union activities.
But, arguably, the GOP’s ultra-free-market extremism has backfired.
When virtually all GOP contenders for 2016 signed on to that agenda, Trump exploited an opening for “America First” nativism and protectionism.
In Trump’s disparagement of Latino immigrants, independent women, and “uppity” minorities, his base hears a promise to “make America great again” by reasserting white male hegemony.
None of this is surprising.
For years, GOP elites have played with fire by stoking popular nativism and racial fears to mobilize older white voters.
With US conservative media putting out a steady stream of racial innuendo, the GOP’s discourse was thoroughly debased well before candidate Trump, himself a media player, came along.
Could Trump actually win?
Elected GOP officeholders, afraid to buck voter sentiment, are starting to declare their support.
While some wealthy donors are redirecting their money to congressional and state-level candidates, many others have jumped on board – and others will, too, to the degree that Trump seems able to beat Clinton.
In any two-party system as polarized and closely balanced as the current US electoral system, a single crisis, such as a terrorist attack, could tip the balance.
GOP politicians, funders, and advocacy group leaders are now trying to convince themselves that Trump, in the White House, could be managed to implement the Republican agenda.
A pivotal Supreme Court nomination is at stake, and Speaker of the House Paul Ryan has a government-slashing budget ready for a Republican president to sign.
Ryan, who has not yet officially endorsed Trump, will come under growing pressure to do so.
The Republicans will ride the beast they created – and hope that it does not consume them.
Donald Trump and the Sense of Power
NEW HAVEN – US President-elect Donald Trump campaigned in part on a proposal to cut taxes dramatically for those with high incomes, a group whose members often have elite educations as well.
And yet his most enthusiastic support tended to come from those with average and stagnating incomes and low levels of education.
What gives?
Trump’s victory clearly appears to stem from a sense of economic powerlessness, or a fear of losing power, among his supporters.
To them, his simple slogan, “Make America great again,” sounds like “Make YOU great again”: economic power will be given to the multitudes, without taking anything away from the already successful.
For those who consider themselves at least middle class, however, anything that smacks of a handout is not desired.
Instead, they want their economic power back.
They want to be in control of their economic lives.
In the twentieth century, communists politicized economic inequality, but they made sure that their agenda could in no way be interpreted as creating alms or charity for the less successful.
It was fundamentally important that communists take power by a revolution, in which workers unite, take action, and feel empowered.
Trump supporters call his triumph a revolution, too, though the violence – at least by the campaign itself – was limited to name-calling and insults.
It was still nasty enough, apparently, to inspire those of his supporters who interpret aggressiveness as evidence of power.
It is certainly not just in America that people desire a sense of vocational accomplishment, rather than simply money to live on.
In no country does it feel generally right to respond to rising economic inequality by imposing heavy taxes on the rich and transferring the money to others.
That feels like changing the rules of the game after it has been played.
In their recent book Taxing the Rich: A History of Fiscal Fairness in the United States and Europe, Kenneth Scheve of Stanford and David Stasavage of New York University use two centuries of data on tax rates and on income inequality to examine outcomes in 20 countries.
They found that there was little or no tendency for governments to make taxes more progressive when pretax inequality increased.
Katherine Cramer, author of The Politics of Resentment, gained some insight into this outcome in Wisconsin, where, like Trump, the state’s governor, Scott Walker, has been popular among working-class voters.
After he was elected in 2010, Walker cut taxes on higher incomes, refused to raise the state minimum wage above the federally-mandated minimum, and rejected the insurance exchanges created by President Barack Obama’s signature 2010 health-care reform, which would benefit lower-income people.
Instead, Walker promised measures that would take power away from labor unions, actions that usually are perceived as likely to lower working class incomes.
Cramer interviewed rural working-class voters in Wisconsin, trying to understand why they supported Walker.
Her interviewees stressed their rural values and commitment to hard work, which have been a source of personal pride and identity.
But they also stressed their sense of powerlessness against those perceived as unfairly advantaged.
She concluded that their support for Walker, amid evidence of economic decline, reflected their extreme anger and resentment toward privileged people in big cities, who, before Walker, had ignored them, except to tax them.
And their taxes went, in part, to pay for government employees’ health insurance and pension plans, benefits that they themselves often could not afford.
They wanted power and recognition, which Walker seemed to offer them.
Such voters are also almost certainly anxious about the effect of rapidly rising information technology on jobs and incomes.
Economically successful people today tend to be those who are technologically savvy, not those living in rural Wisconsin (or rural anywhere).
These working-class voters feel a loss of economic optimism; yet, admiring their own people and upholding their values, they want to stay where they are.
Trump speaks these voters’ language; but his proposals to date do not seem to address the underlying shift in power.
He stresses cutting domestic taxes, which he asserts will unleash a new flurry of entrepreneurism, and renegotiating trade deals in a protectionist direction, to keep jobs in America.
But such policies are unlikely to shift economic power to those who have been relatively less successful.
On the contrary, entrepreneurs may develop even more clever ways to replace jobs with computers and robots, and protectionism may generate retaliation by trading partners, political instability and, ultimately, possibly even hot wars.
To satisfy his voters, Trump must find ways to redistribute power over income, not just income itself, and not just by taxing and spending.
He has expressed only limited ideas here, like subsidizing school choice to improve education.
But powerful economic forces such as technological innovation and lower global transportation costs have been the main drivers of increasing inequality in many countries.
Trump can’t change this fact.
If those who lack the skills that today’s economy demands refuse redistribution, it is hard to see how Trump will make them better off.
The Trump revolution, as it has been presented so far, seems highly unlikely to deliver what his supporters really want: an increase in workers’ economic power.
The Coming Short-Termism
WASHINGTON, DC – The inauguration of Donald Trump as US president on January 20 could bring more short-term thinking to economic policymaking in the United States and around the world.
If it does, we can expect to see increased tension between official measures and long-term goals, especially for monetary policy, development, and trade.
With respect to monetary policy, I am reminded of when I became Turkey’s Minister of Economic Affairs after the February 2001 financial crash.
At that time, one of my first priorities was to bring medium-term inflation down to single digits from the 30-70% range that had prevailed during the previous decade.
With great difficulty, we passed a law granting the Central Bank of Turkey independent control over the instruments of monetary policy; the government and the central bank would jointly set the inflation target, which I consider to be the proper arrangement.
In 2001, inflation was going to be near 65%, and the International Monetary Fund wanted Turkey to commit to a 20% target for the following year.
Instead, we committed to a 35% target, and surpassed that by bringing inflation down to 30% in 2002.
The takeaway from this story is that the central bank gained credibility.
After we had set the 35% target, I visited businesses across the country, and saw that they were all budgeting for a 50-55% inflation rate.
When I stressed to them that the target was 35%, they signaled their incredulity with polite smiles.
So, when that target was exceeded, the central bank became known as a stable and effective institution that would serve Turkey well for many years.
Credible, independent central banks have become a valuable economic policymaking asset around the world over the last three decades.
They are a good example of the benefits to long-term thinking.
To be sure, central banks are not always right; but they are far better than governments engineering short-term boosts to win elections.
Short- and long-term thinking do not necessarily align in economic development, either.
I have often heard business leaders complain that competitive-bidding laws prevent them from just “making a deal” with development agencies.
But even though a transparent procurement process that rules out quick deals is slow, there is good reason to insist on it.
Despite the “lost” time on individual projects, studies have shown that competitive-bidding laws generally save money and reduce corruption in the long term.
If red tape is slowing things down too much, the solution is to simplify the procedures, not to abolish competitive bidding.
Similarly, on trade policy, some protectionist measures can deliver quick benefits to a sector or even a country, and in the case of well-crafted export subsidies, those benefits may last a long time.
But, eventually, when other countries retaliate, and trade wars become the order of the day, the benefits are overwhelmed by the costs, and everybody is worse off.
The World Trade Organization was established precisely to prevent this scenario, and its system of agreed rules and legal procedures has generally kept a lid on competitive protectionism.
In these and many other areas, such as climate policy, there are clear trade-offs between short- and long-term thinking.
Generally speaking, the best policies should take both perspectives into account.
But, over time, long-term thinking has rightly become a hallmark of good governance.
John Maynard Keynes was correct that “in the long run we are all dead,” but the human life span can be quite a long run, indeed.
And we should also think about how our children and grandchildren will benefit – or not – from the policy choices we make today.
Political leaders who have a purely private-sector background tend to take a more short-term approach than leaders with experience in public service, not least because most markets produce incentives for corporations to emphasize quarterly and yearly profits and share prices above all else.
So, the incoming Trump administration, which is heavily staffed with life-long private-sector players, will likely emphasize speed and quick deals over long-term policies and institution building.
This approach may create short-term gains, or even spectacular results; and many observers will welcome it as a departure from slow, procedural bureaucracy.
And long-term thinking is about a future that is uncertain, and may play out very differently than expected.
But if leaders end up pursuing an extreme form of short-termism – by, say, passing big tax cuts with no accompanying revenue increase, weakening public institutions, or imposing tariffs or engaging in other forms of protectionism, without accounting for retaliation by other countries – the gains will not last long.
In both politics and economics, no reform should throw out the baby with the bathwater.
Trump’s Tax Plan and the Dollar
CAMBRIDGE – Now that Donald Trump has been elected President of the United States and Republicans control both houses of Congress, corporate tax reform is coming to America.
The package currently being discussed includes two important features: a cut in the tax rate, from 35% currently to 20% or even 15%; and a “border-adjustment” tax, which is typical of a value-added-tax (VAT) regime, but unusual for corporate taxes.
A border-adjustment tax would treat domestically purchased inputs and imported inputs differently, and encourage exports.
Corporations would no longer be able to deduct the costs of imported inputs from their taxable income; but, at the same time, their export-sales revenue would not be taxed.
The proposal has generated an intense debate about whether it will improve the US trade balance.
Having published our own work on “fiscal devaluations,” we believe that a border-adjustment tax would have minimal prospects for success, and that it could significantly undermine America’s net foreign-asset position.
The idea of using fiscal-policy instruments to improve trade competitiveness dates back to John Maynard Keynes.
In his 1931 Macmillan Report to the British Parliament, Keynes proposed that an import tariff be paired with an export subsidy, which would mimic the effects of exchange-rate devaluation, while maintaining the gold-pound parity.
In our own work, we have demonstrated that, in addition to this policy combination, countries that maintain a fixed exchange rate or are in a currency union can achieve the same effect by raising their VAT and cutting payroll taxes by equivalent amounts.
This tax-swap policy has received a lot of attention in the eurozone, with Germany implementing it in 2006, and France in 2012.
The incoming Trump administration’s proposal to cut corporate-tax rates and impose a border-adjustment tax is similar to the VAT-payroll tax swap, because both strategies raise the cost of imports and subsidize exports.
But we do not expect such a strategy to improve US competitiveness for the simple reason that the US authorities maintain a flexible exchange rate.
If Trump’s proposed tax reforms are implemented in full, the dollar will appreciate along with demand for US goods: a 20% tax cut will push the value of the dollar up by 20%.
And this, in turn, will offset any competitiveness gains.
The only way that this would not happen is if the US Federal Reserve prevented the dollar from appreciating by lowering interest rates. But this would fuel domestic inflation, so there is no reason to believe that the Fed would take such a step.
Thus, while a border-adjustment tax can benefit countries that have a fixed exchange rate or are in a currency union, it basically has nothing to offer countries with floating exchange rates, because the resulting currency appreciation offsets the fiscal devaluation.
But the effect of a US border-adjustment tax would not be neutral.
An appreciating dollar would erode America’s net foreign-asset position, because an overwhelming 85% of its foreign liabilities are denominated in dollars, while around 70% of its foreign assets are denominated in a foreign currency.
With US foreign assets amounting to 140% of its GDP, and its foreign liabilities amounting to 180% of GDP, a dollar appreciation of 20% would result in a capital loss equal to about 13% of GDP.
The fiscal consequences of Trump’s proposals would be mixed.
On one hand, the border-adjustment tax could push up tax revenues, because the US imports more than it exports.
With the US trade deficit at 4% of GDP, a 20% border-adjustment tax would create additional tax revenues equal to about 0.8% of GDP.
On the other hand, the lower corporate-income-tax rate would decrease revenues and essentially cancel out any gains from the tax on imports.
To be sure, a border-adjustment tax would have other benefits that we have not discussed.
It might generate additional tax revenues, by discouraging international companies from engaging in “transfer pricing” between their subsidiaries, or from shifting profits to low-tax countries.
And, of course, lower tax rates could provide an economic stimulus and decrease the budget deficit.
But in terms of international competitiveness, the bottom line is that Trump’s proposed tax plan – particularly the border-adjustment tax – would most likely not have a positive impact on the US trade balance.
Worse, it could be very costly in terms of US net foreign assets.
The Tarnished Golden Rule
BERLIN – “Do unto others as you would have them do unto you.”
What a simple and logical concept – a straightforward way to resolve knotty moral dilemmas.
Yet, at a time when distinguishing right from wrong seems to be more difficult than ever, this classic postulate – the “Golden Rule” – seems to be going out of fashion.
The ethical norm of reciprocity pervades human history, beginning with the ancient civilizations in Egypt, Greece, India, and China.
It is among the only intellectual threads that connect the teachings of virtually every major religion and those of philosophers through the ages, from classical Rome’s Seneca the Younger to Jean-Jacques Rousseau and John Locke, and on to Jean-Paul Sartre and John Rawls.
The Golden Rule is the backbone of our modern understanding of universal human rights and forms the core of the modern social contract.
It is the starting point of our interactions with one another within our communities and on a global basis.
It underpins the rise of today’s sharing economy, exemplified by Uber and Airbnb.
It even guides our personal relationships.
But the Golden Rule is under assault, and those with the most influence are leading the charge.
Politicians, even in the world’s supposedly enlightened democracies, are refusing to provide refuge to desperate people fleeing brutal war; making little, if any, effort to address high and rising economic inequality; and are all but ignoring the factors driving civil-rights movements like America’s Black Lives Matter.
This lack of empathy is frightening, and it is not limited to politics.
At a time when business has massive – perhaps even excessive – influence worldwide, companies, in their drive for profit or power, often disregard their own societal obligations.
Consider the case of Theranos, a biotech company founded by Elizabeth Holmes in 2003 that promised to revolutionize blood tests.
For several years, the company’s “Edison” blood-testing devices were lauded as groundbreaking.
Theranos boasted reputable financial backers, partnerships with a large number of pharmacies, and a board that seemed very impressive on paper.
Its valuation skyrocketed to $9 billion.
Last year, the truth came out: Theranos was all smoke and mirrors.
Not only were the vast majority of the lab tests the company offered conducted on traditional machines; many of the results it was producing were inaccurate.
In fact, it later emerged that Theranos had stopped using the Edison machines altogether in the summer of 2015, and had voided results from them that had been issued since 2014, sending tens of thousands of corrected reports to physicians and patients.
But Theranos could not void the damage.
It was, after all, in the health-care industry; it wasn’t selling socks or soap.
Its mistakes had real-world consequences for the many patients who had based their health decisions on erroneous data.
Major multinationals like Apple, Amazon, and Starbucks have structured their businesses to minimize taxes to such an extent that they are now facing sanctions from the likes of the European Union.
The New York Times recently disclosed that US presidential candidate Donald Trump is a tax-avoidance enthusiast, as well.
Trump calls tax avoidance “smart.”
Most people, including me, call it selfish, insidious, irresponsible, and a breach of the social contract that enabled him and his family to accrue their wealth in the first place.
Any society that made a virtue out of his reckless and self-serving behavior could not function, much less prosper.
Yet such behavior is increasingly common, with serious consequences.
In the United Kingdom, political leaders stoked fears and made impossible promises – ultimately bringing about a vote to “Brexit” the EU.
The new president of the Philippines, Rodrigo Duterte, has launched what is essentially a war on human rights, while pursuing an isolating path of aggressive behavior toward other countries.
The Trump campaign may be collapsing under the weight of its standard-bearer’s personal history; but an important reason it got this far is that it advanced the lie that American workers would benefit from the construction of a wall – both literal and metaphorical – around the country.
The truth, however, is that Trump’s isolationist approach – which will not die with his defeat next month – would have the opposite impact.
The reciprocity norm has been virtually omnipresent since the dawn of human civilization.
Yet we cannot take it for granted.
We must not lose sight of its value, in our personal or professional lives, and we must not allow our leaders to do so, either.
Donald the Destroyer
WASHINGTON, DC – Donald Trump, the Republican Party’s presumptive nominee to contest the United States’ presidential election in November, is clearly not a standard Republican.
The party’s leaders and elected officials fought against him during the primary, and many are still reluctant to endorse him.
Trump is now aligning some of his policy proposals with mainstream Republican ideas, but he is also clearly determined to retain his distinctive identity.
The resulting ideological mix comprises three main components: virulent anti-immigrant animus, ignorant anti-trade rhetoric, and extreme anti-government sentiment.
Taken separately, any one of these would be damaging.
Together, they would deal a major blow to US and global prosperity, while also weakening national and international security.
Without question, Trump is the most anti-immigrant presidential candidate the US has seen in modern times.
His first idea and overriding catchphrase is to “build a wall” along the country’s southern border, which would supposedly keep out Mexican and other Latin immigrants.
He also wants to deport 11 million people and keep out all Muslims.
This is a recipe for a police state – checking identities, raiding people’s houses, and encouraging neighbors to inform on one another.
It is also fundamentally anti-American, in the sense of undermining everything that the country has achieved.
The US is a nation of immigrants – the best in the world at integrating new arrivals.
After one generation in the country, no one cares where your family came from.
Trump – and those who bring him to power – would throw all of this out of the window.
The associated social disruption would by itself cause not just an economic slowdown, but a sustained decline in GDP and incomes.
The Trump campaign’s anti-trade stance is similarly shocking, including to the business community.
Trump genuinely wants to confront China and other countries with a potential trade war, ignoring completely the impact on the US (where exports account for around 14% of total economic activity).
The US has spent the past 70 years helping to build a global system that, despite its flaws, for the most part enables countries to trade peacefully and across great distances.
Trump’s vow to tear up the rules is a recipe for another Great Depression, with massive unemployment and millions of people unable to pay their mortgages, student loans, and other debts.
Trump has added some themes from the Republicans’ traditional anti-government agenda, but with his own grandiose twists.
Financial reform would be repealed completely, regardless of the consequences.
The US would return to the arrangements that brought the world’s financial system to the brink of complete collapse in 2008 – and caused the country to lose at least one year’s GDP (more than $20 trillion).
Moreover, Trump’s proposed tax cuts would be very large – thus increasing the federal budget deficit and driving up national debt substantially.
Trump will rely on the standard Republican claim that the tax cuts will “pay for themselves” or lead to rapid growth.
Such claims are completely at odds with modern American experience, including under George W. Bush.
This approach to economic policy is classic populism: Promise voters impossible things, particularly when the negative fallout from the promises becomes apparent only well down the road.
If Trump were elected, Americans could expect the same sort of economic cycle seen repeatedly in places like Argentina over the past 100 years.
Inequality would widen, with great wealth for the few and low wages for the many, followed by a traumatic bust – in which the wealthy again do fine, the middle class is ground down to poverty, and the social safety net is ripped to shreds.
In our book White House Burning, James Kwak and I emphasized that fiscal sustainability is important not just for economic prosperity but also for national security.
In 1814, the British were able to burn down the White House (and most other official buildings in Washington, DC) because American politicians had almost completely undermined the central government’s fiscal capacity.
The US had no effective navy, a weak army, and insufficient ability to mobilize in the face of an obvious national emergency.
Trump’s promise to “Make America Great Again” is a political swindle.
Populists will promise anything, including policies that are untenable or that will lead to certain disaster.
Trump’s proposed policies are no different: They would undermine America’s security, depress its economy, and destroy the financial system.
The authoritarian populism that Trump embodies has challenged democracies at least since the end of the Roman Republic.
Authoritarians have always beaten up their opponents – physically, in the courts, and now on Twitter – to make them keep quiet.
Trump’s opponents must not be intimidated.
His rise represents the most profound challenge to American democracy since Germany invaded Poland in 1939.
Rejection of his candidacy is necessary to keep America and the world safe.
Will Trump Bring Down the West?
LONDON – I have spent my whole political life somewhere called “the West.”
It was not literally “west”: while its heartland was Western Europe and the United States, it also included faraway countries like Australia and Japan.
Rather, it was a community that embraced shared hopes and values.
Reflecting America’s global leadership after World War II, the West was protected by US hard power and shaped by US soft power.
And it was the most peaceful and prosperous place in the world.
The West has long provided the foundation for the global order – probably the most successful such foundation ever created.
Led by the US, the West built, shaped, and championed international institutions, cooperative arrangements, and common approaches to common problems.
As it helped to sustain peace and boost prosperity in much of the world, its approaches and principles attracted millions of followers.
The election of Donald Trump as US President, however, threatens this entire system.
If Trump does in office what he promised to do during his crude and mendacious campaign, he could wreck a highly sophisticated creation, one that took several decades to develop and has benefited billions of people.
Those of us who, like Americans, have gained from it must fight for it while it still breathes.
One promise on which Trump must not follow through is to advance trade protectionism.
The case for tearing up free-trade agreements and aborting negotiations for new ones is premised on the belief that globalization is the reason for rising income inequality, which has left the American working class economically marooned.
But the real sources of American workers’ economic pain are technological innovation and tax-and-spend policies that favor the rich.
If Trump, say, walks away from the North American Free-Trade Agreement (NAFTA) with Mexico and Canada, turns his back on ratifying the Trans-Pacific Partnership, and challenges the World Trade Organization, he will hurt the very people who voted for him.
And he will lose friends and influence abroad.
Another dangerous policy that Trump could pursue would be to back away from America’s security arrangements with countries like Japan and South Korea, as well as with NATO.
In Trump’s distorted view, the US should not be offering “free” security to its allies, and instead should leave them to fend for themselves.
In practice, such a stance would be highly destabilizing.
Eastern Europe and the Baltic states would be at the mercy of Russia.
And Asia and the Middle East would be at risk of nuclear proliferation, as countries lacking the US security backstop would seek to develop their own nuclear arsenals – an approach that Trump has said would be acceptable.
Trump’s pledge to scrap the nuclear deal with Iran is a case in point.
Does anyone think Saudi Arabia would sit still if Iran restarted its weapons program?
Criticizing the agreement – a major achievement of US President Barack Obama – might have served Trump during the campaign, but actually abrogating the deal would make the world a far more dangerous place.
Trump’s stated approach to climate change is just as problematic.
He has declared his intention to pull out of the Paris climate agreement, aimed at reducing greenhouse-gas emissions and staving off catastrophic climate change.
He has already appointed Myron Ebell, an outspoken climate change denier, to oversee the transition at the US Environmental Protection Agency.
Trump bases this approach on the nonsensical belief that human-driven climate change is a hoax, invented by the Chinese to make US industry less competitive. And that is far from the only accusation Trump has hurled at China.
His generally hostile attitude toward the country, particularly with regard to trade, threatens further damage to an already-tense bilateral relationship – and thus poses a risk for US multinationals and US allies alike.
A Trump presidency also poses something of an existential threat.
His derogatory comments about marginalized groups – including Muslims, Mexicans, women, and people with disabilities – imperil the values that are fundamental to America’s identity and place in the world, and that bind the countries of the West together.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel is one leader who seems to recognize how quickly the collapse of US leadership could bring about the end of the post-1945 global order.
Her response to Trump’s victory was eloquent and powerful: “Germany and America are connected by values of democracy, freedom, and respect for the law and the dignity of man, independent of origin, skin color, religion, gender, sexual orientation, or political views.”
On the basis of those values, she declared, she would work with Trump.
That is precisely how all of America’s allies and friends should be responding.
Like Merkel, we should all speak up for all that the West has stood for, and all that it has achieved.
We must condemn any move by Trump to shirk the rule of law and the norms of a free society.
We must argue the case for free trade, which has brought far-reaching benefits to humanity.
And we must fight to uphold the nuclear deal with Iran and nuclear non-proliferation around the world.
There is also an imperative to reiterate our commitment to stand firm against Russian adventurism in Eastern and Central Europe.
In particular, we must make clear that Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty applies to Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, and Poland – all members of the military alliance that the US still leads.
(It would also help if, after years of backsliding, NATO’s European members upped their contributions to our collective defense.)
Finally, we should assert that, while we in the West do not agree with China’s mercantilist policies and repressive measures at home, we want to work with it, not seek to marginalize and humiliate it.
The idea of “the West” is one of America’s finest achievements (though many other countries have also contributed).
It would be a true disaster for the world if America, in an act of self-destructive decadence, tossed this noble, practical, and inspiring creation into the dustbin of history.
Trump’s Uncertain New World
MEXICO CITY – The only certainty about US President-elect Donald Trump’s incoming administration is the uncertainty that will attend it.
Remaining unpredictable may be a successful tactic in business, but it is an unsettling, even dangerous, trait for the leader of the world’s most powerful country.
This is especially true with respect to three sensitive policy areas.
The first is the US economy and its impact on all other countries’ economies.
If Trump cuts taxes and manages to enact a massive infrastructure program, America’s budget deficits will rise, perhaps dramatically.
This, together with the Federal Reserve’s gradual interest-rate hikes, will strengthen the dollar, weaken so-called emerging-market currencies, and shift money from the rest of the world to the US.
As Latin American, Asian, and African countries’ currencies depreciate, their reserves will plummet or their own interest rates will spike, and inflation will rise.
For economies that have been barely holding on since the recent commodities boom ended, this is a worrying, if not terrifying, prospect.
On the other hand, Trump might maintain his aura of unpredictability by not pursuing tax cuts, significant infrastructure spending, or even his promised Mexican border wall.
In that case, the US economy would not heat up, the stock market’s rally might reverse, the Fed might postpone new interest rate increases, and American deficits would not spiral out of control, as they did during George W. Bush’s presidency, following the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.
Emerging economies would not suffer too much in this scenario, and they might even benefit from a prudently valued dollar and a deficit- and inflation-free American economy.
But, as long as Trump projects uncertainty, he will effectively create worst-case-scenario conditions, because markets, investors, central banks, and governments have no choice but to prepare for the worst, even if they are hoping for the best.
The same can be said for Cuba, a country that is acutely vulnerable to Trump’s promises to roll back President Barack Obama’s policies.
Because Congress refused to normalize US-Cuba relations by repealing the US embargo, Obama was forced to resort to legally reversible executive orders to loosen restrictions on travel, remittances, and trade and investment.
Trump, for his part, has promised to undo all of this unless he can get “a better deal for the Cuban people, the Cuban-American people, and the US as a whole.”
Though he has not specified what he means by this, he seems to want more concessions on human rights from Raúl Castro, in exchange for the unilateral concessions already made by the Obama administration.
This is a nonstarter: the Castro regime is not going to do what it has never done and negotiate internal political issues with another country.
So no one knows if the Obama administration’s Cuba policy will remain in place under Trump.
If it does not, the tourism industry will suffer the most.
Now that major airlines have flights to and from the island, Cuban-Americans and any other tourists can travel there freely, which means that there are investment opportunities in hospitality, telecommunications, transportation, retail banking, and other related industries.
But, now that Trump could possibly cancel all those flights, it would be madness for anyone to commit, say, $200 million to refurbishing Havana’s José Martí International Airport.
Once again, the continued uncertainty weighs most heavily not only on Cuba, but on potential investors, who must assume the worst.
No smart investor is going to bet on Trump acting sensibly, and plunge ahead into Cuba when the rules of the road are subject to change.
And those rules will remain unclear for some time in Mexico as well – another country that will be disproportionately affected by Trump’s words and actions.
During his campaign, Trump did everything he could to offend Mexico and the Mexican people, and to shroud future US-Mexican relations in uncertainty, by promising to build the border wall, deport undocumented Mexican immigrants en masse, and renegotiate or withdraw the North American Free Trade Agreement.
There is an ongoing debate in Mexico today over whether any of this will actually happen, and how the country should respond if it does, especially with regard to the abrogation of NAFTA.
According to Trump, the US has suffered a net job loss under NAFTA, because Mexican workers are paid lower wages for work that was previously done in the US.
But NAFTA’s US-based supporters and many Mexicans argue that the deal actually created more American jobs than were lost in Rust Belt states that Trump won in the election, because it increased US exports to Mexico.
Either way, imposing tariffs on imports from Mexico would merely operate as a tax on US consumers.
There is room for negotiation, and a new, better NAFTA could eventually address all member countries’ concerns.
The problem is “eventually”: Mexico does not have much time.
Under Mexican President Enrique Peña Nieto’s administration, economic growth – at barely 2% annually – has been unexceptional, and the economy cannot expand more rapidly without increased foreign investment.
But that will not be forthcoming until the NAFTA issue is laid to rest and new trade and investment rules are clarified and codified.
Uncertainty may as well be Trump’s middle name, and he might even welcome that moniker.
But for nearly everyone else, Trump’s unpredictability is an albatross.
Come January 20, all countries that deal with the US will have to make minimizing the burden of his administration one of their highest priorities.
A Majority of “Deplorables”?
VIENNA – Barack Obama was right to say that democracy itself was on the ballot in the just-concluded US presidential election.
But, with Donald Trump’s stunning victory over Hillary Clinton, do we now know for certain that a majority of Americans are anti-democratic?
How should Clinton voters relate to Trump’s supporters and to the new administration?
Had Clinton won, Trump most likely would have denied the new president’s legitimacy.
Clinton’s supporters should not play that game.
They might point out that Trump lost the popular vote and hence can hardly claim an overwhelming democratic mandate, but the result is what it is.
Above all, they should not respond to Trump’s populist identity politics primarily with a different form of identity politics.
Instead, Clinton supporters ought to focus on new ways to appeal to the interests of Trump supporters, while resolutely defending the rights of minorities who feel threatened by Trump’s agenda.
And they must do everything they can to defend liberal-democratic institutions, if Trump tries to weaken checks and balances.
To move beyond the usual clichés about healing a country’s political divisions after a bitterly fought election, we need to understand precisely how Trump, as an arch-populist, appealed to voters and changed their political self-conception in the process.
With the right rhetoric, and, above all, plausible policy alternatives, this self-conception can be changed again.
Members of today’s Trumpenproletariat are not forever lost to democracy, as Clinton suggested when she called them “irredeemable” (though she is probably right that some of them are resolved to remain racists, homophobes, and misogynists).
Trump made so many deeply offensive and demonstrably false statements during this election cycle that one especially revealing sentence went entirely unnoticed.
At a rally in May, he declared, “The only important thing is the unification of the people, because the other people don’t mean anything.”
This is telltale populist rhetoric: there is a “real people,” as defined by the populist; only he faithfully represents it; and everyone else can – indeed should – be excluded.
It is the kind of political language deployed by figures as different as Venezuela’s late president, Hugo Chávez, and Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan.
Notice what the populist always does: he starts with a symbolic construction of the real people, whose supposedly single authentic will he deduces from that construction; then he claims, as Trump did at the Republican convention in July: “I am your voice” (and, with characteristic modesty: “I alone can fix it”).
This is an entirely theoretical process: contrary to what admirers of populism sometimes argue, it has nothing to do with actual input from ordinary people.
A single, homogeneous people who can do no wrong and need only a genuine representative to implement their will properly is a fantasy – but it is a fantasy that can respond to real problems.
It would be a mistake to think that Venezuela and Turkey had been perfect pluralist democracies before Chávez and Erdoğan came along.
Feelings of dispossession and disenfranchisement are fertile ground for populists.
In Venezuela and Turkey, parts of the population really were systematically disadvantaged or largely excluded from the political process.
There is substantial evidence that low-income groups in the US have little to no influence on policy and go effectively unrepresented in Washington.
Again, notice how a populist responds to a situation like this: instead of demanding a fairer system, he tells the downtrodden that only they are the “real people.”
A claim about identity is supposed to solve the problem that many people’s interests are neglected.
The particular tragedy of Trump’s rhetoric – and, arguably, its most pernicious effect – is that he has convinced many Americans to view themselves as part of a white nationalist movement.
Representatives of what is euphemistically called the “alt-right” – latter-day white supremacy – were at the center of his campaign.
He has stoked a sense of common grievance by maligning minorities and, like all populists, portraying the majority group as persecuted victims.
It did not have to be this way.
Trump has obviously made a successful claim to represent people.
But representation is never simply a mechanical response to pre-existing demands.
Rather, claims to represent citizens also shape their self-conception.
It is crucial to move that self-conception away from white identity politics and back to the realm of interests.
This is why it is crucial not to confirm Trump’s rhetoric by dismissing or even morally disqualifying his supporters.
This only allows populists to score more political points by saying, in effect: “See, elites really do hate you, just as we said, and now they are bad losers.”
Hence the disastrous effect of generalizing about Trump’s supporters as racists or, as Hillary Clinton did, “deplorables” who are “irredeemable.”
As George Orwell once put it: “If you want to make an enemy of a man, tell him that his ills are incurable.”
Of course, identity and interests are often linked.
Those defending democracy against populists also sometimes have to tread on the dangerous ground of identity politics.
But identity politics need not require an appeal to ethnicity, let alone race.