The grotesque coupling of legitimate solidarity with Palestine and anti-Jewish invective seems to have forged a politically correct form of anti-Semitism – one that, 70 years after the Holocaust, is raising the specter of Kristallnacht over Europe’s Jewish communities.
Israelis are struggling to comprehend why five million refugees and 200,000 deaths in Syria mean so much less to the Western conscience than the 2,000 Palestinians killed in Gaza.
They cannot quite grasp how European demonstrators can denounce Israel’s wars as “genocide” – a term that has never been applied to the Syrian hecatomb, the obliteration of Grozny by Russia, the 500,000 casualties in Iraq since the United States-led invasion in 2003, or US airstrikes in Afghanistan and Pakistan.
In fact, the answer is simple: Defining Israel’s sins in terms borrowed from the Holocaust is Europe’s righteous way to rid itself of its Jewish complex.
“The Holocaust,” as Thomas Keneally wrote in Schindler’s Ark, “is a Gentile problem, not a Jewish one.”
Or, as the psychiatrist Zvi Rex famously quipped, “Germans will never forgive the Jews for Auschwitz.”
There is no denying that Gaza’s agony is a humanitarian disaster.
But it does not even approach other humanitarian crises of recent decades, including those in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), Sudan, Iraq, and Afghanistan.
In fact, since 1882, the entire Arab-Jewish/Israeli conflict has produced barely half the number of casualties that Syria has in just three years.
Since 1950, the Arab-Israeli conflict ranks 49th in terms of fatalities.
This does not square with the global vilification of Israel that is drowning out legitimate criticism.
When other countries falter, their policies are questioned; when Israel’s behavior is controversial or problematic, its right to exist comes under fire.
There are more United Nations resolutions devoted to human rights abuses committed by Israel than to abuses by all other countries combined.
Stories about Israel focus almost exclusively on the Palestinian conflict.
Joyce Karam, the Washington bureau chief of the Pan-Arab newspaper Al-Hayat, believes that this is because “Muslim killing Muslim or Arab killing Arab seems more acceptable than Israel killing Arabs.”
Syrian, Libyan, and Yemenite victims are faceless; the lionization of the incomparably fewer Gazan casualties makes them unique.
This is not to say that Israel should be consoled by the macabre arithmetic of bloodshed.
The hypocrisy of some of Israel’s critics in no way vindicates its colonial encroachment on Palestinian space, which makes it the last developed, “Western” country occupying and manhandling a non-Western people.
Most of today’s conflicts – in Colombia, Somalia, the DRC, Sudan, and now even Iraq and Afghanistan – are internal.
Even a major power like Russia faces punishing sanctions for refusing to end its occupation of a foreign land.
Israel’s clash with Palestine represents a particularly compelling drama for the West.
The story of Israel extends far beyond the current conflict, to recount an extraordinary symbiosis between Jewish heritage and European civilization that ended in calamity.
From its birth, Israel has borne the scars of the greatest crime ever committed on Europe’s soil.
The plight of the Palestinians – the victims of Zionism’s triumph – touches another neuralgic point in the European mind.
Nonetheless, the Israel-Palestine tragedy is unique.
It is an absorbing odyssey of two nations with mutually exclusive claims on sacred lands and religious shrines that are central in the lives of millions of people worldwide.
It is also a war of conflicting images, in which both parties claim a monopoly on justice and martyrdom.
Jewish persecution, and the way that Zionism has employed it, has become a model for Palestinian nationalism.
Catchwords like “exile,” “diaspora,” “Holocaust,” “return,” and “genocide” are now an inextricable component of the Palestinian national ethos.
It is important to note that the Holocaust does not give Israel immunity from criticism, nor can every attack on Israel’s policies be dismissed as anti-Semitism.
Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu’s Israel is rightly perceived as a status quo state that aspires to have it all: continued control over and settlement of the Palestinian territories and “quiet for quiet” from the Palestinians.
But Hamas’s control within Gaza is equally problematic.
In order to end its fatal flirtation with jihadism and bolster stability, Gaza must pursue an economic and political deal with Israel that represses the temptation of war.
Just as the rehabilitation of the Egyptian towns along the Suez Canal in the wake of the 1973 Yom Kippur war paved the way for an Israeli-Egyptian peace, a prosperous Gaza would serve the interests of all parties involved – beginning with Israel.
Asia’s Middle Eastern Shadow
TEL AVIV – In 2010, then-US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton announced America’s eastward shift in global strategy.
The United States’ “pivot” to the Asia-Pacific region was required not only because of the security threats posed by the rise of China, but also as a consequence of America’s long and costly obsession with the Middle East.
The Middle East has long confronted the US with formidable challenges, which ultimately exceeded America’s imperial capacities and sapped public support.
But the real question now is whether America is still able and willing to uphold its global pretensions.
After all, Asia is no less a demanding theater than the Middle East.
Indeed, dealing with it might require reconciling the pivot to Asia with an ongoing presence in the Middle East, if only because the two regions have much in common.
For starters, in a region replete with territorial disputes and old rivalries that are as bitter as the Arab-Israeli conflict, America faces a geopolitical environment with no security architecture and no agreed conflict-resolution mechanism.
The division of the Korean Peninsula, the India-Pakistan conflict over Kashmir, and the question of Taiwan (which by 2020 the US will no longer be able to defend from a Chinese attack, according to a 2009 study by the RAND Corporation) appear as intractable as the Israeli-Palestinian dispute.
Moreover, like the Middle East, Asia is home to an uncontrolled arms race that includes both conventional capabilities and weapons of mass destruction.
Four of the world’s ten largest militaries are in Asia, and five Asian countries are full-fledged nuclear powers.
Nor does the Middle East have a monopoly on Islamist extremism, ethnic tension, or terrorism.
China’s restive Muslim Uighurs, the Hindu-Muslim conflict in India, the ethnic cleansing of the Rohingya Muslims in Myanmar, the secessionist Muslim insurgency in the Philippines, and the ethnic separatist insurgency in southern Thailand all highlight Asia’s complex tapestry of unresolved religious and ethnic trouble spots.
Moreover, America’s Asian pivot is occurring at a time when its international credibility has been badly eroded by domestic political dysfunction and disappointing performance in the Middle East.
This, for example, explains Japan’s fear that the US might eventually reach an accommodation with China over the disputed Senkaku Islands (Diaoyu Islands in Chinese).
Indeed, Japan’s quest to re-establish its own military capability is a vote of limited confidence in its US ally.
Obama’s recent wavering on the use of force in Syria has left many in Asia doubting whether they can rely on America not only if China forcibly asserts its maritime claims, but also if North Korea carries out its threats to attack the South.
Conspicuously, South Korean President Park Geun-hye’s “Trustpolitik” – a soft-power approach to North Korea that calls for deeper cooperation with China, the North’s most important ally – is particularly popular.
As in the Middle East, America’s bilateral military relationships in Asia are often with “frenemies,” countries that share an alliance with the US while deeply mistrusting one another.
US Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel’s agreement in early October with his South Korean counterpart on a Tailored Deterrence strategy became untenable a few days later, when the US promised Japan a massive upgrading of its military capabilities.
South Korea views this as tantamount to outsourcing China’s containment to an unrepentant imperial power.
In any case, an American withdrawal from the Middle East is hardly a recipe for countering China’s rise in East Asia, given that the two regions are increasingly intertwined.
While the US is pivoting to the East, leaving old allies like Saudi Arabia and Egypt deeply resentful, China is pivoting westward.
China’s exports to the Middle East are already more than twice those of the US.
Its annual exports to Turkey total $23 billion, and now include military supplies, such as a missile-defense system that is not compatible with those of Turkey’s NATO allies.
If China’s penetration into the Middle East persists at the current pace, it might even be able to obstruct the flow of energy resources to America’s Asian allies.
In a global competition, a superpower’s competitors are bound to exploit its weaknesses.
The 2008 financial crisis, which destroyed the mystique of Western economic prowess, led to a marked a shift in China’s global strategy.
The Chinese began toying with the idea of abandoning their “peaceful rise” in favor of what then-President Hu Jintao defined at a July 2009 conference of Chinese diplomats as “the democratization of international relations” and “global multipolarity.”
The US, as hegemon in the Middle East for many years, could not solve any of the region’s major problems single-handedly.
If its pivot to Asia is to be credible, the US will eventually have to agree to be one among a number of great powers in Asia, a co-equal partner with China, Japan, and India in shaping the region’s strategic environment.
Negotiations in a Strategic Trap
TEL AVIV – The Israeli-Palestinian peace process, stymied by irreconcilable differences between the parties, has always depended on the strategic regional context.
It was born, after all, in the wake of the first Gulf War, and was facilitated by the regional consequences of the Cold War’s end.
These days, the process is shaped by two major regional dynamics, the so-called Arab Spring and the Iran nuclear deal.
The Iran deal has turned into one of the most serious crises of trust ever in the United States’ relations with its Middle East allies.
Though they have no alternative, both Israel and the Arab states will find it difficult to trust future US commitments to their security.
To Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu, US President Barack Obama betrayed Israel when he sacrificed Egypt’s former president, Hosni Mubarak, and paved the way for the Muslim Brotherhood’s rise to power.
Now he has wielded the knife a second time by reaching a deal with Iran, supposedly behind Netanyahu’s back.
Israel’s conventional strategic wisdom was based on an equation of “Bushehr versus Yitzhar” – that is, a readiness to dismantle West Bank settlements if the Iranian centrifuges in Bushehr were dismantled. As far as Netanyahu is concerned, this is not taking place.
Nor do the Arab revolutions counsel Israel’s strategic planners to take security risks.
Israel, they would say, is now surrounded by imploding, failing states/regions (Lebanon, Syria, Gaza, and Egypt’s Sinai Peninsula), as well as by a strategically vital buffer state, Jordan, whose long-term survival cannot be taken for granted.
The anarchy along Israel’s borders is becoming a breeding ground for Sunni extremists for whom the Jewish state is the ultimate enemy.
To create a Palestinian state when existing Arab states are crumbling – and with a part of Palestine controlled by Hamas – does not seem like a brilliant idea.
Netanyahu is a conservative in revolutionary times.
Unimpressed with what others saw as the beginning of an era of democracy in the Arab world, he preferred not to budge on any front, including Palestine.
Now he is faced with a strategic nightmare come true: Iran’s possible integration into the international community without having to dismantle its nuclear-weapons potential.
In this context, US Secretary of State John Kerry’s peace initiative has become trapped in a paralyzing power game.
Should the process fail, Kerry warns, the US will not be able to rescue Israel from the wave of international condemnation and sanctions that would be unleashed against it.
But Netanyahu’s card is more than a threat.
His friends in the US Senate have already introduced a bill, which currently has 59 cosponsors, that would impose new sanctions on Iran; this is tantamount to torpedoing the entire Iran deal.
It is this reality that has led the Americans to endorse two Israeli positions – recognition of Israel as a Jewish state and intrusive security arrangements – that the Palestinians are bound to reject.
Recognizing the “Jewish state” would be a betrayal of the constituent ethos of Palestinian nationalism, while intrusive security arrangements would be a standing invitation to radical groups to fight what would be seen as occupation in disguise.
Instead of controlling the extremists, a robust Israeli security presence in Palestine would precipitate the collapse of its institutions.
Iran will not change its regional policies overnight.
The nuclear deal is not the “grand bargain” that Iran proposed to the US in 2003 and that was supposed to address, in addition to the nuclear dispute, a wide array of regional issues, including the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
For Iran, a strategic partnership with the US would be the ultimate betrayal of the Islamic revolution, an inconceivable change of identity.
With or without a nuclear deal, Iran, which was disinvited from the Geneva II conference on Syria, because of its rejection of the conference’s US-inspired terms of reference, aspires to challenge America’s policies and represent an alternative path for the region.
“We did not agree to dismantle anything,” Iran’s foreign minister insisted in defiance of the US interpretation of the nuclear deal.
Such talk allows Netanyahu to persist in his doomsday rhetoric.
One would expect that, with the rising Iranian threat fostering tacit security cooperation between Israel and its more stable Arab neighbors (particularly Saudi Arabia), Netanyahu would aspire to resolve the Palestinian issue, thus removing the last obstacle to an overt strategic partnership.
That was exactly the rationale behind Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin’s endorsement of the Oslo process from the outset.
But Netanyahu’s school of thought is radically different.
Not only does it advocate an Israeli presence in the West Bank (the Biblical homeland of Judea and Samaria); it also links territorial concessions to the Palestinians to the neutralization of existential threats emanating from the outer circle of the region.
Among US presidents, George W. Bush identified most strongly with this right-wing Israeli philosophy, and his war in Iraq and policies toward Iran accorded with it perfectly.
Indeed, both he and his father moved to promote an Israeli-Palestinian peace settlement only after their respective Iraq wars.
The 1991 Madrid Peace Conference followed the Gulf War, while the “road map” came after the Iraq War.
Now, however, international acceptance of Iran as a nuclear-threshold state, together with the threat emanating from imploding Arab neighbors, flatly contradicts Netanyahu’s assumptions about the conditions that must be fulfilled for Israel to offer “painful concessions” to the Palestinians.
Someone clearly looks likely to fall into a strategic trap, but who?
A New Peace Paradigm
TEL AVIV – The collapse of yet another attempt by the United States to broker an Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement should do more than provoke finger-pointing.
It should spur a fundamental reconsideration of a paradigm of peacemaking – direct bilateral negotiations, under US guidance – that lost its relevance long ago.
While the US remains an indispensable global actor, it is no longer willing to use coercive diplomacy in its quest to build a new order.
Despite its professed strategic pivot toward Asia, US President Barack Obama’s administration has done little to address China’s increasingly assertive efforts to stake its territorial claims in the South and East China Seas or North Korea’s affronts to the status quo on the Korean Peninsula.
Add to that America’s weak response to Russia’s annexation of Crimea, and it is no wonder that Israeli and Palestinian leaders have dismissed its peace overtures.
US Secretary of State John Kerry, in his bid for an Israeli-Palestinian settlement, operated as if conflict resolution could be achieved through non-coercive solutions, deriving from the good will of the relevant parties.
According to this plainly naive approach, the negotiation process operates according to its own embedded logic, independent of considerations of power, coercion, and leverage.
But treating force and diplomacy as distinct phases of foreign policy gives the negotiating parties the sense that American power lacks purpose and resolve.
Diplomatic ripening sometimes requires the mediator to be a manipulator and an arm-twister.
Indeed, America’s only successful attempts at peace diplomacy in the Middle East involved a masterly combination of power, manipulation, and pressure.
Secretary of State Henry Kissinger used it to lead Israel toward groundbreaking interim settlements with Egypt and Syria following the 1973 Yom Kippur War.
President Jimmy Carter used it to conclude the 1978 Camp David Accords, establishing diplomatic relations between Egypt and Israel.
And Secretary of State James Baker used it to overcome the recalcitrance of Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir during the 1991 Madrid Peace Conference.
If the US cannot provide this today, it must relinquish its monopoly on international conflict resolution.
It is time for the US to recognize that it cannot resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, defuse the Iranian nuclear dispute, change North Korea’s behavior, or stop the Syrian civil war on its own.
Over the last two decades, the world grew accustomed to US-led international coalitions for war in the Middle East.
America should now try to form a different kind of coalition – one aimed at achieving peace.
Such an alliance would entail a larger role for the other three members of the so-called “Middle East Quartet” – the European Union, Russia, and the United Nations – and key Arab countries.
Within this new peace paradigm, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict would become amenable to a truly international solution.
If Iran’s nuclear program demands negotiations with the five permanent members of the UN Security Council, plus Germany, and North Korea’s requires the so-called “six-party talks,” why should the resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict be left exclusively to the US?
As if the Israeli-Palestinian conflict’s depth and duration were not enough to merit an international solution, there is also the issue of Palestine’s mistrust of the US.
For Palestinians, the US – a staunch ally of Israel whose leaders have strong domestic political incentives not to challenge it – cannot act as an honest broker in negotiations.
Under a truly international paradigm, the principles underlying a peace deal – two states along the 1967 border (with territorial swaps to accommodate Israel’s settlement blocs), two capitals in Jerusalem, an agreed solution to the refugee problem, and robust security arrangements – could be enshrined in a Security Council resolution.
After establishing the terms of a fair deal, the international alliance – under US leadership – could devise an implementation strategy.
Such an international approach would also require a broader peace process, aimed at achieving a regional settlement between Israel and its Arab neighbors.
This is critical, because the future Palestinian state could not offer Israel much security.
Even now, Palestine is a relatively minor security challenge for Israel; the more formidable threats, which have compelled Israel to build up its military considerably, come from the Arab states that surround it.
The promise of a regional settlement that offers Israel the needed security guarantee – not to mention a considerable boost to its international standing – would make the painful concessions, including compromises on borders and Jerusalem, which are critical to the creation of a Palestinian state, more digestible for Israeli leaders.
The initiators of the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative understood this; perhaps now the US will come to appreciate it as well.
Shock and Panic
CARDIFF – No medical therapy is treated more differently by countries, regions, hospitals, and doctors than electroconvulsive therapy (ECT).
This is surprising in an era when treatments that work should supposedly be used with some uniformity.
In fact, despite a consensus that ECT is the most effective treatment for severe depressive disorder, it comes at the bottom of the list in most treatment regimens for mood disorders.
Some of the unease about ECT stems from psychiatry’s dark past, when patients in many countries had fewer legal rights than prisoners.
Not so long ago, physical treatments such as lobotomy and ECT could be inflicted on patients without their consent, and sometimes for punitive purposes.
But there is no comparable protest against the use of antipsychotic drugs, which have similarly been forced on people – and even used to torture prisoners.
And, whereas few people now get ECT involuntarily, and in all cases consent is sought, a large and growing number get antipsychotic drugs under false pretences, including children, vulnerable adults, patients with Alzheimer’s, and a host of others whose lives are shortened by treatment, with no effort undertaken to seek their consent.
Although ECT’s opponents believe that it causes brain damage, this is difficult to prove.
Like antipsychotic drugs, antidepressants, and tranquilizers, ECT has an immediate organic effect.
But, while ECT rarely, if ever, causes clear clinical evidence of brain damage and has not been shown to do so in animal studies, antipsychotic drugs regularly do, in the form of tardive dyskinesia and other syndromes. The same is true of antidepressants. 
There is no dispute that ECT can cause short-term memory loss.
But critics have found it difficult to demonstrate memory or other cognitive problems that endure beyond three months. Nor can enduring autobiographical memory disturbances and inability to remember lists be readily attributed to ECT, because ECT is rarely given on its own.
Indeed, very few of those who receive ECT do not also receive benzodiazepines, which do cause significant autobiographical memory problems when given alone, and antipsychotic drugs, which cause difficulties with lists of names or telephone numbers, and other comparable problems.
Yet these drugs are rarely, if ever, blamed for cognitive disturbances following psychiatric treatment.
The failure of ECT’s critics to demonstrate what to them seems obvious indicates an active conspiracy to minimize treatment-induced problems and to block those who have been injured by treatment from seeking redress.
In fact, at recent guideline meetings in the United Kingdom on the issue of ECT, there have been no representatives from psychiatry, but many from patient groups.
Organized psychiatry appears to have little interest in ECT, or is scared of harassment from patient advocates.
As a result, even evidence that a person’s mood and clinical state has been significantly improved after ECT can be transformed into evidence of brain damage.  When patients come forward to say they were helped by ECT, or a patient’s medical record points to clinical improvement with treatment, the apparent improvements are read as indicating the disinhibition and vacuousness that accompanies brain damage.
There are better targets in mental health than ECT.
Where is the concern about the millions who are becoming physically dependent on antidepressants?
Where are the protests about the one-year-olds being treated with antipsychotic drugs?
How is it possible that, because no company with currently patented drugs is campaigning to help medical and nursing staff recognize the catatonic features displayed by one in ten patients going through a psychiatric unit – features that could be treated rapidly with benzodiazepines or ECT – these features are missed completely?
Why is it all but impossible to find anything but vilification of ECT on the Internet, and anything but glowing testimonies about drug treatments?
ECT’s critics seem to think that if they do not protest against its use at every opportunity, its advocates will inflict it on people who do not need it.
But, in contrast to psychotropic drugs, there are no marketing departments geared to maximizing ECT.
This visceral focus on ECT has almost certainly led to ever more people ending up on drugs, and ever more brain damage and memory problems as a consequence.
It sometimes seems that the critics are behaving according to the romantic illusion that if they can just abolish ECT, mental illness will disappear with it.
Sigmund Freud would have been fascinated.
Should Adult Sibling Incest Be a Crime?
PRINCETON – Last month, the German Ethics Council, a statutory body that reports to the Bundestag, recommended that sexual intercourse between adult siblings should cease to be a crime.
The recommendation follows a 2012 decision by the European Court of Human Rights upholding the conviction of a Leipzig man for having a sexual relationship with his sister.
The man has served several years in prison, owing to his refusal to abandon the relationship.
(His sister was judged to be less responsible and was not jailed.)
Incest between adults is not a crime in all jurisdictions.
In France, the offense was abolished when Napoleon introduced his new penal code in 1810.
Consensual adult incest is also not a crime in Belgium, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Russia, China, Japan, South Korea, Turkey, Côte d’Ivoire, Brazil, Argentina, and several other Latin American countries.
The Ethics Council took its investigation seriously.
Its report (currently available only in German) begins with testimony from those in a forbidden relationship, particularly half-brothers and sisters who came to know each other only as adults.
These couples describe the difficulties created by the criminalization of their relationship, including extortion demands and the threat of loss of custody of a child from a previous relationship.
The report does not attempt to provide a definitive assessment of the ethics of consensual sexual relationships between siblings.
Instead, it asks whether there is an adequate basis for the criminal law to prohibit such relationships.
It points out that in no other situation are voluntary sexual relationships between people capable of self-determination prohibited.
There is, the report argues, a need for a clear and convincing justification for intruding into this core area of private life.
The report examines the grounds on which it might be claimed that this burden of justification has been met.
The risk of genetically abnormal children is one such reason; but, even if it were sufficient, it would justify only a prohibition that was both narrower and wider than the current prohibition on incest.
The prohibition would be narrower, because it would apply only when children are possible: The Leipzig man whose case brought the issue to attention had a vasectomy in 2004, but that did not affect his criminal liability.
And the goal of avoiding genetic abnormalities would justify widening the prohibition to sexual relationships between all couples who are at high risk of having abnormal offspring.
Given Germany’s Nazi past, it is difficult for Germans today to treat the desirability of that goal as anything but permitting the state to determine who may reproduce.
The Council also considered the need to protect family relationships.
The report notes that incest between siblings is rare, not because it is a crime, but because being brought up together in a family or family-like environment (including Israeli kibbutzim that rear unrelated children collectively) tends to negate sexual attraction.
The report does recognize the legitimacy of the objective of protecting the family, however, and makes use of it to limit the scope of its recommendation to sexual relations between adult siblings.
Sexual relations between other close relatives, such as parents and their adult children are, the report argues, in a different category because of the different power relations between generations, and the greater potential for damage to other family relationships.
The taboo against incest runs deep, as the social psychologist Jonathan Haidt demonstrated when he told experimental subjects about Julie and Mark, adult siblings who take a holiday together and decide to have sex, just to see what it would be like.
In the story, Julie is already on the Pill, but Mark uses a condom, just to be safe.
They both enjoy the experience, but decide not to do it again.
It remains a secret that brings them even closer.
Haidt then asked his subjects whether it was okay for Julie and Mark to have sex.
Most said that it was not, but when Haidt asked them why, they offered reasons that were already excluded by the story – for example, the dangers of inbreeding, or the risk that their relationship would suffer.
Perhaps not coincidentally, when a spokesperson for German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s Christian Democrats was asked to comment on the Ethics Council’s recommendation, she also said something completely beside the point, referring to the need to protect children.
The report, however, made no recommendations about incest involving children, and some of those caught by the criminal law did not even know each other as children.
When Haidt pointed out to his subjects that the reasons they had offered did not apply to the case, they often responded: “I can’t explain it, I just know it’s wrong.”
Haidt refers to this as “moral dumbfounding.”
In the case of the incest taboo, our response has an obvious evolutionary explanation.
But should we allow our judgment of what is a crime to be determined by feelings of repugnance that may have strengthened the evolutionary fitness of ancestors who lacked effective contraception?
Even discussing that question has proved controversial.
In Poland, a comment presenting the views of the German Ethics Council was posted online by Jan Hartman, a philosophy professor at the Jagiellonian University in Krakow.
The university authorities described Hartman’s statement as “undermining the dignity of the profession of a university teacher” and referred the matter to a disciplinary commission.
In so quickly forgetting that the profession’s dignity requires freedom of expression, a renowned university appears to have succumbed to instinct.
That does not augur well for a rational debate about whether incest between adult siblings should remain a crime.
Should Bondholders be Bailed Out?
CAMBRIDGE – A year after the United States government allowed the investment bank Lehman Brothers to fail but then bailed out AIG, and after governments around the world bailed out many other banks, key question remains: when and how should authorities rescue financial institutions?
It is now widely expected that, when a financial institution is deemed “too big to fail,” governments will intervene if it gets into trouble. But how far should such interventions go?
In contrast to the recent rash of bailouts, future government bailouts should protect only some creditors of a bailed-out institution.
In particular, the government’s safety net should never be extended to include the bondholders of such institutions.
In the past, government bailouts have typically protected all contributors of capital of a rescued bank other than shareholders.
Shareholders were often required to suffer losses or were even wiped out, but bondholders were generally saved by the government’s infusion of cash.
For example, bondholders were fully covered in the bailouts of AIG, Bank of America, Citigroup, and Fannie Mae, while these firms’ shareholders had to bear large losses.
The same was true in government bailouts in the United Kingdom, Continental Europe, and elsewhere.
Bondholders were saved because governments generally chose to infuse cash in exchange for common or preferred shares – which are subordinate to bondholders’ claims – or to improve balance sheets by buying or guaranteeing the value of assets.
But, while these considerations provide a basis for providing full protection to depositors and other depositor-like creditors when a financial institution is bailed out, they do not justify extending such protection to bondholders.
Unlike depositors, bondholders generally are not free to withdraw their capital on short notice.
They are paid at a contractually specified time, which may be years away.
Thus, if a financial firm appears to have difficulties, its bondholders cannot stage a run on its assets and how these bondholders fare cannot be expected to trigger runs by bondholders in other companies.
Moreover, when providing their capital to a financial firm, bondholders can generally be expected to obtain contractual terms that reflect the risks they face.
Indeed, the need to compensate bondholders for risks could provide market discipline: when financial firms operate in ways that can be expected to produce increased risks down the road, they should expect to “pay” with, say, higher interest rates or tighter conditions.
But this source of market discipline would cease to work if the government’s protective umbrella were perceived to extend to bondholders.
If bondholders knew that the government would protect them, they would not insist on getting stricter contractual terms when they face greater risks.
The problem of “moral hazard” – which posits that actors will take excessive risks if they do not expect to bear fully the consequences of their actions – is commonly cited as a reason not to protect shareholders of bailed-out firms.
But it also counsels against protecting firms’ bondholders.
Thus, when a large financial firm runs into problems that require a government bailout, the government should be prepared to provide a safety net to depositors and depositor-like creditors, but not to bondholders.
In particular, if the firm’s equity capital erodes, the government should not provide funds (directly or indirectly) to increase the cushion available to bondholders.
Rather, bonds should be at least partly converted into equity capital, and any infusion of new capital by the government should be in exchange for securities that are senior to those of existing bondholders.
Governments should not only avoid protecting bondholders after the fact, when the details of a bailout are worked out; but should also make their commitment to this approach clear in advance.
Some of the benefits of a government policy that induces bondholders to insist on stricter terms when financial firms take larger risks would not be fully realized if bondholders believed that the government might protect their interests in the event of a bailout.
In other words, governments should establish bailout policies before the need to intervene arises, rather than make ad hoc decisions when financial firms get into trouble.
The best policy should categorically exclude bondholders from the set of potential beneficiaries of government bailouts.
This would not only eliminate some of the unnecessary costs of government bailouts, but would also reduce their incidence.
Should Children Take Antidepressants?
The last 12 months have witnessed radical changes and considerable controversy regarding how childhood and teenage depression is treated.
Although few antidepressant drugs have been licensed for pediatric use, rates of prescribing in the under-18 age group have risen by around 60% over the past decade, with over a million children and adolescents receiving what are called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI’s).
Now, however, concerns over these drugs’ safety and side effects in children and adolescents – including elevated suicide rates – have awakened regulators in many countries.
After reviewing all relevant pediatric trials, the UK’s Medinces and Heathcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) advised that the risks outweighed the benefits for all SSRI’s (except fluoxetine), and that these products should not be prescribed as new therapy for patients under 18 years of age with depressive illness.
For the first time, the MHRA made public a summary of the review that this decision was based on, including both efficacy and safety data for all of the trials, regardless of whether they had previously been published or not.
This was important because about half of the trials had not been published in peer-reviewed journals.
The pediatric trial data released by the MHRA presented a unique opportunity to examine whether the unpublished data supported the findings from published studies of SSRI’s.
My colleagues and I addressed this question in a review published in The Lancet in April 2004. The review showed that while the published data generally indicated minimal risk, the unpublished trial data were far less sanguine, and even suggested an increased risk of serious adverse events, including suicide-related behavior.
The MHRA was not alone in being concerned about pediatric trials.
A review in the British Medical Journal (BMJ) in April 2004, claimed that most papers on SSRI trials overstated the evidence for efficacy and understated the risk of harm.
An article by the Center for Science in the Public Interest classified all available published placebo-controlled trials of SSRI’s in children and adolescents as industry-funded or non-industry funded.
The results showed that 90% of industry-funded trials in the published literature were reported as positive, while only 55.6% of non-industry-funded trials were positive.
More recently, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) applied a ”black box” warning to all antidepressant drugs labelling, but fell short of restricting the use of any individual drug.
This was done after an FDA commissioned re-analysis of safety data from all trials of the newer antidepressants demonstrated increased risk of suicidality (definitive suicidal behaviour/ ideation) and increased risk of treatment-emergent hostility or agitation in those treated with the active drug compared to placebo.
Taken together, it is not hard to see why some commentators argue that there has been little attempt by the pharmaceutical industry to properly assess the risks and benefits of their products in under 18’s.
Often, where trials have been conducted, only favorable results have been published.
The problem is widespread and not restricted to drug companies.
Both regulators and clinicians who run trials have been criticized.
Adding further fuel to the fire, New York State Attorney General Eliot Spitzer recently filed a civil lawsuit against GlaxoSmithKline for potentially misleading doctors by publicizing a favorable study of paroxetine for pediatric depression while downplaying other unfavorable trials.
In response, GlaxoSmithKline made full-trial reports of all studies involving paroxetine in patients under 18 available on their website.
The case points to several changes in the way data are collected and released that are urgently needed to determine definitively whether SSRI’s are safe and effective for treating pediatric depression.
Tighter regulation of all clinical trials is needed, as is a public worldwide database that contains trial protocols and regularly updated information about trial status and publications.
Moreover, both benefits and harms of all trials must be published within a reasonable timeframe, and properly designed, non-industry-funded trials are needed to confirm both safety and efficacy. Finally, product labels must reflect negative or equivocal results, not just those that are positive.
Such changes may well lead to a dramatic reduction in the use of SSRI’s in treating depressed children and adolescents.
But whatever the outcome, it is urgent that doubts about the safety of these drugs are resolved.
Should China be “Contained”?
CAMBRIDGE – This month marks the 40th anniversary of Henry Kissinger’s secret trip to Beijing, which launched the process of mending a 20-year breach in diplomatic relations between the United States and China.
That trip, and President Richard Nixon’s subsequent visit, represented a major Cold War realignment. The US and China put aside their intense hostility in a joint and successful effort to contain an expansionist Soviet Union.
Today, the Soviet Union has vanished, and Chinese power is growing.
Some Americans argue that China’s rise cannot be peaceful, and that the US, therefore, should now adopt a policy of containing the People’s Republic.
Indeed, many Chinese officials perceive that to be the current American strategy.
They are wrong.
After all, Cold War containment of the USSR meant virtually no trade and little social contact.
Today, by contrast, the US not only has massive trade with China, but also extensive social contact, including 125,000 Chinese students attending American universities.
With the end of the Cold War, the containment of the Soviet Union ushered in by Kissinger’s visit could no longer serve as the basis for US-China relations.
Moreover, relations with China cooled after the Tiananmen Square shootings in 1989, and the Clinton administration had to devise a new approach.
When I was supervising the Pentagon’s East Asia Strategy Review in 1994, we rejected the idea of containment of China for two reasons. If we treated China as an enemy, we were guaranteeing an enemy in the future.
If we treated China as a friend, we could not guarantee friendship, but we could at least keep open the possibility of more benign outcomes.
In addition, it would have been difficult to persuade other countries to join a coalition to contain China unless China resorted to bullying tactics, as the Soviets did after World War II.
Only China, by its behavior, could organize the containment of China by others.
Instead of containment, the strategy that the Clinton administration devised could be termed “integrate but hedge” – something like Ronald Reagan’s “trust but verify” approach to strategic agreements with the Soviets.
On one hand, the US supported China’s membership in the World Trade Organization and accepted Chinese goods and visitors.
On the other hand, the Clinton-Hashimoto Declaration of April 1996 affirmed that the US-Japan security treaty, rather than being a Cold War relic, would provide the basis for a stable and prosperous East Asia.
Clinton also began to improve relations with India, a strategy that has enjoyed bipartisan support in the US.
The Bush administration continued to improve bilateral relations, while deepening and formalizing the economic dialogue with China.
Then Deputy Secretary of State Robert Zoellick made clear that the US would accept the rise of China as a “responsible stakeholder.”
That policy continues to guide the Obama administration, which has broadened the annual economic consultations with China to include security issues.
As I argue in my new book The Future of Power, one of the major power shifts of the twenty-first century is Asia revival.
In 1800, Asia represented half the world’s population and half the world’s economy.
By 1900, the industrial revolution in Europe and North America drove down Asia’s share of global output to 20%.
By the middle of this century, Asia should again represent half the world’s population and GDP.
This is a natural and welcome evolution, as it enables hundreds of millions of people to escape from poverty. At the same time, however, it has given rise to fears that China will become a threat to the US.
Such fears appear exaggerated, particularly when one considers that Asia is not one entity. It has its own internal balance of power.
Japan, India, Vietnam, and other countries do not want to be dominated by China, and thus welcome a US presence in the region.
Unless China develops its “soft power,” the rise in its military and economic power is likely to frighten its neighbors into seeking coalitions to balance its rise.
It is as if Mexico and Canada sought an alliance with China to balance US power in North America.
After the 2008-2009 financial crisis, as China recovered rapidly and resumed 10% annual economic growth, some Chinese officials and commentators urged a more assertive foreign policy to reflect China’s new strength.
Many mistakenly believed that the US was in decline, and that the crisis presented new strategic opportunities for China.
For example, China began pressing territorial claims in the South China Sea, as well as escalating a longstanding border dispute with India.
The net result is that over the past two years, China has worsened its relations with Japan, India, South Korea, Vietnam, and others – quite a remarkable record that confirms the US strategic premise that “only China can contain China.”
But it would be a mistake to focus only on the hedging part of American strategy.
The US and China (as well as other countries) have much to gain from collaborating on transnational issues.
One cannot devise and implement solutions to global financial stability, climate change, cyber terrorism, or pandemics without such cooperation.
If power is the ability to obtain the outcomes one wants, it is important to remember that sometimes our power is greater when we act with others rather than merely over others.
This important dimension of a “smart power” strategy for the twenty-first century is not captured by the concept of containment.
When Kissinger landed in Beijing four decades ago, he ushered in not only a Cold War transformation, but also a new era of US-Chinese engagement.
Should Europe Regulate Sovereign Wealth Funds?
WIESBADEN – State-controlled investments from overseas – so-called sovereign wealth funds (SWFs) – are now the subject of intense debate.
The United States and France have made their fears known.
In Germany, too, the debate centers on SWFs’ political and economic significance for the country’s future.
The problem has been exacerbated by the growing wealth of a number of countries, some of them formerly run by socialist or communist regimes.
China, Russia, India, and the Gulf States have integrated their wealth into the global economy, to the immense benefit of world trade.
The openness of Germany’s markets makes them especially attractive to global trade.
This openness will not change, yet there are some who now call for new safety fences – in other words, for protection. 
For example, Russian investors are interested in taking a massive share in the German-French aerospace company EADS, which is already 5%-owned by a Russian bank.
For many, this proposal has underscored a change in investors’ behavior.
But what, exactly, has changed?
SWFs have been around for years.
Among the first countries to invest their considerable state-owned funds were Kuwait, the United Arab Emirates, Norway, and Singapore.
They invested, and still invest, their budgetary surpluses worldwide in government bonds and state-owned enterprises.
Industrialized countries like the US and Japan also have so-called “reserve funds.” 
Some of these funds are huge.
Both funds are invested worldwide, including with the port operator PSA.
Some funds are subject to considerable restrictions.
Japan limits its state investments overseas to bonds, mostly those issued by the US.
Until recently, China, which holds foreign currency reserves of more than $1.2 trillion (the world’s largest), followed this policy, too.
But a $3 billion investment by the Chinese SWF in the US investment firm Blackstone suggests a more worryingly strategic investment policy, one that appears aimed at advancing its own industrial interests in certain markets. 
Russia, where the line between state-controlled and privately controlled companies is often blurry, has demonstrated this strategy in Europe.
Indeed, Russian investments in aerospace, telecommunications, and, most of all, in the energy sector, are the main source of concern for Germany.
Are state-controlled investors now aiming primarily for strategic rather than purely financial returns?
Because SWFs’ resources are so substantial, it is advisable to take precautions to avoid becoming a target of politically motivated market manipulation, or becoming economically and psychologically dependent on foreign governments’ decisions. 
Most Western countries already have instruments to deter foreigners from making unwanted investments, not only in defense industries, but also in other sectors.
But, while Germany’s Foreign Trade and Payments Act protects against takeovers in the defense industry (though the law needs strengthening) elsewhere Germany has no system for examining investments by SWFs that may be strategically motivated.
The International Monetary Fund now encourages more transparency by foreign investors, and has plans for a code of conduct.
The EU Commission also favors voluntary agreements aimed at strengthening transparency.
Some SWFs now seem willing to engage in constructive dialogue. 
But assessing potential threats is not easy.
Most investments are seen to benefit a country’s economy, if not its security.
We in Germany need to distinguish one from the other.
Bills have been drafted that amount to amendments to the Foreign Trade and Payments Act and related regulations.
While strengthening the act, they seek to avoid affecting the openness of the German economy. 
Under proposed new legislation, if a foreign investment in a German company amounts to more than 25%, an assessment can be made of whether public order or safety might be threatened.
In my view, this would address the concerns about SWFs, while not generally impeding investment because it would apply only in a very few cases.
Germany has also drawn up a plan to protect its industries that is modeled on US regulation.
Since 1988, the US president can prohibit foreign direct investment if it is seen as a threat to national security.
An additional control was introduced last year, so now all direct investments in which a foreign government is involved are scrutinized by the Committee on Foreign Direct Investment.
The principle of reciprocity should clearly apply to transnational investments.
Germany is open to foreign investors, but in return we Germans demand the same market access abroad.
Much remains to be done in this area even in Europe, as Germany’s own experiences with France and Spain demonstrate.
In China and almost all Middle Eastern countries, foreigners are restricted to minority shareholdings and must contend with high import duties and numerous non-tariff barriers.
Protective measures must remain the exception rather than the rule.
We Europeans must accept the challenges of global competition, and transnational investments are the basis of thriving economic development at home and abroad.
Nevertheless, we must not allow ourselves to become the passive economic playthings of other nations, or of big state-owned enterprises.
We must play an active part in shaping globalization, and that means crafting appropriate rules.
Should Germany Exit the Euro?
MUNICH – Last summer, the financier George Soros urged Germany to agree to the establishment of the European Stability Mechanism, calling on the country to “lead or leave.”
Now he says that Germany should exit the euro if it continues to block the introduction of Eurobonds.
Soros is playing with fire.
Leaving the eurozone is precisely what the newly founded “Alternative for Germany” party, which draws support from a wide swath of society, is demanding.
Crunch time is fast approaching.
Cyprus is almost out of the euro, its banks’ collapse having been delayed by the European Central Bank’s provision of Emergency Liquidity Assistance, while euroskeptic parties led by Beppe Grillo and Silvio Berlusconi garnered a combined total of 55% of the popular vote in the latest Italian general election.
Moreover, the Greeks and Spaniards are unlikely to be able to bear the strain of economic austerity much longer, with youth unemployment inching toward 60%.
The independence movement in Catalonia has gathered so much momentum that a leading Spanish general has vowed to send troops into Barcelona should the province hold a referendum on secession.
France, too, has competitiveness problems, and is unable to meet its commitments under the European Union’s Fiscal Compact.
Portugal needs a new rescue program, and Slovenia could soon be asking for a rescue as well.
Many investors echo Soros.
They want to cut and run – to unload their toxic paper onto intergovernmental rescuers, who should pay for it with the proceeds of Eurobond sales, and put their money in safer havens.
The public already is being misused in an effort to mop up junk securities and support feeble banks, with taxpayer-funded institutions such as the ECB and the bailout programs having by now provided €1.2 trillion ($1.6 trillion) in international credit.
If Soros were right, and Germany had to choose between Eurobonds and the euro, many Germans would surely prefer to leave the euro.
The new German political party would attract much more support, and sentiment might shift.
The euro itself would be finished; after all, its primary task was to break the Bundesbank’s dominance in monetary policy.
But Soros is wrong.
For starters, there is no legal basis for his demand.
Article 125 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union expressly forbids the mutualization of debt.
Worst of all, Soros does not recognize the real nature of the eurozone’s problems.
The ongoing financial crisis is merely a symptom of the monetary union’s underlying malady: its southern members’ loss of competitiveness.
The euro gave these countries access to cheap credit, which was used to finance wage increases that were not underpinned by productivity gains.
This led to a price explosion and massive external deficits.
Maintaining these countries’ excessive prices and nominal incomes with artificially cheap credit guaranteed by other countries would only make the loss of competitiveness permanent.
The entrenchment of debtor-creditor relationships between the states of the eurozone would fuel political tension – as occurred in the United States in its first decades.
In order to regain competitiveness, the southern countries will have to reduce their goods prices, while the northern countries will have to accept higher inflation.
Eurobonds, however, would impede precisely this outcome, because relative prices in the north can be raised only when northern savers invest their capital at home instead of seeing it publicly escorted to the south by taxpayer-financed credit guarantees.
According to a study by Goldman Sachs, countries like Greece, Portugal, and Spain will have to become 20-30% cheaper, and German prices will have to rise by 20% relative to the eurozone average.
To be sure, if Germany were to leave the common currency, the road back to competitiveness would be easier for the southern countries, since the rump euro would undergo devaluation; but the crisis countries’ fundamental problem would remain as long as the other competitive countries remain in the eurozone.
Spain, for example, would still have to cut its prices by 22-24% relative to the new eurozone average.
From this perspective, the crisis countries would not be spared painful retrenchment as long as they remained in a monetary union that includes competitive countries.
The only way to avoid it would be for them to exit the euro and devalue their new currencies.
But, so far, they have not been willing to go this route.
Politically, it would be a big mistake for Germany to exit the euro, because that would reinstate the Rhine as the border between France and Germany.
Franco-German reconciliation, the greatest success of the postwar period in Europe, would be in jeopardy.
Thus, the only remaining option, as unpleasant as it may be for some countries, is to tighten budget constraints in the eurozone.
After years of easy money, a way back to reality must be found.
If a country is bankrupt, it must let its creditors know that it cannot repay its debts.
And speculators must take responsibility for their decisions, and stop clamoring for taxpayer money whenever their investments turn bad.
Should Iran Be Attacked?
President George W. Bush has said that Iran’s development of nuclear weapons is unacceptable, and recent press accounts suggest that his administration is exploring preventive military options.
In Iran, President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad has defied the diplomatic efforts of the European Union and others, using the nuclear issue to stir rally domestic support.
Is it too late to prevent a showdown?
Iran claims that its nuclear program is aimed solely at peaceful uses, and that it has the right to develop uranium enrichment and other technologies as a signatory of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT).
But it spent 18 years deceiving inspectors from the watchdog International Atomic Energy Agency, leading some countries to argue that Iran destroyed its credibility and forfeited its rights to enrichment on its own soil.
Russia has offered to provide nuclear enrichment and reprocessing services for the civilian reactor it is building in Iran.
If Iran were interested solely in peaceful uses, the Russian offer or some other plan (such as placing stocks of low enriched uranium in Iran) could meet their needs.
Iran’s insistence on enrichment inside the country is widely attributed to its desire to produce highly enriched uranium for a bomb.
Would an Iranian bomb really be so bad?
Some argue that it could become the basis of stable nuclear deterrence in the region, analogous to the nuclear standoff between the United States and the Soviet Union during the Cold War.
But statements by Iranian leaders denying the Holocaust and urging the destruction of Israel have not only cost Iran support in Europe, but are unlikely to make Israel willing to gamble its existence on the prospect of stable deterrence.
Nor is it likely that Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and others will sit passively while the Persian Shia gain the bomb.
They will likely follow suit, and the more weapons proliferate in the volatile Middle East, the more likely it is that accidents and miscalculations could lead to their use.
Moreover, there are genuine fears that rogue elements in a divided Iranian government might leak weapons technology to terrorist groups.
These are the dangers that lead some to contemplate air strikes to destroy Iran’s nuclear facilities before they can make weapons.
At first glance, a “surgical” strike may look tempting.
But military options are less attractive when carefully analyzed.
Iran’s nuclear facilities are dispersed; some are underground.
If one adds suppression of air defenses, such a strike might involve roughly 600 targets – far from surgical.
Moreover, while an air strike might set back Iran’s program by a few years, it would solidify nationalist support for the government and the nuclear program, particularly because one attack would not be enough.
The process of protracted strikes could thwart positive political changes among the younger generation, thus reducing the chances of a more democratic and benign Iran emerging in the future.
At the same time, Iran has effective means of retaliation.
It might not be able to close the Strait of Hormuz, but threats to refineries, storage facilities, and tankers would send oil prices even higher.
Moreover, Iran’s support of terrorist organizations, such as Hezbollah, could bring violence to other countries.
With the outcome of Bush’s ill-advised war in Iraq uncertain and his legacy depending heavily upon finding a political solution, Iran’s support for Iraqi Shiite radicals could give it considerable leverage.
When Bush administration officials say that “all options are on the table,” they are warning the Iranians that the use of force is possible.
But one is tempted to believe them when they add that they are now focused on diplomacy.
As Theodore Roosevelt once said, negotiations may go better when you talk softly but carry a big stick.
At the same time, however, Iran knows how costly it would be for the Americans (and perhaps the Israelis) to use force, which reduces the effect of the threat.
At present, a diplomatic solution does not look promising.
Iran has threatened to leave the NPT if sanctions are imposed, and Russia and China worry that even modest targeted sanctions could escalate and ultimately legitimize an American use of force that they wish to avoid.
China wants to preserve its access to Iranian oil, and Russia seeks to preserve a valuable commercial market.
But both realize that a failure to resolve the issue in the context of the UN (in which they are major stakeholders as permanent members of the Security Council) could severely damage the future of that institution.
Today, the diplomatic package consists mostly of penalties, albeit the small ones of targeted sanctions.
Their main effect will be psychological if widespread support for them creates a sense in Iran that it has isolated itself.
Unlike North Korea, Iran is more likely to care about its international standing.
The diplomatic package could be made more attractive if the US would add more positive incentives.
Through a credible intermediary, the US could offer to consider security guarantees and relief from existing sanctions if Iran agrees to forego domestic enrichment and accept the Russian offer, perhaps garbed as an IAEA-backed international consortium in which Iran could participate.
This would mean abandoning the temptations of coercive regime change that hamstrung American diplomacy in Bush’s first term.
By increasing economic and cultural ties, diplomacy might unleash the soft power that could contribute to more gradual regime transformation over the longer term.
Meanwhile, such an approach might avoid the costly use of force and buy time for a more benign outcome than what lies at the end of the current path of events.
Blaming the Fed
FRANKFURT – Critics of the US Federal Reserve are having a field day with embarrassing revelations of its risk assessments on the eve of the financial crisis.
By law, the Fed is required to publish the transcripts of its Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meetings with a five-year lag.
While the full-blown crisis did not erupt until the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, it was clear by the summer of 2007 that something was very wrong in credit markets, which were starting to behave in all sorts of strange ways.
Yet many Fed officials clearly failed to recognize the significance of what was unfolding.
One governor opined that the Fed should regard it as a good thing that markets were starting to worry about subprime mortgages.
Another argued that the summertime market stress would most likely be a hiccup.
Various critics are seizing on such statements as evidence that the Fed is incompetent, and that its independence should be curtailed, or worse.
This is nonsense.
Yes, things could and should have been done better; but to single out Fed governors for missing the coming catastrophe is ludicrous.
The Fed was hardly alone.
In August 2007, few market participants, even those with access to mountains of information and a broad range of expert opinions, had a real clue as to what was going on.
Certainly the US Congress was clueless; its members were still busy lobbying for the government-backed housing-mortgage agencies Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, thereby digging the hole deeper.
Nor did the International Monetary Fund have a shining moment.
In April 2007, the IMF released its famous “Valentine’s Day” World Economic Outlook, in which it declared that all of the problems in the United States and other advanced economies that it had been worrying about were overblown.
Moreover, it is misleading to single out the most misguided comments by individual governors in the context of an active intellectual debate over policy.
It is legitimate to criticize individual policymakers who exercised poor judgment, and they should have a mark on their record.
But that does not impugn the whole FOMC, much less the entire institution.
Central banks’ state-of-the-art macroeconomic models also failed miserably – to a degree that the economics profession has only now begun to acknowledge fully.
Although the Fed assesses many approaches and indicators in making its decisions, there is no doubt that it was heavily influenced by mainstream academic thinking – including the so-called real business cycle models and New Keynesian models – which assumed that financial markets operate flawlessly.
Indeed, the economics profession and the world’s major central banks advertised the idea of the “great moderation” – the muting of macroeconomic volatility, owing partly to monetary authorities’ supposedly more scientific, model-based approach to policymaking.
We now know that canonical macroeconomic models do not adequately allow for financial-market fragilities, and that fixing the models while retaining their tractability is a formidable task.
Frankly, had the models at least allowed for the possibility of credit-market imperfections, the Fed might have paid more attention to credit-market indicators as a reflection of overall financial-market conditions, as central banks in emerging-market countries do.
Last but not least, even if the Fed had better understood the risks, it would not have been easy for it to avert the crisis on its own.
The effectiveness of interest-rate policy is limited, and many of the deepest problems were on the regulatory side.
And calibrating a response was not easy.
By late 2007, for example, the Fed and the US Treasury had most likely already seen at least one report arguing that only massive intervention to support subprime loans could forestall a catastrophe.
The idea was to save the financial system from having to deal with safely dismantling the impossibly complex contractual edifices – which did not allow for the possibility of systemic collapse – that it had constructed.
Such a bailout would have cost an estimated $500 billion or more, and the main beneficiaries would have included big financial firms.
Was there any realistic chance that such a measure would have passed Congress before there was blood in the streets?
Indeed, it was precisely this logic that me led to give a very dark forecast in a widely covered speech in Singapore on August 19, 2008, a month before Lehman Brothers failed.
I argued that things would not get better until they got much worse, and that the collapse of one of the world’s largest financial firms was imminent.
My argument rested on my view that the global economy was entering a major recession, and I had the benefit of my quantitative work, with Carmen Reinhart, on the history of financial crises.
I was not trying to be sensational in Singapore.
I thought that what I was saying was completely obvious.
Nevertheless, my prediction gained bold front-page headlines in many major newspapers throughout the world.
It gained headlines, evidently, because it was still far from a consensus view, although concerns were mounting.
Were concerns mounting at the Fed as well in the summer of 2008?
We will have to wait until next year to find out.
But, when we do, let us remember that hindsight is 20-20.
Should the Troops Come Home Now?
Last weekend’s announcement that Iraqi lawmakers have finally formed a unity government is welcome news, both for Iraq and for George W. Bush and Tony Blair.
The American and British governments, increasingly unpopular at home, desperately needed some tangible evidence of progress to assuage their domestic critics and to begin to speak openly of an exit strategy.
But Iraq’s greatest challenges lie ahead.
If Bush and Blair declare victory before the real battles have begun, they will undermine the very process to which both have committed so much at such great cost.
Bush waited weeks for a positive development that would allow him to suggest he can reduce troop levels in Iraq from 133,000 to 100,000 by the end of 2006.
Blair, still stung by his Labour Party’s defeat in local elections in early May, also welcomed the good news from Iraq.
During a triumphal surprise visit to Baghdad on May 22, he said he expected Iraqi forces to take responsibility for “territorial security” in much of the country by the end of the year.
“It is the violence that keeps us here,” he said.
“It is the peace that allows us to go.”
The optimism is premature.
The formation of a unity government is only the first of many hurdles Iraq’s new government must clear if it is to build a durable peace.
Its first task will be to remove those provisions of Iraq’s constitution that pit Iraq’s Sunni, Shia, and Kurds against one another.
Under current Iraqi law, the parliamentary committee charged with making these constitutional changes has four months to complete its task.
The four-month clock began ticking on May 3, following the first meeting of Iraq’s new parliament.
The changes are badly needed.
The committee must enact a new hydrocarbon law that guarantees each of Iraq’s factions a fair share of the country’s oil wealth, which accounts for 97% of total export revenue.
Under the current constitution, local governments have the right to exploit (and profit directly from) oil extracted from new sites beneath their territory, while only a share of the income from existing sites must go to Iraq’s central government.
On May 15, two small independent energy companies (Turkey’s Genel Enerji and Canada’s Addax Petroleum) became the latest foreign firms to begin drilling in Kurdish-controlled territory under an agreement with the regional government.
Kurdish politicians within the new parliament have good reason to protect these lucrative deals as debate begins over constitutional changes.
But the central government will need a large share of that income if it is to finance the construction of new institutions of governance, invest in critical infrastructure, undertake onerous reforms aimed at economic liberalization, and provide the resource-poor (and already restive) Sunnis of central Iraq with a greater share of the country’s wealth.
The constitution must also be amended to reverse the worst effects of a de-Baathification process that aimed to dismantle the vestiges of Saddam Hussein’s regime.
In practice, de-Baathification has excluded thousands of Iraqis – most of them Sunnis who joined the party during the Saddam era only to secure good jobs – from the country’s political and economic life.
Finally, the Iraqi government must begin dismantling the militia groups that still outgun the fledgling Iraqi army, and it must defeat the largely Sunni-led insurgency.
Each of these tasks is formidable. If Bush and Blair prematurely withdraw large numbers of the troops that support Iraqi stability, the country’s new government would have little chance of success.
There is some reason for optimism that efforts to stem the tide of violence can succeed.
Media reports of Iraqi bloodshed focus overwhelmingly on Baghdad – where the large majority of foreign journalists are based – creating the impression that the desperate security situation there is representative of the country as a whole.
But in the Kurdish-controlled areas of the north and Shiite-dominated provinces in the south, levels of crime and deadly violence compare favorably with those in many cities in the United States.
But attacks in Iraq’s “Sunni triangle” (and Baghdad in particular) occur at a rate rivaling those in Chechnya and the Niger Delta.
Since Sunni militants destroyed the Shiite Askariya mosque in February, hundreds of Iraqis have been killed in a series of tit-for-tat sectarian attacks.
Tens of thousands have fled from mixed Sunni-Shiite cities to safer havens in ethnically homogenous enclaves that are effectively controlled by Sunni and Shiite militias.
Only the presence of foreign troops slows the further balkanization of the country’s already fractious politics.