If a banker is told that he or she will be compensated entirely in bonds this year, with the bank’s annual profits determining the number of bonds to be received, the banker would obviously want to boost this year’s profits – even if it required taking bigger risks.
After the banker receives his or her first bond payment, the incentives become more complex.
The banker wants last year’s bonds to be paid (creating an incentive to safeguard stability) but wants a high payment this year (creating an incentive to maximize profit, which usually entails risk-taking).
Moreover, bankers could find ways to sell the long-term bonds.
While regulators can require that the bonds remain unpaid by the bank, and even that bankers prove that they have not sold them, senior bankers are adept at finding loopholes.
They could, for example, retain ownership of the bonds, but sell off their economic interest.
Bank executives who hold large numbers of these bonds would have an incentive to lobby to dilute the bonds’ guarantee.
If the bank’s financial condition deteriorated, their bond holdings might motivate them to conceal that and hope for a turnaround before their bonds were wiped out.
All of this highlights the imperative that regulators develop a shrewd and comprehensive strategy for supervising such a compensation system.
Otherwise, it would lose its effectiveness.
Compensating bankers with bonds helps to promote safety, but it does not let the regulators off the hook.
Despite these challenges, a new, bond-based compensation strategy could enhance bank stability considerably.
Though there is no silver bullet for bank regulation, implementing such a system with care and vigilance would be an important step in the right direction.
JPMorgan Inside the Whale
CAMBRIDGE – It has been a bad few weeks for JPMorgan Chase (JPM), the multinational financial-services firm that by some measures is America’s biggest bank.
Two of its traders were indicted, and the bank agreed to a billion-dollar fine for failing to report the extent of its “London Whale” losses fast enough and accurately enough.
Now it faces even bigger fines – perhaps exceeding $10 billion – for mortgage activities, mostly by two of the financial firms, Bear Stearns and Washington Mutual, that it bought up during the financial crisis.
The conventional wisdom is that the United States government would not have gone after JPM had these setbacks and errors become salient during the financial crisis.
The London Whale trades, for example, were from early 2012; had they occurred in 2008, when the financial system was fragile, JPM, it is said, would have gotten a legal pass.
This view seems well founded, because the government was then propping up the big banks in a concerted effort to overcome the financial crisis.
Weakening the big banks further seemed likely to deepen and prolong the crisis.
So JPM, according to this view, has been unlucky: too many of its legal problems postdate the financial crisis or came to light well after it erupted.
That, however, is not the only way to view JPM’s – and the economy’s – luck.
If the $6 billion London Whale losses had occurred in 2008 instead of 2012, then, yes, the government would not have piled on with fines and criminal indictments.
But what would JPM’s trading partners have done in 2008, when the economy was in turmoil, if the losses hit then?
The financial marketplace was quite wary and tense in 2008, owing to the collapse of Lehman Brothers and the government bailout of mega-insurer American International Group (AIG).
With major financial institutions’ exposure to the previously over-priced mortgage market unclear, financial transactions froze up.
Those who dealt with Citibank, for example, worried about its exposures and losses. Were they under control, or were they just the tip of an iceberg?
If Citi was facing bigger losses than those already known, could it make good on new obligations to trading partners and lenders?
Better to avoid Citi, some financial players thought.
JPM’s London Whale trades – bets on the future state of the American economy that JPM could not reverse without big losses – were of a type that the bank could readily have made in 2008.
The losses, initially put at $2 billion, soon tripled.
So imagine that JPM had made these kinds of bets during the financial crisis in 2008, realized that they were mistakes, and found that it could not reverse them easily.
JPM then announces a $2 billion loss, and CEO Jamie Dimon calls the problem “a tempest in a teapot” (as he did in 2012).
But the announcement of a $2 billion loss in that setting of economic turmoil would have made JPM’s counterparties jittery.
Was it just $2 billion?
Was this a big problem in an otherwise sound institution, or was there an iceberg beneath the surface.
After all, AIG was an AAA-rated firm that turned out in late 2008 to have assumed more risk than it could handle.
How can we be sure, market players might have asked, that JPM is not in the same boat?
Now consider how destabilizing it would have been had the same escalating series of announcements that JPM issued in the wake of the London Whale trades come during the financial crisis: It’s not $2 billion, but $4 billion; no, it’s not just $4 billion, but $6 billion.
Sorry.
Had that happened, Dimon would have needed to withdraw his comment that the problem was just a tempest in a teapot, and doubts would have arisen, in the midst of the crisis, about just how good JPM’s well-regarded risk-management practices really were.
In that setting, what JPM called its “fortress” balance sheet would suddenly have looked highly vulnerable, and the bank could have found itself under far more damaging attack than it has in the last year.
But the attack would have come from investors, not regulators.
And once some traders refuse to deal with a bank, the damage can become self-perpetuating, as losses mount and other traders follow suit.
Worse, the economy might have suffered further.
During the crisis, financiers rightly pointed out that JPM and several other major firms were islands of stability in the financial storm.
But had the London Whale losses occurred then, JPM would not have been on the list of sound financial institutions, undermining confidence further and potentially making the crisis that much worse.
Indeed, JPM runs one of the two major private operations for settling major trades of government debt.
If a shadow falling over JPM from its trading desk had extended to its capacity to settle government debt properly, the economic fallout could have been severe.
Napoleon is reputed to have said that he wanted lucky generals.
No matter how good a leader is, success is not assured and pure chance plays a larger role than many care to admit.
No matter how well managed JPM was, both it and the US economy are lucky that what has befallen it in the last year did not happen – as it well could have – in 2008.
Privacy Since Snowden
LONDON – A year has passed since the American former intelligence contractor Edward J. Snowden began revealing the massive scope of Internet surveillance by the US National Security Agency.
His disclosures have elicited public outrage and sharp rebukes from close US allies like Germany, upending rosy assumptions about how free and secure the Internet and telecommunications networks really are.
Singlehandedly, Snowden has changed how people regard their phones, tablets, and laptops, and sparked a public debate about the protection of personal data.
What his revelations have not done is bring about significant reforms.
To be sure, US President Barack Obama, spurred by an alliance between civil-society organizations and the technology industry, has taken some action.
In a January speech, and an accompanying presidential policy directive, Obama ordered American spies to recognize that “all persons should be treated with dignity and respect, regardless of their nationality or wherever they might reside, and that all persons have legitimate privacy interests in the handling of their personal information.”
Some specific advances, unprecedented in the shadowy world of intelligence agencies, have accompanied this rhetorical commitment to privacy.
When technology companies sued the government to release details about intelligence requests, the Obama administration compromised, supporting a settlement that allows for more detailed reporting.
Under this agreement, companies have the option of publishing figures on data requests by intelligence agencies in ranges of 250 or 1,000, depending on the degree of disaggregation of the types of orders.
Though this represents a step forward, it is far from adequate, with gaping loopholes that prohibit reporting on some of the most notorious NSA programs, such as the dragnet collection of phone records under section 215 of the USA PATRIOT Act.
Moreover, Obama has demurred on the most significant recommendations of the independent review group that he appointed.
And the “USA FREEDOM Act,” which was meant to stop the mass collection of Americans’ phone records, is being diluted by a set of amendments that would enable the government to continue collecting metadata on millions of individuals, without their consent.
This metadata – covering whom we talk to, when, and for how long – can reveal as much about our private lives as the content itself.
Worse, relative to the rest of the world, the US has taken the strongest action since the Snowden revelations began.
Of course, Snowden exposed more about the US government’s surveillance activities than any other country.
But the documents also included egregious examples of overreach by the Government Communications Headquarters, the United Kingdom’s signals intelligence agency, and information about intelligence sharing in the so-called “Five Eyes” network of the US, the UK, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand.
The agreements that govern the pooling and exchange of intelligence among these governments remain closely guarded secrets.
In the UK, public and parliamentary debate on surveillance practices has been minimal, at best.
And not only does Canadian law prohibit companies from reporting virtually any information about government requests for data; Prime Minister Stephen Harper has nominated a lawyer who spent his career advising intelligence agencies to serve as an official privacy commissioner, raising the ire of activists.
Some countries have even intensified their surveillance activities.
Immediately following the Snowden revelations, the French government snuck into a military appropriations bill the authority to increase government surveillance of the Internet dramatically, including for “commercial” reasons.
The European Parliament’s criticism of the mass surveillance practiced by the UK, Sweden, France, and Germany (and potentially soon by the Netherlands) seems not to carry much weight for national governments.
With the 800th anniversary of Magna Carta this month, Snowden’s revelations have also fueled a new movement to create country-specific Internet “bills of rights” establishing the principles of privacy, free speech, and responsible anonymity.
In a stirring speech at the United Nations last September, Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff placed her country at the forefront of this movement by promoting Brazil’s historic Marco Civil bill.
But the proposed bill included the requirement that Internet companies keep their servers in Brazil – purportedly to protect information from American intelligence agencies’ prying eyes – while easing access to these data for Brazil’s own law-enforcement and security agencies.
Fortunately, Brazil’s legislators kept these provisions out of the final Marco Civil, which was adopted in April.
Alas, other governments are threatening to impose similar forced data-localization requirements.
Such rules run not only contrary to the fundamental principles of an open and interconnected Internet infrastructure; they also create new privacy risks.
And they do nothing to solve the basic problem of restricting government access to personal data held by private companies.
How companies worldwide respond to Snowden’s revelations will have a profound impact on their users’ rights.
So far, some have taken the right approach, pressing for greater transparency, while strengthening encryption on their networks to keep intelligence agencies out.
Companies throughout the information and communication technology sector have started to make transparency reports an industry standard.
But more telecommunications companies and hardware manufacturers should join Internet companies and privacy rights advocates to build a broad reform coalition.
A year ago, Snowden alerted the world to governments’ egregious violation of people’s privacy.
It is up to the technology industry, civil-society organizations, and the general public to keep governments honest in pursuing much-needed reforms.
Only then can the Internet provide the boon to freedom that it has long promised.
A Dream for the Digital Age
PRINCETON – Fifty years ago, Martin Luther King dreamed of an America that would one day deliver on its promise of equality for all of its citizens, black as well as white.
Today, Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg has a dream, too: he wants to provide Internet access to the world’s five billion people who do not now have it.
Zuckerberg’s vision may sound like a self-interested push to gain more Facebook users.
But the world currently faces a growing technological divide, with implications for equality, liberty, and the right to pursue happiness that are no less momentous than the racial divide against which King preached.
Around the world, more than two billion people live in the Digital Age.
They can access a vast universe of information, communicate at little or no cost with their friends and family, and connect with others with whom they can cooperate in new ways.
The other five billion are still stuck in the Paper Age in which my generation grew up.
In those days, if you wanted to know something but did not own an expensive encyclopedia (or your encyclopedia was no longer sufficiently up-to-date to tell you what you wanted to know), you had to go to a library and spend hours searching for what you needed.
To contact friends or colleagues overseas, you had to write them a letter and wait at least two weeks for a reply.
International phone calls were prohibitively expensive, and the idea of actually seeing someone while you talked to them was the stuff of science fiction.
Internet.org, a global partnership launched by Zuckerberg last month, plans to bring the two-thirds of the world’s population without Internet access into the Digital Age.
The partnership consists of seven major information-technology companies, as well as non-profit organizations and local communities.
Knowing that you cannot ask people to choose between buying food and buying data, the partnership will seek new, less expensive means of connecting computers, more data-efficient software, and new business models.&nbsp;
Microsoft founder Bill Gates has suggested that Internet access is not a high priority for the poorest countries.
It is more important, he says, to tackle problems like diarrhea and malaria.
I have nothing but praise for Gates’s efforts to reduce the death toll from these diseases, which primarily affect the world’s poorest people.
Yet his position seems curiously lacking in big-picture awareness of how the Internet could transform the lives of the very poor.
For example, if farmers could use it to get more accurate predictions of favorable conditions for planting, or to obtain higher prices for their harvest, they would be better able to afford sanitation, so that their children do not get diarrhea, and bed nets to protect themselves and their families against malaria.
A friend working to provide family-planning advice to poor Kenyans recently told me that so many women were coming to the clinic that she could not spend more than five minutes with each.
These women have only one source of advice, and one opportunity to get it, but if they had access to the Internet, the information could be there for them whenever they wanted it.
Moreover, online consultations would be possible, sparing women the need to travel to clinics.
Internet access would also bypass the problem of illiteracy, building on the oral traditions that are strong in many rural cultures and enabling communities to create self-help groups and share their problems with peers in other villages.
What is true for family planning is true for a very wide range of topics, especially those that are difficult to speak about, like homosexuality and domestic violence.
The Internet is helping people to understand that they are not alone, and that they can learn from others’ experience.
Enlarging our vision still more, it is not absurd to hope that putting the world’s poor online would result in connections between them and more affluent people, leading to more assistance.
Research shows that people are more likely to donate to a charity helping the hungry if they are given a photo and told the name and age of a girl like those the charity is aiding.
If a mere photo and a few identifying details can do that, what might Skyping with the person do?
Providing universal Internet access is a project on a scale similar to sequencing the human genome, and, like the human-genome project, it will raise new risks and sensitive ethical issues.
Online scammers will have access to a new and perhaps more gullible audience.
Breaches of copyright will become even more widespread than they are today (although they will cost the copyright owners very little, because the poor would be very unlikely to be able to buy books or other copyrighted material).
Moreover, the distinctiveness of local cultures may be eroded, which has both a good and a bad side, for such cultures can restrict freedom and deny equality of opportunity.
On the whole, though, it is reasonable to expect that giving poor people access to knowledge and the possibility of connecting with people anywhere in the world will be socially transforming in a very positive way.
Marriage Counseling for the G-20 and the IMF
BERKELEY – The relationship between the International Monetary Fund and the G-20 is symbiotic but conflicted.
Like a long-married couple who habitually bicker and fight, the two can’t seem to live together – but they can’t live apart, either.
The question of what to do about this relationship is coming to a head in advance of the November G-20 summit chaired by South Korea.
Since the 1997-1998 crisis, Asian governments have sought to keep their distance from the Fund.
It is admirable, therefore, that South Korea’s government has taken the lead in discussions about reforming the IMF’s mandate.
It has contributed significantly to international thinking on the design of new lending facilities.
The IMF’s crisis-prevention efforts begin with its country surveillance, as provided for by Article IV of its Articles of Agreement.
The problem with these exercises is that they are regularly relegated to the “duly noted” bin: governments receive them, file them away, and go back to doing what they were doing before.
A further problem is that these exercises rarely address the implications of national policies for third countries and the international system.
Article IV surveillance of the United States during the sub-prime mortgage boom said little about the dangers posed by such lending for international financial markets.
Article IV reviews of China have similarly said little about the implications of the country’s policies for global imbalances.
To close these gaps, the IMF is now experimenting with “spillover reports” that focus on cross-country impacts.
But so long as big countries, which are the main source of spillovers, show little inclination to act on the Fund’s recommendations, it is not clear that this analytical step forward will be a practical step forward as well.
Article IV also gives the IMF a mandate to oversee the “effective operation” of the international monetary system.
It is past time for the Fund to put some flesh on these constitutional bones.
Staff and management should be tasked with producing a biannual report on the international monetary system. This report would evaluate the sustainability of current-account balances and exchange rates, and the adequacy or excessiveness of members’ foreign-exchange reserves.
It would recommend policies for eliminating imbalances and describe what kind of exchange-rate and reserve changes must accompany any adjustments.
It would probably be too politically sensitive for the Fund to announce by exactly how much different currencies were overvalued and undervalued, and to declare some as seriously misaligned.
Instead, it could settle for offering a range of assessments.
If this proved successful, it could then move toward publishing more forceful, umpire-like decisions.
In order to better carry out the other half of its dual mandate, the IMF has signaled that it will ask for a further increase in its resources, to $1 trillion, up from the $750 billion agreed at the London G-20 meeting in April 2009.
In the spring of 2010, the IMF committed upwards of $300 billion to Southern Europe alone.
Clearly, more firepower is called for.
But, in addition to more resources, the IMF needs a more effective way of deploying them.
Here, with input from South Korea, it is developing plans for a Precautionary Credit Line (PCL).
This would generalize and extend its Flexible Credit Line (FCL), under which countries with impeccable credentials are prequalified for automatic access to IMF credit without having to accept onerous conditions.
Unfortunately, only three countries – Mexico, Colombia, and Poland – have signed up for an FCL.
Others hesitate, either because they worry about not qualifying or because they remain concerned about the stigma of association with the Fund.
Augmenting an FCL for countries with impeccably strong policies with a PCL for countries with reasonably strong policies might break this deadlock.
Countries qualifying for a PCL would have to meet some, but relatively minimal and unobtrusive, conditions.
They might have to pay somewhat higher interest rates to address concerns about moral hazard.
The stigma problem could then be addressed if the IMF was authorized to pre-qualify unilaterally a swath of countries for one facility or the other.
One problem with the FCL is what might happen if the IMF disqualifies a previously prequalified country.
Investors could take this as an indication that policies had deteriorated significantly and rush for the exits.
This danger would be attenuated if pre-qualification was not a yes-or-no decision: if there were a range of facilities for which countries could be pre-qualified, they could be moved between them as circumstances changed.
But it is not clear that this would be enough to remove the danger that an IMF decision, taken in response to deteriorating country policies, could precipitate a crisis.
As always, the devil is in the details.
It is to be hoped that we will learn the details before the G-20 meets in Seoul in November.
Saving Retirement
CAMBRIDGE – Public pension programs around the world are in financial trouble.
Because of continuing increases in life expectancy, the number of eligible retirees is rising more rapidly than the tax revenue available to finance benefits.
In the United States, the Congressional Budget Office projects the relative cost of the Social Security program’s old-age pension benefits to rise by more than a quarter over the next 25 years, from 4.9% of GDP today to 6.2% in 2038.
Because the taxes that are earmarked to support Social Security do not automatically rise faster than GDP, either the growth rate of benefits must be reduced or tax rates must be increased.
One reason for the rapid rise in benefits stems from how they are adjusted for inflation.
Under current US law, retirees’ benefits are automatically adjusted to account for increases in the traditional consumer price index (CPI).
But experts have long understood that the CPI overstates the true increase in the cost of living, and that the resulting over-indexing of benefits should be fixed.
Part of the problem is that the CPI does not reflect how consumers change the composition of their purchases over time as relative prices change.
President Barack Obama’s administration initially followed expert advice and suggested that the traditional CPI be replaced by a more accurate measure known as the chain-weighted CPI.
Although this would reduce the annual rate of increase in benefits by only about 0.25%, outlays for Social Security and other inflation-indexed programs over the next ten years would be more than $200 billion lower.
Applying the chain-weighted CPI to tax-bracket adjustments would raise more than $100 billion over the same period.
But there is another, more fundamental reason why the traditional CPI overstates the true rise in the cost of living: It does not accurately reflect the introduction of new goods and services or improvements in the quality of existing goods and services.
So it is unfortunate that Obama recently withdrew his proposal to change the traditional index, preferring the political gesture of “protecting Social Security benefits” to the more responsible policy of correcting the way that benefits and taxes reflect rising prices.
But the more important reform for stabilizing the financing of Social Security pension benefits is to adjust the benefits for the rise in life expectancy.
When the US created its Social Security program in the 1930’s, the legislation specified that benefits would be paid to retirees at age 65.
Life expectancy at age 65 rose after that by about one year per decade.
Today, life expectancy at age 65 is about six years higher than it was in 1940.
The increase in the number of retirement years put Social Security in financial trouble.
The US Congress responded in 1983 by gradually raising the age for full benefits from 65 to 67.
Individuals who want to retire as early as 62 can still do so with an actuarially fair reduction in their benefits.
Alternatively, they can work longer and receive higher benefits.
Of course, the decision to increase the age for full benefits was never going to be politically popular.
Congress was therefore careful to delay the start of the gradual adjustment, applying it only to those below the age of 45 at the time of the legislation, with the higher retirement age to be fully phased in only in 2027.
As a result, the public was generally unaware during the decade after the 1983 legislation that the age for full benefits would eventually rise.
When pollsters asked voters whether they would favor an increase in the Social Security retirement age to improve the program’s financial stability, the response was overwhelmingly negative.
But here is the politically important fact: At no time did any member of Congress propose that the legislation be changed to delay or eliminate the rise in the eligibility age for full benefits.
Congress acted responsibly to slow the growth of benefits, even though reversing the increase in the eligibility age would have been politically popular.
Since the 1983 legislation was enacted, life expectancy at age 67 has increased by another three years, bringing it to 85.
There is every reason to expect life expectancy to continue to rise in the future at the rate of one year per decade.
The obvious solution to the current and future Social Security financing problem is to reprise the 1983 legislation by gradually raising the age for full benefits from 67 to 70, with appropriate actuarial adjustments for earlier and later retirements.
Because life expectancy at age 67 is roughly 18 years, this would be equivalent to reducing average lifetime benefits by one-sixth (the present value of the benefit reduction is actually higher, given that the reduction comes at the start of the retirement period).
It would be even better to avoid future political posturing by enacting legislation now that automatically raises the eligibility age for full benefits in such a way that average life expectancy at that threshold is kept constant, at 15 years.
Some experts object on principle to an increase in the eligibility age for full benefits, because some low-income groups do not experience the same one-year-per-decade rise in life expectancy.
A simple solution to that problem would be to relate the age at which full benefits are paid to each individual’s average lifetime earnings.
A more fundamental reform would be to shift from a pure pay-as-you-go system to a mixed system that combines the current benefits with investment-based personal retirement accounts.
Such investment-based annuities would be a natural supplement to the lower pay-as-you-go benefits that would result from raising the eligibility age for full benefits.
Obviously, retirees deserve advance notice before benefits are reduced.
That is why it is important for the US – and for many countries around the world – to act now to make the changes needed to stabilize future pension finances.
A Healthy Path to Chinese Consumption Growth
CAMBRIDGE – China’s economic policymakers want to shift the country’s production away from exports and heavy industry, and to increase the share of consumption in GDP.
A relatively simple institutional change to encourage health-care insurance could do much to promote the latter goal.
A higher level of consumer spending would raise the average Chinese family’s standard of living, a primary component of what China’s leaders now call the “Chinese Dream.”
Faster growth in consumer spending would also reverse the recent slowdown in GDP growth, providing the extra demand needed to create employment for the millions of Chinese who are leaving agriculture and the millions more who are graduating from the country’s universities.
Consumer spending in China now accounts for just 36% of GDP, about half the consumption share of GDP in the United States and Western Europe.
This remarkably low level reflects both the small share of household income in total GDP and the high rate of household saving.
Chinese officials hope that higher household incomes will boost consumer spending, as the tightening labor market causes wages to rise and as urbanization shifts workers from low-productivity farm work to higher-wage employment in the cities. 
Reducing the share of income that Chinese households save could also raise consumer spending faster and more easily.
The high rate of household saving in China reflects many factors, including the risk of job loss and the lack of a reliable government pension program.
But the main reason why Chinese households save so much of their relatively low salaries is to ensure that they have the funds to meet high medical costs if a family member requires surgery or other inpatient care.
People save so much because insurance is so inadequate.
The government’s universal health-care insurance is very rudimentary, and private health insurance is not widely available.
So households accumulate large amounts of cash as a hedge against the possibility that those funds will be needed some day for hospital care.
Private health insurance would make such excessive saving unnecessary by pooling relatively small premiums from individuals – or from their employers – and then paying out to those who are hit with large medical bills.
Thus, by encouraging the purchase of health insurance by individuals or employers, the Chinese government could reduce significantly the overall household saving rate.
Individuals who have such insurance would be better off, because they would not face the risk of large medical bills and would be able to spend more on other forms of consumption.
The most direct way to encourage the purchase of health insurance would be to exclude employer payments for such insurance from employees’ taxable income.
That has been a very effective incentive for the purchase of private insurance in the United States and Britain.
Tax benefits could also be extended to individual purchases of health insurance by allowing individuals to deduct the premiums that they pay from their taxable incomes.
Tax incentives are now used in China to encourage employer plans for retirement saving.
The Chinese government recently modified the tax law to exclude employers’ contributions to employee pension plans from taxable income and to allow the funds in those plans to accumulate tax-free.
This tax-favored employee saving plan is a good substitute for more comprehensive social-security pensions, but it has had the undesirable effect of increasing household saving, rather than increasing consumer spending. 
By contrast, a similar tax rule to exempt employer payments for health insurance would reduce national saving by causing employees to substitute health insurance for large personal cash accumulations.
If the Chinese government does use this approach to stimulate the purchase of insurance, it should limit the favorable tax treatment to insurance for expensive medical conditions like surgery or the treatment of diabetes.
In other words, tax-favored health-insurance policies should have high deductibles.
It is the fear of having to pay for expensive medical conditions that now drives individuals to accumulate substantial cash reserves.
And focusing the favorable tax treatment on such major risk insurance would reduce the wasteful distortion to spend more on minor health conditions that do not stimulate household saving and do not need insurance protection.
A general expansion of health insurance would also lead to an increase in the provision of hospital services.
Private providers will enter the market when they see that insurance has increased demand for such services.
And the Chinese government will be able to expand the provision of health services without having to pay for them, because consumers’ insurance will be available to pick up the tab.
In short, favorable tax treatment of the purchase of insurance for major medical costs would reduce the national saving rate, increase consumer spending, lower the public’s anxiety about the cost of treatment, and increase the quantity of health care.
The sooner the authorities act, the faster the Chinese Dream will be realized.
Fighting the Fed
CAMBRIDGE – The US Federal Reserve is battling with members of Congress over a proposed law, the Federal Reserve Accountability and Transparency Act, that would require the Fed to use a formal rule to guide monetary policy.
The Fed fears that the law would limit its independence, while the bill’s proponents argue that it would produce more predictable growth with low inflation.
Who is right?
In order to understand the conflict, it is useful to compare the Fed’s independence with that of the Bank of England and the European Central Bank.
In Britain, the BoE has “instrument independence” but not “target independence.”
The head of the Treasury sets a goal for the inflation rate and leaves it to the BoE to decide which policies will achieve that goal.
If the target is missed by more than one percentage point on either side, the BoE’s governor must send an open letter to the head of the Treasury explaining why (and what the Bank proposes to do about it).
By contrast, the Maastricht Treaty tasked the ECB with maintaining “price stability,” but left it free to provide its own operational definition.
The ECB defined price stability to be annual inflation of less than but close to 2%.
Given the structure of the European Monetary Union, there is no government oversight of the ECB, which thus has both “target independence” and “instrument independence,” though restrictions preclude specific policies.
The Fed is “independent,” but only in a very special sense: vis-à-vis the government’s executive branch.
While the US president can instruct administrative agencies like the Commerce Department or the Treasury Department to take specific actions (as long as they do not conflict with valid legislation), the administration cannot tell the Fed how to manage interest rates, reserve requirements, or any other aspects of monetary policy.
But, though the Fed is independent of the White House, it is not independent of Congress.
The Fed was created by Congressional legislation that now stipulates a “dual mandate” of price stability and maximum employment.
It is up to the Fed to formulate operational definitions of these goals and the policies it will pursue to achieve them.
The proposed legislation would affect both “target” and “instrument” independence.
The Fed decided to define price stability as a “two percent annual inflation over the medium term of the price index of consumer expenditures.”
For the past 12 months, that rate of increase has been about 1.5%.
While full employment has not been defined, many economists believe it is equivalent to an unemployment rate of about 5.5%.
The most recent rate was 6.1%.
Reflecting the fear that the Fed’s current policy of sustained low interest rates will lead to higher inflation, the law would require the Fed to adopt a formal procedure for setting its key short-term interest rate, the “federal funds rate.”
More specifically, the law suggests a specific interest-rate rule (the Reference Policy Rule) while giving the Fed the opportunity to adopt a different rule if it explains to Congress why it prefers the alternative.
The Reference Policy Rule is essentially the rule first proposed in 1993 by John Taylor of Stanford University, based on his statistical estimate of what the Fed appeared to have been doing under Paul Volcker and Alan Greenspan during a period of both low inflation and low unemployment.
It states that the federal funds rate should be 2% plus the current inflation rate plus one-half of the difference between current and target inflation and one-half of the percentage difference between current and full-employment GDP.
All of this implies that if the economy is at full employment and targeted inflation, the federal funds rate should equal 2% plus the rate of inflation.
It should be higher if the inflation rate is above the target level and lower if current GDP is less than the full-employment level.
Given uncertainty about the level of full-employment GDP, this rule still leaves the Fed substantial discretion.
While the federal funds rate may be heading to 1% over the next 12 or 18 months, by then the narrowing GDP gap will imply an even higher Taylor-rule interest rate.
And, complicating things further, given US banks’ vast holdings of excess reserves as a result of the Fed’s bond-buying policies (quantitative easing), the federal funds rate is no longer the key policy rate that it once was.
Instead, the Fed will be focusing on the interest rate on excess reserves.
The proposed legislation is full of excessive and impossible requirements, and the Republican-controlled House of Representatives may not be able to pass it, even in modified form.
Even if it does, it will not get through the Democratic-controlled Senate.
But if the Republicans hold a Senate majority after the next election, some form of legislation requiring a monetary-policy rule could land on the president’s desk.
He or she might veto it, but a Republican president after the 2016 election might not.
The Fed no doubt fears that if the principle of requiring a formal rule is accepted, Congress could tighten the requirement, forcing a more restrictive monetary policy.
That is why the new Fed chair, Janet Yellen, forcefully opposed such legislation in recent congressional testimony.
One thing is certain: The bill will put pressure on the Fed to pay more attention to inflation, avoiding a persistent rate above its own 2% target.
Otherwise, the Fed’s operational independence could be restricted, forcing it to focus its policies more sharply on its inflation mandate.
The Greek Budget Myth
CAMBRIDGE – Recently, newspaper headlines declared that Greece would have a balanced budget for 2013 as a whole.
The news came as quite a shock: Recall that when Greek officials came clean about the true state of their country’s public finances in 2010, the budget deficit was more than 10% of GDP – a moment of statistical honesty that triggered the eurozone debt crisis.
It seemed too good to be true that the Greek deficit would be completely eliminated in just three years.
In fact, it is too good to be true.
Any reader who went beyond the headlines soon discovered that the prediction of a zero budget deficit was in fact misleading.
The International Monetary Fund was predicting only that Greece would have a zero “primary” budget deficit in 2013.
A “primary” budget deficit (or surplus) is the difference between a government’s outlays for everything excluding the interest payments that it must pay on its debt and its receipts from taxes and other charges.
In the case of Greece, the interest payments apply to government debt held by Greek individuals and institutions, as well as to government debt held by the IMF, the European Central Bank, and other foreign lenders.
The overall budget deficit is still predicted to be 4.1% of Greece’s GDP in 2013 – a substantial improvement compared to 2010 but still far from fiscal balance.
The difference between the overall deficit and the primary deficit implies that the interest on the Greek national debt this year will be 4.1% of GDP.
Moreover, the Greek government’s interest payments are exceptionally low.
Given that its debt will still be about 170% of GDP this year, the 4.1%-of-GDP interest bill implies that the Greek government pays an average interest rate of just 2.4% – far less than the nearly 9% rate that the market is now charging on ten-year Greek government bonds.
The difference reflects a combination of the lower rate on short-term debt and the highly favorable terms on which Greece is now able to borrow from official lenders at the IMF and the ECB.
If Greece had to borrow at the market interest rate on ten-year bonds, its deficit would rise by 6.5% of the Greek government debt or 11% of GDP.
In this case, the overall Greek deficit would be about 15% of GDP, putting its debt on a rapidly exploding path.
Greece’s economic weakness increases the current level of the deficit.
Five years of declining GDP have depressed tax receipts and increased transfer payments.
The IMF estimates that these cyclical effects on revenue and outlays have raised the overall deficit by nearly 5% of Greek GDP.
On a cyclically adjusted basis, Greece’s overall budget would show a surplus of 0.6% of GDP this year.
This also implies that if Greece could escape from its current recession, its national debt would decline, both absolutely and as a share of GDP.
More generally, the national debt of any country grows by the size of its budget deficit or declines by the size of its budget surplus.
Even an economy with an overall budget deficit will have a declining government debt/GDP ratio if the growth rate of its nominal GDP exceeds that of its debt.
For Greece, with an overall deficit of 4.1% of GDP and a debt/GDP ratio of 170%, the debt ratio would fall if the combination of inflation and real (inflation-adjusted) GDP growth exceeded 2.4%.
Stated differently, now that Greece has achieved a zero primary budget deficit, its debt burden will decline if its nominal growth rate exceeds the average interest that it pays on its government debt.
Budget deficits and the resulting national debt are important not only in themselves; they also contribute to a country’s current-account deficit, which is the difference between its level of domestic investment by businesses and households in structures and equipment and the amount that it saves to finance those investments.
That amount, which includes the saving of businesses and households, is reduced by the amount that the government borrows.
In the case of Greece, the saving of businesses and households exceeds the level of investment in businesses and housing by just enough to outweigh the dissaving by the government, resulting in a very small current-account surplus.
Stated differently, Greece is now able to finance its current level of consumption and investment, including government and private spending, without relying on capital inflows from the rest of the world.
Looking ahead, the IMF predicts that Greece will have a gradually rising primary surplus and a gradually declining overall deficit over the next several years.
But, unless Greece is able to increase its rate of economic growth, the budget will remain in deficit and the debt will remain at nearly its current share of GDP.
Obamacare’s Fatal Flaw
CAMBRIDGE – Obamacare, officially known as the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, is the health-insurance program enacted by US President Barack Obama and Congressional Democrats over the unanimous opposition of congressional Republicans.
It was designed to cover those Americans without private or public health insurance – about 15% of the US population.
Opponents of Obamacare have failed to stop it in the courts and, more recently, in Congress.
The program was therefore formally launched on October 1.
Although it has been hampered by a wide range of computer problems and other technical difficulties, the program is likely to be operating by sometime in 2014.
The big question is whether it will function as intended and survive permanently.
There is a serious risk that it will not.
The potentially fatal flaw in Obamacare is the very same feature that appeals most to its supporters: the ability of even those with a serious preexisting health condition to buy insurance at the standard premium.
That feature will encourage those who are not ill to become or remain uninsured until they have a potentially costly medical diagnosis.
The resulting shift in enrollment away from low-cost healthy patients to those with predictably high costs will raise insurance companies’ cost per insured person, driving up the premiums that they must charge.
As premiums rise, even more relatively healthy individuals will be encouraged to forego insurance until illness strikes, causing average costs and premiums to rise further.
With this in mind, Obamacare’s drafters made the purchase of insurance “mandatory.”
More specifically, employers with more than 50 employees will be required after 2014 to purchase an approved insurance policy for their “full-time” employees.
Individuals who do not receive insurance from their employers are required to purchase insurance on their own, with low-income buyers receiving a government subsidy.
But neither the employer mandate nor the personal requirement is likely to prove effective.
Employers can avoid the mandate by reducing an employee’s workweek to less than 30 hours (which the law defines as full-time employment).
But even for full-time employees, firms can opt to pay a relatively small fine rather than provide insurance.
That fine is $2,000 per employee, much less than the current average premium of $16,000 for employer-provided family policies.
Not providing insurance and paying the fine is a particularly attractive option for a firm if its employees have incomes that entitle them to the government subsidies (which are now available to anyone whose income is below four times the poverty level).
Rather than incur the cost of the premium for an approved policy, a smart employer can pay the fine for not providing insurance and increase employees’ pay by enough so that they have more spendable cash after purchasing the subsidized insurance policy.
Even after both payments, employers can be better off financially.
News reports indicate that many employers are already taking such steps.
But the biggest danger to Obamacare’s survival is that many individuals who do not receive insurance from their employer will choose not to insure themselves and will instead pay the fine of just 1% of income (rising permanently after 2015 to 2.5%).
The preferred alternative for these individuals is to wait to buy insurance until they are ill and are facing large medical bills.
That wait-to-insure strategy makes sense if the medical condition is a chronic disease like diabetes or a condition requiring surgery, like cancer or a hernia.
In either case, the individual would be able to purchase insurance after he or she receives the diagnosis.
But what about conditions like a heart attack or injuries sustained in an automobile accident?
In those cases, the individual would not have time to purchase the health insurance that the law allows.
If they are not insured in advance, they will face major hospital bills that could cause serious financial hardship or even cause them not to receive needed care.
Anyone contemplating that prospect might choose to forego the wait-to-insure strategy and enroll immediately.
But private insurance companies could solve that problem by creating a new type of “emergency insurance” that would make enrolling now unnecessary and allow individuals to take advantage of the wait-to-insure option.
Such insurance would cover the costs that a patient would incur after a medical event that left no time to purchase the policies offered in the Obamacare insurance exchanges.
Emergency insurance might also cover the cost of care until the “open enrollment” period for purchasing insurance at the end of each year (if political pressure does not lead to the repeal of that temporary barrier to insurance).
This type of insurance is very different from existing high-deductible policies.
Given the very limited scope and unpredictable nature of the conditions that it would cover, the premium for such a policy would be very low.
It would not satisfy the broad coverage requirements that Obamacare mandates, forcing individuals to pay the relatively small penalty for being uninsured and to incur the subsequent cost of buying a full policy if one is needed later.
But the combination of emergency insurance and the wait-to-insure strategy would still be financially preferable for many individuals, and the number would grow as premiums are driven higher.
Employers with a large number of full-time employees could encourage their existing insurance companies to create the emergency policies.
They might even choose to self-insure the emergency risk for their employees.
The “wait-to-insure” option could cause the number of insured individuals to decline rapidly as premiums rise for those who remain insured.
In this scenario, the unraveling of Obamacare could lead to renewed political pressure from the left for a European-style single-payer health-care system.
But it might also provide an opportunity for a better plan: eliminate the current enormously expensive tax subsidy for employer-financed insurance and use the revenue savings to subsidize everyone to buy comprehensive private insurance policies with income-related copayments.
That restructuring of insurance would simultaneously protect individuals, increase labor mobility, and help to control health-care costs.
Bringing It Back Home
CAMBRIDGE – An increasing number of American companies are making plans to shift their headquarters to Europe.
These so-called “inversions” would reduce these companies’ total tax bill by allowing them to escape from the United States’ uniquely unfavorable corporate tax rules.
So what should US policymakers do?
President Barack Obama’s administration is seeking to block corporate inversion through administrative measures that may not hold up in US courts.
It would be far better to develop a bipartisan legislative plan aimed at removing the temptation to shift corporate headquarters in the first place.
Such a plan, if attractive to US multinational corporations, could result in a shift in employment and production to the US and higher tax revenue.
Under current law, US corporate profits are taxed at a rate of 35% – the highest rate among OECD countries, where the average is 25%.
That tax is paid on profits earned in the US and on repatriated profits earned by US companies’ foreign subsidiaries.
For example, the subsidiary of a US firm that operates in Ireland pays the Irish corporate tax of 12.5% on the profits earned in that country.
If it repatriates the after-tax profits, it pays a 22.5% tax (the difference between the 35% US rate and the 12.5% tax that it already paid to the Irish government).
But if it reinvests the profits in Ireland – or in any other country – no further tax must be paid.
Not surprisingly, American firms prefer to leave those profits abroad, either in financial instruments or by investing in new or existing subsidiaries.
As a result, American companies now hold abroad roughly $2 trillion in profits that have never been subject to US tax.
All other OECD countries treat the profits of their companies’ foreign subsidiaries very differently, relying on the so-called “territorial” method of taxing foreign earnings.
For example, a French firm that invests in Ireland pays the 12.5% Irish corporate tax but is then free to repatriate the after-tax profits with a tax of less than 5%.
America’s current tax system adversely affects the US economy in several ways.
The extra tax that US firms pay if they repatriate profits raises their cost of capital, thus reducing their ability to compete in international markets.
Foreign firms can also outbid their US counterparts in acquiring new high-tech firms in other countries.
And when a foreign firm acquires a US company, it pays US tax on the profits earned in the US but not on the profits earned by that firm’s other foreign subsidiaries, thus lowering its total tax bill.
A shift to a territorial system of taxation would remove the disadvantages faced by American multinational corporations and encourage them to reinvest their overseas profits at home, increasing US employment and profits.
Because only a small share of overseas profits is now repatriated, the US government would lose very little tax revenue by shifting to a territorial system.
A few years ago, the US Treasury Department estimated that shifting to a territorial system would reduce corporate tax revenue by only $130 billion over ten years.
It would also be desirable to reduce the US corporate tax rate gradually, bringing it closer to the 25% OECD average.
That, too, would encourage more repatriation of overseas earnings.
Given that American companies have large amounts of profits abroad that have never been subject to US tax, the transition could even be carried out in a way that raises net revenue.
In exchange for shifting to a territorial system and reducing the tax rate, the federal government could tax all of these untaxed past earnings at a low rate to be paid over a ten-year period.
Companies would then be free to repatriate their pre-existing earnings without paying any additional tax, while future foreign earnings could, as in other countries, be repatriated by paying a low 5% tax.
A 10% tax on those existing accumulated foreign earnings would raise about $200 billion over the ten years.
A 15% tax would raise $300 billion.
The choice of tax rate would be part of the negotiation over how far to reduce the overall US corporate tax rate.
For example, with a 10% tax, a company with $500 million of accumulated overseas earnings would incur a tax liability of $50 million, to be paid over ten years.
It could repatriate $500 million at any time with no additional tax liability.
Repatriation of any earnings in excess of $500 million would be subject to a 5% tax.
The shift to a territorial system and a lower corporate tax rate would appeal to American multinational corporations even if they had to pay a 10-15% tax on accumulated past earnings.
If Obama is looking for an opportunity to negotiate a bipartisan deal that would strengthen the US economy and increase employment, he should seriously consider such a package of reforms.
The Future of American Growth
CAMBRIDGE – The near-term outlook for the US economy has improved, owing to the sharp increase in household wealth in 2013, together with the end of the fiscal drag caused by the increase in tax rates in 2012.
The United States now has a chance to raise real (inflation-adjusted) per capita GDP faster than the feeble 1.7% average rate recorded during the four years since growth resumed in the summer of 2009.
Of course, significantly faster GDP growth in 2014 is not guaranteed.
For starters, achieving it requires overcoming the negative impact of the jump in long-term interest rates that followed the Federal Reserve’s announcement last June that it would likely end its asset-purchase program this year.
Moreover, the cloud of rising budget deficits at the end of the decade – and exploding national debt after that – is also discouraging investment and consumer spending.
But let’s look beyond 2014 and ask what will happen to US economic growth over the longer term.
The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) projects that real per capita GDP growth will slow from an annual rate of 2.1% in the 40 years before the start of the recent recession to just 1.6% between 2023 and 2088.
An annual per capita growth rate of 1.6% means that a child born today will have a real income that, on average, is 60% higher at age 30 than his or her parents had at the same age.
Of course, not everyone will experience the average rate of growth.
Some will outperform the average 60% rise over the next three decades, and some will not reach that level.
But a 30-year-old in 2044 who experiences only half the average growth rate will still have a real income that is nearly 30% higher than the average in 2014.
But things are even better than those numbers imply.
Although government statisticians do their best to gauge the rise in real GDP through time, there are two problems that are very difficult to overcome in measuring real incomes: increases in the quality of goods and services, and the introduction of new ones.
I believe that both of these problems cause the official measure of real GDP growth to understate the true growth of the standard of living that real GDP is supposed to indicate.
Consider the problem of accounting for quality improvements.
If I pay the same price for some product or service this year as I did last year, but the quality of the product or service is better, my standard of living has increased.
The same is true if the price rises but the quality increases even more.
Unfortunately, a government statistician cannot judge the increase in quality of everything from restaurant meals to medical care.
So looking only at the cost of a meal or of a day in the hospital causes an overestimate in the price index and an underestimate of the rise in the real standard of living.
The problem of taking new products into account is even more difficult.
Virtually everyone around us uses a smart phone, a laptop computer, or a tablet.
We know what these cost and how much they add to the total nominal value of GDP.
But how much more than the standard retail price would individuals pay to keep these “must-have” products?
Likewise, what is the value to patients of laparoscopic surgery or drugs that relieve anxiety or prevent heart attacks?
In short, I am convinced that the real standard of living produced by the goods and services that we buy is increasing faster than our official data reveal.
That is true now, and it is likely to continue to be true in the future.
That is not a reason for complacency.
The US can and should adopt policies that will cause real incomes to rise even faster. But that is a subject for a future column.
New Hope for India
CAMBRIDGE – India’s recent general election could be the most important positive economic event of 2014.
Indian voters decisively rejected the Congress party, which had governed India virtually without interruption since it gained independence from Britain in 1947.
They are likely to be happy they did.
Sonia Gandhi, the head of Congress and the widow of former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, has been the power behind the throne since 1998, turning Prime Minister Manmohan Singh into little more than a figurehead.
Under her leadership, Congress has pursued a populist agenda that increased transfer payments and reduced India’s annual economic-growth rate to less than 4% in 2013.
GDP per capita is still only about $4,000, less than half the level in China.
The newly elected prime minister, Narendra Modi, campaigned on a platform that promises to deliver to India as a whole the rapid growth in employment and income that the state of Gujarat achieved when he was its chief minister.
Under Modi’s leadership, Gujarat became a business-friendly state that expanded economic activity, and attracted business investment from both Indian and overseas companies.
A remarkable feature of the recent election is that Modi’s Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) received an absolute majority in the national parliament, an almost unprecedented achievement in India.
As a result, Modi will not have to compromise with the other national or regional parties to pursue his legislative agenda.
Two key officials will help Modi manage his economic program.
The new finance minister, Arun Jaitley, is an experienced political leader who served in ministerial positions in previous BJP governments.
Jaitley is also known as a strategic thinker who is sympathetic to business interests.
The head of the Reserve Bank of India (the central bank) will continue to be Raghuram Rajan, a distinguished economist who has already shown his desire to reduce India’s near-double-digit annual inflation rate, and to reform some of the inherited counterproductive restrictions on the country’s financial sector.
The measures needed to stimulate economic growth will take time to implement and to produce results.
But anyone who wants to see whether the new government is acting to achieve faster long-term growth should examine whether progress is being made in the following ten policy areas.
Education.
Although India has excellent institutions of higher education and technology, only a small share of the population can take advantage of the opportunities they offer, because primary and secondary education is so inadequate.
Only 60% of the adult population can read and write at an elementary level.
Teachers themselves are poorly educated, and many are so unmotivated that they do not even show up at the schools where they are supposed to work.
Infrastructure.
India needs better roads and ports to enable efficient transport of products domestically and to the rest of the world.
The recent expansion of private airlines and airports shows what private firms in this sector can accomplish.
Fiscal consolidation.
Large budget deficits are absorbing the national savings that should be used to expand business investment, and are increasing the national debt that will have to be financed by future taxes.
Privatization.
The enterprises owned by the Indian government in manufacturing and other sectors operate inefficiently and often produce losses that absorb national saving.
Selling off these enterprises would contribute directly to accelerating the pace of economic growth.
Removal of subsidies.
Subsidized electricity and fuel leads to wasteful overconsumption and contributes to the fiscal deficit.
Though these subsidies are politically difficult to eliminate, they should be replaced by cash transfers, which can now be done efficiently in India, owing to a remarkable new system of fingerprint-based cash transfers.
Agricultural reform.
In the current system, the government buys, warehouses, and distributes agricultural products.
As a result, an enormous amount of goods are spoiled in storage, while production incentives are misdirected.
Agricultural markets should be privatized.
Property rights and zoning.
Anyone who visits Mumbai or other major Indian cities sees how zoning restrictions cause misuse of urban land and limit modernization.
Ambiguous property rights, especially to agricultural land, prevent industrialization in rural areas.
Relaxing limits on foreign investment.
Foreign firms are now barred from majority ownership of banks and insurance companies.
Relaxing such restrictions would strengthen the financial sector and play an important role in economic growth.
Tax reform.
India’s complex system of national and state sales taxes distorts domestic trade.
Replacing these taxes with a national value-added tax and using revenue-sharing to the states has been long debated and should now be enacted.
Corruption.
Major cases of high-level corruption have undermined economic confidence and impeded official decision-making.
India is also handicapped by small-scale corruption, with bribery a common feature of all forms of business and personal transactions.
The government should crack down on instances of high-level graft and use the new system of cash transfers to limit the scope of petty corruption.
The Indian stock market is up about 20% this year in anticipation of stronger growth and rising profits.
Now it is up to Modi and the BJP to show that they can deliver on their campaign promises.
Looking Up in 2014?
CAMBRIDGE – For the past six years, I have been skeptical about the standard optimistic forecasts of the pace of US economic growth in the year ahead.
Where most forecasters and policy officials saw green shoots and reasons for confidence, I saw strong headwinds that would cause an economic downturn and then a subpar recovery.
But I think the evidence for 2014 is more balanced.
Although there are serious risks facing the US economy in the coming year, there is also a good chance that growth will be substantially stronger than it has been since before the recession began.
The economy was still expanding in the late summer of 2007, when I spoke at the US Federal Reserve’s annual Jackson Hole conference about serious risks to the economic outlook.
I warned that house prices had begun to fall in the summer of 2006 from dangerously high levels, implying a future collapse of construction activity and large losses of household wealth.
Reduced household wealth would lead, in turn, to lower consumer spending, further depressing GDP.
I also stressed that financial markets had become dysfunctional.
Banks and other financial institutions had doubts about the value of various asset-backed securities on their own balance sheets and on those of potential counterparties.
No one knew the real value of credit-default swaps and of the various tranches of collateralized debt obligations.
Financial institutions were therefore reluctant to lend to other financial institutions.
With credit flows disrupted, the economy could not continue to expand.
Moreover, I warned that the Fed was too complacent and should be reducing sharply the federal funds rate, which was above 5%.
The economy peaked a few months later, and the Fed began aggressive easing in 2008.
Although the Fed and the US Treasury cooperated in addressing financial-market dysfunction, this was not enough to restore solid economic growth.
The restoration of normalcy to financial markets and lower interest rates did cause an economic upturn in the summer of 2009, leading many forecasters and market participants to expect a typical rapid post-recession recovery.
I warned that the upturn would be much more tepid than expected: unlike previous business cycles, the recession that began at the end of 2007 was not caused by high interest rates, so lowering rates would have little impact.
US President Barack Obama’s new administration announced a three-year fiscal package intended to stimulate aggregate demand.
Administration officials and others predicted that fiscal stimulus would cause the economy to rebound, as it had in the past.
But the fiscal package was not very effective. It was too small to close the output gap, leaving continued downward pressure on demand.
Much of the “stimulus” merely financed increased spending by state governments that would have been paid for in other ways.
Other parts of the stimulus went to individuals, but, given the nature of the fiscal package, increased transfers and spending added more to the national debt than to GDP.
When the Fed saw how weak the upturn remained, it launched a strategy of “unconventional monetary policy,” combining large-scale purchases of long-term securities (quantitative easing) with promises to keep the short-term federal funds rate extremely low for an extended period of time.
The goal was to encourage portfolio investors to shift into equities and other assets, with the resulting increase in their prices pushing up household wealth and consumer spending.
Lower long-term rates were also expected to reduce the cost of mortgage credit, raising the value of homes.
The Fed and others were again overly optimistic about the extent to which these policies would boost GDP growth.
Despite the fall in long-term interest rates, house prices reached bottom only in 2012, and the stock market did not rise faster than corporate earnings until 2013.
The economy therefore limped along year after year, with real GDP in the final quarter of each year less than 2% higher than it had been a year earlier.
Employment grew more slowly than the population, and annual real-wage increases averaged only about 1%.
Fortunately, the outlook may now be changing for the better.
Real GDP growth reached 4.1% in the third quarter of 2013, and fourth-quarter growth appears to have been relatively strong, driven by a dramatic rise in housing starts and industrial production.
The sharp increases in the prices of homes and equities contributed to a roughly $6 trillion rise in real household wealth in the 12 months ending in September 2013 – a harbinger of increased consumer spending (at least by higher-wealth households) in 2014.
There are, of course, risks to the pace of expansion in the coming year.
Nearly half of 2013 third-quarter GDP growth was inventory accumulation, implying that final sales rose by only about 2.5%.
Businesses worry about the potential for higher corporate taxes, especially if the Republican Party loses its majority in the US House of Representatives.