Beberapa negara sudah menyetujui penurunan emisi gas rumah kaca secara sukarela yang dapat mencegah pemanasan planet bumi melebihi 2° Celsius.
Setelah itu, melalui kekuatan maha dahsyat (deus ex machine), akan terungkap bahwa perusahaan-perusahaan penghasil bahan bakar fosil terbesar dunia – disebut supermajors – sepakat untuk mewujudkan emisi nihil pada tahun 2100, dengan menangkap karbon di sumbernya, menyedot karbon di atmosfer, dan menyimpannya di bawah tanah.
Planet bumi akan terselamatkan dan perekonomian akan berkembang bebas.
Mainkan musiknya dan tampilkan credit title di akhir pertunjukan.
Masalahnya adalah naskah ini fiksi, bukan dokumenter.
Teknologi yang diperlukan belum tersedia dan upaya mewujudkan emisi nihil pada dasarnya mustahil.
Layaknya pertunjukan buatan Hollywood, pesan-pesan yang termuat dalam konferensi Paris sangat dipengaruhi oleh mereka yang memiliki banyak uang.
Perhitungan matematikanya sebetulnya tidak sulit dipahami.
Infrastruktur energi dunia – dirancang dengan peruntukan bagi bahan bakar fosil – bernilai $55 triliun.
Paper value dari cadangan bahan bakar fosil – yang sebagian besar dimiliki perusahaan supermajors – bernilai sekitar $28 triliun.
Pengaruh industri bahan bakar fosil nampak jelas pada fakta bahwa pemerintah negara-negara di seluruh dunia diperkirakan akan mengeluarkan dana sebesar $5.3 triliun tahun ini untuk subsidi bahan bakar fosil, termasuk pembiayaan besar-besaran untuk meniadakan dampak negatifnya terhadap kesehatan dan lingkungan hidup.
Dengan kata lain, negara-negara yang menghadiri pertemuan di Paris ini menghabiskan lebih banyak dana untuk mensubsidi penyebab terjadinya perubahan iklim, dibandingkan dengan biaya kesehatan global, atau justru lebih tepatnya dibandingkan dengan pengeluaran untuk mitigasi dan adaptasi perubahan iklim.
Akan tetapi itu tidak menjadi bagian kisah di Paris.
Nantinya, komunitas global akan menyaksikan pemikiran naratif tentang dua bentuk “geoengineering” yang belum teruji, sebagai tokoh protagonis yang berupaya memanipulasi sistem planet bumi.
Upaya yang paling disoroti adalah bio-energi dengan penangkapan dan penyimpanan karbon (bio-energy with carbon capture and storage atau BECCS).
Pada bulan Mei, Departemen Energi Amerika Serikat melaksanakan pertemuan terbatas guna membahas teknologi ini, yang akan menjadi kedok dimanfaatkan oleh perusahaan supermajors untuk melindungi aset-aset mereka.
Meskipun demikian, penerapan BECCS memerlukan area dengan luas 1,5 kali besarnya India, dipenuhi dengan lapangan atau hutan yang mampu menyerap karbon dioksida dalam jumlah besar, serta di saat yang sama menyediakan cukup pangan bagi populasi dunia yang diperkirakan akan mencapai lebih dari sembilan miliar penduduk pada tahun 2050.
Kelak, harapan yang ditawarkan melalui teknologi ini, penangkapan karbon melalui proses biologi akan dipadukan dengan program lain yang mampu menangkap emisi ketika dilepaskan atau ditarik dari udara lalu dipompa ke dalam poros di bawah permukaan bumi, kemudian hilang.
Penghasil bahan bakar fosil mendorong penggunaan carbon capture supaya tambang mereka tetap bisa beroperasi.
Sayangnya, bagi planet bumi, banyak ilmuwan menganggapnya secara teknis adalah mustahil dan secara finansial terlampau sulit – khususnya apabila teknologi tersebut diterapkan untuk menangkal kekacauan akibat perubahan iklim.
Kita memerlukan perbaikan geoengineering yang kedua untuk mencegah kenaikan suhu di luar kendali, hal ini dikenal sebagai pengelolaan radiasi matahari.
Idenya adalah meniru pendinginan alami pada erupsi gunung berapi, melalui beragam teknik seperti penggunaan selang yang memompa asam sulfat sejauh 30 kilometer ke stratosfer untuk menghalangi cahaya matahari.
Royal Society di UK percaya bahwa kebutuhan akan teknologi ini tidak dapat dihindarkan dan lembaga ini sudah bekerja sama dengan mitra di negara-negara lainnya demi mencari cara agar pemanfaatannya harus diatur.
Pada awal tahun ini, National Academies of Science di Amerika Serikat memberikan dukungan yang sekedarnya atas teknik ini, dan pemerintah Tiongkok mengumumkan investasi besar pada modifikasi cuaca, bisa jadi mencakup pengelolaan radiasi matahari.
Rusia tengah mengupayakan pengembangan teknologi tersebut.
Berbeda dari carbon capture, menghalangi cahaya matahari sebetulnya memiliki potensi menurunkan suhu global.
Secara teori, teknologi ini sederhana, murah, dan bisa diterapkan oleh satu negara atau sekelompok kecil; persetujuan PBB tidak diperlukan.
Namun pengelolaan radiasi matahari tidak akan menghilangkan gas rumah kaca dari atmosfer, melainkan menutupi dampaknya saja.
Jika selang-selang tersebut dihentikan, suhu bumi akan melonjak.
Teknologi bisa menunda kenaikan suhu, namun itu berarti kendali atas thermostat planet akan dipegang oleh mereka yang memilikinya.
Bahkan para penganjur teknologi ini mengakui bahwa model berdasarkan rancangan komputer memperkirakan adanya dampak negatif yang buruk pada kawasan-kawasan tropis dan subtropis.
Perubahan iklim berbahaya, namun geoengineering berpotensi menjadikannya lebih buruk.
Kisah yang diinginkan para produser di konferensi Paris mampu diyakini penontonnya, sesungguhnya bergantung pada beberapa teknologi yang belum terbukti efektif atau teruji.
Penting bagi kita untuk melihat lebih jauh.
Layar akan dibuka dengan seperangkat janji palsu dan ditutup dengan kebijakan yang mengarah pada kekacauan semata – kecuali para penonton juga turut bermain peran.
Kereta Cepat Copenhagen-Paris
COPENHAGEN – Pada tahun 2009, ketika Copenhagen menjadi tuan rumah Konferensi Perubahan Iklim PBB, saya ikut hadir sebagai anggota parlemen dan saya merasa sedang menyaksikan peristiwa yang mengubah dunia.
Selama bertahun-tahun, para negosiator mengupayakan penetapan perjanjian yang ambisius dan mengikat untuk membatasi emisi gas rumah kaca dan perhatian dunia tertuju ke Denmark.
Sayangnya, krisis keuangan gobal dan kepentingan-kepentingan khusus negara menyatu hingga menggagalkan tercapainya kesepakatan yang komprehensif.
Kini, para negosiator iklim bertemu lagi – kali ini di Paris, dimana harapan terbentuknya perjanjian juga sama besarnya.
Tetapi kali ini, besar kemungkinannya kesepakatan yang kuat akan terwujud.
Saya akan hadir, sebagai menteri Denmark yang bertanggung atas isu-isu iklim, dan saya yakin konferensi tahun ini akan menandai momen ketika negara-negara menunjukkan komitmennya untuk mengendalikan pemanasan global.
Situasi politik sekarang sangat berbeda dengan enam tahun lalu.
Dulu saat konferensi di Copenhagen diselenggarakan, dunia belum pulih dari krisis yang hampir meruntuhkan keuangan global, politisi-politisi terkemuka masih mempertanyakan apakah betul aktivitas manusia bertanggung jawab atas terjadinya perubahan iklim, dan kelompok industri menolak kewajiban penurunan emisi.
Kini, ekonomi global telah pulih, para ilmuwan iklim telah menjawab kerugian terakhir tentang penyebab perubahan iklim, dan komunitas bisnis telah berpihak dengan lingkungan hidup.
Pada tahun 2009, jumlah pemimpin bisnis hijau (green business) sangat sedikit.
Sekarang, jumlahnya melonjak pesat.
Pada bulan November, contohnya Goldman Sachs mengumumkan investasi $150 miliar pada energi hijau hingga tahun 2025.
Dinamika perundingan pun telah berubah secara drastis.
Tujuannya tidak lagi perumusan perjanjian yang memaksa penurunan emisi yang harus dilakukan semua negara; sebaliknya kami sedang mengembangkan kerangka kerja penurunan emisi yang memungkinkan pemerintah untuk memutuskan jenis kontribusi masing-masing negara.
Akibatnya, tiap negara akan menggerakkan kemajuan kesepakatan ini.
Mereka sudah menyadari bahwa konsekuensi buruk akan timbul dari tidak adanya tindakan, dan manfaat dari upaya penurunan emisi sekarang akan terbayarkan dalam jangka panjang.
Tanda-tanda kemajuan sudah banyak ditemukan.
Misalnya tahun lalu Amerika Serikat dan Tiongkok menandatangani perjanjian bilateral untuk melawan perubahan iklim.
Amerika Serikat setuju akan mengurangi emisi sebesar 26-28% hingga tahun 2025 dan Tiongkok berkomitmen akan menetapkan emisi puncaknya sekitar tahun 2030 dan lalu menurunkan jumlah emisi.
Pendekatan baru ini telah memperluas ruang lingkup perundingan iklim.
Perjanjian di Paris diharapkan akan melibatkan lebih dari 180 negara dan mencakup setidaknya 90% emisi CO2 global.
Sebagai perbandingan, Protokol Kyoto tahun 1997 mencakup kurang dari 15% emisi global.
Tentu saja banyak tindakan yang bisa dan harus dilakukan.
Denmark akan terus memerangi perubahan iklim.
Selama 25 tahun ke depan, kebutuhan energi global akan meningkat hampir sepertiga, terutama di negara-negara non-OECD seperti Tiongkok dan India, dan kita harus memastikan pemenuhan energi ini dilakukan dengan cara-cara yang berkelanjutan.
Organisasi seperti International Energy Agency (Badan Energi Internasional) bisa lebih banyak berperan dalam membantu mendorong transisi menuju energi bersih.
Komunitas internasional nampaknya akan berhasil mencapai tujuan yang disepakati sebelumnya di Copenhagen untuk mengucurkan dana $100 miliar per tahun sebagai pendanaan iklim untuk negara-negara berkembang mulai tahun 2020.
Supaya terwujud, kita perlu memanfaatkan kekuatan marketplace, meningkatkan daya tarik dana publik agar mendorong investasi swasta.
Dalam hal ini, the Danish Climate Investment Fund (Dana Investasi Iklim Denmark), yakni bentuk investasi pemerintah bersama dengan dana pensiun besar di Denmark untuk proyek-proyek iklim demi kepentingan perusahaan-perusahaan asal Denmark, bisa menjadi contoh bagi negara lain.
Upaya ini juga memerlukan penghapusan subsidi bahan bakar fosil secara bertahap, serta pengembangan instrumen keuangan baru untuk  mendorong para investor memecahkan masalah secara mandiri, tanpa bergantung pada dana publik.
Kesepakatan di Paris akan menghasilkan kerangka kerja global yang sangat dibutuhkan semua negara dalam mengurangi total emisi gas rumah kaca.
Meskipun kesepakatan tersebut mampu diwujudkan, tidak berarti kita berhasil memenangkan perjuangan melawan perubahan iklim, hal itu akan menjadi landasan kuat bagi transisi menuju perekonomian hijau.
Basic Income Revisited
LONDON – Britain isn’t the only country holding a referendum this month.
On June 5, Swiss voters overwhelmingly rejected, by 77% to 23%, the proposition that every citizen should be guaranteed an unconditional basic income (UBI).
But that lopsided outcome doesn’t mean the issue is going away anytime soon.
Indeed, the idea of a UBI has made recurrent appearances in history – starting with Thomas Paine in the eighteenth century.
This time, though, it is likely to have greater staying power, as the prospect of sufficient income from jobs grows bleaker for the poor and less educated.
Experiments with unconditional cash transfers have been taking place in poor as well as rich countries.
UBI is a somewhat uneasy mix of two objectives: poverty relief and the rejection of work as the defining purpose of life.
The first is political and practical; the second is philosophical or ethical.
The main argument for UBI as poverty relief is, as it has always been, the inability of available paid work to guarantee a secure and decent existence for all.
In the industrial age, factory work became the only source of income for most people – a source that was interrupted by bouts of unemployment as the industrial machine periodically seized up.
The labor movement responded by demanding “work or maintenance.” Acceptance of maintenance in lieu of work was reflected in the creation of a system of social security: “welfare capitalism.”
The aim of welfare capitalism was explicitly to provide people an income – typically through pooled compulsory insurance – during enforced interruptions of work.
In no sense was income maintenance seen as an alternative to work.
As the idea of interruption from work was extended to include the disabled and women bringing up children, so entitlements to income maintenance increased beyond the capacity of social insurance, with benefits paid to eligible individuals from general taxation.
In the 1980s, US President Ronald Reagan and British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher unwittingly extended the scope of welfare further, as they dismantled institutions and legislation designed to protect wages and jobs.
With both left to the market, “in work” benefits, or tax credits, were introduced to enable employed workers to earn a “living wage.”
At the same time, conservative governments, alarmed at the growing cost of social security, started to cut back on welfare entitlements.
In this newly precarious environment of work and welfare, UBI is seen as guaranteeing the basic income previously promised by work and welfare, but no longer reliably secured by either. (A leading advocate, Guy Standing of the University of London, has written a book called The Precariat.)
An additional argument, always resonant in this tradition, but particularly so today in poor countries, is UBI’s emancipatory potential for women.
The ethical case for UBI is different.
Its source is the idea, found both in the Bible and in classical economics, that work is a curse (or, as economists put it, a “cost”), undertaken only for the sake of making a living.
As technological innovation causes per capita income to rise, people will need to work less to satisfy their needs.
Both John Stuart Mill and John Maynard Keynes looked forward to a horizon of growing leisure: the reorientation of life away from the merely useful toward the beautiful and the true.
UBI provides a practical path to navigate this transition.
Most of the hostility to UBI has come when it stated in this second form.
A poster put up during the Swiss referendum campaign asked, “What would you do if your income were taken care of?”
The objection of most UBI opponents is that a majority of people would respond, “Nothing at all.”
But to argue that an income independent of the job market is bound to be demoralizing is as morally obtuse as it is historically inaccurate.
If it were true, we would want to abolish all inherited income.
The nineteenth-century European bourgeoisie was a largely rentier class, and few questioned their work effort.
Virginia Woolf famously wrote that a woman who wanted to write fiction “must have money and a room of her own.”
The explosion of robotics has given the demand for UBI renewed currency.
Credible estimates suggest that it will be technically possible to automate between one-quarter and one-third of all current jobs in the Western world within 20 years.
At the very least, this will accelerate the trend toward precariousness of jobs and income.
At worst, it will make a sizeable share of the population redundant.
A standard objection to UBI as a way to replace earnings from vanishing jobs is that it is unaffordable.
This partly depends on what parameters are set: the UBI’s level, which benefits (if any) it replaces, whether only citizens or all residents are eligible, and so on.
But this is not the main point.
The overwhelming evidence is that the lion’s share of productivity gains in the last 30 years has gone to the very rich.
And that’s not all: 40% of the gains of quantitative easing in the United Kingdom have gone to the richest 5% of households, not because they were more productive, but because the Bank of England directed its cash toward them.
Even a partial reversal of this long regressive trend for wealth and income would fund a modest initial basic income.
Beyond this, a UBI scheme can be designed to grow in line with the wealth of the economy.
Automation is bound to increase profits, because machines that make human labor redundant require no wages and only minimal investment in maintenance.
Unless we change our system of income generation, there will be no way to check the concentration of wealth in the hands of the rich and exceptionally entrepreneurial.
A UBI that grows in line with capital productivity would ensure that the benefits of automation go to the many, not just to the few.
The Year of Resilience
NEW YORK – Ten years ago this month, representatives from 168 United Nations member states met in Kobe, the capital of Japan’s Hyogo Prefecture, to decide how to manage risk better in the wake of the devastating Indian Ocean tsunami, which claimed more than 227,000 lives.
Over five days, which included the anniversary of the 1995 Kobe earthquake, they crafted the Hyogo Framework for Action (HFA), composed of a raft of measures designed to “reduce the losses in lives and social, economic, and environmental assets of communities and countries.”
In two months, UN member states will gather for the third World Conference for Disaster Risk Reduction in another Japanese city synonymous with disaster risk: Sendai – the center of the Tōhoku region, which bore the brunt of the 2011 earthquake and tsunami that led to the Fukushima nuclear meltdown.
One question will be on everyone’s mind at the meeting: Has the world lived up to the HFA’s ambitious goals?
The evidence of the last decade – which has been marked by some of the worst natural disasters on record – is far from favorable.
Port-au-Prince collapsed in an earthquake.
Hurricane Katrina devastated New Orleans.
Drought killed an unknown number of people in the Horn of Africa.
Floods and earthquakes affected millions in Pakistan and China.
Heat waves and wildfires ravaged countries around the world.
These disasters serve as a stark reminder of the need for instruments like the HFA, especially because the drivers of disaster risk – improper land use, non-existent or poorly implemented building codes, environmental degradation, poverty, climate change, and, most important, weak governance by inappropriate and insufficient institutions – still abound.
That is why world leaders need to agree on an updated version of the HFA at the Sendai conference.
To be sure, there have been some important, albeit less noticeable, successes over the last ten years.
In Asia, where 80% of the world’s disasters are concentrated, the number of people directly affected has dropped, decade-on-decade, by almost one billion, owing to measures like the Indian Ocean tsunami early-warning system.
Indeed, timely evacuations in the face of accurately forecasted major storm systems have enabled the Philippines and India to save thousands of lives just in the last year.
And, over the last three years, China has worked hard to keep economic losses within its 1.5%-of-GDP target.
Meanwhile, Turkey will have earthquake-proofed every school and hospital in the country by 2017.
Ethiopia has developed a sophisticated data-management system to help guide its efforts to address not only drought but also other natural hazards.
Both countries – and many others – have incorporated the study of disaster risk into their school curriculum.
In Latin America, a cost-benefit analysis in Ecuador has concluded that each dollar invested in disaster risk reduction, by eliminating recurring losses from floods and storms, ultimately provides $9.50 in savings.
Similarly, the European Union estimates that €1 ($1.18) spent on flood protection brings €6 in savings.
In the United Kingdom, for example, investment in flood defenses meant that 800,000 properties were protected during last winter’s storms, significantly reducing the bill for response and recovery.
But more must be done.
In the last 44 years, disasters caused by weather, climate, and water-related hazards have led to 3.5 million deaths.
Though progress has been made in reducing disaster-related mortality – according to the Center for Research into the Epidemiology of Disasters, the number of disaster-related deaths has not increased significantly in the last decade, despite the uptick in disasters – this figure remains far too high.
Moreover, even where people’s lives are saved, their livelihoods are often decimated.
Since 1960, disasters have cost the world more than $3.5 trillion, with both developed and developing countries paying a huge price in terms of lost productivity and damaged infrastructure.
That is why, at the upcoming UN conference in Sendai, world leaders must agree, through a revised HFA, to scale up their efforts to cope with the risks posed by rising sea levels, global warming, rampant urbanization, and rapid population growth.
Only with strong political commitment at the highest level can real progress toward a safer, more sustainable future be made.
It should not be difficult to win support for a revised HFA.
After all, there is no compelling – or even rational – reason why a finance minister or CEO would choose to pay for recovery but not to invest in prevention.
It is time for the world to embed resilience to disasters into the industrialization process and the development of towns and cities, accounting for factors like seismic threats, flood plains, coastal erosion, and environmental degradation.
If the UN conference produces the right agreement, resilience can become the hallmark of 2015, setting the tone for agreements later in the year on climate change and sustainable development – both of which hold important implications for disaster risk.
An Unconventional Truth
NEW YORK – Who would have thought that six years after the global financial crisis, most advanced economies would still be swimming in an alphabet soup – ZIRP, QE, CE, FG, NDR, and U-FX Int – of unconventional monetary policies?
No central bank had considered any of these measures (zero interest rate policy, quantitative easing, credit easing, forward guidance, negative deposit rate, and unlimited foreign exchange intervention, respectively) before 2008.
Today, they have become a staple of policymakers’ toolkits.
Indeed, just in the last year and a half, the European Central Bank adopted its own version of FG, then moved to ZIRP, and then embraced CE, before deciding to try NDR.
In January, it fully adopted QE.
Indeed, by now the Fed, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the ECB, and a variety of smaller advanced economies’ central banks, such as the Swiss National Bank, have all relied on such unconventional policies.
One result of this global monetary-policy activism has been a rebellion among pseudo-economists and market hacks in recent years.
This assortment of “Austrian” economists, radical monetarists, gold bugs, and Bitcoin fanatics has repeatedly warned that such a massive increase in global liquidity would lead to hyperinflation, the US dollar’s collapse, sky-high gold prices, and the eventual demise of fiat currencies at the hands of digital krypto-currency counterparts.
None of these dire predictions has been borne out by events.
Inflation is low and falling in almost all advanced economies; indeed, all advanced-economy central banks are failing to achieve their mandate – explicit or implicit – of 2% inflation, and some are struggling to avoid deflation.
Moreover, the value of the dollar has been soaring against the yen, euro, and most emerging-market currencies.
Gold prices since the fall of 2013 have tumbled from $1,900 per ounce to around $1,200.
And Bitcoin was the world’s worst-performing currency in 2014, its value falling by almost 60%.
To be sure, most of the doomsayers have barely any knowledge of basic economics.
But that has not stopped their views from informing the public debate.
So it is worth asking why their predictions have been so spectacularly wrong.
The root of their error lies in their confusion of cause and effect.
The reason why central banks have increasingly embraced unconventional monetary policies is that the post-2008 recovery has been extremely anemic.
Such policies have been needed to counter the deflationary pressures caused by the need for painful deleveraging in the wake of large buildups of public and private debt.
In most advanced economies, for example, there is still a very large output gap, with output and demand well below potential; thus, firms have limited pricing power.
There is considerable slack in labor markets as well: Too many unemployed workers are chasing too few available jobs, while trade and globalization, together with labor-saving technological innovations, are increasingly squeezing workers’ jobs and incomes, placing a further drag on demand.
Moreover, there is still slack in real-estate markets where booms went bust (the United States, the United Kingdom, Spain, Ireland, Iceland, and Dubai).
And bubbles in other markets (for example, China, Hong Kong, Singapore, Canada, Switzerland, France, Sweden, Norway, Australia, New Zealand) pose a new risk, as their collapse would drag down home prices.
Commodity markets, too, have become a source of disinflationary pressure.
North America’s shale-energy revolution has weakened oil and gas prices, while China’s slowdown has undermined demand for a broad range of commodities, including iron ore, copper, and other industrial metals, all of which are in greater supply after years of high prices stimulated investments in new capacity.
China’s slowdown, coming after years of over-investment in real estate and infrastructure, is also causing a global glut of manufactured and industrial goods.
With domestic demand in these sectors now contracting sharply, the excess capacity in China’s steel and cement sectors – to cite just two examples – is fueling further deflationary pressure in global industrial markets.
Rising income inequality, by redistributing income from those who spend more to those who save more, has exacerbated the demand shortfall.
So has the asymmetric adjustment between over-saving creditor economies that face no market pressure to spend more, and over-spending debtor economies that do face market pressure and have been forced to save more.
Simply put, we live in a world in which there is too much supply and too little demand.
The result is persistent disinflationary, if not deflationary, pressure, despite aggressive monetary easing.
The inability of unconventional monetary policies to prevent outright deflation partly reflects the fact that such policies seek to weaken the currency, thereby improving net exports and increasing inflation.
This, however, is a zero-sum game that merely exports deflation and recession to other economies.
Perhaps more important has been a profound mismatch with fiscal policy.
To be effective, monetary stimulus needs to be accompanied by temporary fiscal stimulus, which is now lacking in all major economies.
Indeed, the eurozone, the UK, the US, and Japan are all pursuing varying degrees of fiscal austerity and consolidation.
Even the International Monetary Fund has correctly pointed out that part of the solution for a world with too much supply and too little demand needs to be public investment in infrastructure, which is lacking – or crumbling – in most advanced economies and emerging markets (with the exception of China).
With long-term interest rates close to zero in most advanced economies (and in some cases even negative), the case for infrastructure spending is indeed compelling.
But a variety of political constraints – particularly the fact that fiscally strapped economies slash capital spending before cutting public-sector wages, subsidies, and other current spending – are holding back the needed infrastructure boom.
All of this adds up to a recipe for continued slow growth, secular stagnation, disinflation, and even deflation.
That is why, in the absence of appropriate fiscal policies to address insufficient aggregate demand, unconventional monetary policies will remain a central feature of the macroeconomic landscape.
Resurrecting Glass-Steagall
WASHINGTON, DC – A major shift in American politics has taken place.
All three of the remaining mainstream Democratic presidential candidates now agree that the existing state of the financial sector is not satisfactory and that more change is needed.
President Barack Obama has long regarded the 2010 Dodd-Frank financial-reform legislation as bringing about sufficient change.
Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, Senator Bernie Sanders, and former Governor Martin O’Malley want to do even more.
The three leading Democratic candidates disagree, however, on whether there should be legislation to re-erect a wall between the rather dull business of ordinary commercial banking and other kinds of finance (such as issuing and trading securities, commonly known as investment banking).
This issue is sometimes referred to as “reinstating Glass-Steagall,” a reference to the Depression-era legislation – the Banking Act of 1933 – that separated commercial and investment banking.
This is a slight misnomer: the most credible bipartisan proposal on the table takes a much-modernized approach to distinguishing and making more transparent different kinds of finance activities.
Sanders and O’Malley are in favor of this general idea; Clinton is not (yet).
There are three main arguments against a modern version of Glass-Steagall. None is convincing.
First, some prominent former officials argue that not all of the financial firms that got into trouble in 2008 were integrated commercial-investment banking operations.
For example, Lehman Brothers was a standalone investment bank, and AIG was an insurance company.
This argument is, at best, irrelevant.
What happened “last time” is rarely a good guide to fighting wars or anticipating future financial crises.
The world moves on, in terms of technology and risks. We must adjust our thinking accordingly.
At worst, the argument is just plain wrong.
Some of the greatest threats in 2008 were posed by banks – such as Citigroup – built on the premise that integrating commercial and investment banking would bring stability and better service.
Sandy Weill, the primary architect of the modern Citigroup, regrets that construction – and regrets lobbying for the repeal of Glass-Steagall.
(As James Kwak and I argued in our book 13 Bankers, what really mattered was the decades-long bipartisan process of deregulation, for which the end of Glass-Steagall was a prominent symbol.)
Second, leading representatives of big banks argue that much has changed since 2008 – and that big banks have become significantly safer.
Unfortunately, this is a great exaggeration.
Ensuring a financial system’s stability is a multifaceted endeavor – complex enough to keep many diligent people fully employed.
But it also comes down to this: how much loss-absorbing shareholder equity is on the balance sheets of the largest financial firms?
In the run-up to the 2008 crisis, the largest US banks had around 4% equity relative to their assets.
This was not enough to withstand the storm. (Here I’m using tangible equity relative to tangible assets, as recommended by Tom Hoenig, Vice Chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and a beacon of clarity on these issues.)
Now, under the most generous possible calculation, the surviving megabanks have on average about 5% equity relative to total assets – that is, they are 95% financed with debt.
Is this the major and profound change that will prove sufficient as we head through the credit cycle?
No, it is not.
Finally, some observers – although relatively few at this point – argue that the biggest banks have greatly improved their control and compliance systems, and that the mismanagement of risk on a systemically significant scale is no longer possible.
This view is simply implausible.
Consider all the instances of money laundering and sanctions busting (with evidence against Credit Agricole last week, Deutsche Bank this week, and almost every major international bank in the past few years).
This is the equivalent of near misses in aviation.
If the US had the equivalent of the National Transportation Safety Board for finance, we would receive detailed public reports on what exactly is – still, after all these years – going wrong.
Sadly, what we actually get is plea bargains in which all relevant details are kept secret.
The regulators and law-enforcement officials are letting us down – and jeopardizing the safety of the financial system – on a regular basis.
The best argument for a modern Glass-Steagall act is the simplest.
We should want a lot more loss-absorbing shareholder equity.
And, to reinforce this, we should want to make the largest banks simpler and more transparent, with “strong structural firewalls” as Dennis Kelleher, of Better Markets, puts it.
Of course, in that context, we should ensure that various activities by “shadow banks” (structures that operate with bank-like features, as Lehman Brothers did) are properly regulated.
Building support for legislation to simplify the biggest banks would greatly strengthen the hand of those regulators who want to require more shareholder equity and better regulation for the shadows.
These policies are complements, not substitutes.
Conflict Management and Economic Growth
NEW DELHI – One of the most interesting aspects of the prolonged economic crisis in Europe, and of the even longer crisis in Japan, is the absence of serious social conflict – at least thus far.
Yes, there have been strikes, marches, and growing anger at political leaders, but protests have been largely peaceful.
While that may change, the credit for social peace must go to institutions such as elections (“throwing the rascals out” is a non-violent way to vent popular anger), responsive democratic legislatures, and effective judiciaries.
All of these institutions have successfully mediated political conflict during a time of great adversity in advanced countries.
This suggests that a major reason for underdevelopment may be that such institutions, which allow countries to cope with distress, are missing in poor economies.
Economic growth permits conflict between social actors to be papered over.
A downturn, however, usually exposes or sharpens latent social tension.
Why do the benefits of growth seem to be easier to share than are the burdens of adversity?
This is not a trivial question.
Perhaps the answer lies in human psychology.
If consumption is shaped by habit, an income loss is very hard to bear and one might fight to avoid it, while fighting for additional gain when one is doing well is less important.
Also, because conflict may destroy growth opportunities, it may be seen as costlier when growth is strong.
For example, squabbling between workers and management may drive away investors – and thus the chance to start new projects.
But if there are no new investment opportunities on the horizon, squabbling is less costly, because the existing plant and machinery are already sunk costs.
Regardless of why conflicts are greater in times of economic adversity, how a society deals with them depends on the scope and quality of its conflict-management institutions.
The Oxford University economist Paul Collier has shown that years of weak economic growth typically precede civil war in poor countries.
Even after establishing peace, the probability that these countries will relapse into conflict is high.
Not surprisingly, these states typically have weak conflict-management institutions – patchy law enforcement, limited adherence to democratic principles, and few meaningful checks and balances on the government.
Similarly, Dani Rodrik of Harvard University has found that the countries that experienced the sharpest declines in growth after 1975 had divided societies and weak conflict-management institutions.
Societies with well-functioning institutions allocate the burden of distress in predictable ways.
For example, people who suffer the most adversity can fall back on an explicit social safety net – a minimum level of unemployment insurance, for example.
In the United States in recent years, federal and state legislatures prolonged unemployment benefits as joblessness persisted.
Similarly, debtors and creditors can rely on credible bankruptcy proceedings to determine their relative shares.
With an explicit institutional mechanism in place to dictate the division of pain, there is no need to take to the streets.
By contrast, when institutions are too weak to offer predictable and acceptable settlements, or to protect existing shares, everyone has an incentive to jockey for a larger slice of the pie.
Outcomes will be mediated more by actors’ relative bargaining power than by pre-existing implicit or explicit contracts.
Often, bargaining will break down.
Everyone is made worse off by strikes, lockouts, and even violent conflict.
Can countries without a reliable and effective legislature or legal system do better to protect against downturns?
One answer may be to use arrangements that depend in a limited way on the legal system for enforcement.
For example, labor contracts in many developing countries effectively prohibit employers from firing workers.
This is regarded as inefficient because firms cannot adjust quickly to changing business conditions.
Often, such prohibitions are attributed to overly strong unions that hold the economy hostage.
But, if slow or corrupt courts mean that a worker who is wrongfully dismissed has no legal recourse, perhaps the prohibition on firing – enforced by mass protests against violations, which are easily and publicly observable – is the only way to protect workers from arbitrary decisions by employers.
Job tenure may also serve as a form of social security, because the government performs miserably on providing a safety net and private insurance markets do not exist.
Thus, an inflexible contract can protect workers when the preponderance of bargaining power is with firms.
Such inflexible arrangements are not without cost.
In a downturn, too many firms will fail, because they cannot shed labor.
Alternatively, knowing that they cannot fire permanent workers, firms may remain tiny in order to remain below the authorities’ radar.
Or they may hire informal workers who have no rights, or pay inspectors to look the other way (a related point could be made about workplace safety in Bangladesh’s garment factories).
Thus, the attempt to protect workers with rigid labor laws may have the unintended consequence of generating too few protected jobs.
This may be the situation in India, where most workers have few rights, and the few large firms that are established in the formal sector tend to use a lot of labor-saving capital in order to avoid hiring protected workers.
Change is not easy.
Protected workers have no reason to give up their benefits.
Moreover, removing rigid protections without offering alternative, contingent safety nets and judicial redress is a recipe for conflict.
At the same time, some protection is better than none, and if most workers are unprotected, change becomes necessary to avoid even worse conflict.
Sustainable change in developing countries requires reforming not only specific arrangements, such as rigid labor laws, but also more basic institutions, such as the legislature and the judiciary, to make them more responsive to people’s needs.
If developed countries’ citizens want to feel slightly better about their economies’ slow growth and high unemployment, they should contemplate how much worse matters could be without the institutions that they have.
The view expressed here are the author’s own.
Трамптың ғаламдық күші
ГОНКОНГ – АҚШ президенттік сайлауында Дональд Трамптың күтпеген жеңісін түсіндіруге көп күш жұмсалған болатын.
Бірақ, бәлкім, қарапайым түсіндіру ең дәл болып табылар: Трамп қарсыластарын ақымақтай алдады.
Іс жүзінде жеңіске лайықты болған бұрынғы мемлекет хатшысы Хиллари Клинтоннан бастап, өз кандидатурасына қарсы болған республиканшылдармен қатар барлық адамдар АҚШ сайланған Президентін жете бағаламады.
Әлемдік державалар, әсіресе Азиядағылар осындай қатені жасамауы қажет.
Сайлау науқаны барысында, Трамп Клинтонның қандай екенін  дәл білген: ақылды және тәжірибелі, бірақ оған өзінде бар айлакерлік және шоу жасаушылық жетіспейді.
Сондықтан ол ақымақтық танытқандай, пайдасыз деген штаттарда сайлау науқанын жүргізді, ал Клинтон деректерге негізделген стратегиясы бойынша жүрді.
Клинтонның тәсілі оған Трампқа қарағанда 2,7 миллионнан астам дауыс берді. Ал Трамп өз тәсілі арқылы президент орнын жеңіп алды.
Енді  билікке келуге дайындалып жүрген Трамп сол тәсілдердің көбісін қайта қолданып жүр, мысалы, баспасөз конференцияларға қарағанда митингілерге көп көңіл бөліп, Сирияда ушығып бара жатқан дағдарысқа назарын аударудың орнына Трамп «Сенбі түні Live» АҚШ комедия шоуында пікірлерін айтуда.
Сонымен қатар, ол Филиппин Президенті Родриго Дутерте және Тайвань Президенті Цай Инвэнь қоңырауларын қабылдап,  АҚШ дипломатиясын мүлдем өзгертіп отыр.
Трамп тағы да әлемді таңқалдырмай тұрып, біз оны түсінуді үйренуіміз керек.
Трамппен айналысатын кез келген адам оның тек аяусыз өз мүддесі үшін ғана жұмыс істейтін, Макиавелли ханзадасындай екенін білуі керек.
Макиавелли айтуынша, «Ханзада жайында алғашқы пікірді жасау, және оның қандай адам екенін түсіну үшін айналасындағы бар адамдарды бақылау керек».
Сондықтан, Трамп жоспарын анықтау үшін, біз оның тағайындаған адамдарынан бастауымыз керек.
Ұлттық қауіпсіздік, қорғаныс және сыртқы саясаттағы лауазымдарға Трамп таңдауларының арасында ортақ жәйт тез анық болады: барлықтары Таяу Шығыс және Ресей бойынша мамандар болып табылады.
Трамп, оған дейін билікте болғандардың Ресейді оқшаулау әдісін кері бұруды жоспарлап отыр.
Оның орнына, ол Ресейді Таяу Шығысты басқаруға көмектесу үшін пайдаланады.
Бірінші кезекте бизнесмен болған Трамп үшін, бәсекелесінің жауларымен айналасуы  жақсы табыс әкелетін іс болады.
(Сондай-ақ, бұл АҚШ одақтастарынан қорғаныс үшін төлем аламын деген оның ниетін тамаша толықтырады).
Трамптың Ресей президенті Владимир Путинмен жақындығы да көмектеседі, негізі АҚШ барлау қызметтері оның Трампқа көмектесу үшін сайлауға араласты деп сенеді.
Бірақ Трамптың Ресейді айналып жүруінің себептері - және салдары - Таяу Шығыс тақырыбынан да кең.
Жоғары мұнай бағасының АҚШ пен Ресейге пайда әкеліп, ал Қытай және Жапония сияқты елдер одан зардап шегеді.
Шынында да, Ресей Қытайға, сондай-ақ басқа Азия мемлекеттеріне географиялық қысым көрсете алады.
(Жапонияның Қытайға қалай тез  жақындап жатқанына назар аударыңыз).
Соңында, Ресей, сайып келгенде, өз қорғанысы үшін көбірек жауапкершілікті өз мойнына алуға Еуропаны ынталандыратын күш бола алады.
Трамптың экономикалық саясаты, бүкіл әлем бойынша, оның ішінде Азияда да көрініс табады.
Ал бұл оның кабинет тағайындауларынан анық болып тұр.
Трамп Goldman Sachs бұрынғы үш қызметкерлерін өз экономикалық командасына іріктеп алды - иә, Трамп өзі сайлау науқаны барысында қарсы шыққан сол Goldman Sachs-тан.
Оның топшылдық пен сыбайлас жемқорлық «батпақтарын кептірем»  деп берген уәдесі, осылайша тактикалық емес, шынайы әдісі болды.
Сондай-ақ, бұл Трамп науқан уәделерінің арасындағы іске асыратынысалық қысқартулары мен қайта реттеу болатынын көрсетеді.
«Сәтсіздікке ұшырауға тым үлкен» банктерді тежеуге бағытталған саясатының, әсіресе 2010 Додд-Франк қаржы реформасының заңнамасы, Трамп төрағалығынан аман қалуы екіталай.
Шын мәнінде, Трамп және оның командасы сәтсіздікке ұшырауға тым үлкен болуды проблема ретінде көріп тұрған жоқ.
Керісінше, олар АҚШ-тың бюджетіне сол логиканы қолданып жатыр.
Әлемнің АҚШ ты кредиттеуді жалғастырудан бірақ ешқандай таңдауы жоқ екенін біле отырып, Трамп салықтарды кесіп және инфрақұрылым бойынша қаржы жұмсай отырып, АҚШ бюджет тапшылығын және қарыздарын құруды жайлы табады.
Кейбір фаталистердің айтуларына қарамастан, Трамптың экономикалық саясаты іс жүзінде жұмыс істеуі мүмкін.
Теріс нақты пайыздық ставкалар көмегімен, жеткілікті инфрақұрылымын дамытуға арналған инвестицияларымен бірге Трамп, бүгінде Американың қарызын азайту үшін жеткілікті өнімділік мен ЖІӨ өсуін жандандыра алады.
Табыс кілті сайлаудан бері 13 жыл бұрынғы максимумға жеткен АҚШ долларының қымбаттауын бақылау болуы мүмкін.
Мықты доллар Азия үшін жақсы емес.
Доллар әлсіз болған кезде, трансұлттық корпорациялар жергілікті валютада жоғары табыс әкелетін дамушы нарықтардағы бизнесін қаржыландыру үшін қарызды долларымен алады.
Жергілікті валютада жоғары қайтарымдар және АҚШ долларына төмендеген шығындар әркім үшін жақсы болады, әсіресе жоғары экспорт және өсіп келе жатқан капитал ағындарынан пайда алатын дамушы нарықтар үшін табысты болмақ.
Бірақ, доллар нығая бастағанда, цикл кері өзгереді.
Шетел валюталық және кредиттік қамту дамушы нарықтық валюталары бойынша кеңейіп, сауда қымбаттайды.
(Жаһандық физикалық сауданың кем дегенде 40%-ы АҚШ долларында жүргізіледі, бұл қаржы ағындарының кем дегенде 60% -ын құрайды).
Ақыр соңында,  доллар бағасының арту мөлшері сауда пайдасына қарағанда жоғары болғандықтан, дамушы нарықтар доллармен инвестиция жасауды бастауы мүмкін, ал бұл одан әрі доллардың құнын арттырады.
Өсіп жатқан геосаяси шиеленістер циклді нығайтады; АҚШ-тың Федералды резервтік жүйесі пайыздық мөлшерлемелердің тез қалыпқа келтіруін бастап жатқанда, доллар тұрақтылықты білдіреді.
Барлық дерлік Азия валюталары, соның ішінде иена мен юань да, төмендеу қысымының астында тұр; Жапония банкі мен Қытай Халық банкі, бұл құнсыздануды тежеу үшін қадамдар жасап жатыр, бірақ әсері аз болып тұр.
Ал дамушы экономикалар төмендеген сұраныс арқылы басылып жатқан төмен шикізат тауарлары бағасынан зардап шегуде.
Доллардың жалғасып жатқан өсуі осы проблемаларды ушықтыратын болады.
Бірақ, Трамп және оның оңшыл әріптестері түсінетіндей, дамушы нарықтардың бастарына қиындық түскенде, тек ФРЖ қысымды жеңілдету үшін өтімділікті қамтамасыз ете алады.
Басқаша айтқанда, бұл жерде де, Трамп күш лауазымы тұрғысынан жұмыс істеп жатыр.
Біз оны жете бағаламаудан алшақ болуымыз керек, себебі барлығымызда ілеспе зиян болып кету тәуекеліміз бар.
Is Globalization Really Fueling Populism?
BRUSSELS – On both sides of the Atlantic, populism of the left and the right is on the rise.
Its most visible standard-bearer in the United States is Donald Trump, the Republican Party’s presumptive presidential nominee.
In Europe, there are many strands – from Spain’s leftist Podemos party to France’s right-wing National Front – but all share the same opposition to centrist parties, and to the establishment in general.
What accounts for voters’ growing revolt against the status quo?
The prevailing explanation is that rising populism amounts to a rebellion by “globalization’s losers.”
By pursuing successive rounds of trade liberalization, the logic goes, leaders in the US and Europe “hollowed out” the domestic manufacturing base, reducing the availability of high-paying jobs for low-skill workers, who now have to choose between protracted unemployment and menial service-sector jobs.
Fed up, those workers are now supposedly rejecting establishment parties for having spearheaded this “elite project.”
This explanation might seem compelling at first.
It is true, after all, that globalization has fundamentally transformed economies, sending low-skill jobs to the developing world – a point that populist figures never tire of highlighting.
Moreover, educational attainment correlates strongly with income and labor-market performance.
Almost everywhere, those with a university degree are much less likely to be unemployed than those without a secondary education.
In Europe, those with a graduate degree are, on average, three times as likely to have a job as those who have not finished secondary school.
Among the employed, university-educated workers earn, on the whole, much higher incomes than their less-educated counterparts.
But if these factors account for the rise of populism, they must have somehow intensified in the last few years, with low-skill workers’ circumstances and prospects deteriorating faster vis-à-vis their high-skill counterparts.
And that simply is not the case, especially in Europe.
In fact, higher education has provided significant labor-market advantages for a long time.
Judging from the available data, the “wage premium” for workers in occupations that require high levels of education has been roughly constant in Europe over the last decade.
While it has increased in some countries (Germany and Italy), it has decreased in others (France, Spain, and the United Kingdom).
The difference in employment rates of the highly educated and the less educated has also remained relatively constant, with the less educated actually closing the gap slightly in recent years.
A comparison between trends in the US and Europe further weakens the “losers of globalization” argument.
The wage premium is substantially larger in the US (300-400%) than in Europe (50-80%).
Other labor-market statistics, such as unemployment rates, show a similar pattern, indicating that higher education is more valuable in America’s labor market.
Yet the US economy is less open to – and less affected by – trade than the European economy is.
The final nail in the coffin of the globalization-based explanation for the rise of populism in Europe is the fact that the share of low-skill workers (who have not completed a secondary education) is declining rapidly.
At the turn of the century, there were more than 50% more low-skill workers than university graduates.
Today, university graduates nearly outnumber low-skill workers in the work force; following the prevailing logic, the share of voters supporting anti-globalization parties should be shrinking.
A clear-cut economic explanation for a complicated political phenomenon is certainly appealing.
But such explanations are rarely accurate.
The rise of populism in Europe is no exception.
Consider the situation in Austria.
The economy is relatively strong, underpinned by one of Europe’s lowest unemployment rates.
Yet Norbert Hofer, the leader of the right-wing populist Freedom Party (FPÖ) managed to defeat his competitors from both of the centrist establishment parties in the first round of the presidential election last month. Hofer’s main area of focus was immigration.
The attraction to Hofer’s anti-immigrant rhetoric is telling, and mirrors a broader pattern across northern Europe.
Amid relative economic stability, rising real wages, and low unemployment rates, grievances about the economic impacts of economic globalization are simply not that powerful.
Instead, right-wing populist parties like the FPÖ, Finland’s True Finns, and Germany’s Alternative für Deutschland are embracing identity politics, playing on popular fears and frustrations – from “dangerous” immigration to the “loss of sovereignty” to the European Union – to fuel nationalist sentiment.
In the southern European countries, however, the enduring impact of the euro crisis makes populist economic arguments far more powerful.
That is why it is left-wing populist parties that are winning the most support there, with promises of, say, tax credits for low-paid workers.
The most extreme case is Greece’s leftist Syriza party, which rode to victory in last year’s elections on pledges to end austerity.
(Once in power, of course, Syriza had to change its tune and bring its plans in line with reality.)
Calling the rise of populism in Europe a revolt by the losers of globalization is not just simplistic; it is misleading.
If we are to stem the rise of potentially dangerous political forces in Europe, we need to understand what is really driving it – even if the explanation is more complex than we would like.
How to Move China
DENVER – “Insanity,” Albert Einstein is reported to have said, is “doing the same thing over and over again and expecting different results.”
For those who have long scoffed at the possibility that China might be willing to deal decisively with its pesky North Korean neighbor, the results of US Secretary of State John Kerry’s recent visit to Beijing will be all too predictable.
But, for those who watch China’s ever-changing internal political landscape carefully, there is much happening that more than justifies Kerry’s trip.
Indeed, if US President Barack Obama’s administration is to be criticized for its handling of the latest North Korean “crisis,” the main problem has not been too much reliance on China, but too little.
Theories about China’s attitude toward North Korea often begin and end with the view that what the country fears, above all, is an inflow of refugees in the event of a North Korean collapse – a spillover that could rend the delicate ethnic quilt of China’s northeast provinces.
The problem is that, while some Chinese do worry about refugees, “China” cannot be regarded as a collective noun with a singular view about anything; like any complex modern state, China contains many different views about many different issues.
Of course, there are those in Beijing who worry day and night about North Korean refugees; but there are also many in Beijing, Shanghai, and elsewhere who worry about the chronic crisis that North Korea’s periodic outbursts cause in an otherwise stable region of the world.
As President Xi Jinping eloquently put it at the annual Boao business forum on Hainan Island earlier this month: “No one should be allowed to throw a region and even the whole world into chaos for selfish gain.”
Xi is no dictator who can impose his will on China.
Indeed, for all the characterization of China as a despotic state that one hears from the political right in the United States, its president enjoys fewer powers than his American counterpart.
Gaining consensus in China is a glacial process that will not be accomplished in a single speech.
Xi’s comments obviously extend beyond a concern about refugees.
North Korea is, strangely, a domestic issue for China.
For starters, it is a historic ally for which many Chinese fought and died, their memory enshrined not only on monuments throughout China (though precious few in North Korea), but also in families.
Second, despite a supposed lack of ideology in contemporary China, there is, in fact, a raging debate – often taking place below the radar – about the future of China’s political system and its relationship to the economy.
And, while North Korea’s communist system and that of China have become profoundly dissimilar, some Chinese worry that a collapse of North Korea’s order could shift the battle lines of that debate.
Finally, there are those who would view a North Korean collapse as a boon to US strategic interests and a setback for Chinese interests.
Such hardline, zero-sum thinking is not the exclusive preserve of American think tanks.
Some Chinese ask what the rules of the game would be in the event that the Korean peninsula is united under South Korea.
Could they expect to see US troops and bases along the Chinese border on the Yalu River, or perhaps a string of listening posts to gather intelligence?
Though such deployments would be inconceivable to most thinking Americans (indeed, the real task would be to maintain budget support in Congress and elsewhere for any deployments in a united Korea), Chinese security experts worry about it.
Though the US and China do not lack issues to discuss, the bilateral dialogue in the security field lacks depth and follow-up.
The Chinese have never been eager to discuss with their US counterparts what the two countries should do in the event of a North Korean implosion.
But, if such talks were held more frequently, and the issue were addressed seriously (and repeatedly), surely progress could be made in overcoming suspicion on this question.
Indeed, Kerry’s main task is to begin an effort to reduce the strategic distrust between the two countries, which is a significant factor underlying China’s reluctance to do more on North Korea.
This will require that both sides focus on the issue at hand – a challenge especially for the Americans, whose official discussions with the Chinese inevitably become an effort to plow through a laundry list of issues often advanced by single-issue constituencies.
Focus and establishment of priorities should be the watchwords for the US side.
Kerry’s first trip to China was a start in this direction, but it must be followed by a regular pattern of telephone calls and additional visits, with a view to ridding the Korean peninsula of nuclear weapons.
Paradoxically, North Korea’s Kim Jung-un, a leader apparently undistinguished by any accomplishment or sign of wisdom, could catalyze a new start in US-Chinese relations.
Heeding History in East Asia
SEOUL – Chinese, South Korean, and Japanese diplomats recently took to the podium of the United Nations General Assembly to reassert their countries’ positions on the territorial issues surrounding several small islands in the seas of East Asia.
But the composed manner in which they delivered their remarks belied their countries’ long-simmering tensions over the islands, which have come to a near boil in the last few months.
At the center of one heated dispute, between China and Japan, are the Senkaku Islands, which the Chinese call the Diaoyu Islands.
In September, Japan’s government announced its purchase of three of the islands from their private Japanese owner, inciting protests across China.
Soon after, hundreds of Chinese fishing vessels approached the islands to assert China’s sovereignty.
These vessels have lately been joined by an increasing number of Chinese surveillance forces, which periodically enter the waters surrounding the islands, sometimes leading to direct confrontation with Japanese patrol ships.
With the situation threatening to escalate further, both sides need to contain the conflict quickly and restore the status quo.
Indeed, the situation is all the more volatile in view of the political transition now underway in China.
Meanwhile, the Republic of Korea and Japan are engaged in a territorial standoff over the islets of Dokdo (called Takeshima in Japanese).
In early August, Lee Myung-bak became the first South Korean president to visit the islets; Japan’s government responded by proposing to take the sovereignty issue to the International Court of Justice.
But the ICJ cannot exercise jurisdiction in the dispute without both countries’ consent, and South Korea has rejected Japan’s proposal, maintaining that Lee was within his authority to visit the islets, given that Dokdo is unquestionably South Korean territory.
Indeed, South Korea’s government denies that there is any dispute over the islands.
Historical context is crucial to assessing the Dokdo issue.
Like the rest of Korea, Dokdo was annexed by Japan in the early twentieth century, and restored to Korean control after World War II, when Korea regained its independence.
Thus, while outsiders might view the desolate islands as insignificant, for Koreans, Japan’s position on Dokdo is tantamount to a challenge to their country’s independence and a denial of its right to exercise sovereignty over its own territory.
As a result, Dokdo has been a thorn in relations between the two countries for decades.
In 2005, the creation of a so-called “Takeshima Day” by a local government in Japan triggered a public uproar in South Korea.
But Japan has not shied away from the issue, with prominent political figures joining Takeshima Day celebrations each year.
Furthermore, Japan’s habit of distorting facts in its history books – for example, denying that its former colonial subjects were forced into sexual slavery – has fueled distrust and anger in South Korea and elsewhere in East Asia, including China.
Dokdo is situated midway between the Korean peninsula and Japan’s main island, roughly 115 nautical miles from each.
But the islets are much closer to the nearest Korean island, Ulleungdo, than to Japan’s Okishima.
A survey of historical documents shows a distinct shift in Japan’s position on Dokdo.
For example, in the late seventeenth century, when conflict between Korea and Japan erupted over the passage of Japanese fishermen to Ulleungdo, Tottori-han (one of Japan’s feudal clans) told Japan’s central government that Ulleungdo and Dokdo did not fall within Japanese territory.
Likewise, a report in 1870 by Japan’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, “A Confidential Inquiry into the Particulars of Korea’s Foreign Relations,” shows that the ministry recognized Dokdo as Korean territory.
Indeed, the report includes the subject title “How Takeshima and Matsushima Came to Belong to Joseon” (later renamed Korea).
Moreover, the Dajokan, Japan’s highest decision-making body in 1868-1885, denied any claims of sovereignty over Dokdo through its Order of 1877.
Yet, in 1905, Japan took measures to incorporate Dokdo in order to use it as a strategic military site for its war with Russia.
The final text of the 1951 San Francisco Peace Treaty, which ended WWII in the Pacific, makes no mention of Dokdo.
But earlier versions identified the islets as Korean territory.
The reference in the final version, drafted by the United States, was removed in light of US interests in building strategic partnerships with both South Korea and Japan.
However, the 1943 Cairo Declaration, which stipulated the Allied Powers’ basic position on Japan’s territorial boundaries after WWII, stated that Japan would be expelled from all territories that it had annexed through violence.
In this context, the unconditional return of Dokdo to Korea – and Korea’s continued sovereignty over Dokdo – is indisputable.
In an increasingly interconnected world, significant challenges can be addressed only through regional and global partnerships.
But, in order to build a meaningful framework for cooperation, enduring distrust among East Asian countries must be dispelled.
Regional leaders must not get caught up in finger-pointing or avoid taking responsibility for past transgressions.
An honest evaluation of history is crucial to establishing lasting peace and prosperity in East Asia.
IT’S ALIVE!”
So said Dr. Victor Frankenstein when his “creation” was complete.
Researchers have long been fascinated with trying to create life, but mainly they have had to settle for crafting variations of living organisms via mutation or other techniques of genetic engineering.amp#160;
In May, researchers at the J. Craig Venter Institute, led by Venter himself, synthesized the genome of a bacterium from scratch using chemical building blocks, and inserted it into the cell of a different variety of bacteria.
The new genetic information “rebooted” its host cell and got it to function, replicate, and take on the characteristics of the “donor.”
In other words, a sort of synthetic organism had been created.
Reactions in the scientific community ranged from “slight novelty” to “looming apocalypse.”
The former is more apt: Venter’s creation is evolutionary, not revolutionary.
The goal of “synthetic biology,” as the field is known, is to move microbiology and cell biology closer to the approach of engineering, so that standardized parts can be mixed, matched, and assembled – just as off-the-shelf chassis, engines, transmissions, and so on can be combined to build a hot-rod.
Achieving this goal could offer scientists unprecedented opportunities for innovation, and better enable them to craft bespoke microorganisms and plants that produce pharmaceuticals, clean up toxic wastes, and obtain (or “fix”) nitrogen from the air (obviating the need for chemical fertilizers).
During the past half-century, genetic engineers, using increasingly powerful and precise tools and resources, have achieved breakthroughs that are opening up new opportunities in a broad array of fields.
The Venter lab’s achievement builds on similar work that began decades ago.amp#160; In 1967, a research group from Stanford Medical School and Caltech demonstrated the infectiousness of the genome of a bacterial virus called ΦΧ174, whose DNA had been synthesized with an enzyme using the intact viral DNA as a template, or blueprint.
That feat was hailed as “life in a test tube.”
In 2002, a research group at the State University of New York, Stony Brook, created a functional, infectious poliovirus solely from basic, off-the-shelf chemical building blocks.amp#160;Their only blueprint for engineering the genome was the known sequence of RNA (which comprises the viral genome and is chemically very similar to DNA).
Similar to the 1967 experiments, the infectious RNA was synthesized enzymatically.
It was able to direct the synthesis of viral proteins in the absence of a natural template.
Once again, scientists had, in effect, created life in a test tube.
Venter’s group did much the same thing in the recently reported research, except that they used chemical synthesis instead of enzymes to make the DNA.
But some of the hype that surrounded the publication of the ensuing article in the journal Nature was disproportionate.amp#160;
Along with the Venter paper, Nature published eight commentaries on the significance of the work.
The “real” scientists were aware of the incremental nature of the work, and questioned whether the Venter group had created a genuine “synthetic cell,” while the social scientists tended to exaggerate the implications of the work.
Mark Bedau, a professor of philosophy at Reed College, wrote that the technology’s “new powers create new responsibilities.
Nobody can be sure about the consequences of making new forms of life, and we must expect the unexpected and the unintended.
This calls for fundamental innovations in precautionary thinking and risk analysis.”
But, with increasing sophistication, genetic engineers using old and new techniques have been creating organisms with novel or enhanced properties for decades.
Regulations and standards of good practice already effectively address organisms that may be pathogenic or that threaten the natural environment. (If anything, these standards are excessively burdensome.)
On the other hand, Swiss bioengineer Martin Fussenegger correctly observed that the Venter achievement “is a technical advance, not a conceptual one.”
Other scientists noted that the organism is really only “semi-synthetic,” because the synthetic DNA (which comprises only about 1% of the dry weight of the cell) was introduced into a normal, or non-synthetic, bacterium.
Understanding the history of synthetic biology is important, because recognizing the correct paradigm has critical implications for how governments regulate it, which in turn affects the potential application and diffusion of the technology.
Thirty-five years ago, the US National Institutes of Health adopted overly risk-averse guidelines for research using recombinant DNA, or “genetic engineering,” techniques. Those guidelines, based on what has proved to be an idiosyncratic and largely invalid set of assumptions, sent a powerful message that scientists and the federal government were taking seriously speculative, exaggerated risk scenarios – a message that has afflicted the technology’s development worldwide ever since.
Synthetic biology offers the prospect of powerful new tools for research and development in innumerable fields.
But its potential can be fulfilled only if regulatory oversight is based on science, sound risk analysis, and an appreciation of the mistakes of history.
The Debt-Growth Controversy
STANFORD – The recent controversy over errors in a 2010 paper by the economists Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff is a sad commentary on the demands of the 24/7 news cycle and the politically toxic atmosphere surrounding fiscal policy in the United States, Europe, and Japan.
In their paper, “Growth in a Time of Debt,” Reinhart and Rogoff estimated large declines in growth associated with public-debt/GDP ratios above 90%.
But it contained coding errors discovered by a University of Massachusetts graduate student.
When corrected, the effect is substantially smaller, but nonetheless economically consequential.
The Reinhart/Rogoff paper is just a small part of a voluminous academic literature that shows high debt levels to be economically risky.
A more fundamental question is causality: the state of the economy certainly affects the fiscal position, just as taxation, spending, deficits, and debts may affect economic growth.
Research errors in economics are not uncommon, but they are usually caught at an early stage, as happened once to me in a prepublication draft.
Sometimes errors are not discovered until later, when they are working papers, as with Reinhart and Rogoff, or after publication, as with Nobel laureate Ken Arrow, who had to correct a mistake in the proof of his famous impossibility theorem.
Economists use different methods to analyze fiscal issues: stylized analytical models; macroeconometric models fitted to aggregate data, such as those used by the Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank, and the US Congressional Budget Office (CBO); empirical estimation of key parameters, such as spending multipliers; vector autoregressions; and historical studies.
Each of these approaches has its strengths and weaknesses, and serious economists and policymakers do not rely on a single study; rather, they base their judgments on complementary bodies of evidence.
Thus, there is no excuse for the outrage, the exaggerated claims for one paper’s influence, and the attempt to use the error to discredit legitimate concerns over high levels of debt (let alone to vilify the authors).
While large deficits are usually undesirable, sometimes they can be benign or even desirable, such as in recession, wartime, or when used to finance productive public investment.
In normal times, deficits crowd out private investment (and perhaps crowd in private saving and/or foreign capital), and hence reduce future growth.
By contrast, in a deep, long-lasting recession, with the central bank’s policy rate at the zero lower bound (ZLB), a well-timed, sensible fiscal response can, in principle, be helpful.
But the political process may generate poorly timed or ineffective responses – focused on transfers rather than purchases, infra-marginal tax rebates, and spending that fails cost-benefit tests – that do little good in the short run and cause substantial harm later.
America’s 2008 stimulus barely budged consumption upward, and the 2009 fiscal stimulus cost hundreds of thousands of dollars per job – many times higher than median pay.
We should adopt policies that benefit the economy in the short run at reasonable long-run cost, and reject those that do not.
Corroborating statistical evidence shows that high deficits and debt increase long-run interest rates.
The effect is greater when modest deficit and debt levels are exceeded and current-account deficits are large.
The increased interest rates are likely to retard private investment, which lowers future growth in employment and wages.
Numerous studies show that government spending “multipliers,” even when large at the ZLB, shrink rapidly, then turn negative – and may even be negative during economic expansions and when households expect higher taxes beyond the ZLB period.
Permanent tax cuts and those on marginal rates have proved more likely to increase growth than spending increases or temporary, infra-marginal tax rebates; successful fiscal consolidations have emphasized spending cuts over tax hikes by a ratio of five or six to one; and spending cuts have been less likely than tax increases to cause recessions in OECD countries.
Some argue that fiscal consolidation by gradual permanent reductions in spending would be expansionary for high-debt countries, as occurred in some historical episodes.
Others maintain that a temporary increase in spending now would boost growth.
Both could be expansionary – or not, depending on details and circumstances.
Because many countries have been consolidating simultaneously, interest rates are already low; and, for the US, which accounts for more than 20% of the global economy and issues the global reserve currency, caution in generalizing from other fiscal episodes is highly advisable.