Finally, the reform sets out clearly for the first time what is expected of surveillance, and so should promote candor and evenhanded treatment of every country.
In other words, the Fund must ensure that it deals with every country the same way, including delivering clear and sometimes difficult policy messages and sharing its views with the international community.
The new approach to exchange rate policies represents one of the most significant advances.
Under the IMF Articles of Agreement, members are required to collaborate to promote a stable system of exchange rates and to avoid manipulation with a view to gaining an unfair trade advantage.
Past guidance in this area was limited, focusing entirely on manipulation and on avoidance of short-term volatility.
This guidance remains, but what we meant by manipulation is now clearer.
We have also addressed those policies that have caused the most harm to the system in recent years, including overvalued or undervalued exchange rate pegs maintained for domestic reasons.
This change comes at a crucial time for the world economy.
Countries are experiencing strong growth, inflation is low, and the threat of crisis has receded considerably.
Few countries need to borrow from the IMF – a highly positive trend.
But improved surveillance is essential to ensure that the global economy remains on an even keel.
By clarifying what surveillance entails, the new decision should help the IMF and its members see eye to eye on the Fund’s role, help those involved in surveillance do their job properly, and make the Fund more accountable for delivering on this key responsibility.
This reform represents a victory for multilateralism that demonstrates ownership of how Fund surveillance will be strengthened and members’ willingness to live up to their responsibilities in the process.
Of course, it is critically important that it received very broad support from industrial countries, emerging economies, and developing countries.
The international community needs a setting where it can debate the most sensitive economic issues, including – but certainly not limited to – exchange rate issues.
The IMF offers that venue.
At the same time, it can provide the nonpartisan technical expertise that enables governments to define policies that will ensure continued economic stability.
The goal is to support policies that are good for each member country – but also for other countries – through dialogue and persuasion.
This is the very essence of international cooperation.
How to Boost Foreign Investment
MADRID – Economic globalization, together with a rebalancing of power between the world’s north and south, has made developing countries, and many companies within them, key global economic actors.
This provides a new rationale for strengthening the international framework to protect foreign investment.
Once upon a time, global foreign direct investment flowed from only a few sources: the traditionally wealthy states of Europe, North America, and Japan.
But cross-border investment from countries such as Brazil, India, and China is now flowing not just to other emerging and transitional economies, but also to the “old” FDI-exporting states.
These changes have increased the complexity of the international investment regime, and should broaden interest in developing a more effective investment-protection framework.
But just the opposite is happening: a progressive weakening of protection, with states increasingly flouting their treaty obligations and skirting or ignoring the outcomes of international dispute-resolution proceedings.
At the heart of the current system of investment protection is the World Bank, which created the International Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) in 1966 in response to requests for arbitration by the Bank’s president.
But, institutionally, the ICSID has developed less successfully than other members of the World Bank Group – particularly the International Finance Corporation – owing to a deeply rooted organizational culture at the Bank that perceives the ICSID as an instrument serving Western companies’ efforts to prevail over developing states.
This internal fissure was a non-issue during the World Bank’s first decades, when the ICSID itself was a non-factor, with only 38 registered cases between 1966 and 1996.
This began to change with the rapid proliferation of bilateral investment treaties (BITs), which typically granted private investors standing before the ICSID.
This led to a corresponding rise in registered cases – 386 since 1996.
The ICSID and its jurisprudence thus became a central part of international investment law and policy.
Yet the World Bank’s attitude toward the ICSID remained ambivalent.
This was especially evident concerning compliance and enforcement, and matters came to a head with the deluge of cases brought against Argentina stemming from its 2001-2002 economic crisis.
Faced with a large number of claims, Argentina chose to draw out the process by systematically using annulment proceedings against any unfavorable decision, and linked any payment to domestic judicial review – a procedure that violates the language and intent of the ICSID Convention and the BITs themselves.
The strategy worked; Argentina has avoided making any payments to its creditors.
But Argentina’s short-term gain came at a steep price.
A perceived lack of enforceability weakens compliance with investment treaties and rewards repeat offenders, such as Argentina, which has appeared in more ICSID cases than any other state.
Indeed, Argentina has developed a general attitude of impunity, the latest example being the expropriation of energy company YPF from Spain’s Repsol one year ago.
Moreover, the devaluation of the reputational benefit of being a party to the ICSID encourages countries to leave the system, as Bolivia, Ecuador, and Venezuela have recently done.
The unfortunate byproduct of this self-reinforcing cycle of non-compliance and delegitimation is damage to the global economy in general, and, in particular, to the developing countries that are most in need of foreign investment.
These countries are being denied a useful tool for attracting FDI, with recent evidence suggesting that signing a BIT by itself does not lead to increased inflows.
For the moment, the only country that has taken real action is the United States, which last year suspended its trade-preference scheme with Argentina, owing to the country’s failure to pay ICSID-adjudicated awards to two US companies.
As for Europe, the Lisbon Treaty gives the European Union exclusive competence in investment-related matters, but no mechanisms have been implemented to exercise this authority.
The upcoming start of Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership talks offer a key opportunity to advance the cause of stronger investment protection.
As the two largest sources and destinations for foreign investment, accounting for a combined 56% of global FDI outflows and 42% of inflows, the US and EU have a particular interest in ensuring a well-functioning international investment regime.
An emphasis on investment protection could establish de facto international standards that ensure legal security for investors while providing sufficient scope for governments’ legitimate regulatory interests.
The talks would have an even greater impact if the parties agreed on a unified approach to dealing with states that fail to meet their obligations.
In thinking of ways to strengthen the ICSID, it would be helpful to consider the World Trade Organization’s dispute settlement mechanism (DSM), which enjoys a remarkably strong compliance record.
Beyond the obvious availability of countervailing duties as an enforcement tool, several of the DSM’s institutional characteristics, which are absent in the ICSID, help to create and sustain legitimacy.
For example, the existence of a permanent Appellate Body has led to significantly more consistent and predictable jurisprudence.
But, most important, the ICSID would greatly benefit from the level of institutional support that the DSM has at the WTO.
Reinforcing the ICSID is one of the biggest current challenges facing the World Bank and the international community.
Without FDI, there cannot be development; and, without legal security, there will be no FDI.
If we are to see truly global FDI flows, particularly to those countries that need them the most, we must begin to address the institutional deficiencies of the investment-protection regime.
Securing Nuclear Material
VIENNA – World leaders have devoted increasing attention in recent years to the risk of terrorists obtaining nuclear or other radioactive material.
That’s the good news.
But all of us need to act with greater urgency in translating good intentions into concrete action.
The risk of nuclear or other radioactive material falling into the wrong hands is all too real.
There have been embarrassing security lapses at nuclear facilities, and sensitive material is often inadequately secured.
Indeed, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) records numerous cases of theft and other unauthorized activities involving nuclear and radioactive material every year.
Most of these incidents are fairly minor, but some are more serious.
Some material goes missing and is never found.
An incident in Moldova two years ago involving highly enriched uranium – which can be used in a nuclear weapon – illustrates both the scale of the threat and the possibility of effective counter-measures if countries take the problem seriously.
Police seized a quantity of the substance from an individual who was attempting to sell it.
The smugglers had tried to evade detection by building a shielded container – a worrisome level of sophistication on their part.
Fortunately, the Moldovan authorities had been working hard to improve their detection capabilities.
They had also shared information with their counterparts in other countries.
The uranium was seized in a sting operation.
Arrests were made and several people received prison sentences.
Most cases of attempted trafficking do not involve nuclear material; rather, they involve radioactive substances of the type held in hospitals, factories, and other locations all over the world.
These locations are generally not as well protected as nuclear facilities.
Even a relatively small amount of material such as cobalt-60 – used in radiotherapy – could cause serious harm if combined with conventional explosives in a so-called dirty bomb (or otherwise deliberately used to expose the public to dangerous radiation).
Foreign and energy ministers will have an opportunity to strengthen the global nuclear security framework when they meet at the International Conference on Nuclear Security: Enhancing Global Efforts in Vienna on July 1-5.
This will be the first such event that is open to all countries.
At the top of the agenda should be ratification of improvements to a crucial nuclear security instrument – theConvention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material.
The proposed amendment would oblige countries to protect nuclear material when it is being used or stored, not just when it is being transported internationally, as is the case now.
It would also require countries to protect nuclear facilities against acts of sabotage, which could have consequences similar to those of nuclear accidents.
The proposed amendment was agreed in 2005, but it still has not entered into force, because not enough countries have ratified it.
That needs to change if major vulnerabilities are to be addressed successfully.
Nuclear security is a matter of global concern, and global action is required.
Efforts by just a handful of major players will not be sufficient to keep the world safe.
We cannot afford to have weak links in our chain of defense.
All countries must play their part.
Even countries that do not possess nuclear or other radioactive material need to act.
There is evidence that criminal and terrorist gangs have attempted to traffic material through countries perceived to have lax security.
It is imperative that they do not succeed.
One simple measure would make a big difference: All countries should allow peer reviews of their nuclear-security arrangements by international experts.
Peer reviews have been shown to work – for example, in improving safety at nuclear power plants.
Everyone benefits.
Bringing experts in nuclear security together to share their experience is a no-brainer.
More countries need to do it.
Following Moldova’s example, all countries should also ensure that law-enforcement officers are properly trained to respond to the menace of nuclear terrorism.
Countries must invest in equipment and infrastructure and share information across borders.
The fact that there has been no major nuclear terrorist attack should not lull us into a fall sense of security.
The threat remains.
We must seize the opportunity to ensure that our worst nightmare never becomes our waking reality.
Strengthening the Stabilizers
PARIS – The G-20 summit in Cannes in early November is a major opportunity to address the mandate, governance, and institutional capacity of the Financial Stability Board, the international body that monitors, and makes recommendations about enhancing, the international financial system.
The meeting is particularly timely, because the FSB will soon be under new leadership, as its current chairman, Mario Draghi, takes over in November as President of the European Central Bank.
In the midst of the financial meltdown in 2008-2009, the G-20 established the FSB, building on its predecessor, the Financial Stability Forum, and charged it with coordinating urgent international regulatory-reform efforts to ensure greater financial stability and global consistency of rules.
Even as the G-20 wrestles with the challenges of the global economic slowdown and the euro crisis, the mandate to the FSB remains central to a substantial financial-reform agenda – and to avoiding national and regional divergence in areas critical to the global financial system’s stability.
The FSB has been criticized for lacking enforcement capability.
But, in today’s world of sovereign states, treaties creating new international institutions with supranational powers are not realistic alternatives.
Moreover, the FSB’s achievements are significant.
Its agenda is rapidly expanding, and it is becoming an influential and permanent component of the international economic and financial architecture, even as challenging questions surround its future.
Pragmatic steps to clarify the FSB’s mandate and enhance its operational effectiveness can and should be taken.
Today, the FSB is without legal standing (it is only the product of a political statement).
Institutionally, it is simply an extension of the Bank for International Settlements in Basel.
It is funded through the BIS, which also seconds its small staff.
Its internal governance processes are underdeveloped and lack transparency.
As the only entity that integrates central banks, supervisors, treasuries of major economies, and international standard-setting bodies, the FSB is uniquely positioned to set priorities on financial regulation, provide regulatory coherence across the financial sector, oversee consistent implementation, and, in conjunction with the International Monetary Fund, to assess systemic vulnerabilities.
But, while it should identify regulatory gaps and encourage more proactive work by the various standard-setting bodies, it should not take on daily operational responsibilities.
The FSB, along with the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, has been quietly considering new mechanisms for monitoring implementation of standards, particularly in the context of Basel III rules.
FSB membership should imply accountability in implementation of standards.
In the absence of formal enforcement powers, the pragmatic alternative is to develop mechanisms for monitoring implementation of standards on an ongoing basis, and to incorporate systematic, impartial peer reviews.
The Cannes Summit should articulate a renewed commitment to consistent implementation of agreed regulatory reforms, and to minimizing divergence in national regulation that could create systemic risks or significant competitive advantage.
The G-20 should provide the political support to develop a framework that relies on monitoring, consultation, mutual oversight, reporting, and publication.
It is in the financial industry’s interest to support the development of these mechanisms as a means to address the competitive implications of divergent national regulation.
Finally, the G-20 should provide the FSB with adequate institutional capacity to address its tasks, but without creating a bureaucracy.
The first order of business is to endorse a capable and dedicated new FSB chairman.
Beyond that, the FSB should be given legal capacity through proper incorporation – an institutionally intermediate point between its purely political status now and the extreme of a treaty organization.
This would enable to FSB to hire the best possible talent, receive funding from governments, and enter into more formal arrangements with other international bodies in order to carry out its responsibilities more effectively.
Striking Euro Gold (and Silver)
PRINCETON – The alternatives for Europe’s currency, the euro, seem increasingly limited to a desperate muddling through or a chaotic collapse.
But there is a bolder and more productive approach that relies on past experience with multiple currencies.
The threat posed by Europe’s current policy impasse can hardly be overestimated.
In the early 1930’s, monetary-policy incoherence paralyzed US policy, with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York locked in insurmountable conflict with the Chicago Fed over monetary easing (at that time through open-market securities purchases).
Today’s chronic policy disputes between Germany and France are producing a level of uncertainty that is potentially even more destructive.
Every few months, European governments launch a new and ever more ingenious initiative to resolve the eurozone’s debt crisis.
For a day (and sometimes only for a few hours), financial markets rally euphorically.
But soon doubt sweeps back in.
There is no sense of a realistic endgame.
And there is no longer-term vision of how the fiscal integration needed for the effective operation of a monetary union could be achieved in a practical timeframe.
Europeans should look to the past, when previous crises produced innovative solutions.
The extended crisis of the European Monetary System (EMS) between September 1992 and July 1993 looked as if it would derail European integration.
What was initially seen as a problem in one country (Italy) toppled other currency regimes like dominos: Britain, Spain, and Portugal – and, by July 1993, even France was vulnerable.
Then, as now, Europe’s future was at stake.
The solution adopted in frantic late-night negotiations in Brussels initially looked counterproductive.
The massive widening of the EMS bands to 15% on either side of a central parity initially made a single currency appear more remote.
But it also took away the one-way-bet character of speculative attacks on vulnerable currencies, and thus removed the fundamental driver of instability.
The modern equivalent of the band widening of 1993 would be to maintain the euro for all members of the eurozone, but also allow some of them (in principle, all of them) to issue – if necessary – national currencies.
The countries that did would probably find that their new currencies immediately traded at a heavy discount.
California recently adopted a similar approach, issuing IOUs when faced with the impossibility of access to funding.
The success of stabilization efforts could then be assessed according to the price of the new currency.
If the objectives were met – fiscal stabilization and renewed growth – the discount would disappear.
In the same way, after 1993, the French franc initially diverged from its old level, but, in a good policy setting, it then returned within the exchange-rate band.
This approach has an important advantage: it would not require the redenomination of bank assets or liabilities.
As a result, it would not be subject to the multiple legal challenges that a more radical alternative would run into.
Of course, there would also be the possibility that no convergence would occur, and that the two parallel currencies would coexist for a much longer period.
This is not a novel thought.
One of the possibilities raised in the discussions on monetary union in the early 1990’s was that a common currency might not mean a single currency.
That possibility is not just a theoretical construct in fringe debates two decades ago; it is a real historical alternative.
In fact, there is a rather surprising parallel for stable coexistence of two currencies over a long period of time.
Before the victory of the gold standard in the 1870’s, Europe had operated with a bimetallic standard for centuries, using silver as well as gold.
Each metal had its different coinage.
This regime was so successful in part because the coins were used for different purposes.
High-value gold coins were used as a reference for large-value transactions and international business.
Low-value silver coins were used for small day-to-day transactions, including payment of modest wages and rents.
Silver was what Shakespeare termed the “pale and common drudge ‘tween man and man.”
A depreciation of silver relative to gold in this system would bring down real wages and improve competitiveness.
Early modern Italian textile workers would find their pay in silver reduced, while their products still commanded a gold price on the international market for luxuries.
This is one of the reasons why theorists such as Milton Friedman considered a bimetallic standard inherently more stable than a monometallic (gold-based) regime.
Nowadays, the equivalent of the adjustment mechanism in the early modern world of bimetallism would be a fall in, say, Greek wage costs paid in the national currency, as long as it was traded at a discount.
These would be the silver currencies.
Meanwhile, the euro would be the equivalent of the gold standard.
It would be kept stable by the institutions that already exist today, the European Central Bank and those national central banks that have no new alternative.
In this sense, the core countries would be the equivalent of eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century Britain, which had only a gold-standard regime.
Maintaining a choice of currencies in a national as well as an international setting seems odd and counterintuitive.
But it can – and has – been done, and it can be remarkably successful at satisfying peak demand for stability.
Don’t Bet on a Stronger Dollar
NEW YORK – Economic pundits, almost without exception, are predicting a stronger dollar in 2015 – an expectation that is leading investors to place some very large bets.
But that market strategy could turn out to be a very large mistake.
The consensus reflects the fact that the United States is currently the only major economy where growth prospects are improving.
Most recently, the US Commerce Department revised upward its estimate of GDP growth for the third quarter of last year, to 5% –&nbsp;the highest rate in 11 years.
Moreover, the revision was based mainly on personal consumption and business investment – the most stable and persistent components of GDP.
Consumer sentiment is at its highest level since 2007.
Low oil prices, which reduce the cost of gas at the pump, provide an additional boost by giving US households more cash to spend at the mall.
The unemployment rate is 5.6% and falling.
All of this not only enhances confidence that strong US growth will persist; it also reinforces the belief that the US Federal Reserve will begin raising interest rates, conceivably as early as April.
For investors, this makes buying dollars even more attractive.
The other major economies, by contrast, are stagnant, slowing, or both.
Europe’s economy is dead in the water, and the dreaded specter of deflation is looming ever larger.
Because policymakers are out of options, there remains little doubt that the European Central Bank will pursue quantitative easing, whether Germany likes it or not.
European officials will welcome a weaker euro, which will improve competitiveness, at least modestly.
Meanwhile, in Asia, the Japanese economy’s sputtering indicators have spurred the Bank of Japan to increase its securities purchases, which likewise point to the prospect of a weaker yen.
And unmistakable signs of slowing growth in China are leading investors to ask, for the first time in years, whether China’s government will seek to engineer a weakening of the renminbi’s dollar exchange rate.
Other emerging markets’ growth prospects are even worse – not least because of low commodity prices.
As a result, these countries can expect lower capital inflows, again making for weak local currencies.
Such is the supposedly airtight case for a stronger dollar.
How might it spring a leak?
A first reason to doubt projections of a stronger dollar is that none of the news on which they are based is really news.
The expectation of relatively strong US growth is already being reflected in the markets, with the dollar up 9% in trade-weighted terms since mid-2014.
Given this, only a change in fundamentals – the US economy outperforms the consensus forecast and the Fed initiates monetary tightening earlier than anticipated, or other economies’ performance is even worse than expected – would cause the dollar to strengthen further.
In short, with the market’s best guess already incorporated into the exchange rate, the dollar is as likely to fall as it is to rise.
The second risk is that, even based on current growth expectations, investors may have gotten ahead of themselves in anticipating monetary-policy tightening.
The Fed will raise interest rates when it senses that the economy is nearing full capacity and that inflation – wage inflation, in particular – is accelerating.
Labor-force participation will be key to shaping this environment.
As it stands, the low official unemployment rate can be explained partly by declining participation rates, especially among workers aged 25-54.
But there are now signs that the participation rate of these workers is stabilizing, and may even be set to rise.
If it does, the unemployment rate may stop falling, and upward pressure on wages would be limited.
The Fed would then delay tightening for longer than anticipated.
Last but not least, unexpected financial problems – which lower oil prices could catalyze – would interrupt US growth and discourage the Fed from tightening.
After China and Japan, oil-exporting countries, including Russia, are the largest holders of US Treasury securities.
If oil revenues fall further, they may be forced to sell those holdings, using the dollars to intervene in the foreign-exchange market and support their currencies or to bail out troubled banks, like Russia’s Trust Bank, the mid-size institution that the government rescued in December.
Such developments would cause US debt yields to spike, disrupting growth.
The dollar would become weaker, leaving investors wrong-footed.
The dislocations could be severe.
Currency forecasting is a mug’s game.
Exchange-rate movements over horizons as long as a year do not function according to theoretical models.
The behavior of currency markets has repeatedly confounded and even bankrupted sophisticated investors.
With so much currently staked on the market moving in one direction, it is worth contemplating the consequences if this happens again in 2015.
Escaping the New Normal of Weak Growth
MILAN – There is no question that the recovery from the global recession triggered by the 2008 financial crisis has been unusually lengthy and anemic.
Some still expect an upswing in growth.
But, eight years after the crisis erupted, what the global economy is experiencing is starting to look less like a slow recovery than like a new low-growth equilibrium.
Why is this happening, and is there anything we can do about it?
One potential explanation for this “new normal” that has gotten a lot of attention is declining productivity growth.
But, despite considerable data and analysis, productivity’s role in the current malaise has been difficult to pin down – and, in fact, seems not to be as pivotal as many think.
Of course, slowing productivity growth is not good for longer-term economic performance, and it may be among the forces holding back the United States as it approaches “full” employment.
But, in much of the rest of the world, other factors – namely, inadequate aggregate demand and significant output gaps, rooted in excess capacity and underused assets (including people) – seem more important.
In the eurozone, for example, aggregate demand in many member countries has been constrained by, among other things, Germany’s large current-account surplus, which amounted to 8.5% of GDP in 2015.
With higher aggregate demand and more efficient use of existing human capital and other resources, economies could achieve a significant boost in medium-term growth, even without productivity gains.
None of this is to say that we should ignore the productivity challenge.
But the truth is that productivity is not the principal economic problem right now.
Tackling the most urgent problems confronting the world economy will require action by multiple actors – not just central banks.
Yet, thus far, monetary authorities have shouldered much of the burden of the crisis response.
First, they intervened to prevent the financial system’s collapse, and, later, to stop a sovereign-debt and banking crisis in Europe.
Then they continued to suppress interest rates and the yield curve, elevating asset prices, which boosted demand via wealth effects.
But this approach, despite doing some good, has run its course.
Ultra-low – even negative – interest rates have failed to restore aggregate demand or stimulate investment.
And the exchange-rate transmission channel won’t do much good, because it does not augment aggregate demand; it just shifts demand around among countries’ tradable sectors.
Inflation would help, but even the most expansionary monetary measures have been struggling to raise inflation to targets, Japan being a case in point.
One reason for this is inadequate aggregate demand.
Monetary policy should never have been expected to shift economies to a sustainably higher growth trajectory by itself.
And, in fact, it wasn’t: monetary policy was explicitly intended to buy time for households, the financial sector, and sovereigns to repair their balance sheets and for growth-enhancing policies to kick in.
Unfortunately, governments did not go nearly far enough in pursuing complementary fiscal and structural responses.
One reason is that fiscal authorities in many countries – in particular, in Japan and parts of Europe – have been constrained by high sovereign-debt levels.
Furthermore, in a low interest-rate environment, they can live with debt overhangs.
For highly indebted governments, low interest rates are critical to keep debt levels sustainable and ease pressure to restructure debt and recapitalize banks.
The shift to a high sovereign-debt-yield equilibrium would make it impossible to achieve fiscal balance.
In the eurozone, the European Central Bank’s commitment, announced in 2012, to prevent debt levels from becoming unsustainable is politically conditional on fiscal restraint.
There are also political motivations at play.
Politicians simply prefer to keep the burden on monetary policy and avoid pursuing difficult or unpopular policies – including structural reforms, debt restructuring, and the recapitalization of banks – aimed at boosting market access and flexibility, even if it means undermining medium-term growth.
The result is that economies are stuck in a so-called Nash equilibrium, in which no participant can gain through unilateral action.
If central banks attempt to exit their aggressively accommodative policies without complementary actions to restructure debt or restore demand, growth, and investment, growth will suffer – as will central banks’ credibility, or even their independence.
But exit they must, because expansionary monetary policies have reached the point at which they may be doing more harm than good.
By suppressing returns to savers and holders of assets for a protracted period, low interest rates have spurred a frantic search for yield.
This takes two forms.
One is rising leverage, which has increased globally by about $70 trillion since 2008, largely (though not entirely) in China.
The other is capital-flow volatility, which has driven policymakers in some countries to pursue their own monetary easing or to impose capital controls, in order to prevent damage to growth in the tradable sector.
It is past time for political leaders to show more courage in implementing structural and social-security reforms that may impede growth for a time, but will stabilize their countries’ fiscal position.
More generally, fiscal authorities need to do a much better job of cooperating with their monetary counterparts, domestically and internationally.
Such action will probably have to wait until the political consequences of low growth, high inequality, mistrust of international trade and investment, and the loss of central-bank independence become too great to bear.
That probably won’t happen right away; but, given the rise of populist leaders seizing on these adverse trends to win support, it may not be too far off.
In this sense, populism can be a beneficial force, as it challenges a problematic status quo.
But the risk remains that, if populist leaders do secure power, they will pursue policies that lead to even worse results.
The Pitfalls of Strongman Populism
LONDON – The year 2016 showed that the durability of liberal democracy can no longer be taken for granted, even in the West.
In fact, Harvard University political scientist Yascha Mounk’s analysis of World Values Survey data shows that, in many Western countries, public confidence in democracy has been declining for quite some time.
What explains this trend?
The political upheavals of 2016 suggest that many people are frustrated with democratic inaction.
Slow income growth, unemployment, inequality, immigration, and terrorism are supposedly not being tackled decisively enough.
Democratic countries’ political establishments seem to be in a permanent state of torpor, fueling voter demand for strong leaders who promise to smash through political gridlock and sweep away bureaucratic resistance to bold new policies.
These leaders – who assert that they alone can fix their countries’ problems – are often sought, and found, in the corporate world.
Many people regard a successful CEO as someone who can deliver on well-defined objectives, so they conclude that a businessman can solve social problems that a politician cannot.
But this view is misleading, because political leadership is fundamentally different from corporate leadership.
In economists’ parlance, it is the difference between general-equilibrium and partial-equilibrium analysis.
Corporate leaders must deliver for their shareholders, and shouldn’t bother themselves too much with what happens to the rest of society.
If profit maximization requires cutting costs and downsizing, the corporate leader can eliminate jobs and issue severance payments to redundant workers.
What happens to these workers next is a concern for somebody else – namely, the state – to address.
Political leaders, on the other hand, are bound by the principle of “one person, one vote,” and have a responsibility to take care of both the haves and have-nots, the employed and the unemployed alike.
A politician must ensure that unemployed workers have new opportunities, or risk losing their votes.
This is not to say that the CEO’s job is easier; but it is certainly more clearly defined.
Leaders who approach a political task with a corporate mindset are likely to focus more on efficiency than inclusion.
But if their reforms ignore or alienate too many voters, they could be reversed.
As we saw in 2016, Western countries urgently need to find ways to compensate or assist those who have lost out in the current global economy.
This is a painful lesson that post-communist countries learned during the 1990s.
According to “Transition for All,” the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development’s latest Transition Report, the first years of market reforms hurt the vast majority of those countries’ populations.
Interestingly, many of the people who supported these reforms also favored “strong leaders.”
They argued that, because the reforms were unpopular, they needed to be imposed on the public, rather than being impeded by excessively democratic processes.
Unfortunately, this argument backfired.
While some strong leaders managed to implement reforms quickly, the measures benefited only a minority of people, and many of them were eventually reversed.
A typical example is privatization.
State-owned enterprises are almost always inefficient, and often hoard labor.
So, when they are privatized, they become more efficient, but they also shed workers.
This is a positive development from a firm-level, partial-equilibrium perspective; but it may not be if one considers laid-off workers’ wellbeing and the general-equilibrium implications for society.
If privatization displaces too many workers without compensation, a majority of citizens could come to see it as illegitimate, potentially undermining their support for private ownership of productive property.
This is exactly what has happened in more than a few post-communist countries, where privatization has become a dirty word.
The damage caused by certain unpopular reforms lasted far longer than the reforms themselves.
In many post-communist countries, the pain they caused created the political conditions for populist strongmen to take over.
And when some of these new leaders reversed the reforms, they also removed institutional checks on their power, in order to make it harder to challenge their decisions.
Once they consolidated their hold on power, they redistributed the country’s wealth to their cronies.
Not surprisingly, income inequality in many of these countries is worse today than it was when they abandoned privatization and other reforms.
This is why democratic institutions are so important: They enable those who have been harmed by reforms to receive compensation.
With “one person, one vote,” the “losers” count as much as the “winners.”
Because truly democratic policies must be inclusive, implementing reforms in a democracy takes time and effort; but the painful process of building broad pro-reform coalitions also ensures that those policies will endure.
In the long run, inclusive reforms stick, and quick and dirty reforms do not.
The tortoise of democracy beats the hare of benevolent dictatorship.
Homelands for Plants
DURHAM, NORTH CAROLINA – My day begins with a cup of coffee and ends with hot chocolate.
In between, I consume a variety of food and medicines, including my daily 81mg dose of aspirin.
A brightly colored orchid enlivens my study, and, through the window, I catch a glimpse of my green garden.
In short, my life – like everyone’s – is enabled, enriched, and extended by a wide variety of plants and their derivatives.
But the biodiversity on which all of us depend is under threat, as human activity devastates forests and other plant-rich habitats.
The question now is how quickly are species being destroyed – and what can be done to stop it.
Designing effective conservation strategies must begin with knowledge of the species we need to protect.
So far, taxonomists have described roughly 297,500 plant species.
How many have they not yet described?
Where are we likely to find them?
It might seem that, as the pool of undescribed species diminishes, the rate at which taxonomists describe new species should decline.
But the opposite has happened, with rates often increasing nearly exponentially from year to year – a phenomenon that can be explained largely by the growing number of taxonomists.
Indeed, it is only the ratio of new species to taxonomists describing them that is declining.
Based on this development, mathematical models predict that roughly 15% more plant species exist than are currently known, for a total of some 350,000 species – a figure that is consistent with expert opinion.
Perhaps half of the undescribed species have already been collected and housed in herbaria, where they await detection and analysis.
To find the rest, taxonomists must rely on three general patterns governing species’ geographical distribution:
· Most species have very small geographical ranges and are uncommon locally.
· The number of species found in any one habitat varies considerably.
Large tracts of boreal forest across North America and Eurasia have only a handful of tree species, while the Amazon basin may house 16,000.
· Species with small geographical ranges are often concentrated in the same areas, but they tend to be in areas different from where the largest numbers of species live.
Based on these patterns, one could predict that most undescribed species have small geographical ranges and are scarce within them – that is why we have not found them yet.
Moreover, they are likely to be located within known concentrations of species with small ranges, in areas like Central America, the Caribbean, the northern Andes, Brazil’s coastal forests, southern Africa, Madagascar, Southeast Asia, New Guinea, Western Australia, and many tropical islands.
Given that most plants that are currently threatened with extinction – 20% of known species, and probably 30% of all species – fall within this category, efforts to preserve plant biodiversity should emphasize such concentrations of small-range species.
The fact that endangered plant species tend to be concentrated geographically raises the stakes for conservation efforts in those areas.
But it could also facilitate success by enabling policymakers to focus on narrow areas instead of vast habitats.
The nearly 200-member Convention of Biological Diversity – which embodies the global consensus on the need to protect ecological diversity – aims to do just that.
The CBD’s Strategic Plan for Biodiversity calls for the formal protection of at least 17% of the most ecologically important terrestrial areas, while the Global Strategy for Plant Conservation seeks to protect 60% of plant species.
Given that some 67% of plant species live entirely within the selected areas, and an additional 14% live partly in these areas, this approach is highly promising.
Moreover, while some 13% of the world’s land area is currently protected, only 14% of the 17% that contains the most plant species fall within the protected areas.
In order to improve the CBD’s chances of success, countries with higher concentrations of unique species need more robust protections.
Given that many of these countries are in the developing world, the international community should support such efforts.
The situation is complicated by the “Noah’s Ark” effect: while a small total area can house many species, it may not be able to ensure their long-term sustainability.
In other words, even if the aggregate size of all protected areas is large, the individual areas may not be large enough to support viable populations.
The ecological questions involved – how much area countries should protect, and where – are not easy to answer; doing so requires ever-deeper knowledge of plant species and their habitats.
And translating those answers into action demands something that may be even more difficult to secure: strong and sustained political will.
Stumbling in the Dark
SAO PAULO – As well-intentioned gestures go, Earth Hour is hard to beat.
At the stroke of 8:30 p.m. on Saturday, March 27, nearly a billion people in more than 120 countries demonstrated their desire to do something about global warming by switching off their lights for an hour.
In a show of official solidarity, the lights also went out at many of the planet’s most iconic landmarks, from the Opera House in Sydney to the Great Pyramid at Giza, not to mention Beijing’s Forbidden City, New York’s Empire State Building, London’s Big Ben, Paris’s Eiffel Tower, and the skylines of both Hong Kong and Las Vegas.
What ever else it may be, Earth Hour is surely one of the most successful publicity stunts ever dreamed up.
First organized in Sydney, Australia, in 2007 by the local chapter of the World Wildlife Fund, its popularity and the level of participation (both individual and official) that generates has exploded in recent years – to the point that there is barely a corner of the earth that the campaign hasn’t touched.
As Greg Bourne, CEO of World Wildlife Fund in Australia, put it: “We have everyone from Casablanca to the safari camps of Namibia and Tanzania taking part.”
But has Earth Hour actually done anything to halt – or even slow – global warming?
Not so much.
The event’s popularity is not hard to fathom.
Who but the most die-hard global-warming denier could resist the notion, as Earth Hour’s American website phrased it this year, that merely “by flipping off your lights on March 27 at 8:30 p.m. local time you will be making the switch to a cleaner, more secure nation”?
Needless to say, this was not quite the case.
The main thing that anyone accomplished by turning off the lights at nighttime for an hour was to make it harder to see.
The environmental impact was negligible.
Indeed, even if everyone in the world had participated the requisite hour, the result would have been the equivalent of turning off China’s carbon emissions for roughly 45 seconds.
Of course, this wildly optimistic calculation assumes that nobody used more power afterwards.
Recent research by two Canadian psychologists found that people who spent money on green products were, immediately afterwards, less likely to be generous and more likely to steal than those who bought non-green stuff.
Apparently doing something virtuous – like turning off the lights– makes us feel entitled to act badly afterwards.
The Earth Hour organizers acknowledged the symbolic nature of the exercise.
Turning off the lights is just a “call to action,” they noted.
As WWF Director-General James Leape explained, it provides “a global platform for millions of people to voice their concern about the devastating effects of climate change.”
Added another WWF official, “It’s saying to our politicians, you can’t give up on climate change.”
All well and good.
But according to Andy Ridley, Earth Hour actually has a more specific agenda than that.
In addition to being the guy who first came up with the idea for the event over drinks with friends in a Sydney pub several years ago, Ridley is also the executive director of Earth Hour Global, so he presumably speaks with some authority on the subject.
“What we’re still looking for in this coming year,” he told the Associated Press last week, “is a global deal that encourages all countries to lower their emissions.”
Therein lies the big problem with Earth Hour.
As much as we would like to believe otherwise, the fact is that carbon emissions won’t be lowered by a deal.
If that were politically possible, it would have been done a long time ago – if not at the 1992 “Earth Summit” in Rio de Janeiro, then in Kyoto 12 years later; and if not in Kyoto, then in Copenhagen last December.
But it wasn’t.
Indeed, after nearly two decades of trying, the best climate deal that countries have been able to agree on is one that imposes no real obligations, sets no binding emissions targets, and requires no specific actions by anyone.
Surely, there is a lesson here.
Alas, the organizers of Earth Hour prefer to ignore this inconvenient reality.
But there is no getting around it.
If we are serious about wanting to solve global warming, we need to take action that actually does good – as opposed to wasting valuable resources on empty agreements and moral posturing that merely make us feel good.
Switching off our lights and promising to cut carbon emissions may make us feel momentarily virtuous, but that’s all it does.
A meaningful solution to global warming needs to focus on clean-energy research and development, instead of fixating on empty promises of reductions in carbon emissions.
For just 0.2% of global GDP, or $100 billion a year, we could bring about the game-changing technological breakthroughs that will be required to make green energy cheap enough to fuel a carbon-free future.
So let’s stop stumbling around in the dark and do something meaningful for a brighter future.
From Poverty to Empowerment
MUMBAI – As India gears up for its general election next month, it has some cause to celebrate: extreme poverty is finally in retreat.
In 2012 – two decades after the government launched a series of economic reforms aimed at opening up the economy – the official poverty rate had reached 22%, less than half the rate in 1994.
But it is time for India to raise its aspirations.
Escaping abject destitution, though an important milestone, is not the same as achieving a decent standard of living and sense of economic security.
To that end, there is still much to be done.
Indeed, the extent of the task is reflected in a new McKinsey Global Institute report, “From Poverty to Empowerment,” which uses an innovative analytical framework, the “empowerment line,” to estimate the cost to the average citizen of fulfilling eight basic needs: food, energy, housing, potable water, sanitation, health care, education, and social security.
According to this metric, 56% of Indians in 2012 “lacked the means to meet essential needs.”
Remarkably, this number is more than 2.5 times larger than the number of people still living below the poverty line in India.
Even more striking is that the “empowerment gap” – that is, the additional consumption required to bring these 680 million people to the empowerment line – is seven times larger than the cost of eliminating extreme poverty.
Furthermore, while the empowerment line is a measure of individual consumption, a household’s ability or willingness to spend is not sufficient to guarantee a decent life.
People also need access to community-level infrastructure like health clinics, schools, power grids, and sanitation systems.
But the average Indian household lacks access to 46% of basic services, with the severity of the gaps varying widely across districts.
What can India’s government do to provide its citizens with the dignity, comfort, and security that they deserve?
Given that roughly half of current public spending on social programs fails to deliver better outcomes for the poor, simply directing more funds through existing channels is unlikely to have much of an impact.
Instead, policymakers should focus on supporting employment and productivity gains – historically the most potent weapons against poverty.
Of course, this will not be easy.
India’s economy has slowed in recent years.
If economic growth remains on its current trajectory, with no major reforms, more than one-third of the population will remain below the empowerment line in 2022, with 12% still trapped in extreme poverty.
To avoid such an outcome, India’s government should pursue a set of bold reforms that boost growth by encouraging businesses to invest, scale up, and hire.
The reform agenda should be based on four key priorities:
·         The addition of 115 million non-agricultural jobs over the next decade to absorb the growing pool of workers and accelerate the shift toward more modern industries.
·         A doubling of agricultural productivity growth, in order to raise India’s farm yields to the levels achieved in other emerging Asian countries.
·         A doubling of real (inflation-adjusted) public spending on social services over ten years, with much of the increase allocated to fill gaps in health care, the provision of clean drinking water, and sanitation.
·         An overhaul of social-service delivery.
With the right set of measures, more than half a billion people could cross the threshold of consumption required for an economically empowered life, and Indians could gain access to more than 80% of the basic services they need by 2022.
Jobs and productivity growth could contribute 75% of the potential gains, while increased public spending alone, without measures to improve its effectiveness, would contribute less than 10%.
To realize this potential, policymakers should eliminate arcane regulations that handcuff businesses; accelerate infrastructure projects; make the labor market more flexible; remove market distortions; and expand vocational training for the poor and uneducated.
At the same time, they should work to place the efficiency of all public spending on par with that in India’s best-performing states.
All of this demands a strong commitment to better governance and a relentless focus on outcomes.
Common-sense strategies – such as improving coordination among the plethora of ministries and departments that comprise the bureaucracy, and establishing accountable and empowered agencies to deliver results in high-priority areas – could go a long way toward meeting this demand.
Moreover, technology could be used to streamline government services and render them more transparent.
Finally, closer engagement with private- and social-sector actors and local communities could help to increase efficiency, while reducing the burden on the public sector.
India’s young and dynamic population is demanding a better quality of life.
With strong and sustained political will and results-oriented policies, India’s government can deliver it.
Melawan Perubahan Iklim di setiap Kawasan
LONDON – Perjanjian internasional baru demi mengatasi perubahan iklim menjadi semakin kuat seiring dengan bergabungnya Amerika Serikat bersama Uni Eropa melalui penyerahan rencana aksi pengurangan emisi gas rumah kaca secara resmi kepada United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC/Konvensi PBB tentang Perubahan Iklim).
Amerika Serikat menunjukkan pesan kuat dengan menjadi salah satu negara pertama yang menunjukkan tindakan konkrit melawan perubahan iklim.
Ke depannya, negara-negara lain, termasuk Tiongkok dan India, diharapkan juga menyerahkan rencana nasional mereka.
Secara keseluruhan, rencana aksi setiap negara (dikenal dengan istilah “intended nationally determined contributions” (kontribusi nasional), atau “INDCs”) mewakili upaya global secara kolektif untuk berinvestasi dalam masa depan yang rendah karbon dan sejahtera.
Saat ini, kami selaku ketua bersama The Climate Group’s States &amp; Regions Alliance, mengundang para pemimpin negara untuk bergabung dalam upaya ini dengan menyerahkan rencana aksi yang bersifat ambisius dalam menghadapi perubahan iklim.
Kami berseru kepada para pemimpin nasional sebab kami percaya ini adalah tindakan yang benar dan kami tahu upaya ini bisa terwujud.
Kami yakin ini adalah tindakan yang benar karena sebagai pemimpin negara besar dan pemerintah daerah, yang bertanggung jawab atas penerapan rencana aksi mitigasi perubahan iklim masing-masing, kami menyadari bahwa melawan perubahan iklim merupakan tugas dan sekaligus peluang.
Menjadi tugas bagi kita karena perubahan iklim berdampak pada kehidupan sehari-hari.
Di saat yang sama upaya ini menjadi peluang karena peningkatan pembangunan keberlanjutan akan menciptakan lapangan kerja baru dengan teknologi bersih serta perekonomian yang lebih beragam, ramah lingkungan, dan berdaya tahan tinggi.
Kami tahu bahwa upaya bisa terwujud sebab kami sedang menjalankannya.
Setiap daerah tempat kami berasal telah berhasil menurunkan emisi gas rumah kaca hingga tingkat 1990 atau di bawahnya; dan sejak kami memulainya, perekonomian kami tumbuh dua kali lipat.
Pencapaian ini mampu tercipta sebagian karena kebijakan-kebijakan inovatif yang diterapkan pemerintah kami masing-masing.
Adanya pasar karbon yang meliputi 85% emisi gas rumah kaca menjadi inti strategi pemerintah Québec untuk melawan perubahan iklim.
Pada tanggal 1 Januari 2014, Québec menghubungkan pasar karbonnya dengan California, sehingga membentuk pasar karbon regional terbesar di kawasan Amerika Utara.
Seluruh pemasukan yang diperoleh dari penjualan unit emisi Québec masuk ke dalam Green Fund di provinsi tersebut dan kemudian diinvestasikan kembali ke dalam sejumlah prakarsa yang mendorong penurunan emisi gas rumah kaca dan membantu warga Québec beradaptasi terhadap perubahan iklim.
Québec akan melakukan investasi dengan jumlah keseluruhan melebihi $3.3 miliar demi mencapai tujuan ini di tahun 2020, yang akan berkontribusi pada pertumbuhan ekonominya.
Basque Country menetapkan program yang disebut Local Agenda 21, dirancang untuk menunjang perumusan rencana aksi lokal yang berkesinambungan di seluruh wilayahnya.
Sebagai hasilnya, hampir semua kota di Basque sudah mengadopsi rencana aksi tersebut, mencakup lebih dari 25.000 proyek dalam bidang seperti mobilitas, pengelolaan limbah dan pembangunan ekonomi.
Kini, rencana aksi lokal mampu menggerakkan pembangunan berkelanjutan di kawasan, dengan adanya pertukaran pengetahuan antar kota yang membentuk landasan untuk kemajuan di masa depan.
Sementara itu South Australia telah mengembangkan kerangka hukum yang paling suportif terhadap investasi energi terbarukan di Australia yang memungkinkan peningkatan kontribusi pada pembangkit listrik dari nihil pada tahun 2003 hingga saat ini mencapai 40%.
Perubahan ini memberikan tekanan terhadap penurunan harga listrik secara besar-besaran dan mengimbangi biaya Target Energi Terbarukan di South Australia dalam jangka pendek yang semuanya bermanfaat bagi konsumen.
Hal ini juga menempatkan South Australia sebagai pemimpin di industri energi baru.
Negara bagian ini berkontribusi pada lebih dari 40% kapasitas operasional listrik yang bersumber pada tenaga angin di Australia dan menjadi salah satu negara dengan tingkat penetrasi tenaga surya yang tertinggi di dunia (satu dari empat rumah tangga memiliki sistem fotovoltaik).
Saat ini kami melihat arahan ke depan.
Kami telah menunjukkan kepimpinan dengan berupaya mengurangi emisi sebesar 20% pada tahun 2020 di Basque Country dan Québec, dan sebesar 60% pada tahun 2050 di South Australia – namun kami membutuhkan mitra di tingkat nasional.
Di kawasan kami, bisnis memerlukan sinyal kebijakan yang konsisten dan berjangka panjang agar dapat melakukan investasi lebih besar menuju perekonomian rendah karbon.
Dengan bekerjasama, pemerintah daerah dan pusat dapat mencapai hasil lebih besar dibandingkan dengan bekerja secara terpisah.
Sementara kami tengah mempersiapkan diri menuju Konferensi PBB tentang Perubahan Iklim di Paris pada bulan Desember nanti, kami mendorong pemimpin nasional kami agar tidak ragu-ragu lagi.
Bahkan mereka harus bergabung dengan kami di barisan terdepan dalam perjuangan melawan perubahan iklim melalui perumusan rencana aksi nasional yang bersifat ambisius yang juga menaikkan kepemimpinan pemerintah daerah untuk mencapai target penurunan emisi gas rumah kaca yang dibutuhkan.
Subsidies that Save
Was France’s recent wave of protests against an amendment that would have increased employers’ freedom to fire young workers a blessing in disguise?
To defuse the protests, President Jacques Chirac was forced to withdraw the provision, and instead has proposed hiring subsidies as a way to reduce youth joblessness.
A related proposal for targeted wage subsidies is being floated in Germany.
Advocates of greater labor-market flexibility insist that paying employers to hire young people is the wrong approach.
Allow employers to fire workers more easily, they argue, and employers will hire them more readily.
The limitation of this approach, however, is that a free market for labor will neither eradicate unemployment nor transform marginal, low-end workers into high-productivity, high-wage employees.
If the proposed subsidies in France and Germany have a defect, it is not that they are unnecessary, but that they do not go far enough.
In the advanced economies of the West, many people in all age groups are effectively left out of formal employment.
In the United States, the pay of less qualified workers is so meager that, if their situation is not dire, they find it emotionally difficult to keep a job for long, or they become too demoralized or distracted to be adequate employees, or minimum-wage laws make them unaffordable to law-abiding employers.
In Europe, they are excluded from employment by labor agreements and in some cases by minimum-wage laws.
In both cases, these workers lose the opportunity for engagement and personal development that most legitimate jobs provide.
This deprivation in turn generates high social costs, including crime, violence, and dependency.
The latter pathologies then become a weapon in the populist attack on free enterprise, which Western countries require for economic dynamism – and thus prosperity.
So those who are included and benefit by free enterprise, yet are burdened by the social costs of exclusion, should all be willing to pay something to remedy these conditions.
The best remedy is a subsidy for low-wage employment, paid to employers for every full-time low-wage worker they hire and calibrated to the employee’s wage cost to the firm.
The higher the wage cost, the lower the subsidy, until it has tapered off to zero.
With such wage subsidies, competitive forces would cause employers to hire more workers, and the resulting fall in unemployment would cause most of the subsidy to be paid out as direct or indirect labor compensation.
People could benefit from the subsidy only by engaging in productive work – that is, a job that employers deem worth paying something for.
Ideally, the subsidies will go for employing workers of all ages.
However, it is understandable that plans under current discussion envision focusing first on the youngest and oldest workers.
Some people still think of wage subsidies as a welfare hand-out.
But these subsidies are very different from social assistance and social insurance programs.
Although such programs have been substantial in Europe and the US, the working poor remain as marginalized as ever.
Indeed, social spending has worsened the problem, because it reduces work incentives and thus creates a culture of dependency and alienation from the commercial economy, undermining labor force participation, employability, and employee loyalty.
What is needed is higher employment and pay through higher demand for the least productive workers.
Some would count on the free market to solve the problem with time.
But market forces alone are unlikely to solve the unprecedented levels of labor-market exclusion that developed from the mid-1970’s to the early 1990’s.
The prevailing belief in a reliable tendency to return to some normal degree of inclusion has little ground to stand on.
True, most recessions are reversed, just as most booms end.
Nevertheless, what is “normal” is itself shifting all the time.
Many argue that subsidies of any kind should never be countenanced, in part because they are extremely difficult, if not impossible, to abolish, even if they are no longer needed.
According to this view, the total payment to a factor of production should not exceed its marginal productivity, so desirable outcomes should be promoted through tax incentives.
But, as early twentieth-century theorists pointed out, collaboration and exchange within a nation’s diverse labor force increase everyone’s productivity.
There is a mutual gain from economic cooperation in addition to what each type of talent could produce independently – an insight later built on by the philosopher John Rawls.
A society can let the free market distribute this gain, or it can intervene to direct it to the least advantaged, so that some get more than their marginal product, others less.
Since the least skilled workers face morale problems that lower their wages and erode their employability, it makes sense to deliver the mutual gain that is redistributed to them through subsidies that encourage greater self-support and employment.
And, unlike tax incentives, wage subsidies target only employment of low-wage workers.
Both Europe and the US must do more to promote low-wage workers’ inclusion.
A good economy not only sustains growing output and national income; it also ensures its participants’ capacity for self-sufficiency and ability to realize their potential.
A substantial low-wage employment subsidy is a fair and efficient way to achieve this important goal.
The Evolution of Devolution
CAMBRIDGE – The Scots have spoken.
A solid majority voted against independence in their historic referendum last month.
But the debate left no question that an even larger majority favors the further devolution of economic, social, and political power in Britain.
And regional movements elsewhere in Europe – and around the world – are making similar demands.
The logic of devolution is clear.
Scotland, for example, may not want a bigger or smaller government than it has now, but it wants a different mix of taxes and spending.
It wants more local control.
The Scotland Act of 2012, scheduled to come into effect in 2016, provides a down payment on this desired autonomy.
Prime Minister David Cameron, knowing which way the wind is blowing, has promised more.
But if devolution is good for Scotland, then why not for Wales and Northern Ireland?
Why not also for England, for that matter?
An equilibrium in which Scots vote on English laws but the English have no vote on Scottish laws will not remain an equilibrium for long.
And why stop there?
Why not devolution for Yorkshire, a region with a population equal to Scotland’s and an active separatist movement, and for other English regions?
A not-so-United Kingdom of regions need not be a disaster.
The United States is able to function, after a fashion, as a union of 50 states of very different economic size and political complexion.
Other federal states like Canada and Australia may be even better role models.
But it is important to draw the right lessons from the experience of these other states.