That interpretation, however, borders on caricature.
Mark Sykes and François Georges-Picot aimed to devise a plan that would enable Great Britain and France to avoid a ruinous rivalry in the Middle East.
They largely succeeded: Their design kept the region from coming between the two European powers, and it managed to survive for a century.
To be sure, many of the Sykes-Picot borders reflected deals cut in Europe rather than local demographic or historical realities.
But that hardly makes the Middle East unique: Most borders around the world owe their legacy less to thoughtful design or popular choice than to some mixture of violence, ambition, geography, and chance.
The unpleasant reality is that today’s Middle East is what it is because its people and leaders have done such a bad job in shaping it.
Sykes and Picot cannot be blamed for the region’s pervasive lack of tolerance and political freedom, poor schools, or the unfair ways in which girls and women are treated.
Other parts of the world (including those without enormous reserves of oil and gas) have emerged from colonialism in much better shape.
The factors accounting for the record of failure in the Middle East – history, culture, religion, and personalities – are worthy of serious examination.
But the more pressing question that this anniversary raises has less to do with historical analysis than it does with current policy.
In much of the Middle East, a violent struggle for mastery is the new normal.
In four – arguably five – countries in the region, the government does not control significant portions of the state’s territory.
Lebanon has been in this condition for decades, Iraq for more than a decade, and Syria, Libya, and Yemen for some five years now.
Militias, terrorist organizations, foreign fighters, and other armed groups have asserted varying degrees of local authority.
There are also the unfulfilled national aspirations of the Kurds (large numbers of whom live in Turkey, Iraq, Syria, and Iran) and the unresolved matter of how to reconcile the reality of Israel with the Palestinians’ political goals.
The border between Syria and Iraq is for all intents and purposes gone.
Millions of men, women, and children find themselves living in a country that is not their own.
What, then, should be done?
One option would be to try to preserve – or, more accurately, restore – the Sykes-Picot Middle East.
But attempting to reunify the countries that appear on the map – and to make the borders between them matter – would be folly.
These countries will not go back to what they were; ties to region, religion, tribe, ethnicity, and/or ideology have in many cases superseded national identities.
A second option would be to try to negotiate the terms of a new Middle East, a successor to Sykes-Picot.
This, too, would prove to be an expensive failure.
Redrawing the map might be possible one day, but that day is decades away, at best.
There is simply no consensus on what the map should look like, and no party or alliance that could impose or uphold it.
As a rule of thumb, diplomacy can be expected only to work with facts on the ground, not to create them, and the facts on the ground stand in the way of a regional settlement.
All of this leads to a third option: Acceptance of the fact that for the foreseeable future the Middle East will not resemble what appears on maps and globes.
This is not an argument for remaining aloof; as bad as things are, they can always get worse.
To see that they do not, governments and organizations that meet certain standards can and should be strengthened; those that do not can and should be weakened.
But no level of effort will alter the region’s basic reality: borders that count for little and governments that count for only a little more.
Syria, Iraq, and Libya are likely to be countries in name only; important parts of each will essentially be autonomous and on their own, for better or worse.
The fact that Turkey, Iran, Saudi Arabia, Israel, Russia, and the United States are working at cross-purposes more often than not further suggests a messy future without legal foundation.
In some ways, the pre-Sykes-Picot Middle East is coming back – but without the order imposed by the Ottoman Empire.
As a result, the Middle East stands to suffer far worse in the next century than it did in the last – a reality that could well leave us nostalgic for the times of Sykes and Picot.
Recount Kenyans’ Votes
Kenya is aflame after a presidential election on December 27 widely believed to have been rigged to secure the re-election of Mwai Kibaki.
Kibaki’s opponents took to the streets, the government issued shoot-to-kill orders, and hundreds have died at the hands of the police as well as from gang rampages and inter-ethnic violence.
The United States has led the international diplomatic response, but its approach has been deeply flawed.
Kenyans voted in vast numbers, waiting in the hot sun for several hours at crowded polling booths around the country.
The first results to be counted were for Kenya’s parliament, with Kibaki’s government ministers roundly defeated in their local constituencies.
The main opposition alliance, led by Raila Odinga, won about 100 seats, compared to roughly 30 for Kibaki.
It appeared overwhelmingly likely that the presidential vote count would similarly show Odinga beating Kibaki by a wide margin.
That, indeed, is how the early count transpired.
As the tallies from polling stations from around the country came into Nairobi, Odinga built up a lead of several hundred thousand votes.
Then the trouble began.
Vote tallies from Kibaki’s homeland in central Kenya were delayed.
Independent observers from the European Union and elsewhere began to report serious irregularities in the Kibaki strongholds, where opposition party representatives were denied access to polling sites.
Matters became even more dubious as the vote tallies were collected and recorded at the Electoral Commission of Kenya (ECK).
According to detailed evidence submitted by the opposition, the tallies from the countryside, allegedly already padded for Kibaki, were again manipulated, with additional votes awarded to him.
As a result, many more votes were recorded by the ECK for the presidential race than for the parliamentary race, even though voters were clearly instructed – indeed required – to cast a vote in both races.   
When the opposition tried to challenge these inconsistencies, the ECK abruptly declared Kibaki the winner.
Days later, the ECK’s head publicly acknowledged that Kibaki supporters had pressured him to announce the “results” immediately, despite the clear evidence of vote rigging.
Shockingly, he declared that he did not know who really won.
The EU observers also announced that the election tally had not met basic international standards.
The election is a disaster for Kenya, but the response of the international community, led by the US, is no less distressing.
American foreign policy in Africa is in the hands of Assistant Secretary of State Jendayi Frazer, a former student of Secretary of State Condeleezza Rice.
From the start of the post-election crisis, Frazer took three flawed positions.
First, she declared that the vote could not be re-assessed by an independent tally.
In fact, most observers on the scene believed that there was a long paper trail, from the polling sites all the way to Nairobi, which could be re-assessed in detail.
Second, she claimed that there had been vote rigging “on both sides,” and suggested that the true election results were very close and that perhaps Kibaki had won.
Given the vast amount of direct and circumstantial evidence that the rigging was on behalf of Kibaki, Frazer’s assignment of equal blame to each side was met with astonishment and dismay by the opposition.
She also failed to acknowledge an exit poll carried out by a US foundation, which showed a clear Odinga victory.   
Finally, Frazer argued that the two sides needed to compromise and share power.
Instead, Kibaki disdainfully appointed 18 key cabinet members even as “mediation” from abroad was about to begin.
The opposition, of course, was perplexed by the US call for compromise without any serious call to review the vote itself. 
In the end, only Kenya will decide its own fate.
The US or other outside powers will not save Kenyan democracy.
Threats, sanctions, or aid cutoffs would only cause further damage to an economy already in free fall, tragically punishing Kenya’s poor while fomenting further violence.
Still, the international community can play a more constructive role than it has until now by pressing both sides to accept an independent recount.
By standing up for democratic principles, the world would truly stand on the side of the Kenyan people.
In dismissing such a recount, Frazer told Kenyans that they shouldn’t expect their vote to be tallied accurately, and that power can be seized or perhaps even negotiated in a backroom.
She also sent an unmistakable signal to those who would steal votes: at worst, they might have to share a few cabinet positions with the opposition.
Perhaps a recount would show that the election was too close to call.
Perhaps, as the opposition insists, it would demonstrate a clear victory for Odinga.
Either way, Kenyans and their votes would be taken seriously, and tempers could well subside.
Only if both sides accept that there was no clear winner is it reasonable to call for power-sharing (or a new election).
There is still time to get this right.
The international community should stop pushing for a backroom “compromise” that ignores the popular will.
Let the world stand with neither Kibaki nor the opposition, nor for an arbitrary compromise, but with Kenya’s voters.
If Kibaki rejects an independent recount, his refusal will reverberate around Kenya and the world.
Those who ignore voters should quickly learn that they have no place to hide.
Recovering from Kosovo
LONDON – Kosovo’s recent unilateral declaration of independence brought back memories.
I publicly opposed NATO’s attack on Serbia – carried out in the name of protecting the Kosovars from Serb atrocities – in March 1999.
At that time, I was a member of the Opposition Front Bench – or Shadow Government – in Britain’s House of Lords.
The then Conservative leader, William Hague, immediately expelled me to the “back benches.”
Thus ended my (minor) political career.
Ever since, I have wondered whether I was right or wrong.
I opposed military intervention for two reasons.
First, I argued that while it might do local good, it would damage the rules of international relations as they were then understood.
The UN charter was designed to prevent the use of force across national lines except for self-defense and enforcement measures ordered by the Security Council.
Human rights, democracy, and self-determination are not acceptable legal grounds for waging war.
Secondly, I argued that while there might be occasions when, regardless of international law, human rights abuses are so severe that one is morally obliged to act, Kosovo was not such a case.
I considered the “imminent humanitarian disaster” that the intervention was ostensibly aimed at preventing, to be largely an invention.
I further argued that non-military means to resolve the humanitarian issue in Kosovo were far from being exhausted, and that the failed Rambouillet negotiation with Serbia in February-March 1999 was, in Henry Kissinger’s words, “merely an excuse to start the bombing.”
This view was vindicated by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe’s Report on Human Rights Violations in Kosovo , published in December 1999.
The report showed that the level of violence fell markedly when OSCE monitors were placed in Kosovo following the Holbrooke-Milosevic agreement of September 23, 1998; and that it was only after the monitors were withdrawn on March 20, 1999, in preparation for the bombing that general and systematic violation of human rights began.
Between March and June 1999 – the period of NATO bombing – the number of deaths and expulsions in Kosovo shot up.
The “humanitarian disaster” was in fact precipitated by the war itself.
Despite this, the term “genocide,” freely bandied about by Western interventionists, was grotesquely inappropriate at any time.
Without doubt, NATO air strikes and the subsequent administration of Kosovo as a protectorate improved the political situation for Albanian Kosovars.
Without NATO intervention, they probably would have remained second-class citizens within Serbia.
Against this must be set large-scale deterioration in the economic situation of all Kosovars, Albanian and Serbian (44% unemployment), widespread criminalization, and the fact that under NATO rule, Kosovo was ethnically cleansed of half its Serb minority.
Kosovo remains in political limbo to this day.
Two thousand European Union officials run the country, and 16,000 NATO troops guard its security.
Its “independence” is rejected by Serbia, unrecognized by the Security Council, and opposed by Russia, China, and most multi-national states in Europe and Asia, which fear setting a precedent for their own dismemberment.
Indeed, Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov was quick to blame the disturbances in Tibet on Kosovo’s declaration of independence. 
A Serbian insurgency and de facto partition of Kosovo remain possible, and we have yet to face the destabilizing effects of Kosovo’s claim to independence on other divided Balkan states such as Bosnia and Macedonia  But the balance sheet is even worse in terms of international relations.
Kosovo was a stalking horse for Iraq, as the doctrine of humanitarian intervention morphed into President George W. Bush’s doctrine of “pre-emptive war,” by which the US claimed the right to attack any state that it deemed a threat to its national security.
As then-UN Secretary General Kofi Annan rightly argued, this opened the door to the proliferation of unilateral, lawless use of force.  
Not the least damaging consequence of the Bush doctrine is that it dispenses with the need for public proof of aggressive intent.
The Iraq invasion was justified by the same use of fraudulent evidence as was displayed in Kosovo.
On balance, I believe that I was right to oppose the Kosovo war.
It was a regressive answer to a genuine international problem: how to hold together multi-ethnic/religious states in a reasonably civilized way.
Since 1999, Kosovars have rejected Serbian offers of autonomy, because they were confident of American support for independence.
Western countries must consider more seriously how far they should press their human rights agenda on states with both the power and the will to defend their territorial integrity.
Under American leadership, it is the West that has emerged as the restless, disturbing force in international affairs.
China should certainly grant Tibet more autonomy; but is pumping up the Dalai Lama into a world leader or threatening to boycott the Beijing Olympics the best way to secure a better deal for Tibetans, or to obtain Chinese cooperation on matters that are far more important than Tibet’s status?
Activists, impassioned by the justice of their cause, will not consider these questions.
But world leaders should take them seriously.
Recovery before Reform
LONDON – The financial crisis that started in 2007 shrunk the world economy by 6% in two years, doubling unemployment.
Its proximate cause was predatory bank lending, so people are naturally angry and want heads and bonuses to roll – a sentiment captured by the current worldwide protests against “Wall Street.”
The banks, however, are not just part of the problem, but an essential part of the solution.
The same institutions that caused the crisis must help to solve it, by starting to lend again.
With global demand flagging, the priority has to be recovery, without abandoning the goal of reform – a difficult line to tread politically.
The common ground of reform is the need to re-regulate the financial services industry.
At the heart of the political check was America’s Glass-Steagall Act of 1933.
Glass-Steagall aimed to prevent commercial banks from gambling with their depositors’ money by mandating the institutional separation of retail and investment banking.
The result was 65 years of relative financial stability.
In what economists later called the “repressed” financial system, retail banks fulfilled the necessary function of financial intermediation without taking on suicidal risks, while the government kept aggregate demand high enough to maintain a full-employment level of investment.
Then the Money Power struck back, aided and abetted by its apologist cohort of economists.
The Big Bang of 1986 in London ended the separation of banking functions in the United Kingdom.
After prolonged lobbying by the financial-services industry, US President Bill Clinton repealed Glass-Steagall in 1999.
From that point on, commercial and investment banks could merge, and the composite entities were authorized to provide a full range of banking services, including underwriting and other trading activities.
This was part of a wave of deregulation that swept away Franklin Roosevelt’s promise to “chase the money changers from the temple.”
Clinton also refused to regulate credit-default swaps, and the US Securities and Exchange Commission allowed banks to triple their leverage.
These three decisions led directly to the sub-prime extravaganza that brought down the US banking system in 2007-2008.
Since that crash, efforts have been made to reconstruct the dismantled system of financial regulation in order to prevent the “over-lending” that led to the collapse.
The new doctrine is called “macro-prudential regulation.”
Under an international agreement known as Basel III, banks are to be required to hold a higher ratio of equity capital against “risk-weighted assets,” and leverage is to be limited to a smaller percentage of such assets.
National regulators are exploring ways to vary ratio requirements over the business cycle, and have started subjecting banks to regular “stress tests.”
In the UK, a Financial Policy Committee within the Bank of England is to monitor the “systemic risk” of financial failure, with a Prudential Regulatory Authority supervising systemically important institutions.
According to monetary economist Charles Goodhart, a significantly faster-than-normal growth rate for bank credit, house prices, and leverage will give the authorities sufficient warning of impending crisis.
The new orthodoxy places its faith in regulators’ ability to improve on banks’ measurement of risk, while leaving the structure of the banking system unchanged.
But, when it comes to upping equity requirements against “risk-weighted assets,” who is to do the weighting, and according to what methodology?
Goodhart concedes that banks’ “risk weightings” in the pre-recession period were subject to political pressure and “financial-industry capture and manipulation.”
This is inevitable, because, as John Maynard Keynes pointed out, the “riskiness” of many investments, being subject to inherent uncertainty, is immeasurable.
In short, the new regulatory philosophy replaces the illusion that banks can safely be left to manage their risks with the illusion that regulators will do it for them.
Meanwhile, initial enthusiasm for restoring Glass-Steagall – breaking up banking functions into separate institutions – has fallen by the wayside.
It is only logical that banks with state-guaranteed deposits should be safe and boring, with other necessary, but risky activities hived off to separate companies.
But little progress has been made in (re)implementing this idea.
The “Volcker rule,” whereby commercial banks would be barred from trading on their own account, and from owning hedge funds and private-equity firms, languishes in Congress.
In the UK, an Independent Commission on Banking, headed by Sir John Vickers, rejected separation of retail from investment banking, recommending instead “ring-fencing” deposits from the investment arms of universal banks.
Trust-busters argue that such “Chinese walls” always break down under pressure, owing to huge shareholder demand for universal banks to boost profits at the expense of a sound commercial banking core. And senior executives will still have a legal obligation to maximize profits.
The Vickers commission’s proposals also depend on sophisticated regulation, which assumes, against history, that regulators will always be one step ahead of bankers.
The Money Power never surrenders easily.
Whether relying on regulation, or gesturing towards institutional separation, most proposals for banking reform remain at the drawing-board stage, and are sure to be emasculated by financial lobbies.
Moreover, whatever their intrinsic merits, none of these proposals addresses the global economy’s most immediate problem: undersupply, not oversupply, of credit.
In other words, the challenge is to revive lending growth in full awareness that we must begin devising ways to rein it in.
Redefining Sustainable Development
MELBOURNE – Albert Einstein once said that if he had just one hour to find a solution on which his life depended, he would spend the first 55 minutes defining the problem.
Once he knew the right question to ask, he could solve the problem in less than five minutes.
Today, humanity faces such a life-threatening problem: How are we to provide adequate nutrition and a decent quality of life to a global population that is set to surpass nine billion by 2050, without irreparably damaging our planetary life-support system?
To find a solution, we must start by clarifying the problem.
Humans have fundamentally altered Earth’s ecosystems.
By interfering with the carbon, nitrogen, water, and phosphorus cycles, human activity changes the atmosphere, oceans, waterways, forests, and ice sheets, and diminishes biodiversity.
Indeed, the effects of human behavior on the planet’s ecosystems have become so significant in the last few centuries that many scientists now believe that the planet has entered a new geological epoch, dubbed the Anthropocene.
As the environmental consequences of human activity become increasingly apparent, so does humanity’s responsibility to mitigate them.
Last year, at the United Nations Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, world leaders agreed to create a set of universal Sustainable Development Goals, which would change the playing field for future economic policy to safeguard our life-support system.
That’s easy to say. But where does one start?
For almost three decades, sustainable development has been defined as development that meets the needs of the present, without compromising future generations’ ability to meet their needs.
Related policies have reflected the view that sustainable development rests on three equal pillars: the economy, society, and the environment.
But this view is no longer tenable.
As the United States Global Change Research Program’s recently released draft report on climate change points out, some kinds of weather events have become more common, and more intense, in recent years.
In 2012 alone, Arctic sea-ice dipped to a new low, as an area larger than the US melted; unprecedented heat waves struck Australia, and other areas; record floods hit China and Japan; and the United Kingdom had its wettest year on record.
But global responses remain inadequate.
A new approach is needed.
Rather than separate pillars of sustainable development, the economy must be seen as servicing society, which in turn thrives within a secure natural environment.
Viewed this way, sustainable development should be redefined as “development that meets the needs of the present while safeguarding the Earth’s life-support system, on which the welfare of current and future generations depends.”
After all, a healthy, thriving planet is a prerequisite for healthy, prosperous lives.
The process of identifying the Sustainable Development Goals, which are intended to enter into force in 2015, has begun in earnest.
Last week, representatives from 69 countries met at the UN in New York, and an expert group meets this week.
The goals must have measurable, achievable objectives that extend beyond national policy; they must inspire regional and local administrations, businesses, civil society, and individuals everywhere to change their behavior.
They should create goals for humanity that are grounded in shared values – and in relevant science.
This week, my colleagues and I published a report called Sustainable Development Goals for People and Planet, which outlines what is required.
We identified six universal goals for sustainable development: lives and livelihoods, food security, water sustainability, clean energy, healthy ecosystems, and good governance.
The next step is to define measurable targets, such as better lives for slum dwellers or reduced deforestation.
Genuine progress in any of the six target areas will require a comprehensive approach, with policies that span the economic, social, and environmental domains.
For example, eradicating poverty entails the provision of food, water, energy, and access to gainful employment.
But providing energy to all will require governments to discontinue subsidies for fossil fuels and unsustainable agriculture.
And achieving food security is impossible without agricultural systems and practices that not only support farmers and produce enough food to meet people’s nutritional needs, but that also preserve natural resources by, for example, preventing soil erosion and relying on more efficient nitrogen and phosphorus fertilizers.
The Millennium Development Goals, due to expire in 2015, succeeded because they marshaled international resources and funding to address a focused set of poverty-related issues.
The Sustainable Development Goals must go a step further.
Like Einstein’s thought experiment, many lives depend on it.
The Next Social Contract
PARIS – Around the world nowadays, persistent unemployment, skill mismatches, and retirement frameworks have become central to fiscal policy – and to the often-fierce political debates that surround it.
The advanced countries are facing an immediate “aging” problem, but most of the emerging economies are also in the midst of a demographic transition that will result in an age structure similar to that of the advanced economies – that is, an inverted pyramid – in just two or three decades.
Indeed, China will get there much sooner.
Multiple problems affect employment.
Weak demand in the aftermath of the global financial crisis that began in 2008 remains a key factor in Europe, the United States, and Japan.
But longer-term structural issues are weighing down labor markets as well.
Most important, globalization results in a continuous shift of comparative advantage, creating serious adjustment problems as employment created in new activities does not necessarily compensate for the loss of jobs in old ones.
In any case, most new jobs require different skills, implying that workers losing their jobs in dying industries have little hope of finding another one.
Moreover, technological progress is becoming ever more “labor-saving,” with computers and robots replacing human workers in settings ranging from supermarkets to automobile assembly lines.
Given the volatile macroeconomic outlook, many firms are reluctant to hire new workers, leading to high youth unemployment throughout the world.
At the same time, aging – and the associated cost of health care for the elderly – constitutes the main fiscal challenge in maturing societies.
By the middle of this century, life expectancy at age 60 will have risen by about ten years relative to the post-World War II period, when current retirement ages were fixed.
Marginal changes to existing arrangements are unlikely to be sufficient to respond to technological forces, reduce social tensions and young people’s fears, or address growing fiscal burdens.
A radical reassessment of work, skill formation, retirement, and leisure is needed, with several principles forming the core of any comprehensive reform.
For starters, skill formation and development must become a life-long process, starting with formal schooling, but continuing through on-the-job training and intervals of full-time education at different points in life.
Special youth insertion programs should become a normal part of public support for employment and career formation, with exemption from social-security contributions for the first one or two years of employment.
A second principle is that retirement should be a gradual process.
People could work an average of 1,800-2,000 hours per year until they reach their 50’s, taper off to 1,300-1,500 hours in their early 60’s, and move toward the 500-1,000 range as they approach 70.
A hospital nurse, an airplane crew member, or a secondary-school teacher, for example, could work five days a week until her late fifties, four days a week until age 62, three days until age 65, and perhaps two days until age 70.
Employers and workers should negotiate such flexibility, but they should do so with incentives and financial support from government – for example, variable social-security and income taxes.
Paid holidays can be 3-4 weeks until age 45, gradually increasing to 7-8 weeks in one’s late 60’s.
Maternity and paternity leave should be increased where it is low, such as in the United States.
Public policies should also encourage greater scope for individual choice.
For example, every ten years, a worker should be able to engage in a year of formal learning, with one-third of the cost paid by the employer, one-third by public funds, and one-third by personal savings (these proportions could vary by income bracket).
The overall objective should be a society in which, health permitting, citizens work and pay taxes until close to the age of 70, but less intensively with advancing age and in a flexible manner that reflects individual circumstances.
In fact, gradual and flexible retirement would in many cases benefit not only employers and governments, but also workers themselves, because continued occupational engagement is often a source of personal satisfaction and emotionally enriching social interaction.
Using the Gallup World Poll, my colleagues at the Brookings Institution in Washington, DC, Carol Graham and Milena Nikolova, have found that the happiest cohorts are those who work part-time voluntarily.
In exchange for longer work lives, citizens would have more time for both leisure and skill formation throughout their lives, with positive effects on productivity and life satisfaction.
The new social contract for the first half of the twenty-first century must be one that combines fiscal realism, significant room for individual preferences, and strong social solidarity and protection against shocks stemming from personal circumstances or a volatile economy.
Many countries are taking steps in this direction.
They are too timid.
We need a comprehensive and revolutionary reframing of education, work, retirement, and leisure time.
Redesigning Capitalism
PARIS – When the heads of state of the world’s 20 largest economies come together on short notice, as they just did in Washington, D.C., it is clear how serious the current global crisis is.
They did not decide much, except to call for improved monitoring and regulation of financial flows.
More importantly, they committed themselves to launching a lasting process to reform the world’s financial system.
Of course, those who dreamed of a Bretton Woods&nbsp;II were disappointed.
But the original Bretton Woods framework was not built in a day; indeed, the 1944 conference was preceded by two and a half years of preparatory negotiations, which is probably the minimum needed to decide such weighty issues.
The recent G-20 summit occurred with virtually no real preliminary work.
Three tasks must now be addressed.
First, a floor must be put under the international financial system in order to stop its collapse.
Second, new regulations are needed once the system revives, because if it remains the same way, it will only produce new crises.
Finding the right mix will not be easy.
For 25 years, the world has experienced a huge financial crisis every five years, each seemingly with its own cause.
The third task is to focus on real economic activity, end the recession, sustain growth, and, above all, reform the capitalist system to make it be less dependent on finance.
Long-term investments, not short-term profits, and productive work, rather than paper gains, need to be supported.
The first task is already being tackled.
But, although the United States and some European countries have gone a long way toward restoring the lending capacity of banks, that may not be enough.
After all, if the economy is to grow again, banks need borrowers, but the recession has led entrepreneurs to cut their investments.
The second task remains open.
Disagreements about how to re-regulate the financial markets are deep, owing to countless taboos and the huge interests at stake. Moreover, there can be no comprehensive agreement that does not take into account the relationship between finance and the real economy.
The essential problem in addressing the third task is to find out precisely what is going on in the real economy.
Some states (Iceland and Hungary) are clearly bankrupt.
Some merely face a hazardous financial situation (Denmark, Spain, and others).
Their financial crisis is the main reason for their weakness.
All of these problems are so difficult to resolve because they have been festering for so long.
It is now increasingly evident that today’s crisis has its roots in February 1971, when US President Richard Nixon decided to break the link between the dollar and gold.
Until that point, America’s pledge to maintain the gold standard was the basis for the global fixed-exchange-rate system, which was the heart of the Bretton Woods framework.
During the 27 years that it lasted, huge growth in international trade, supported by non-volatile pricing, was the norm, and large financial crises were absent. &nbsp;
Since then, the international financial system has been highly volatile.
The era of floating exchange rates that followed the end of the gold standard required the development of products that could protect international trade from price volatility.
This opened the way to options, selling and buying on credit, and derivatives of all kinds.
These innovations were considered technical successes.
Prices were (mostly) stabilized, but with a slow, if continuous, rising trend.
The market for these financial products grew over 30 years to the point that they delivered huge opportunities for immediate gain, which provided a strong incentive for market participants to play with them more and more.
During this time, capitalism – smooth and successful between 1945-1975 (sustained high growth, low unemployment, and no financial crises)&nbsp;– weakened.
Through pension funds, investment funds, and arbitrage (or hedge) funds, shareholders became well organized and seized power in developed countries’ firms.
Under their pressure, more and more processes were “outsourced.”
In real terms, wages no longer rose (indeed, the average real wage has been stagnant for 25 years in the US), and a growing share of manpower (currently around 15%) was without steady employment.
Everywhere, the share of wages and incomes began to fall as a proportion of GDP.
As a result, consumption weakened, unsteady employment grew, and unemployment stopped declining.
Under such circumstances, the upper middle classes in developed countries increasingly came to look for capital gains instead of improving their living standards through productive work.
This promoted inequality, and led to the under-regulated financial system’s seizure of power over the entire economy, destabilizing the real economy by fatally weakening its capacity to react to external shocks.
Today’s crisis marks the end of economic growth fueled only by credit.
But untying the knot that an overweening financial sector has drawn around the economy will take time.
Indeed, there is still no consensus that this needs to be done.&nbsp;Yet the G-20 has opened the way to discussion of these fundamental issues.
Today’s recession will be a long one, but it will compel everybody to consider its root causes.
Menghubungkan Laut Merah
KING ABDULLAH ECONOMIC CITY – Laut Merah telah menjalankan peran penting dalam perdagangan internasional selama ribuan tahun.
Pada zaman firaun, Laut Merah merupakan jantung perdagangan rempah dunia.
Sekarang, laut tersebut menjadi urat nadi global yang penting, memberi asupan bagi permintaan hidrokarbon untuk negara-negara Barat dan memfasilitasi aliran barang antara pasar-pasar Eropa dan Asia yang bertumbuh pesat.
Lebih dari 10% perdagangan dunia melalui perairan ini setiap tahunnya, angka tersebut akan meningkat karena Mesir telah melipatgandakan kapasitas Terusan Suez.
Meski demikian, dengan sedikit pengecualian, sebagian besar kekayaan modern yang dihasilkan oleh perdagangan itu berlayar cepat, hanya meninggalkan sedikit jejak.
Tidak berarti kondisinya harus tetap seperti ini.
Upaya regional untuk memfasilitasi perdagangan dan membangun infrastruktur memiliki potensi repositioning bagi negara-negara di sekitar Laut Merah sebagai tujuan investasi global dan perdagangan internasional.
Kawasan Laut Merah, terdiri dari 20 negara yang menggunakan jalur perairan tersebut sebagai koridor perdagangan utama, merupakan emerging market terbesar, tercepat, dan yang paling sedikit dieksploitasi di dunia.
Akan tetapi, meskipun angka-angka tersebut menjanjikan, kawasan ini memiliki potensi berkembang lebih maju.
Perkiraan jangka panjang tentang peran perdagangan global di kawasan Laut Merah relatif datar.
Menurut HSBC, sebagai contoh, andil perdagangan antara Timur Tengah dengan Afrika berkisar 10% dari total angka perdagangan dunia pada tahun 2050, hanya bertambah sedikit dari angka 9% sekarang.
Ada beberapa alasan yang membenarkan estimasi konservatif ini.
Mayoritas negara di Timur Tengah dan Afrika memiliki infrastruktur yang terbatas; hanya terdapat beberapa pelabuhan laut dalam di Laut Merah ataupun sekitarnya.
Tingkat pembangunan ekonomi amat beragam, dari negara-negara anggota Gulf Cooperation Council, sampai negara ekonomi berkembang di kawasan Afrika sub-Sahara dan Afrika Timur.
Dan sayangnya, perbedaan politik dan budaya tidak selalu mendorong kerja sama lintas batas.
Inisiatif yang dikoordinasi untuk memfasilitasi perdagangan di kawasan Laut Merah akan memiliki dampak signifikan untuk pembangunan di masa depan, meningkatkan PDB 10%  menjadi $6.6 miliar dan meningkatkan perdagangan hampir 35% menjadi $6.3 triliun menurut penelitian yang dilakukan King Abdullah Economic City.
Dengan menyediakan akses yang lebih besar bagi perdagangan internasional untuk usaha kecil dan menengah, yang merupakan pendorong utama pertumbuhan dan penciptaan lapangan kerja, inisiatif tersebut akan mendiversifikasi ekspor dan secara signifikan memperkuat kontribusi lokal dalam rantai pasokan global.
Perwujudan inisiatif ini memerlukan peningkatan kemampuan logistik di kawasan secara signifikan.
Logistics Performance Index (LPI) Bank Dunia memberi skor di bawah 2,6 bagi kebanyakan negara-negara Laut Merah dari skala 5,0.
Pasar yang paling logistically-friendly di kawasan tersebut, Uni Emirat Arab (UEA), mendapat skor 3,54 dan menjadikan UEA berada di peringkat 20% teratas.
Sektor swasta harus menjadi lini terdepan dalam upaya pembangunan infrastruktur dan rantai logistik yang membentuk tulang punggung perdagangan global, menggunakan teknologi dan sistem yang memaksimalkan efisiensi, dan menyediakan pelatihan dan keahlian untuk meningkatkan kinerja.
Proses ini sendiri akan menciptakan lapangan kerja, membuka jalur karier, dan meningkatkan akses pendidikan di seluruh kawasan.
Pemerintah pusat juga harus berpartisipasi, merampingkan pengendalian bea cukai, merancang kebijakan pengelolaan perbatasan, dan peraturan perdagangan regional.
Permulaan yang baik adalah perumusan Perjanjian Perdagangan Laut Merah (Red Sea Trade Agreement), serupa dengan Kerjasama Trans-Pasifik (Trans-Pacific Partnership), yang menggarisbawahi upaya-upaya khusus untuk mengurangi biaya perdagangan lintas batas dan mekanisme untuk mengatasi sengketa antara penanam modal dan pemerintah.
Inisiatif potensial lainnya adalah pembentukan bank infrastruktur regional, mengadopsi model Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank yang dibuat Cina.
Lembaga tersebut akan memfasilitasi distribusi modal yang efisien untuk pembangunan infrastruktur di seluruh kawasan, memperkuat kemampuan perdagangan nasional dan mendorong pertumbuhan perekonomian yang berkelanjutan. 
Kawasan Laut Merah memiliki peluang unik untuk berkembang menjadi pusat keunggulan (center of excellence) global dalam memfasilitasi perdagangan, memperkuat ikatan perekonomian di kawasan dan membangun mesin pertumbuhan baru bagi perekonomian global.
Satu hal yang dibutuhkan adalah kehendak untuk mewujudkannya.
Reducing Inequality and Poverty in America
CAMBRIDGE – With a new American president and Congress taking office just six months from now, the time has come to rethink the government’s programs aimed at helping the poor.
The current election season has reflected widespread concern about the issue of inequality.
Reducing poverty, rather than penalizing earned success, is the right focus for dealing with it.
The United States government now spends more than $600 billion a year on programs to help the poor.
That’s about 4% of America’s total GDP.
Half of those outlays are for health programs, including Medicaid and the health-insurance subsidies under the 2010 Affordable Care Act (so-called Obamacare).
The other half are for a complex range of programs including food stamps, housing subsidies, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and cash relief.
To put that 4% of GDP in perspective, the federal government’s total revenue from the personal income tax is less than 9% of GDP, implying that nearly half is spent on these means-tested programs.
Spending on these programs also exceeds that for defense (3.3% of GDP) and the 3.3% of GDP spent on all other nondefense discretionary programs.
But, despite this large expenditure, the proportion of the population living in poverty is officially estimated at 15%, about the same as it was 50 years ago.
Experts agree, however, that the government’s poverty measure doesn’t correctly reflect the progress that has occurred, because official statistics focus only on cash income and ignore almost all of the government’s transfer payments.
Many of those who are poor, or would otherwise be poor, are also aided by Social Security benefits for retirees and survivors, and by Medicare for the disabled and those over age 65.
Because eligibility for benefits under these programs does not depend on income or wealth, the amounts spent for these programs are not included in outlays targeted at the poor.
The existing approach to helping the poor needs reform.
Myriad overlapping programs with different eligibility rules are difficult for the poor to navigate, create bad work incentives, and are unnecessarily costly to taxpayers.
The largest of the ten major means-tested programs is the food subsidy program, now called SNAP (Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program).
Some 46 million people, about one-seventh of the US population, receive monthly benefits totaling $75 billion per year.
Despite its widespread use, the government estimates that only about 70% of those who are eligible receive benefits.
Eligibility to receive SNAP benefits is limited to households with incomes below 130% of the poverty level, about $1,700 a month for a family of three.
Because a decision by a second adult to work could eliminate eligibility, the program discourages employment and reduces earned incomes.
Although SNAP is described as a nutrition program, the average benefit of $130 per month is far less than these low-income households spend on food.
The program is thus really equivalent to a cash transfer.
As such, it dominates the program launched by President Bill Clinton to provide cash assistance with significant restrictions.
When Clinton declared in 1996 that he would “end welfare as we know it,” he worked with Congress to create the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program, which requires recipients to work and limits their lifetime eligibility to 60 months.
As a result of these conditions, the $17 billion program has declined in scale and has a participation rate of less than 50% percent of eligible households.
How should programs for the poor be changed to increase participation and avoid adverse effects on work incentives?
One bad idea that is getting a surprising amount of favorable attention is the so-called Universal Income Benefit: providing enough money to all households (below the age of 65) to keep them above the poverty line, even if they had no other income.
The amount given to each household would depend on the number of adults and children, but not on the household’s income or wealth.
This unconditional transfer would solve the problem of lifting all Americans out of poverty.
But it would be impossibly expensive.
Even if it replaced all of the means-tested programs for the poor other than the health programs, its net cost would exceed $1.5 trillion a year, or more than 9% of GDP.
To pay for that without raising the deficit would require doubling the personal income tax.
So the Universal Income Benefit is definitely a non-starter.
The best way to help the poor is the negative income tax plan originally proposed by both Milton Friedman (the conservative economist at the University of Chicago) and James Tobin (the liberal economist at Yale University).
All households below the age of 65 would receive an amount of money that would keep them out of poverty if they had no other income; but the amount of the transfer would decline gradually as their household income rose.
Above a certain threshold, the household would pay an income tax as they do today; below that level, the “tax” would be negative.
The rate at which the transfer declines would be set to limit adverse incentives while protecting the household’s living standard.
The health-care programs for the poor would continue.
While there is no perfect solution to the difficult problem of dealing with poverty, some solutions are better – often much better – than others.
The negative income tax may be the best way possible to achieve simplicity, inclusiveness, and moderate taxpayer cost.
The Referendum Charade
NEW YORK – Referendums are all the rage in Europe.
In June, British voters will decide whether the United Kingdom should remain in the European Union.
The Hungarian government has called for a referendum on accepting its quota of refugees set by the EU.
Hungary’s prime minister, Viktor Orbán, has already said that Hungary would resist letting them in.
“All the terrorists are basically migrants,” he said.
The referendum is likely to go his way.
Perhaps the oddest referendum will take place in April in the Netherlands, following a successful petition campaign.
The question put to Dutch citizens will be whether the Netherlands should sign up to an association agreement between the EU and Ukraine.
All other EU member countries have already agreed, but without the Dutch it cannot be ratified.
One might think that the details of trade agreements and tariff barriers with Ukraine would baffle most Dutch voters, and one might also wonder why they should care enough to hold a referendum.
But referendums fit the populist mood that is sweeping many countries, from Donald Trump’s America to Orbán’s Hungary.
Referendums are an example of what is known as “direct democracy.”
The voice of the people (or rather, the People) is not heard through their elected representatives in government, but directly through plebiscites.
When Winston Churchill suggested in 1945 that the British people should vote in a referendum on whether to continue the wartime coalition government, the Labour leader Clement Attlee opposed it.
He called referendums un-British and a “device of dictators and demagogues.”
Attlee was right.
Even though referendums are sometimes used in representative democracies, as when British voters elected to stay in the European Economic Community in 1975, dictators are much keener on them.
After invading Austria in 1938, Hitler asked the Austrians in a plebiscite whether they wanted to be annexed by Germany.
It was a choice they could not really refuse.
Despots like to be backed by plebiscites, because they do not only pretend to represent the People; they are the People.
The vogue for referendums today reflects distrust of political representatives.
Normally, in a liberal democracy, we vote for men and women expecting them to study and decide on issues that most ordinary citizens have neither the time nor the knowledge to deal with themselves.
Trade agreements are typically something that voters would not be asked to concern themselves with directly.
A referendum is not usually an accurate sounding of people’s rational faculties or a test of their expertise.
Referendums are about gut feelings, which can be easily manipulated by demagogues.
That is why demagogues like them.
So far, the Brexit debate in Britain has been almost entirely emotional, focusing on the historical greatness of Britain, the horrors of foreign tyrannies, or, conversely, fears of what might happen if the status quo were to be upset.
Very few British voters have a clue about how the European Commission actually works, or the role of the European Council, but most have some feeling about Britain standing alone against Hitler, or the prospect of being “swamped” by immigrants.
Usually, in a referendum, people decide on where they stand for reasons that have little to do with the question put to them.
Some people in Britain might choose to leave the EU just because they don’t like Prime Minister David Cameron, who is in favor of staying in.
Voters in the Netherlands and France voted against the proposed EU Constitution in 2005.
Very few had probably ever read the Constitution; it is in fact an unreadable document. The “no” vote stemmed from general discontent with political elites associated with “Brussels.”
To some extent, this was understandable – and not without justification.
EU negotiations are complex and opaque to most people, and EU institutions are remote.
No wonder many citizens feel that they have lost control over their political affairs.
Democratic national governments look more and more impotent, and the EU is not a democracy.
The desire for referendums is not only a sign of internal national divisions; it is yet another symptom of a global populist demand to “take back our country.”
This may be mostly delusional (outside the EU, Britain may actually have less power over its fate than if it stays in), but the crisis of confidence needs to be taken seriously.
After all, even if referendums are often frivolous, their consequences are not.
What happens in Ukraine is important.
Britain’s exit from the EU could have devastating results not only for the UK, but for the rest of Europe, too.
Hungary’s successful example of refusing to cooperate in solving the refugee crisis could provoke other countries to follow suit.
The fundamental problem is that a large number of people feel unrepresented.
Old party politics, governed by old elites working traditional networks of influence, no longer give many citizens a sense of participating in a democracy.
The extraordinary influence of a handful of billionaires in the US, and the lack of transparency in EU politics, aggravate this problem.
Direct democracy will not reestablish people's confidence in their political representatives.
But if a greater degree of trust is not restored, power will go to leaders who claim to speak in the People’s voice.
And nothing good ever came from that.
Reforming Japan’s Constitution
“Reform with no sacred cows” was Junichiro Koizumi’s slogan when he became prime minister five years ago, and no cow here is more sacred than our “peace” constitution.
So it should be no surprise that, as Koizumi moves toward the end of his second and final term in office, his efforts to reform the constitution to allow Japan more effectively to defend world peace are gathering pace.
In mid-April, the Constitution Review committee of Japan’s House of Representatives issued a final report on the fundamental problems facing Japan’s Constitution and submitted it to the Chair of House of the Diet.
Soon the House of Councillors will submit its final report.
Moreover, concrete discussions on constitutional reform are underway within both the ruling Liberal Democratic Party (with Koizumi himself in charge) and the opposition Democratic Party.
The private sector and media outlets like the influential Yomiuri Shimbun newspaper have also joined in.
The Liberal Democrats aim to have their draft constitutional amendments ready for the 50th anniversary of the party’s founding this November.
Although almost everyone concedes that some amendments to the constitution are necessary, agreement on what needs to be done has been difficult to reach.
Indeed, the Liberal Democrats are as divided as everyone else.
In addition to these divisions, there are problems concerning how to amend the constitution.
New legislation will be needed to enable amendments to the constitution, and this will take time and even more debate.
Yet the pressure for fundamental change – particularly of Article 9, which putatively pledges that Japan will never maintain armed forces – is such that there is a real chance that these obstacles can and will be overcome.
Fundamental change, indeed, is needed as soon as possible, because current interpretations of the constitution have consistently distorted Japan’s security and defense policies.
Across Japan, there is a growing view that some of these policies cannot wait for constitutional amendment.
Up to now, issues related to national defense have been regulated by the administrative judgments of the time or by Diet resolutions based on the prevailing interpretation of Article 9.
But this ad-hoc approach has been, and remains, a recipe for paralysis.
The myriad rulings that have resulted from this process have left the exercise of national defense without any clear position under the Constitution and impede Japan from exercising its “collective self-defense” rights and treaty obligations with its allies (principally the United States).
Tortured reasoning about phrases like “use of force” or “exclusively defense-oriented policy” amounts to an open invitation to confusion, both in the military and to countries in the region.
And the so-called “three principles on arms exports” have placed absurd limits on what may be sold or supplied abroad, as even flying boats used for sea rescue have been viewed as banned from export.
Given the current regional security environment– international terrorism tied to local, Asian-based terrorists, various challenges to the security of vital sea lanes, North Korea’s search for nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles, and China’s rapid enhancement of its naval power–, Asia today is far less stable and more complex than it was when Japan's constitution was written.
By revising the country’s National Defense Program Guideline (conventionally called an Outline) last December, Koizumi’s government began the process of clarifying some of these debilitating ambiguities.
The Guideline lifted some of the more foolish limits on arms exports by ending the “all-out prohibition policy” maintained since the Miki Administration of 1976.
For example, it clearly determined that the ongoing Japanese-US joint technical research to develop and produce the SM-3 sea-based ballistic missile defense system is an exception.
More generally, the government may now review requests for weaponry from friendly governments on a case-by-case basis, according to whether the sale risks instigating or fueling international conflicts.
As a result, the sale or supply of used or new surface combat vessels by the Japan Coast Guard or even Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force (JMSDF) to ASEAN countries, say, Malaysia, Indonesia or Singapore, to help them fight maritime terrorism and piracy more effectively will now likely be permitted.
Supplying European countries as well ASEAN countries with JMSDF flying boats for sea rescue, patrol, and fire fighting will also now likely be approved.
These favorable and appropriate actions will allow Japan, for the first time in its postwar history, to meet the international community’s requests in a timely way.
Yet, without fundamental constitutional reform, Japan’s position in Asia and the world will remain anomalous.
It should be remembered that, after the US, Japan is the largest contributor to the United Nations, and to its peacekeeping budget.
Yet its constitution severely constrains its ability to send combat units for the Security Council’s peacekeeping operations.
Japan needs to be able to back up the Security Council with men, and hence share the political risk, as well as the cost, of the UN’s efforts to maintain world peace.
President Xi’s Singapore Lessons
NEW YORK – China is at a crucial point today, as it was in 1978, when the market reforms launched by Deng Xiaoping opened its economy to the world – and as it was again in the early 1990’s, when Deng’s famous “southern tour” reaffirmed the country’s development path.
Throughout this time, examples and lessons from other countries have been important.
Deng was reportedly substantially influenced by an early visit to Singapore, where accelerated growth and prosperity had come decades earlier.
Understanding other developing countries’ successes and shortcomings has been – and remains – an important part of China’s approach to formulating its growth strategy.
Like Singapore, Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan in their first few decades of modern growth, China has been ruled by a single party.
Singapore’s People’s Action Party (PAP) remains dominant, though that appears to be changing.
The others evolved into multi-party democracies during the middle-income transition.
China, too, has now reached this critical last leg of the long march to advanced-country status in terms of economic structure and income levels.
Singapore should continue to be a role model for China, despite its smaller size.
The success of both countries reflects many contributing factors, including a skilled and educated group of policymakers supplied by a meritocratic selection system, and a pragmatic, disciplined, experimental, and forward-looking approach to policy.
The other key lesson from Singapore is that single-party rule has retained popular legitimacy by delivering inclusive growth and equality of opportunity in a multi-ethnic society, and by eliminating corruption of all kinds, including cronyism and excessive influence for vested interests.
What Singapore’s founder, Lee Kwan Yew, and his colleagues and successors understood is that the combination of single-party rule and corruption is toxic.
If you want the benefits of the former, you cannot allow the latter.&#160;&#160;
Coherence, long time horizons, appropriate incentives, strong “navigational” skills, and decisiveness are desirable aspects of continuity in governance, especially in a meritocratic system managing complex structural shifts.
To protect that and maintain public support for the investments and policies that sustain growth, Singapore needed to prevent corruption from gaining a foothold, and to establish consistency in the application of rules.
Lee did that, with the PAP supplying what a full formal system of public accountability would have provided.
China, too, most likely wants to retain, at least for a while, the benefits of single-party rule, and delay the transition to “messier” governance influenced by multiple voices.
In fact, a pluralistic system is already evolving under the umbrella of the Chinese Communist Party – a process that may eventually lead to citizens gaining an institutionalized voice in public policy.
For now, however, those representative elements that have been added incrementally are not powerful enough to overcome the growing corruption and excessive influence of vested interests.
To maintain single-party legitimacy – and thus the ability to govern – those narrower interests must be overridden in favor of the general interest.
That is the challenge that China’s new leadership faces.
If China’s leaders succeed, they can then have a sensible and nuanced debate about the evolving role of the state in their economy, a debate on the merits.
Many insiders and external advisers believe that the state’s role must change (not necessarily decline) to create the dynamic innovative economy that is key to navigating the middle-income transition successfully.
But there remain many areas in which further debate and choice are needed.
Lee Kwan Yew in Singapore and Mao Zedong and Deng in China gained their peoples’ trust as founders and initial reformers.
But that trust dissipates; succeeding generations of leaders do not inherit it completely, and must earn it.
That is all the more reason for them to heed the lessons of history.
China’s new leaders should first reassert the Party’s role as defender of the general interest by creating an environment in which narrow interests, seeking to protect their growing influence and wealth, do not taint complex policy choices.
They must demonstrate that the Party’s power, legitimacy, and substantial assets are held in trust for the benefit of all Chinese, above all by fostering a pattern of inclusive growth and a system of equal opportunity with a meritocratic foundation.
And then they should return to the task of governing in a complex domestic and global environment.
There are times when muddling through – or, in the Chinese version, crossing the river by feeling the stones – is the right governing strategy, and there are times when a bold resetting of values and direction is required.
Successful leaders know what time it is.
Feeling the stones may seem like the safest option for China’s next president, Xi Jinping, and China’s other new leaders; in fact, it is the most dangerous.
The only safe option is a radical realignment of the Party with the general interest.
The issue, then, is whether the reformers who carry the real spirit of the 1949 revolution will win the battle for equitable and inclusive growth.
The optimistic (and I believe realistic) view is that the Chinese people, through a variety of channels, including social media, will weigh in, empowering reformers to push through a progressive agenda.
Time will tell.
But it is hard to overstate the outcome’s importance to the rest of the world.
Virtually all developing countries – and, increasingly, the advanced countries as well – will be affected one way or another as they, too, struggle to achieve stable and sustainable growth and employment patterns.
Reforming Repo Rules
CAMBRIDGE – Sometimes, we just don’t learn.
After the financial crisis, the United States enacted the Dodd-Frank Act to overhaul American financial regulation, with the aim of reducing the risk of another financial meltdown.
But it did nothing to reform “repo” lending – arguably the weakest link in the financial chain.
And we have just seen another major financial firm collapse as a result.
A repo, or repurchase agreement, is a sale of a security (often a US Treasury obligation) that the seller promises to buy back later – often the day following the original sale – at a slightly higher price.
The repo buyer thus lends to the seller, with the difference between the immediate “spot” price of the obligation and the “forward” repurchase price representing the interest on the loan.
These repo loans give firms – typically financial firms – access to vast pools of cheap financing (often emanating from US money-market funds).
It is a market measured in the trillions of dollars.
MF Global, the global financial firm that filed for bankruptcy in October, is just the most recent noteworthy example of how repo lending can go wrong.
Like Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers before they failed, MF Global had huge short-term, repo-based debt.
Bear failed in 2008 as its mounting real-estate losses prevented it from quickly rolling over its repo debt, which made up fully one-quarter of its balance sheet.
Then, a year later, Lehman failed with one-third of its balance sheet in repo.
Repo debt seems to have made up an astounding one-half of MF Global’s balance sheet.
The rules of the financial game privilege repo financing over other kinds, and Dodd-Frank did nothing to fix this.
First, normal bankruptcy rules don’t apply to repos.
Second, much repo financing flows into large risk-taking financial firms like MF Global, Lehman, and Bear Stearns through money-market funds, which must invest very short-term, because their depositors want immediate liquidity.
In the US, the usual bankruptcy rules allow regulators and courts to hold a bankrupt company’s operations together long enough to determine if the firm is worth more dead than alive.
The law stops creditors from grabbing assets after the company enters bankruptcy, and it recalls many payments made to favored creditors in the 90 days before bankruptcy was declared, so that all creditors facilitate the firm’s survival.
Repo creditors’ exemption from these rules privileges them over the failed firm’s other creditors.
The original rationale was that allowing repo creditors to cash out fast would reduce runs, contagion, and credit freezes.
But the opposite seems to be the case: if the regular rules applied, repo players would be more careful.
They would be wary of firms like MF Global with massive short-term liabilities and only a thin equity buffer to absorb losses.
They would charge more, curtail some short-term lending, or both, and they would insist that firms like MF Global maintain a larger equity cushion.
If they charged more, other capital sources – long-term debt and equity – would become more attractive.
The result is that the economy gets too much overnight repo, and the rest of us pay a price for it, because favoring such short-term debt means that more financial firms like Bear, Lehman, and MF Global fail.
True, failed firms’ creditors, owners, and managers bear the brunt of the losses initially.
But when systemically vital firms overdose on repo, we all pay, first as taxpayers when the government bails them out, and then as we suffer from the resulting economic disruption and downturn.
The second financial rule that privileges repos is that money-market funds must keep their portfolios extremely liquid, because their customers draw checks on their deposits.
The cash therefore goes into short-term investments – often via repos to financial firms with risky investments.
We cannot do without this short-term financing channel, but it need not be as big as it is.
When shocks hit a fragile financial system, as in 2007 and 2008, the government has reason to guarantee the money market funds, as US authorities did.
These implicit government guarantees attract more money into these financial channels from nonguaranteed channels, and more “hot money” flows into firms like MF Global, Lehman, and Bear via repo.
There is no easy way out of this problem, but we must try to find one.
One improvement would be to reform the bankruptcy rules that favor repos.
Another would be to increase financial institutions’ capital requirements.