Yet Greece's creditors have continued to ignore these developments.
This is clearly not sustainable – a point that former Director of the International Monetary Fund's Europe Department Reza Moghadam recognized when he recently called for writing off half of Greece's debt, provided an agreement can be reached on credible growth-enhancing structural reforms.
Social sustainability is essential for long-term economic success.
A country cannot prosper if its educational system lacks the resources and capacity to prepare its children to thrive in the digital economy.
Likewise, a reform program cannot be implemented if inequality, poverty, and social frustration strengthen extremist political parties, such as Greece's overtly fascist Golden Dawn party or France's far-right, anti-Europe National Front, which now boasts 25% electoral support.
When times are tough, immigrants and minorities become easy targets.
As Joseph Stiglitz recently pointed out, it is unlikely that Hitler would have come to power in Germany if the unemployment rate was not 30% at the time.
It does not help when some of those trapped in the poor ghettos surrounding major cities – however small a minority – become tempted by violence and fall prey to terrorist recruiters.
Regardless of what today's corporate profit reports and stock indices may show, a country cannot achieve inclusive, sustainable success – in economic or human terms – if these fundamental social issues are not adequately addressed.
Of course, fiscal caution cannot be abandoned; after all, if governments or the private sector were to spend borrowed or newly minted money freely, the result would simply be more crises, which would hurt the poor most.
But social sustainability must be an integral part of a country's economic program, not an afterthought.
The persistent tendency to pay lip service to social sustainability, while implementing economic programs focused on unrelenting austerity, is a leading cause of political instability in Europe.
Though reform programs aimed at building viable macroeconomic frameworks remain essential, they must include strong provisions for countercyclical policies to offset the “paradox of thrift" (the tendency to save more during a recession, undermining economic growth).
When aggregate demand falls short of aggregate supply, governments must increase public spending.
Moreover, governments that are now focused narrowly on microeconomic issues need to devote the same level of attention and commitment to designing and implementing social policies that focus explicitly on ensuring the livelihoods, health, education, and housing of the most vulnerable segments of the population.
And, using new technology to analyze large amounts of data, they should boost the efficiency of social programs, while encouraging the active participation of concerned citizens.
The European Commission and the IMF have admitted their errors – not only the inaccurate macroeconomic forecasts on which the Greek program was based, but also the decision not to account for social sustainability – and have acknowledged that the program has not produced the expected results.
Yet, for some reason, Greece's creditors refuse to negotiate with the new government (which enjoys strong domestic support) to develop a new program that incorporates debt relief, a lower fiscal surplus, and structural reforms that support growth and promote social cohesion.
This must not continue.
The last five years have underscored the challenge of achieving financial stability.
But political and social stability have proved to be even more elusive.
Policymakers must direct just as much effort and resources toward realizing social sustainability as they do toward getting the Basel III financial reforms right.
Europe's future prosperity – and its global role – depends on it.
Europe’s Opportunity in Hollande
BRUSSELS – Rarely has an election resonated so widely across the European Union as the French presidential ballot has done.
Rarely has a leadership change in one EU member state created expectations of a real policy shift.
Remarkably, a new European demos and public sphere are emerging from the economic crisis.
Europeans are recognizing how interdependent they are.
One country’s failures can threaten the entire European economy, and can call into question the fruits of 60 years of integration.
Peace, solidarity, and prosperity are not irreversible achievements; only 27 countries working together can guarantee them.
François Hollande’s victory is a fresh chance for Europe.
It should spell the end of a policy oriented exclusively towards austerity, which has paralyzed our economies and divided the EU.&nbsp;The new French president’s commitment to a European growth policy has brought hope to citizens, and should not alarm anyone – certainly not the financial markets.
Hollande’s plans for a growth initiative fall on fertile ground, especially in the European Parliament, which has repeatedly called for such measures.
I am delighted that this message is increasingly echoed by the political mainstream, including most recently by European Central Bank President Mario Draghi.
Likewise, the European Commission is working on a “growth pact” to be discussed by EU leaders in June.
Indeed, Europe needs a master plan to avoid a tailspin of recession, growing unemployment, and weakening banking systems.
A new master plan for growth would not be about printing money.
Fiscal discipline remains essential, as are deep structural reforms.
The growth pact can be properly financed by new sources of revenue, such as a financial-transaction tax and joint project bonds for infrastructure investment, or by curbing tax evasion and tax fraud and eliminating tax havens, as well as by more efficient and intelligent use of structural funds.
What is to be done?
First, targeted investment should be given priority.
The European Investment Bank would be a good vehicle – in addition to new project bonds – to boost spending on major infrastructure projects (for example, in the energy sector).
The EIB could be given significantly more resources to boost its loan programs.
In the longer-term, we should revisit the idea of joint Eurobonds.
Channeling EU structural funds towards innovation is essential, given that spending on research and development is alarmingly low compared to our global partners.
Fundamental reform of the Common Agricultural Policy should not remain a taboo.
Indeed, the CAP is ensuring neither sustainable agriculture nor decent incomes for all farmers.
Undoubtedly, tough negotiations lie ahead on this front, including with Hollande.
Second, young people must be a top priority.
Our responsibility here is twofold: to put growth back on track, but also to respond immediately to the human tragedy that has hit our youth.
The eurozone’s unemployment rate, at 10.9%, is at its highest level since the euro was introduced, and young people everywhere, as the first to suffer the consequences of the crisis, are paying a disproportionally high price.
Youth unemployment in Spain, for example, is above 50%.
We cannot afford to sacrifice a generation, or, rather, risk creating a lost generation that could destroy Europe’s social fabric and stability.
We need an immediate contingency plan: invest to finance job training, improve educational opportunities, and, crucially, create incentives for employers to hire young people.
The ECB has been offering long-term loans to banks at a favorable rate.
This money should be loaned out to small and medium-size enterprises, which are the lifeblood of Europe’s economy.
The EU also needs common initiatives to replace piece-meal bilateral agreements on tax evasion and tax havens, which undermine the goal of a fair society.
Third, member states should not cut the EU budget indiscriminately during negotiations on the Union's long-term spending plan for 2014-2020.
If we are serious about a master plan for growth, we need to provide the necessary means.
The EU budget is an investment vehicle that boosts economic growth and creates jobs.
It finances crucial pan-EU transport and energy links. It helps to foster innovation and boost research and development.
The EU budget leverages investment, allows for economies of scale, and cannot run a deficit.
The EU’s lack of solidarity, imagination, courage, unity, and vision in recent years has made Europe a symbol of division for some, if not many.
We cannot let this continue.
Hollande’s election offers us a valuable opportunity to meet the challenges that the EU faces.
Alternatively, we can allow growing poverty, fear, and anger to give rise to xenophobia and racism, and thus place at risk the EU’s greatest accomplishments.
But let us be optimistic.
It is not too late.
Europe can still emerge stronger from its current economic woes.&nbsp;The EU is changing direction at last, and Europe’s leaders will find an energetic partner in the European Parliament.
Europe’s Paradoxical Parliament
What do members of the European Parliament (MEPs) actually do?
Most of the 375 million or so people eligible to vote in the European elections on June 4-7 probably have only a hazy idea, or none at all, which explains why voter turnout throughout the European Union is likely to be disastrously low.
Thirty years ago, when the first elections to the parliament were held, almost two-thirds of the electorate voted, but over the years, participation has dropped steadily.
This year it may be 30%.
Europe’s politicians are by and large proud of the EU and the way it has both grown and deepened.
But it is also the EU’s growing complexity that is at the root of voters’ waning enthusiasm, so their indifference is a matter for serious concern.
The European elections are themselves curious and unsatisfactory; there are no obvious EU-wide issues that people can vote for or against, and, with the average MEP’s constituency numbering well over half a million people, the vote is not a test of personal popularity, either.
In most parts of Europe, the elections will be an opportunity for protest votes on national issues.
Paradoxically, though, great deal hangs on the elections’ outcome.
The number of seats won by the socialists and centre-right parties is likely to influence the make-up of the next European Commission – and thus the EU’s political agenda until 2014.
But you wouldn’t know this from the low level of media interest.
Most journalists, like national electorates, have little understanding of the significant shift in Europe’s political decision-making over the last 20 years.
They hang on to the outdated notion that their national parliaments make all key decisions, when in reality some four-fifths of the policies that determine Europe’s future are taken in Brussels and then rubber-stamped by national parliamentarians.
A glance at any EU member state’s parliamentary calendar shows that lawmaking there is largely confined to domestic issues.
The specialist MEPs, on the other hand, use their expertise and their steadily increasing powers to exert a good deal of influence on EU legislation.
But this does not mean that the European Parliament is a “real” parliament.
It can’t raise taxes, declare war, or sack a government (even though in theory it can dismiss all the members of the European Commission en masse, the so-called “nuclear option” that is unlikely ever to be used).
More to the point, perhaps, the European Parliament doesn’t really work on the same basis of left-right politics as national parliaments do; it deals in practicalities more than ideologies.
For all that, the European Parliament’s importance goes far beyond its members’ technical expertise on complex issues, or its usefulness as a democratic fig leaf for an EU decision-making process that is dominated by inter-governmental horse-trading.
The parliament has been able to claw greater power for itself because it is the only mechanism Europe has for questioning and challenging EU policy proposals, and ironing out the sometimes clumsy and high-handed diktats of Brussels’ officialdom.
Unfortunately, however, the European Parliament is fairly inept at selling itself to public opinion.
A recent Gallup poll showed that 36% of people questioned in all 27 EU countries no longer trust the parliament, with the only consolation being that even more, 37%, now mistrust the European Commission.
Of those who said they wouldn’t be voting in this year’s European elections, 64% cited “lack of information” as the reason, with 62% complaining that their vote “wouldn’t change anything.”
This feeling of ignorance coupled with powerlessness is not entirely the European Parliament’s fault.
The combination of high politics and grinding technical detail makes EU policymaking a much less interesting spectacle than national politics, and of course there’s the added problem that so many of the players are unknown foreigners.
But, even when the parliament does make an effort to connect with voters, the ponderous bureaucratic culture of its permanent officials tends to spoil things.
Last year, the parliament launched a lamentably amateurish Web-TV broadcasting service whose large budget was spent not on good programming but on doing everything in all the EU’s official languages.
So what is to be done?
Many of the 736 EU parliamentarians are unsung heroes who risk being seen more and more as a problem rather than a solution to the EU’s ills.
Rather than tinkering, perhaps the EU should boldly create an American-style bicameral system by turning the parliament into a House of Representatives and electing a Senate to replace the Council of Ministers, with two senators per member state.
But that is probably far too revolutionary for an EU that took 50 years to fashion today’s unsatisfactorily hybrid decision-making structures.
Europe’s Power to Lead
CAMBRIDGE &#45;&#45; At this year’s World Economic Forum in Davos, the buzz was about Asia’s growing power.
One Asian analyst argued that by 2050, there will be three world powers: the United States, China, and India.
He did not mention Europe, but underestimating Europe’s power is a mistake.
Yes, Europe currently punches below its weight.
It is fragmented, peaceful, and normative in a world of hard power, but part of the world is not about military power.
The use of force among advanced industrial democracies is virtually unthinkable.
In their relations with each other , such countries are all from Venus, to paraphrase Robert Kagan, and here Europe’s focus on law and institutions is an asset.
As for other parts of the world, a recent Pew poll found that many Europeans would like Europe to play a larger role, but to balance American military power would require a doubling or tripling of defense spending, and few Europeans are interested in such an increase.
Nevertheless, a smart strategy for Europe will require greater investments in hard power.
The picture for Europe, however, is not as bleak as pessimists assume.
Power is the ability to get the outcomes one wants, and the resources that produce such behavior depend upon the context.
In functional terms, power is distributed like a three-dimensional chess game.
On the top board are military relations among states, with the US the world’s only superpower with global reach.
Here the world is uni-polar.
On the middle board are economic relations, where the world is already multi-polar.
Here, Europe acts as a union, and other countries like Japan and China play big roles.
The US cannot reach a trade agreement or settle anti-trust cases without the approval of the EU.
Or, to take another example, Europe was able to lead the drive to remove Paul Wolfowitz from the World Bank.
The bottom chessboard includes transnational relations outside the control of governments – everything from drugs to infectious diseases to climate change to terrorism.
On this board, power is chaotically distributed among non-state actors, and it makes no sense to call this world either uni-polar or multipolar.
Here, close civilian cooperation is important, for which Europe is well endowed.
European countries’ success in overcoming centuries of animosity, and the development of a large internal market, has given them a great deal of soft power.
At the Cold War’s end, East European countries did not try to form local alliances, as they did in the 1920’s, but looked toward Brussels to secure their future.
The first is the rise of Asia.
The big question will be China and its internal evolution.
China has lifted 400 million people out of poverty since 1990, but another 400 million still live on less than $2 per day.
Unlike India, China has not solved the problem of political participation.
If China replaces its eroded communism with nationalism or ensure social cohesion, the result could be a more aggressive foreign policy and unwillingness to deal with issues like climate change.
Or it may deal with its problems and become a “responsible stakeholder” in world politics.
Europe can contribute significantly to China’s integration into global norms and institutions.
In general, Europe and the US have more to fear from a weak China than they do from a wealthy China.
Political Islam and how it develops will be the second factor.
The struggle against extreme Islamist terrorism is not a “clash of civilizations,” but a civil war within Islam.
A radical minority is using violence to impose a simplified and ideological version on a mainstream with more diverse views.
While the largest number of Muslims live in Asia, they are influenced by the heart of this struggle in the Middle East, an area that has lagged behind the rest of the world in globalization, openness, institutions, and democratization.
Here Europe’s economic might and soft power have a lot to contribute.
More open trade, economic growth, education, development of civil society institutions, and gradual increases in political participation might help strengthen the mainstream over time, as could the way Muslims are treated in Europe and the US.
Equally important will be whether Western policies toward the Middle East satisfy mainstream Muslims or reinforce the radicals’ narrative of a war against Islam.
The third major determinant of which scenario prevails will be American power and how it is used.
The US will remain the most powerful country in 2020, but, paradoxically, the strongest state since the days of Rome will be unable to protect its citizens acting alone.
American military might is not adequate to deal with threats such as global pandemics, climate change, terrorism, and international crime.
These issues require cooperation in the provision of global public goods and the soft power of attracting support.
No part of the world shares more values or has a greater capacity to influence American attitudes and power than does Europe.
That suggests that the fourth political determinant of the future will be the evolution of European policies and power.
Europe’s Racist Schools
I am what many people call a “Gypsy.” I prefer the term “Roma.”
There are more than 10 million of us across Europe.
The vast majority of us live in Third World conditions – denied access to adequate housing, health care, and education.
I was born in a provincial town in Bulgaria in the late 1960’s, when, like the rest of Eastern Europe, the country was under Communist rule.
The Party recognized no ethnic minorities – we were all, formally, equal.
Indeed, we were so equal that the government gave many of us new, Bulgarian names.
One day, when I was a teenager named Husni, my name became Ivan.
But we were not equal.
Roma lived in segregated ghettos.
We were second-class citizens.
One of my clearest early childhood memories is of my father telling my younger sister and me, “Education is the key to success.”
He said, “If you want to be accepted as equals by Gadje [non-Roma], you must be better educated than they are.
This is not easy.
But if you succeed, this will change not only your life but also the lives of many of your people.”
Education is the only way out of the ghetto for many Roma.
But in societies like Bulgaria, where racism is rampant, Roma have to fight for equal schooling.
Most of the children I grew up with received an inferior education that did not train them for university or skilled jobs.
They are either unemployed or working as unskilled laborers in Bulgaria or in the black market abroad.
By contrast, in large part because of my father, I managed to complete high school, then medical school, and become a general practitioner.
By the early 1990’s, Bulgaria had changed.
The transition to democracy promised freedom and prosperity to all who had suffered in communism’s stranglehold.
Yet the Roma found themselves losers of the democratic transformation.
Their situation, always tenuous, dramatically worsened.
Their poor schooling left them ill equipped for the new economy.
The communist dogma was shattered, but so was the pretense that we were all equals in a homogenous society.
The government allowed employment discrimination to go unchecked, leaving the majority of Roma without jobs, and communities were plunged deeper into poverty.
I obtained a law degree to help advocate for members of my community.
Today, I live and work in Brussels, where I lead an organization that advises the European Union and national governments on Roma-related policies.
I support my family and have achieved fulfillment in my career.
But I am an exception.
It is because of the importance of education in making me an exception that I am so deeply troubled by a recent decision of the European Court of Human Rights.
The case was brought by 18 Roma children from the city of Ostrava in the Czech Republic who had been assigned to special remedial schools for the “mentally deficient.”
In Central and Eastern Europe, Roma are often unfairly placed in these special schools, which provide sub-par education that all but guarantees a life of poverty and manual labor.
I served as one of the lawyers for the children.
The evidence showed that more than half of the Roma children in Ostrava were placed in special schools, and that more than half of the population of special schools was Roma.
All told, Roma children in Ostrava are more than 27 times more likely than non-Roma to be placed in such schools.
This is not a unique situation.
Far from it.
The same disproportionate patterns of school assignment exist throughout much of Central and Eastern Europe.
As a United Nations expert body has declared, this is racial segregation, plain and simple.
But the Court was unmoved.
Its judgment recognized that the claimants raised “a number of serious arguments,” and that the education system in Ostrava perpetuated racial segregation.
But the Court ruled that, absent a showing of actual racial bias in the minds of testers and administrators – virtually impossible to prove – the pervasive reality of racial disadvantage was not unlawful.
In what could have been a landmark victory that would open the doors of opportunity for Europe’s Roma, the Strasbourg Court instead chose to keep Roma locked out of a decent education.
Its decision reverberates across the Continent – not just for the Roma, but for all who have a stake in promoting the values of tolerance and equality in a democratic Europe.
Anyone who believes in the rights of all children to quality education should be troubled by a decision so myopic.
For decades, racial segregation in European schools has stigmatized generations of Roma children as stupid and disabled.
The Court’s decision allows this brutal and systematic violation of fundamental rights to continue.
The Roma, and Europe, have suffered a great defeat.
Europe’s Russia Problem
NEW YORK – How should Europe react to the rise of a hostile Russia on its eastern flank?
Different countries have reacted differently, influenced by their historical experience and their economic interests.
Yet it is essential for the European Union to develop a unified policy, reconciling these divergent national interests and attitudes.
Europe cannot afford not to resist Russia’s geopolitical aggression, and it needs to be unified to have any chance of success.
Yet, the unified European policy must not be purely geopolitical, because if it were, the common interest would not be strong enough to override national interests.
Russia could divide and conquer as it is doing already.
In purely geopolitical terms, Russia holds the stronger hand.
Europe’s superiority lies in its values and principles as an open, democratic, peaceful, prosperous, and law-abiding society.
These values hold great attraction for the people in the former Soviet Union—and that includes the leaders as well as the masses, in spite of the fact that the West did not back up its values and principles with deeds in the past.
As a result, admiration of and aspiration to European values is mixed with disillusionment and resentment, and the Putin regime has been able to gather enthusiastic support by baiting the West and scoring well in the geopolitical game.
Nevertheless, Russia remains susceptible to Europe’s allure.
Historically, Russia always aspired to be part of Europe, and the Putin regime recognizes that it would pay a big price if it sought to return to the Soviet Union’s isolation.  
But Russia’s strengthened geopolitical position vis-à-vis Europe obscures grave weaknesses in other areas.
Its authoritarian political system stifles private enterprise and innovation.
The rule of law is absent, and much more effort is spent on extortion and rent collection than production.
Consequently, economic progress has not kept pace with the accumulation of oil revenues.
These deficiencies became accentuated by the decline in the price of oil.
Another great weakness is demography.
Russia has immense territory but only 140 million people.
A growing portion of the population consists of Muslim minorities with higher birthrates than ethnic Russians.
Overall population is expected to drop by 10 million in a decade.
Resource rich but sparsely populated Siberia is bordered by resource-deficient but teeming and rising China.
If the Central Asian republics are cut off from the West, they are liable to turn to China in order to avoid becoming totally dependent on Russia.
In the long run, Putin’s baiting of the West may turn out to be as self-defeating as Saakashvili’s baiting of Russia.
But in the short run there is a real danger that Russia will pursue its age-old aspiration of becoming part of Europe by seeking to become the dominant entity.
In these circumstances, Europe needs to pursue a two-pronged strategy.
On the one hand, it must protect itself against the geopolitical threat posed by a newly assertive and adventurous Russia.
On the other, it must seek to replace the rule of force with the rule of law, and geopolitics with the pursuit of democracy, open society, and international cooperation.
The European Union could not possibly forge a common policy without such a two-pronged approach.
There would be too many freeloaders and defectors in a purely geopolitical game, but in a two-pronged approach each member state could find its proper place.
The key to neutralizing the geopolitical advantage that Russia enjoys is to establish a unified energy policy with a Europe-wide regulatory authority which has precedence over national regulators and a Europe-wide distribution network.
This would deprive Russia of its ability to play one country against another, because a concession granted to one national distributor would immediately become available to customers in all the other countries.
Energy companies are beginning to realize this and becoming less resistant to a common European energy policy.
That would also serve another shared objective, namely helping to bring climate change under control.
The other prong, promoting the rule of law, international cooperation, and the principles of open society has to be pursued indirectly, by reforming the international financial system and by paying special attention to Russia’s near-abroad.
Ukraine, in particular, is in a perilous state, but financing public works that would create jobs in eastern Ukraine, where the steel industry is in distress, could make a major difference both politically and economically.
Georgia must also be helped to recover from the damage inflicted by the Russian invasion, but help should be contingent on the Saakashvili regime observing the principles of open society.
Russia cannot be helped directly because of its excessive reliance on arbitrary state power, but when Russia sees progress in international cooperation, particularly with China, it will not want to be left out in the cold.
Strengthening and supporting the former Soviet republics would serve both prongs of a unified EU policy towards Russia.
It would be against open society values if Russia were allowed to turn these countries into satellites just because it has superior military force.
And Europe has a geopolitical interest in keeping them open as sources of energy supply.
Europe’s Russia Question
BRUSSELS – Friend or foe, or something uneasily in-between?
That’s the question Europe is asking about Russia, and Russia about a newly aggressive Europe.
President Vladimir Putin’s choice of Dmitri Medvedev, Chairman of Gazprom, the gas company with an emerging stranglehold on European energy supplies, only throws this question into an even starker light.
Relations between Europe and Russia have been deteriorating for several years, but once manageable economic issues, including energy, are now being aggravated by much more volatile political differences.
The risk is a climate of undisguised hostility, with potentially greater costs than during the nadir of the Cold War.
The most obvious and imminent flashpoint is Kosovo.
The likelihood is that early next year most of the European Union’s member nations will recognize the Albanian-majority enclave on Serbia’s southern edge as an independent state.
This is certain to enflame not just Serbia, but also the Kremlin.
Then there are rising tensions over plans by the United States to based a missile defense system in Poland and the Czech Republic, as well as the growing likelihood that further NATO enlargement will include Georgia, the increasingly prosperous neighbor with which Russia has fractious relations.
Russia continues to fan secessionist flames there by encouraging the independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
Tempers are rising in both Russia and Europe, yet, paradoxically, when it comes to the major challenges they face, their interests are largely identical.
Both are threatened by Islamic extremism and growing unrest.
Both have much to lose if the Middle East erupts into fresh violence.
And both face serious demographic problems, given shrinking and aging populations, as well as the challenge of Asia’s rising superpowers.
The breakdown in relations has been gradual and undramatic – more a morose and resentful refusal to see each other’s point of view than a succession of rows.
This owes much to the humiliations that Russia suffered when the end of communism forced its economy to its knees, and to Western short-sightedness about Russia’s fundamental strengths and resilience.
The EU is as much to blame as the Kremlin.
For its part, Europe needs to mount a charm offensive to persuade Putin and Medvedev that Russia’s real interest is in improving bilateral relations.
Russia needs to collaborate on energy in ways that bring genuine security.
In the Middle East, it needs to persuade Iran to hold in check the military elements of the nuclear program that Russia has made possible.
None of this will be easy, not only because Europe’s relationship with Russia has grown so chilly, but also because Putin is understood to despise the EU as politically impotent.
Russian leaders may have misinterpreted as a sign of weakness Europe’s representation at last month’s EU-Russia summit by two Portuguese politicians – European Commission president Jose Manuel Barroso and Prime Minister Jose Socrates, whose government currently holds the revolving EU presidency.
Most telling in Russian eyes has been EU countries’ competition for oil and gas contracts, which has done much to convince the Kremlin that Europe is not a political force to be reckoned with.
On the European side, engineering a new spirit of détente will be tough.
There is widespread disapproval of Putin’s autocratic style and of his government’s human rights record.
Extending an olive branch to Russia will have little or no voter appeal in most EU countries, and Putin’s efforts to retain power de facto if not de jure after Medvedev wins his likely victory next March are certain to make matters worse.
The question, therefore, is whether Europe and Russia can establish a new framework for talking to one another.
There are plenty of well-worn diplomatic paths, so it’s not structures that are lacking.
What’s needed is a more positive frame of mind, and specific ideas about what to do.
Europe’s Scientific Meltdown
After World War II, most Europeans agreed that scientific research would not only boost their economies, but also deliver greater technological autonomy from the United States and act as a catalyst for social change.
The British Royal Society advocated creating the German Max Planck Society on the ground that solidarity between international scientific communities could contribute to reconciling former enemies.
As a result, big projects such as the European Centre for Nuclear Research (CERN), the European Space Agency (ESA), and the European Molecular Biology Organization (EMBO), were founded to help unite European research efforts in basic science. 
Today, however, European science is declining in almost all countries (Sweden, Finland, and Iceland are exceptions), wasting existing talent and losing attractiveness for young people.
On average, a young European scientist working in the US receives 2.5 times more research support than in Europe.
No surprise, then, that a brain drain has developed.
This is not due to lower scientific quality, but to the higher levels of sustained support available to American group leaders to transform new ideas into discoveries.
Massive military and health investments by the US government have generated a critical mass of research, which in turn attracts private funding – including from European companies, particularly in the pharmaceutical industry.
Something similar can and does work in Europe.
In Finland, for example, ten years of sustained public funding is now catalyzing private investments and fueling regular increases in R&amp;D budgets. 
Edith Cresson, a former European Commissioner for Research, once said that, “funding directly nanotechnologies would have been more rewarding than creating CERN.”
She was wrong: the complexity of modern science does not allow anyone, least of all bureaucrats, to predict where innovation will emerge.
Public funding of basic research 
 and
 industrial investments are both needed to achieve long-term technological development.
Although most national funding agencies lack imagination when it comes to European cooperation, several institutions are aware of Europe’s deteriorating research and the handicaps European scientists face in competition with those in the US and Japan (and also, increasingly, India and China).
What mechanisms will ensure the Council’s autonomy, a key condition for basing research awards strictly on scientific quality?
· 
 Implement general European training schemes.
 Large facilities have trained a few generations of genuinely European scientists.
But they cover only a small range of scientific disciplines; in most others, education is still overwhelmingly national.
The Bologne protocol, which aims at harmonizing university training throughout Europe, could prove useful here.
In parallel, European post-doctoral schemes need reappraisal.
In the US, such schemes contribute to widespread dissemination of expertise, whereas European laboratories still use them as waiting lines without putting enough emphasis on multinational and multidisciplinary trajectories.
· 
 Give appropriate recognition, salaries, and autonomy to young scientists.
 Unfortunately, young scientists are largely viewed as a source of cheap manpower, deterring the best students from embracing scientific careers.
The new Charter of Scientists now under discussion in the European Commission should improve the situation, by making flexible career tracks compatible with transferable social benefits.
Europe needs proactive policies to meet the challenges of new research needs ­– and to take advantage of subsequent job opportunities – in areas like sustainable development, climate change, natural hazards, and public health.
Creating an international pool of expertise could become an important asset for European universities, while enabling European industries to create new jobs.
Europe’s science policies should also frame a new deal for developing countries.
Today, scientific relations between developed and developing countries are unequal; important genetic discoveries based on Third World diseases provide neither appropriate credit to local scientists nor fair returns to the populations that made them possible.
Moreover, the North-South gap in public health is a major threat to the future of mankind.
Europe should seek to make science more user-friendly, both to its own researchers and would-be scientists and those in developing countries.
Let us hope that Europe’s politicians have the foresight to meet these challenges before European science becomes irreversibly marginalized.
Europe’s Second Chance in the Balkans
Confronting the disintegration of Yugoslavia in 1991, former EU Council President Jacques Poos made his famous but now derided statement: “This is the hour of Europe… not the hour of the Americans.”
What the EU learned from the subsequent four years of Balkan disasters under its management is now being tested by another major turning point and potential crisis – when and how Kosovo is to become independent.
Once again, Europe’s role may well prove decisive.
The decision on Kosovo may not imply the prospect of renewed large-scale conflict, but it does raise serious questions for Europe’s relations with Russia and the United States, as well as for stability throughout the Balkans.
While the US has a major stake in the outcome, EU countries obviously have the most significant interests in the region, and perhaps this time they will assume a corresponding leadership role.
For at least the next two months, the United Nations Security Council will debate a blueprint for Kosovo’s future, arduously worked out during a year of “negotiations” between the governments in Belgrade and Pristina by UN envoy and former Finnish president Martti Ahtisaari.
The bluebrint provides for Kosovo’s “supervised independence,” maximum protection for Serb and other minorities, and a supervisory role for the EU.
Ahtisaari’s proposal is an acknowledgement that no agreement between the parties is possible, and that there is no constructive alternative to Kosovo’s independence.
Together with the US, the EU collectively has rallied around the Ahtisaari proposal.
But individually, a number of European countries – Spain, Greece, Italy, Cyprus, Romania, Slovakia, and Austria – are skeptical or negative toward Kosovo independence, which raises profound questions about the EU’s resolve.
Meanwhile, Serbian Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica is waging a tireless and remarkably effective diplomatic campaign denouncing both Ahtisaari and his proposal.
He has strengthened the position of many in Europe and elsewhere who are skeptical of challenging a country’s territorial integrity or who still claim to believe in a negotiated settlement.
More worrisome is the current uncertainty about whether a shaky Europe will stand up to Russia, upon which Serbia depends to maintain sovereignty over Kosovo.
So far, the Kremlin has resolutely stated that it will accept only a settlement agreed to by both parties, in effect endorsing Serbia’s position.
While conveying the possibility of a veto, Russia’s current strategy is to delay a Security Council vote as long as possible by prompting a new fact-finding mission to Kosovo, which will most likely be followed by renewed insistence on another effort to negotiate a settlement.
Serbia welcomes delay in the hope that this will stimulate violence by frustrated Kosovars, thereby increasing Europe’s opposition to independence and bolstering Serbia’s dedication to maintaining the status quo, or, as a last resort, to partitioning Kosovo.
Some European countries apparently believe that they can maintain an EU consensus in support of Ahtisaari’s plan but allow Russian foot-dragging on the grounds that delay is not unreasonable and something better may turn up with additional negotiations.
But, by adopting such a stance, they thwart their own envoy and may well stimulate the violence they profess to abhor.
History offers little consolation.
The EU’s handling of relations with Serbia in the past only encouraged intransigence.
Instead of repeatedly making clear that Kosovo independence is an indispensable requirement for EU membership – so important to Serbia’s modernization and Balkan stability – EU leaders like Javier Solana laud Kostunica as a great democratic leader.
They relentlessly but unsuccessfully pressured Montenegro’s leaders to remain in a dysfunctional union with Serbia, condoned Kostunica’s dubious 2006 referendum on a new constitution enshrining Kosovo as a part of Serbia, and weakened demands for Serbia’s cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal in The Hague.
Realizing Ahtisaari’s proposal will depend on EU solidarity and persistence, coupled with strong American support, to manage the vicissitudes of UN debate, lobby skeptical non-permanent Security Council members, such as Indonesia and South Africa, and persuade Russia to abstain rather than exercise its veto.
Many believe that Russia will not risk its relations with Europe and the US, ultimately abstaining if Western countries hold firm.
But Russia appears to be in a Gaullist mood, and has other outstanding issues causing friction with the US and Europe.
Putin’s Russia is not Yeltsin’s Russia, when the West could simply shunt aside Russian concerns.
Europe is vulnerable on many fronts, particularly in view of its dependence on Russian energy, while America’s weakened presidency has diminished US influence in Russia.
If Russia does veto the Ahtisaari plan, the EU’s united facade will likely fracture, with many European countries refusing either to join the US in recognizing an independent Kosovo without the UN’s blessing or to send a supervisory mission there.
That would open a new and tumultuous era in the Balkans, with more than Kosovo at stake.
Indeed, with the UN and the Western alliance in disarray, the region could fall victim to further Russian policy mischief.
Europe’s Shaky Foundations
BERLIN – Slowly, word is getting round – even in Germany – that the financial crisis could destroy the European unification project in its entirety, because it demonstrates, quite relentlessly, the weaknesses of the eurozone and its construction.
Those weaknesses are less financial or economic than political.
The Maastricht Treaty established a monetary union, but the political union that is an indispensable precondition for the common currency’s success remained a mere promise.
The euro, and the countries that adopted it, are now paying the price.
The eurozone now rests on the shaky basis of a confederation of states that are committed both to a monetary union and to retaining their fiscal sovereignty.
At a time of crisis, that cannot work.
At the beginning of the crisis, in 2007-2008, the eurozone’s fundamental flaws could have been corrected had Germany been willing to support a joint European crisis response.
But German officials preferred to maintain national primacy – and thus a confederational approach to Europe.
Throughout history, confederations have never really worked, because the question of sovereignty (and thus of power and legitimacy) remains unresolved.
The United States is a case in point.
After winning independence, the American colonies united loosely under the Articles of Confederation.
But that arrangement failed financially and economically, and the US soon moved towards a full federation.
Today, Europe – or, more precisely, the eurozone – faces an almost identical situation, except that the historical conditions for further integration are much more complex and difficult than they were in post-independence America.
Europe has three choices.
Muddling through as before would only escalate and prolong the crisis.
Ending the monetary union would end the European project itself, and wreak unmanageable havoc.
Finally, Europe could move forward to real economic and political integration – a step that today’s leaders lack the confidence to take, because they don’t believe that they have the necessary public support at home.
Much, therefore, speaks for starting with a combination of the first and second options.
Then, once the European project is halfway over the cliff, the federalist moment might arrive.
But the operative word is “might”: a headlong plunge into the abyss might prove equally likely.
Europe’s do-nothing approach to the crisis has already produced visibly adverse consequences.
Elected officials’ passivity has stoked popular mistrust, which now threatens the European project.
Indeed, the crisis is beginning to erode the very foundations – the Franco-German and transatlantic partnerships – of a post-war European order that has ensured a period of peace and prosperity without precedent in the history of the continent.
Financial-market pressure has now reached France, and poses a danger that is far from over.
If France is brought to its knees and Germany doesn’t stand by its partner unwaveringly and with everything that it has to offer, the European catastrophe will be complete.
And that could happen sooner rather than later: France cannot and will not give up on the Mediterranean region, so the exit fantasies entertained by rich northern Europeans (Germans, above all) endanger the Franco-German pillar of European peace.
Across the Atlantic, America’s fiscal crisis and weak economic growth will force it to reduce its global military commitments.
Moreover, the US will orient itself increasingly towards the Pacific rather than the Atlantic.
For Europeans, with our turbulent eastern and southern neighborhoods, this presents an additional security challenge for which we are materially and intellectually unprepared.
Even today, Europe’s military weakness is working to undermine the transatlantic relationship.
An additional threat to the transatlantic alliance arises from the emerging new world order.
The coming years, indeed decades, will be characterized by an increasingly aggressive US-Chinese dualism as China becomes stronger and America’s weakness persists.
While this rivalry will have a military component, as evidenced by China’s enormous military buildup, it will manifest itself primarily in terms of economic, political, and normative spheres of influence.
East and Southeast Asia and the Pacific will play the central role here.
But China will try to draw Europe into this new global game.
Indeed, it has already begun to do so.
The recent visits by Prime Minister Wen Jiabao to Europe’s crisis countries, to which he offered generous loans and assistance, made this strikingly clear.
And America’s weakness, the growing dependence of European (especially German) exports on the Chinese market, and the enticements of the Far East more generally, will nurture a new and promising Eurasian perspective as Transatlanticism declines.
European illusions about Asia will no longer be directed at Russia, which, apart from its natural resources, will simply have nothing to offer.
No, this time, the temptation will spring from China, which well understands Europe’s significance in its emerging geopolitical contest with (and against) the US.
As with Germany vis-à-vis France, here, too, Europe must stand unwaveringly by its transatlantic partner to avoid putting itself in great jeopardy.
The two foundations of Europe’s seven decades of peace are cracking.
Repairing them requires nothing less than pressing ahead, at long last, toward a strong, united Europe.
Europe’s Short Vacation
NEW YORK – Since last November, the European Central Bank, under its new president, Mario Draghi, has reduced its policy rates and undertaken two injections of more than €1 trillion of liquidity into the eurozone banking system.
This led to a temporary reduction in the financial strains confronting the debt endangered countries on the eurozone’s periphery (Greece, Spain, Portugal, Italy, and Ireland), sharply lowered the risk of a liquidity run in the eurozone banking system, and cut financing costs for Italy and Spain from their unsustainable levels of last fall.
At the same time, a technical default by Greece was avoided, and the country implemented a successful – if coercive – restructuring of its public debt.
A new fiscal compact – and new governments in Greece, Italy, and Spain – spurred hope of credible commitment to austerity and structural reform.
And the decision to combine the eurozone’s new bailout fund (the European Stability Mechanism) with the old one (the European Financial Stability Facility) significantly increased the size of the eurozone’s firewall.
But the ensuing honeymoon with the markets turned out to be brief.
Interest-rate spreads for Italy and Spain are widening again, while borrowing costs for Portugal and Greece remained high all along.
And, inevitably, the recession on the eurozone’s periphery is deepening and moving to the core, namely France and Germany.
Indeed, the recession will worsen throughout this year, for many reasons.
First, front-loaded fiscal austerity – however necessary – is accelerating the contraction, as higher taxes and lower government spending and transfer payments reduce disposable income and aggregate demand.
Moreover, as the recession deepens, resulting in even wider fiscal deficits, another round of austerity will be needed.
And now, thanks to the fiscal compact, even the eurozone’s core will be forced into front-loaded recessionary austerity.
Moreover, while über-competitive Germany can withstand a euro at – or even stronger than – $1.30, for the eurozone’s periphery, where unit labor costs rose 30-40% during the last decade, the value of the exchange rate would have to fall to parity with the US dollar to restore competitiveness and external balance.
After all, with painful deleveraging – spending less and saving more to reduce debts – depressing domestic private and public demand, the only hope of restoring growth is an improvement in the trade balance, which requires a much weaker euro.
Meanwhile, the credit crunch in the eurozone periphery is intensifying: thanks to the ECB long-term cheap loans, banks there don’t have a liquidity problem now, but they do have a massive capital shortage.
Faced with the difficulty of meeting their 9% capital-ratio requirement, they will achieve the target by selling assets and contracting credit – not exactly an ideal scenario for economic recovery.
To make matters worse, the eurozone depends on oil imports even more than the United States does, and oil prices are rising, even as the political and policy environment is deteriorating.
France may elect a president who opposes the fiscal compact and whose policies may scare the bond markets.
Elections in Greece – where the recession is turning into a depression – may give 40-50% of the popular vote to parties that favor immediate default and exit from the eurozone.
Irish voters may reject the fiscal compact in a referendum.
And there are signs of austerity and reform fatigue both in Spain and Italy, where demonstrations, strikes, and popular resentment against painful austerity are mounting.
Even structural reforms that will eventually increase productivity growth can be recessionary in the short run.
Increasing labor-market flexibility by reducing the costs of shedding workers will lead – in the short run – to more layoffs in the public and private sector, exacerbating the fall in incomes and demand.
Finally, after a good start, the ECB has now placed on hold the additional monetary stimulus that the eurozone needs.
Indeed, ECB officials are starting to worry aloud about the rise in inflation due to the oil shock.
The trouble is that the eurozone has an austerity strategy but no growth strategy.
And, without that, all it has is a recession strategy that makes austerity and reform self-defeating, because, if output continues to contract, deficit and debt ratios will continue to rise to unsustainable levels.
Moreover, the social and political backlash eventually will become overwhelming.
That is why interest-rate spreads in the eurozone periphery are widening again now.
The peripheral countries suffer from severe stock and flow imbalances.
The stock imbalances include large and rising public and private debt as a share of GDP.
The flow imbalances include a deepening recession, massive loss of external competitiveness, and the large external deficits that markets are now unwilling to finance.
Without a much easier monetary policy and a less front-loaded mode of fiscal austerity, the euro will not weaken, external competitiveness will not be restored, and the recession will deepen.
And, without resumption of growth – not years down the line, but in 2012 – the stock and flow imbalances will become even more unsustainable.
More eurozone countries will be forced to restructure their debts, and eventually some will decide to exit the monetary union.
Europe’s Silent Pro-Treaty Majority
At the European Union’s coming EU summit, debate will center on whether to go forward with a “mini” EU Constitutional Treaty.
That debate is the result of the rejection of the draft treaty by French and Dutch voters in 2005.
But those “no” votes have obscured the fact that 18 of the EU’s 27 member states have ratified the treaty.
Luxembourg’s voters, for example, approved it by a 56.5% majority immediately after the Dutch and French no votes.
Indeed, with two-thirds of member states and a majority of European citizens supporting the Treaty, it cannot simply be abandoned.
At the same time, French and Dutch citizens’ voices cannot be ignored – all the more so because it is unimaginable that an identical text could be submitted to a second referendum in either country.
Because all 27 states must ratify the Treaty, it therefore seems obvious that it cannot enter into force in its current form, and that the “yes” countries cannot push ahead with it unchanged.
But it is equally impossible to start from scratch.
So we must try to reconcile the “yes” and “no” countries if we are to overcome the crisis into which Europe has been plunged.
And we need to do so quickly if the EU is to deliver on its citizens’ expectations.
This is because Europe faces many complex challenges in a globalized world.
In areas as diverse as employment and social inclusion, environmental protection and climate change, health, external and internal security, and the fight against illegal migration and poverty in the Third World, European citizens are demanding effective policies.
It is also obvious that member states cannot solve these problems alone, but only through coordinated EU action and common policies.
But to achieve these results, and thereby convince our citizens of the EU’s value, Europe’s decision-making capacity must be strengthened and democratized.
This does not mean that enlarging the EU’s competencies should be the aim at any cost.
In fact, the Constitutional Treaty defines more clearly which competencies should be shared between the EU and its member states, and how.
It also reinforces the principle of subsidiarity by giving a stronger say to national parliaments.
So the objective is not automatically “more Europe,” but rather a “better Europe” capable of acting effectively and more transparently in areas where collective action is clearly necessary.
For all these reasons, the institutional reforms that are contained in the constitutional treaty are still urgently needed.
If Europe is to fulfill its role as a major global actor, its scope cannot be limited to that of a large common market.
It must be an integrated economic, political, and social force.
In order to realize the full potential of the common market, the EU must adapt its economic governance to the challenges of globalization – research, technological development, and knowledge must be at the heart of the European economy, particularly given Europe’s efforts to be at the forefront of combating climate change.
It also needs to speak with one voice on matters of foreign policy in order to play a more important international role in solving major conflicts and shaping a more peaceful and balanced world order.
Finally, the EU needs to promote social cohesion while adapting Europe’s social model to globalization’s challenges.
It is no exaggeration to say that a large majority of member states and their citizens has already expressed its wish for this vision of the EU by voting for the Constitutional Treaty.
At a meeting convened by Spain and Luxembourg in Madrid in January to which all the “yes” countries were invited, this view was also supported by four other member states that are committed to the constitutional treaty.
It may well be impossible to press ahead with the Treaty without any changes to the text.
However, the Madrid meeting made clear that there is a consensus among these member states in favor of a Europe that can play a key role in our globalized world, and whose actions are based on the principles – effectiveness, transparency, and democracy – that inspire the European integration process.
The solution to the impasse over Europe’s Constitutional Treaty certainly does not lie in the direction of diminishing its scope, and thus perhaps making it just an “ordinary” treaty.
Minimalist solutions respond to neither the expectations of the citizens nor the requirements of a rapidly changing world.
The answer is more likely to be found in the Treaty’s simplification, taking out those elements that are not absolutely necessary, and also enriching it in such areas as climate change.
The EU’s German Presidency, which I know shares the “ambitious” view of the Treaty, is working hard on finding a way out of the deadlock at this month’s European Council.
Those countries that have stepped forward as “friends of the Constitution” have also been making clear that the initiative they launched in Madrid will support the German Presidency’s efforts.
If not all the EU’s members are ready to take this path, flexible solutions of the sort that have been a feature of European compromise in the past may be needed.
By all means, let us try to preserve the solidarity of all 27 EU states.
But those member states that are willing to move forward should not be prevented from doing so.
Differentiation should not mean division, but rather progress at variable speeds.
Europe’s Solidarity Imperative
LONDON – When Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, publicly proclaimed that the ECB would do “whatever it takes” to ensure the future stability of the euro, the effect of his remarks was immediate and remarkable.
Borrowing costs fell dramatically for the governments of Italy and Spain; stock markets rallied; and the recent decline in the external value of the euro was suddenly checked.
It remains unclear how long-lasting the effects of Draghi’s intervention – or of the public support offered to him by German Chancellor Angela Merkel, French President François Hollande, and Italian premier Mario Monti – will prove to be.
What we can say with certainty is that Draghi’s remarks and the reaction they evoked demonstrate that the fundamental problems of the eurozone are not primarily financial or economic; they are political, psychological, and institutional.
International observers took such notice of Draghi’s commitment to do “whatever it takes” to save the euro because so many of them have come to doubt other leading European players’ commitment to do likewise.
(Some of these doubts are, of course, politically or financially self-serving; a certain model of financial capitalism perceives the euro as a threat, and its adherents will do everything they can to bring about its demise.)
But eurozone leaders’ inability to assuage doubt about their commitment to the euro after two and a half years of crisis suggests that the problem is deeply rooted.
In their own defense, eurozone ministers point to the raft of reforms that they have introduced over the past 30 months, which will promote economic modernization, the restoration of sound government finances, and closer economic coordination.
Unfortunately, these reforms have all too often served as displacement activity – worthwhile in themselves, but failing to answer unambiguously the question posed with increasing urgency by international markets: Are the eurozone’s largest and currently most prosperous members absolutely committed to its continuation?
No one doubts that Germany and most other eurozone members would prefer the single currency to continue.
Today’s uncertainty concerns whether this preference may be overridden by pressing considerations of national politics, or resentment at the slow pace of reform in certain eurozone countries.
Indeed, a German proverb to the effect that “trust is good, but control is better” has been the basis of eurozone leaders’ policy since the developed world’s debt crisis engulfed the single currency’s system of governance.
The implication is clear: trust between the members of the eurozone cannot be taken for granted, but must be earned and maintained.
The limitations of this approach have now been revealed.
While the eurozone’s richer countries have indeed done much to help their troubled neighbors, they have done so in an obtrusively conditional, transitional, and incremental fashion.
At one level, it is entirely understandable that Germany and other eurozone countries should demand assurances that their resources will not be wasted.
But this constant need for reassurance, for the limiting of risk and involvement to the minimum necessary, provokes a fear that at some point Germany and others will judge their partners’ assurances insufficient and the risks run in helping them intolerable.
If that happens, the euro’s demise cannot be far behind.
The Treaty of Rome, signed in 1957, represented a noble and ambitious departure in European history.
Solidarity and predictability in international relations, based on common institutions and common interests, would ensure Europe’s prosperity and stability much more effectively than had the traditional balancing act of high-wire diplomacy, whose practitioners had too often crashed to the ground.
The euro was founded in this spirit of solidarity, and its contribution to limiting economic and financial instability in Europe over the past five years should not be underestimated.
The example of the 1930’s is a reminder of how much worse things might have been.
Eurozone leaders’ temptation to revert to earlier, discredited models of European relationships was bearable for a time, but it has now reached the limit of its tolerability.
My impression is that German public and political opinion is beginning to recognize the economic devastation for Europe and Germany implied by a euro breakup.
German politicians bear the important democratic responsibility of reinforcing this realization and advocating the steps needed to avert a catastrophe.
It can be no part of a well-functioning democracy for leaders to hide unwelcome truths from their electorates.
It would be a delusion to imagine that the eurozone need only follow its current path to ensure the single currency’s future.
If nothing else, that current path unacceptably accentuates the differences between member states in a way that is politically and economically unsustainable in the longer term.
The philosophy of control and reciprocity that until now has characterized the eurozone’s approach to its crisis of governance needs to be replaced by one of solidarity and all that follows from it.
This means a more balanced economic policy within the eurozone, an enhanced role for the ECB, a real banking and financial union, and a road map to partial and conditional mutualization of legacy debt.
Eurozone leaders have spoken about all of these, but the time has come for unequivocal commitments and a realistic timetable for action.
We are now perilously close to the moment when “muddling through” could give way to renewed crisis.
So the Bundesbank’s self-righteous zeal in asserting that its responsibilities are somehow graver – and more binding – than those of other central banks is dangerously wrong-headed.
“Nein” merely brings calamity closer.
None of Europe’s financial problems would look remotely as challenging today if doubts about the eurozone’s future had been dispelled two years ago, and the reputational and financial costs would have been dramatically less than they have been in the past 30 months.
In the long run, solidarity is cheaper for all involved, while its absence could become ruinously expensive in the foreseeable future.
Europe\u0027s Solidarity With Ukraine
Many generations of Poles dreamt of the day when Europe's postwar division would be undone.
Many generations of Ukrainians were also deprived of a right to their own country, language, and culture.
What united prisoners of conscience in the 1960's, 1970's, and 1980's was the faith that one day their countries would find their place in a united Europe.
For Poles, the dream was realized on May 1 with EU accession.
For Ukraine, the situation is more uncertain, but momentous decisions about its future are also about to be made.
In May, the European Union will specify the principles that will guide relations with its new neighbors. In June, a NATO summit will discuss prospects for Ukraine's entry into the alliance.
And this autumn Ukraine's presidential election will determine the country's development for decades to come.
At this crucial moment, we call on Europe to open itself toward Ukraine, a great European country whose needs and aspirations cannot be forgotten in the process of constructing the new Europe.
Europe should go beyond defining its relationship with Ukraine as a neighbor: it should clearly state that Ukraine has a realistic chance of entry into NATO and the EU.