So Polish influence in Union councils is at rock bottom.
Luckily, the leaders of Europe’s three biggest states are different people than in 2004.
Angela Merkel, Nicolas Sarkozy, and Gordon Brown appear to have a clearer appreciation of the Union’s security problems to its east, and so may find the will to act decisively now, rather than dither as their predecessors did when Ukraine moved into crisis in 2004.
Unless Ukraine’s democratic opposition is allowed to take part in the election, a new crisis is certain.
Tymoshenko, who has survived three assassination attempts, is not the type of woman to surrender her campaign on a technicality.
While the Orange Revolution made ordinary Ukrainians more conscious of their rights than ever before, this alone cannot guarantee that they are certain to see those rights vindicated in the coming weeks.
However, it will make the job of repressing them much harder.
And isn’t that what the battle for democracy is all about?
Back to the Future in Finance
FLORENCE – Former Federal Reserve Board Chairman Paul Volcker provided the central inspiration for President Barack Obama’s proposal for overhauling banking.
Without question the most successful central banker of the twentieth century, Volcker was an early and persistent voice warning of the problems of what he called “the bright new financial system.”
But Volcker has also been a prominent critic of the dangers of currency volatility.
What is the link between nostalgia for a simplified and less risky banking sector and the wish to reintroduce a currency system that also seems a relic of the past?
There was already much discussion about reviving 1930’s-style regulation of banks before Obama’s dramatic and combative announcement on January 21.
The proposals for what is now called the “Volcker rule,” which would ban proprietary trading and prevent banks from “owning, investing in, or sponsoring” hedge funds or private equity funds, is an updated version of the Glass-Steagall Act, the law enacted in the United States in 1933 to separate investment banking from commercial banking.
The drive in the 1930’s to restrict banking activities occurred in many countries.
In Belgium, where the first universal banks had been established in the early nineteenth century, investment and commercial banking were also separated.
Italian banks were banned from holding securities in industrial corporations.
The argument of the 1930’s was cast less in terms of banks that were “too big to fail” than as a response to the faulty advice that banks had offered their clients.
Investment banks had sold shares and bonds (especially for foreign corporations and governments) to their retail customers, offloaded their own risk, and created a large revenue stream of fees for themselves.
Then, as now, many people demanded some punishment for the banks and bankers.
But they also wanted banks to direct more resources to financing domestic investments and industry.
The bank reforms generally did punish the bankers, but they were not successful in promoting new bank lending.
Today’s discussion focuses less on the danger that banks pose to their customers than on the risks they create for taxpayers.
Proprietary trading was justified not because it created large profits for banks (it did), but because it was supposed to create markets and provide liquidity for rarely traded instruments.
The banks themselves established what in effect were their own substitute markets, which allowed their customers and themselves to price instruments that would otherwise have been impossible to value.
The huge profits were supposed to be the reward for the provision of a public service.
Such large banks are needed because small players alone cannot make a market.
Big banks are also major players in international currency markets, and accumulate major foreign-exchange positions both between their subsidiaries and on a consolidated basis.
If modern banks are too big and too dangerous because they are too vulnerable, the most obvious way to make them safer is to demand higher capital requirements.
Historically, that was the course advocated in most international discussions.
But, unfortunately, the most obvious way for banks to increase their capital ratios is to curtail their lending.
In an economic downturn, that is the last thing that businesses need or want.
The new answer to the dilemma is to legislate what sorts of activity should be cut out completely.
The hope is that refocusing financial activities in this way will revive other types of lending.
In the 1930’s, the control of banks went hand in hand with the control of capital movements and in the end with the fixing of exchange rates.
These markets needed the big banks to act as stabilizers and take the other side of bets.
When large banks are unable to play this role, and are forced to retrench, the likelihood of market volatility increases.
The continuation of the current crisis is likely to produce more foreign-exchange crises, as governments’ creditworthiness and the position of their banks go hand in hand.
In 1992, during the crisis that rocked the European Monetary System, France’s finance minister, Michel Sapin, spoke in parliament about how the French Revolution had used the guillotine on speculators.
Could we go back to 1944, when the lessons of the 1930’s were drawn at an international level, and fix exchange rates once more?
That would run counter to almost every argument of modern economics, but, at a moment when we are looking to the past for financial solutions, it is no longer unthinkable.
Back to the Great Game in Kazakhstan
BRUSSELS – Those who oppose Western rapprochement with Kazakhstan cite the country’s lack of political and human rights.
But, while Kazakhstan has not gone down the “color revolution” route to democracy that other post-Soviet republics like Ukraine and Georgia have followed, its timidity about reform does not justify isolation.
After all, the West is not deterred in the slightest from dealing with authoritarian Russia and communist China.
Moreover, Kazakhstan, though a Muslim majority country, has established the type of secular, multi-ethnic, and multi religious polity that the West is seeking to encourage throughout the Muslim world.
But the principal reasons for the West not to isolate Kazakhstan are geostrategic.
The Kazakhs are keen to sell their oil and gas to the West at the very moment that the European Union is anxious to shed its dependence on Russian supplies.
Yet the window of opportunity for an EU-Kazakh partnership may be closing.
Kazakhstan’s historical ties to Russia and its geographical proximity to China have caused a keen competition between those two countries for influence.
It is vital that Europe join in this “great game” for influence and draw Kazakhstan’s political orientation westwards.
There are signs that Europe is finally waking up to the possibilities that Kazakhstan offers.
Indeed, two recent developments may help anchor Kazakhstan as a Western ally.
The first is the country’s election to the annual rotating chairmanship of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) in 2010.
Kazakhstan had lobbied for years for this opportunity in the face of fierce opposition from Britain and other EU countries.
Its selection to lead the OSCE is seen as a reward for President Nursultan Nazarbayev’s policy of engagement with the West.
Russia is deeply suspicious of the OSCE – the Kremlin recently restricted the number of OSCE observers for Russian elections – so Kazakhstan’s future stewardship hints that the Kazahks are anxious to move closer to the West, and unafraid to challenge their former masters in the Kremlin.
In the long term, the European Neighborhood Policy (ENP), the EU’s blueprint for relations with states on its periphery, offers the best chance for nurturing this relationship.
The ENP is designed to forge a “circle of friends” around the EU based on shared interests in security, economic development, the rule of law, and respect for human rights.
The European Parliament has, for now, rejected the idea that Kazakhstan could one day become an ENP member.
But this narrowness of vision will have to be overcome if Kazakhstan is not to be lured into either the Chinese or Russian orbits.
Kazakhstan is a suitable partner for the ENP in every respect.
The country’s southwest edge is on the same longitude as the countries of the south Caucasus and Turkey, all of which are already ENP countries or in the case of Turkey an EU candidate.
This alone makes a strong geographical case for Kazakhstan’s ENP status.
There are of course concerns about freedom of speech and a lack of media diversity, but conditions in Kazakhstan are no worse than in, say, Azerbaijan, its ethnic Turkic cousin, which is fully in the ENP.
Moreover, Kazakhstan is already in formal talks with the EU about human rights issues.
But it is Kazakhstan’s strong secular tradition, inherited from its Soviet past, and a very large European Christian minority (approximately 40% of its 15.2 million people) that make it a society that the West needs to encourage, given the Islamic arc of instability upon which it sits.
Drawing Kazakhstan westward would help embed this secular tradition.
The challenge is clear.
Russia and China will not wait for the EU to make up its mind about whether Kazakhstan is a worthy partner.
Kazakhstan already plays a key role in the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), a group that comprises Central Asian countries, along with Russia and China.
The SCO focuses on regional security, economic ties, and cultural cohesion in much the same way as the OSCE and EU do.
There is little doubt that the SCO is an instrument for Russia and China to make the case for a multi-polar world based on regional security blocs that counterbalance American strategic hegemony.
It would therefore be tragic if the EU missed the opportunity to tie Kazakhstan firmly to the West.
There may not be many more chances.
Back to the Politics of Cultural Despair
Some years ago the historian Fritz Stern wrote a book about Germany entitled The Politics of Cultural Despair.
He used the example of three (now forgotten) bestselling authors of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries to show the deep aversion of many Germans to the modern world, notably to market economics and democratic politics.
For Stern, this was part of the cultural soil in which National Socialism flourished.
Much has changed since the Nazi era.
The murderous triumph and bloody defeat of the politics of cultural despair was followed by an economic miracle that made Germany one of the world’s most prosperous countries, with nearly six decades of increasingly stable democracy.
Yet there are still traces within Germany of an attitude that finds modern economics distasteful and the opening of all frontiers to a globalized world frightening.
“Pure capitalism” and “globalization” evoke horrific images.
Swarms of capitalist “locusts” threaten to descend on defenseless, hardworking people, to quote the unfortunate metaphor used in a recent speech by Franz Müntefering, the chairman of the governing Social Democrats.
Of course, revulsion for liberal economies and global markets is not confined to Germany.
A similar sentiment formed one of the motives for the French and perhaps even the Dutch to reject the European Union’s Constitutional Treaty, which some regarded as too “Anglo-Saxon” in its economic liberalism.
For many, the alternative to capitalism and globalization is an idyllic image of a “European social model,” which no one has yet defined.
Indeed, it would be difficult to do so.
Social policies in Europe – like everything else – vary widely, and popular attitudes cover a spectrum, from tired protectionism and longing for subsidies in some of “old Europe” to the free-market enthusiasm of more recent EU members in the West (Ireland and Portugal) and the East (Poland and Slovakia).
In fact, Europe’s much-vaunted social model is more a dream than a reality, the dream of a cozy world in which a benevolent state looks after us.
This world has ceased to be viable in large part for reasons of demography, as ever more claimants for assistance make costs unaffordable.
Some people – and even a few politicians – are drawing the right conclusions from this.
They know that ultimately we all must rely on our own initiative and effort, and they make use of the opportunities of open markets.
But others in Europe treat such attitudes like a cartoon whose caption could be in French or German: “Self-reliance is absolutely important, we depend on politics for it”.
Behind such differences lie deep political and cultural traditions concerning the role of the state in everyday life.
This is where the United States really is different from France and Germany, while Britain has a similar tradition of distrusting the state rather than relying on it.
In a different way, this is true of Italy as well.
Italy has long had a large Communist Party, and the left may be in power again; but there is no gut antagonism to the freedoms that capitalism encourages.
Poland is another country in which individual initiative flourishes – to the point that the apocryphal “Polish plumber” came to epitomize the threats posed by globalization in France.
Needless to say, there are no such hang-ups in many of the high-growth economies of Asia.
True, in India the inertia of an indigenous version of Fabian socialism had to be overcome; but this has happened.
In fact, new models to square the circle of economic growth, social cohesion, and political liberty may be emerging in some of the countries that have grasped the mantle of globalization.
The entrenched anti-capitalist, anti-globalization mood elsewhere is a source of concern.
After all, Fritz Stern wrote his book to warn of the dangers posed by a romantic abhorrence of modernity.
High, often long-term unemployment and cuts in social benefits nurture, but do not cause such attitudes; their deep-seated cultural roots matter far more.
So do their consequences.
A sense of frustration that results from anti-capitalist, anti-globalization sentiment leads to a lethal combination of Arcadian dreams (“France to the French”) and the reality of ruthless, if seductive, leaders on the right (Jean-Marie Le Pen in France) and the left (Oskar Lafontaine and his new party in Germany).
Prosperity and liberty will be the victims, unless those who grasp the opportunities of the new world prevail.
Back to the Sixties
BERKELEY – Complaints about the inflationary effects of American monetary policy are rampant, despite there being barely a hint of inflation in the United States.
Rapidly growing catch-up economies are paddling furiously to avoid being dragged down by a torrent of capital inflows.
Prominent policymakers, desperate for alternatives to America’s malfunctioning monetary system, have gone so far as to allude to a return to the gold standard.
I am not talking about 2011, but about 1964. We have been here before.
In 1964, it was the rapidly growing economies of Europe, still catching up to the US, that were howling about the Federal Reserve.
As a result of a recklessly expansionary American policy, they argued, they were being flooded with imported finance. The US was “exporting inflation.”
American officials countered that the financial inflows reflected Europe’s underdeveloped capital markets.
Europe’s inflation problem was a byproduct of its central banks’ reluctance to tighten policy more aggressively, and European countries’ hesitancy to let their currencies rise, reflecting their long-standing commitment to export-led growth.
Plus ça change, as the French would say.
What the French under General Charles de Gaulle actually did say was that fiat monies should be jettisoned in favor of the gold standard. The US would then be subject to tighter policy discipline.
But the French never explained exactly how restoration of the gold standard might be accomplished, or how it would translate into price and economic stability, given gold markets’ volatility and the disastrous consequences of the gold standard – not least in France – in the 1930’s.
The debate, in other words, was as confused and confusing as it is today.
Its one positive effect was to launch an effort to reform the international monetary system.
So now that the French government – not them again! – has committed to making international monetary reform the centerpiece of its G-20 presidency in 2011, it is worth recalling the cautionary tale of the 1960’s.
Back then, international monetary diplomacy focused on creating a new form of international reserves, what became the International Monetary Fund’s Special Drawing Rights.
The idea was that by issuing SDRs, the IMF would provide catch-up economies seeking to accumulate reserves with an alternative to piling up dollars. The US could no longer run balance-of-payments deficits “without tears.��� American policy could be reined in without starving the global economy of liquidity.
The effort failed completely.
Special Drawing Rights never became an attractive alternative to the dollar, only modestly supplementing dollars and other national units in international use.
Because they did not trust the IMF to assume the powers of a global central bank, the Fund’s members established high hurdles to creating SDRs.
Private markets in SDR-denominated instruments similarly failed to develop, in turn limiting their appeal to central banks.
The other focus of negotiations in the 1960’s was an effort to enhance exchange-rate flexibility.
Proposals to this effect – a response to the emergence of chronic surpluses in Germany and Italy, and chronic deficits in the US – attracted growing attention once the SDR negotiations sputtered to a close in 1968.
But, with other countries having enjoyed two decades of export-led growth as a result of pegging their currencies to the dollar, there was a reluctance to mess with success.
While the IMF, in a high-profile report on exchange rates in mid-1970, endorsed the principle of greater flexibility, it offered no new ideas for getting countries to move in this direction and proposed no new sanctions against countries that resisted.
International imbalances continued to mount until the system came crashing down in 1971-1973.
The French government’s recent hints about its reform agenda for 2011 suggest that, contrary to earlier speculation, an enhanced role for the SDR will not be at the center of its efforts.
Rather, the Sarkozy administration will seek to develop mechanisms for managing the transition to an international currency system in which the dollar, the euro, and the renminbi all play consequential global roles.
This is a step forward, one that reflects real learning from history.
But the French have not indicated that they will push for sanctions against chronic surplus countries that fail to adjust their currencies.
The absence of such sanctions was a critical weakness of the original Bretton Woods system, and it remains a central weakness of our own – not coincidentally referred to as Bretton Woods 2.
Without sanctions to police global imbalances, the French step forward will take us halfway across a yawning chasm.
In mid-air, with neither firm ground below nor enough momentum to make it to the other side, is not where the global economy should be.
Back to Utopia?
PARIS – France no longer claims center stage in world history, but it remains influential beyond its national borders.
From the eighteenth century on – including Charles de Gaulle’s epic role in World War II, decolonization in Africa, and the May 1968 student revolt – France has been a frequent bellwether of deep societal changes across Europe.
Will its recent presidential election continue that tradition?
François Hollande, bland and bureaucratic, campaigned on a promise to be a “normal” president, unlike the colorful incumbent, Nicolas Sarkozy – and, indeed, unlike all of his predecessors since the Fifth Republic was established in 1959. Hollande’s victory thus may be a sign that democratic countries have become reluctant to be led by flamboyant or charismatic presidents or prime ministers.
Indeed, across Europe, no democracy is currently led by a strong or charismatic personality.
Italy remains under an interim administration, but there, too, voters appear to have turned their backs on a rococo ruler.
Europe has no Sarkozy or Silvio Berlusconi, but also no Margaret Thatcher, Helmut Kohl, or José Maria Aznar.
At a time of economic and institutional crisis in Europe, all European leaders appear to be, well, extremely normal.
For many, the victory of normalcy over charisma should be cause for celebration.
Democracy is about normal citizens electing normal men and women to lead them for a limited period according to established rules.
But the trend toward normalcy among European leaders coincides with a remarkable absence of vision and strategy.
If any of these normal leaders have a long-term strategy for Europe (can anyone imagine such a thing from EU Council President Herman Van Rompuy or the Union’s foreign-policy supremo, Catherine Ashton?), they are remarkably unable to convey it.
In Hollande’s case, the rare glimpses of a comprehensive vision recall France’s successful social democracy of the 1960’s: a strong welfare state, together with abundant public investment to revive economic growth and boost employment.
Hollande’s reference point seems to be the post-war idyll of his youth, a time of rapid growth, demographic recovery, scarce immigration, and scant global competition.
In other words, Hollande will try to entice other European leaders with a vision for a world that no longer exists.
This politics of nostalgia is troubling, not only because France and Europe confront severe economic challenges, but also because France and other democracies are confronted with real challenges to their legitimacy.
In hindsight, the 2012 French Presidential election could well be remembered not so much for Hollande’s victory and the triumph of normalcy, but as the decisive step in populist parties’ long march to power.
In the first round of the French presidential election, the far left, a motley collection of anti-capitalists and radical environmentalists garnered 14% of the vote.
On the far right, Marine Le Pen’s National Front, the political heir of French fascism, won 18%, the party’s best result ever.
In other words, one-third of French voters are now attracted to candidates with extreme ideologies that share an anti-liberal rejection of the euro, capitalism, and globalization.
Both sides find their roots in an idealized past: the French Revolution and its egalitarian promise for the far left, and the French Empire and its domination of the world’s non-white peoples for the far right.
Moreover, both extremes are strongly nationalistic. Persuaded as they are that France should act alone, they would close the economy to foreign competition, suppress financial markets, and send immigrants back to their homelands.
The convergence goes beyond their agendas’ common irrationality.
Both the far left and the far right find their core constituency among the vast number of French who feel economically insecure and politically disenfranchised – in essence, all those who perceive themselves as having no opportunity in an open society.
Hollande’s brand of normalcy does not appeal to these populist voters.
But to dismiss them would be unwise, because their utopian aspirations are based on genuine and legitimate anxieties.
Slow growth and globalization have divided all European societies – and the United States – into two new classes: those whose education and social capital enable them to cope with today’s globalized economy, and those stuck in low-paid, often transient jobs (and thus most directly affected by competition from legal and illegal immigrants).
No mainstream European leader, including Hollande, even mentions this new division.
Indeed, both Hollande and Sarkozy represented those adapted to globalization and viewed the rest as a reservoir of voters to be seduced, not as a new underclass.
This superficial understanding of populism makes the French presidential election an ominous symptom of Europe’s blind leadership.
A façade of normalcy cannot withstand the real dangers threatening the foundations of European societies.
Bad Money, Good Money
London – The British comic genius Spike Milligan once observed that he would love to have the opportunity to discover that money wouldn’t make him happy.
Big lottery winners, it is claimed, end up miserable, though real-life research suggests that they are as happy as you and I would be with a check for a million dollars.
Money, however, can trigger all sorts of other emotions – like rage, for example.
That is pretty much how most people reacted to the stories about bankers’ bonuses, when the great crash of 2007-2008 wiped out banks, businesses, shareholders’ savings, growth, and jobs.
There was, as one banker charmingly conceded, a bit of asymmetry between what bankers were being paid and what their banks had lost.
The Nobel Laureate Amartya Sen notes in his latest magisterial book The Idea of Justice that most people understand that a process is fair when they can detect a connection between effort and reward.
The bankers failed this test dismally.
We gritted our teeth and for the sake of our national economies supported our governments as they bailed out the banks with public money.
It was a necessary, if infuriating, act of salvation to avoid economic disaster.
Having socialized banks’ losses after we had seen the privatization of their gains, our rage quotient has shot up once more at the news that the banks we saved are again filling the troughs into which all those snouts are enthusiastically dipped.
The sheer unseemliness of what is happening raises blood pressure as well as eyebrows.
How do they have the nerve?
We should not, however, allow this sentiment to turn into an all-purpose rant against personal wealth.
Sometimes its owners use it in hugely generous amounts for great public gain.
Consider the cases of two of the world’s biggest philanthropists, George Soros and Mo Ibrahim.
George Soros, the enormously successful investor, has used much of his own wealth to establish the Open Society Institute, which has helped to underpin the democratic revolution in Central and Eastern Europe and to press for human rights worldwide.
Mo Ibrahim is one of Africa’s most distinguished entrepreneurs. He built a business empire on technology, software, and mobile telecommunications.
Ibrahim has established a foundation whose main purpose is to raise standards of governance in Africa.
The continent certainly needs to pay heed.
With a billion people living in more than 50 countries, Africa is wracked by poverty and, in too many places, torn apart by war.
The Oxford development economist Paul Collier reckons that 75% of the poorest people in the world live in countries that have only recently recovered from conflict or are still in conflict. Most of them are in Africa.
These are countries where it sometimes seems easier to start an uprising than to start a business.
Guinea, with a nasty military junta in power, is on the brink of disaster.
In Sudan, the Darfur conflict is unresolved and divisions between the north and the south once again threaten peace, with a promised referendum on southern independence due by 2011.
Hundreds of thousands of displaced people huddle in camps in Somalia, where warlords rule.
The list, alas, goes on.
It is not as though Africa lacked resources or the ability to govern itself well.
Peaceful Botswana is a good example of what can be achieved.
While climate, geography, and the colonial past share some of the blame for today’s misery, most of the responsibility belongs to those African governments that have behaved so badly.
Ibrahim wants to stamp out corruption, to see the rule of law applied everywhere, to foster policy environments that encourage businesses to start up and thrive, and to strengthen the role of women.
He wants to reward those who support pluralist democracy and is a champion of civil society and a free press, and the Ibrahim Foundation is also deeply involved in the fight against global warming.
He also points out that less than 5% of total trade in Africa is undertaken between African countries.
There is a powerful argument for regional economic integration on the continent, abolishing trade barriers, sharing infrastructure like power generation, and allowing free movement of people, goods, money, and jobs.
Some countries in East Africa are now trying to do something about that for themselves.
Philanthropists like Mo Ibrahim and George Soros – or Bill Gates and Warren Buffett – can use their fortunes to make the world a better place.
We shouldn’t allow our exasperation with bankers to morph into an assault on the creation of wealth.
As Spike Mulligan was unable to discover for himself, money really can make people happier, producing a more just world with greater opportunity for the poor and disadvantaged.
Let’s hope that we move in that direction in 2010.
Bailout Blues
NEW YORK – It doesn’t take a genius to figure out that the United States’ financial system – indeed, global finance – is in a mess.
And now, with the US House of Representatives having rejected the Bush administration’s proposed $700 billion bailout plan, it is also obvious that there is no consensus on how to fix it.
The problems in the US economy and financial system have been apparent for years.
But that didn’t prevent America’s leaders from turning to the same people who helped create the mess, who didn’t see the problems until they brought us to the brink of another Great Depression, and who have been veering from one bail-out to another, to rescue us. 
As global markets plummet, some version of the rescue plan will almost certainly be put to another vote in Congress.  Unless the plan is markedly different from the current one, while it may help Wall Street,  what about the economy?
What about taxpayers, already beleaguered by unprecedented deficits, and with bills still to pay for decaying infrastructure and two wars?
In such circumstances, is there any bailout plan that can work?
To be sure, the rescue plan that was just defeated was far better than what the Bush administration originally proposed.
But its basic approach remained critically flawed.
First, it relied – once again – on trickle-down economics: somehow, throwing enough money at Wall Street would trickle down to Main Street, helping ordinary workers and homeowners.
Trickle-down economics almost never works, and it is no more likely to work this time. 
Moreover, the plan assumed that the fundamental problem was one of confidence.
That is no doubt part of the problem; but the underlying problem is that financial markets made some very bad loans.
There was a housing bubble, and loans were made on the basis of inflated prices. 
That bubble has burst.
House prices probably will fall further, so there will be more foreclosures, and no amount of talking up the market is going to change that.
The bad loans, in turn, have created massive holes in banks’ balance sheets, which have to be repaired.
Any government bailout that pays fair value for these assets will do nothing to repair that hole.
On the contrary, it would be like providing massive blood transfusions to a patient suffering from vast internal hemorrhaging.
Even if a bailout plan were implemented quickly – which appears increasingly unlikely – there would be some credit contraction.
The US economy has been sustained by a consumption boom fueled by excessive borrowing, and that will be curtailed.
States and localities are cutting back expenditures.
Household balance sheets are weaker.
An economic slowdown will exacerbate all our financial problems.
We could do more with less money.
The holes in financial institutions’ balance sheets should be filled in a transparent way.
The Scandinavian countries showed the way two decades ago.
Warren Buffet showed another way, in providing equity to Goldman Sachs.
By issuing preferred shares with warrants (options), one reduces the public’s downside risk and ensures that they participate in some of the upside potential. 
This approach is not only proven, but it also provides both the incentives and wherewithal needed for lending to resume.
It avoids the hopeless task of trying to value millions of complex mortgages and the even more complex financial products in which they are embedded, and it deals with the “lemons” problem – the government gets stuck with the worst or most overpriced assets.
Finally, it can be done far more quickly. 
At the same time, several steps can be taken to reduce foreclosures.
First, housing can be made more affordable for poor and middle-income Americans by converting the mortgage deduction into a cashable tax credit.
The government effectively pays 50% of the mortgage interest and real estate taxes for upper-income Americans, yet does nothing for the poor.
Second, bankruptcy reform is needed to allow homeowners to write down the value of their homes and stay in their houses.
Third, government could assume part of a mortgage, taking advantage of its lower borrowing costs.
By contrast, US Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson’s approach is another example of the kind of shell games that got America into its mess.
Investment banks and credit rating agencies believed in financial alchemy – the notion that significant value could be created by slicing and dicing securities.
The new view is that real value can be created by un-slicing and un-dicing – pulling these assets out of the financial system and turning them over to the government.
But turning them over to the government at market value doesn’t improve banks’ balance sheet; to do that requires overpaying for the assets, a transfer of wealth from ordinary taxpayers to the banks..
In the end, there is a high likelihood that if such a plan is ultimately adopted, American taxpayers will be left on the hook.
In environmental economics, there is a basic principle, called “the polluter pays principle.”
It is a matter of both equity and efficiency.
Wall Street has polluted the economy with toxic mortgages. It should pay for the cleanup. 
There is a growing consensus among economists that any $750 billion bailout based on Paulson’s plan won’t by itself do the trick of resuscitating our economy.
If so, the huge increase in the national debt and the realization that even $700 billion is not enough to rescue the US economy will erode confidence further and aggravate its weakness.
But it is impossible for politicians to do nothing in such a crisis.
So we may have to pray that a agreement crafted with the toxic mix of special interests, misguided economics, and right-wing ideologies that produced the crisis can somehow produce a rescue plan that works – or whose failure doesn’t do too much damage. 
Getting things right – including a new regulatory system that reduces the likelihood that such a crisis will recur – is one of the many tasks to be left to the next administration.
Balancing the State and the Market
BERLIN – The financial and economic crisis that erupted in 2008 will, in retrospect, be regarded as a transformative moment, because it raised fundamental questions about the future shape of our economic systems. These questions are not so much about the end of capitalism – as some perceive or even desire – but rather about the different ways in which capitalism is understood in different countries.
What we are witnessing today is a reversal of the debates of the 1980’s. Back then, Ronald Reagan used to joke: “The nine most terrifying words in the English language are: I’m from the government and I’m here to help!”
Now that governments have spent trillions of dollars, euros, yen, and pounds on stabilizing financial markets and the economy in general, those words seem far less terrifying.
In fact, faith in the market has been dented, while trust in government and regulation is increasing.
After decades of consensus that the state should set the rules and otherwise leave the private sector alone, the state is now widely seen as a beneficial force that should play an active role in the economy.
This is happening despite the lack of a clear indication of the superiority of the state.
On the contrary, the US government’s heavy intervention in the American housing market is probably the most pertinent example of the state’s shortcomings, one that no doubt contributed significantly to the crisis.
Most governments have used their stimulus packages to serve vested interests as well. The accumulated debt will constitute a lasting burden on public finances.
Moreover, we must remember that budgets were already strained before the crisis, and that governments’ balances do not reflect all aspects of reality.
In Germany, for example, overall debt jumps from the current 65% of GDP to 250% when pension liabilities are included.
Interest payments account for an ever-larger share of budgets – and will continue to grow when interest rates start to rise again.
In the absence of strong political commitment and credible plans for gradual fiscal consolidation, there is a distinct risk that at some point sovereign yields will rise markedly – with negative implications for the economy and politics.
The second danger&#160;is that governments will continue to see it as their duty to decide which firms to save and which to let fail.
A line must be drawn between a time of crisis, when emergency measures are needed to avert economic collapse, and normal circumstances, in which the full force of market mechanisms applies.
The instinct of governments, however, may be to revert to the idea of protecting national champions or reasserting national sovereignty in some sectors.
But instinct is not necessarily a sound basis for decision-making.
And in times of globalization, distinguishing between “national” and “foreign” is neither appropriate nor feasible.
In order to preserve the state’s ability to act while avoiding competitive distortions between and within industries, we should establish criteria to guide future decisions in this area.
As a matter of principle, companies that were in trouble prior to a severe economic crisis should not be eligible for state assistance of the type that the world recently witnessed. Moreover, aid must be limited, lest firms become addicted to it.
Governments should also be aware of the long-term costs: large-scale state interference in market processes will produce its own set of corporate winners and losers.
Structural change may be delayed, depriving us of the opportunities offered by the crisis to build more competitive and dynamic industries – and accelerating the relative global decline of mature economies.
Indeed, the third danger&#160;is that greater state intervention in the economy entails a shift away from globalization, paving the way for various forms of national protectionism.
We can see this in the financial industry, where increased state ownership has led to a distinct danger of re-nationalization and re-fragmentation of financial markets.
Many financial institutions that received government funds have concentrated on their respective home markets and scaled back their activities abroad.
Similarly, there is a risk that new regulation may, either deliberately or as an unintended side effect, lead to re-nationalization of markets.
It is understandable that governments seek solace in the presumed safety of national markets. But the shelter that national markets provide is illusory: the only way to increase the resilience of financial markets and to ensure that recurrence of this kind of crisis becomes less likely is to build a regulatory framework that is commensurate with integrated markets.
We need global (or at least European) rules, and we need strong institutional structures to enforce these rules – a requirement that is not necessarily limited to the financial markets.
Balancing the World’s Imbalances
Good times – and these are good times for the global economy – are rarely the moment for concrete initiatives to deal with difficult problems.
It is against this backdrop that I find welcome this weekend’s announcement by a group of major economies acknowledging their shared responsibility for the orderly resolution of global imbalances while sustaining robust growth.
For the past year, China, the euro zone, Japan, Saudi Arabia, and the United States have been discussing these plans among themselves and with the IMF.
Behind the somewhat forbidding label of “multilateral consultation” are discussions that are the first of their kind, and that have proved to be a promising tool for dealing with an issue of global importance.
These five economies are relevant to global imbalances in different ways: either on account of their current account deficits or surpluses, or because they represent a very large share of world output.
They all agree that resolving these imbalances is in each of their interests.
But they also recognize that it is a multilateral challenge and a shared responsibility for them all.
Over the last year, partly reflecting past policies in these countries, the imbalances have shown signs of stabilizing and, indeed, even of improving slightly.
But these countries must signal that policies will continue to ensure a progressive and orderly reduction in imbalances together with sustained growth.
Otherwise, the global economy will remain at risk from renewed protectionist pressures and economic or political events that might trigger a disorderly resolution of the imbalances and undermine growth.
The five economies spelled out their policy plans in considerable detail to the semi-annual meeting of the IMF’s membership, which gave them a warm welcome.
This is the first time such plans have been presented together.
As Gordon Brown, the chairman of the Fund’s International Monetary and Financial Committee, noted, these plans are fully in line with the medium-term approach to solving imbalances that the Fund’s membership has consistently supported:
China has elevated the reduction of external imbalances to a major national objective in 2007.
It intends to boost domestic demand and is committed to moving gradually toward greater exchange rate flexibility.
Euro-zone countries reaffirmed their intention to press ahead with structural reforms across a broad front, in product, labor, and financial markets.
Japan plans to accelerate labor market reforms, strengthen competition, and advance fiscal consolidation to sustain domestic confidence.
Saudi Arabia is boosting its spending on social and infrastructure investments substantially, as well as expanding oil sector capacity.
And the US is taking steps to balance its budget, boost private savings, and enhance energy efficiency.
The US also intends to strengthen capital market competitiveness and ensure that it remains an attractive environment for foreign investment.
Just as global imbalances were not built up overnight, nor will they be solved quickly.
The aim of multilateral consultation was not to seek to solve imbalances in one fell swoop, but rather to solidify agreement on a medium-term approach that could reduce imbalances gradually over time.
The policies outlined by the participants will, when implemented, constitute a step in that direction.
Publication of their plans sends an additional signal of their commitment and provides a valuable roadmap with which to assess progress, and thus help build confidence that all countries are working to reduce imbalances.
The IMF, for its part, will monitor these plans regularly as part of our responsibility to provide policy analysis and advice.
The countries have made it clear that their future policy plans will continue to be consistent with the strategy called for by the IMF’s membership.
The five participants and the rest of our members, as well as we at the Fund, all agree that this has been a fruitful exercise.
An indicator of success is that a second multilateral consultation, aimed at fostering dialogue on how financial globalization and innovation influence growth and stability, is under consideration.
Like the first round of talks, this consultation would occur between a group of economies that have special relevance to the issue.
Bangladesh Goes Taliban
Is Bangladesh headed into the black hole that consumed Afghanistan under the Taliban?
Fears are mounting, as official and fundamentalist religious forces now seem to operate with impunity – and the apparent support of local police, the ruling Bangladeshi National Party, and local authorities.
For many years Bangladesh was an exception in the Islamic world, pursuing an independent course in a peaceful, secular, and democratic fashion.
Traditionally, under Bengali Sufi mystical teachings, the majority Muslim population lived peacefully with other religions, and Bangladesh had a good record on education and civil rights for women.
Until recently, Muslim fundamentalists were discredited, because militias such as “al-Badr” and “Razakar” had supported atrocities against civilians during the civil war of 1971.
That began to change in 2001, when Prime Minister Begum Khaleda Zia, the widow of the assassinated military strongman General Zia, replaced secularism in the Constitution with the “Sovereignty of Allah.”
Encouraged by this change the BNP’s junior coalition partner, Jamaat-e-Islami, which has links with the militias and remains close to Pakistan, has been calling for imposition of Sharia (Islamic law).
The BNP appears to view religious extremism as a tool to break the power of the opposition Awami League, which is largely supported by the secular and urban middle classes.
Similarly, the massive rise in the number of madrassas (religious schools) financed by Saudi and Gulf money – totalling roughly 64,000 and operating under the same fundamentalist Deobandi Islam that inspired the Taliban – is part of a clear effort to change Bangladesh’s culture of religious tolerance.
The danger inherent in Bangladesh’s course is very real.
Indian intelligence officials allege that the leader of a BNP coalition partner, Mufti Fazlul Haque Amini, maintains ties to the banned armed Islamist group Harkat-ul-Jihad-al-Islami, or Huji, which in turn is allegedly linked to Al Qaeda.
In 1999, Huji members attempted to assassinate the moderate poet Shamshur Rahman with an axe.
Forty-four Huji members were arrested, two of whom claimed to have been sent from South Africa and Pakistan by Osama Bin Laden to distribute money to the extremist madrassas.
Bangladeshi migrant workers in the Gulf States who return home imbued with radical Wahhabi and Salafi teachings fan the fires even more.
Competing for influence among radical Islamist leaders in northwestern Bangladesh is Bangla Bhai, who in 2004 attempted an Islamist revolution in several provinces bordering India.
Supported by local police and 10,000 followers, the rebellion ended only after a government crackdown.
The NGO Taskforce against Torture has documented over 500 cases of torture and intimidation by radical Islamists, who also have murdered supporters of the Communist Party, such as Abdul Kayyam Badshah.
Indeed, Hindus, Christians, and Buddhists have been targeted as well, and religious extremists more recently have attacked Sufi shrines deemed to be idolatrous, and even Bengali cultural events that unite all religions in a common identity.
For example, during Ramadan prayers last October, a mob of a 1,000 people razed a mosque of the Ahmadiyya Muslim community.
The 100,000 members of this Muslim sect, which believes that Muhammad was not the last prophet, have been declared infidels, and the government outlawed their publications until the ban was reversed by the Bangladeshi High Court.
Hindus, Ahmadiyyas, and tribal people in the Chittagong hills, fearful for their safety, have been leaving the country in droves.
The atmosphere of violence is palpable in other ways.
Sheikh Hasina, the Awami League’s leader and the daughter of the Bangladesh’s founding father, survived a grenade attack last summer that killed at least 20 people and injured hundreds more. The killers have never been apprehended.
Britain’s High Commissioner in Bangladesh was wounded in a similar bomb attack this May.
To its credit – albeit under pressure from donor countries – the Bengali authorities seem to sense that their country is drifting toward becoming a failed state and are making greater efforts to arrest Islamist killers, despite some of them being part of the ruling coalition.
Two radical Islamist groups have also been banned.
But piecemeal arrests will not be enough to reverse the drift if a culture of intolerance is allowed to fester.
One encouraging note is that annual economic growth has been a steady 5% for the past few years.
But now many Bangladeshis fears for their livelihoods, owing to unlimited Chinese textile imports following the end of quotas last year.
Economic deterioration in Bangladesh would only worsen inter-communal tensions and provide a fertile breeding ground for jihadis, but the reforms needed to head off decline are often blocked by political infighting and opposition boycotts.
The world cannot afford a second Afghanistan in Bangladesh, where Huji members are believed to have given sanctuary to many Taliban fighters after the fall of their regime.
Pressure from India will not be enough to force the Bengali government to adhere to the tolerant form of Islam that the country pursued during its first three decades of independence.
All of Asia’s powers, including China and Japan, will have to play a part in stopping Bangladesh’s drift into fanaticism and chaos.
The rest of the world should support them before it is too late.
Banishing Starvation
VIENNA – Of the world’s almost seven billion people, about one billion are starving, owing to a long list of unfortunate local events and circumstances, together with steadily increasing demand, unpredictable weather patterns, and poor financial management.
And food shortages could grow much worse, as world population is expected to reach nine billion by 2050 or earlier.
But, with the right programs, we can produce enough food for everyone.
Indeed, by taking the right actions now, we can eradicate starvation.
To meet expected demand over the next 20 years, global food supplies must increase by an estimated 50%.
So we need sustainable agriculture-led growth to increase supplies and keep prices affordable while also boosting the incomes of poor farmers in developing countries.
This can be achieved through a program for subsistence farmers that not only improves productivity, but also reduces weather dependency and provides simple financing instruments to encourage investment in new technologies and equipment, increased land ownership, and easier access to local markets.
Lifting subsistence farmers out of their precarious position would be equivalent to halving the number of hungry people.
But it’s a program that can be achieved only if international organizations like the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) work hand-in-hand with national governments and with private donors and partners.
The European Union and other developed countries are already intent on tackling the problem of global food security, and could easily tailor their own schemes to become part of this wider program.
For example, the EU supports the growth of agriculture and rural development through two types of instruments.
Geographical initiatives, like the European Development Fund (EDF), support implementation of agricultural policies in the African, Caribbean, and Pacific countries (the Development Cooperation Instrument provides similar support in Latin America, Asia, and South Africa).
Such programs already add up to significant spending – the current EDF, which runs from 2007-2013, has set aside more than €1 billion to support agriculture, rural development, and food security in Africa alone.
The second type of instrument is emergency funding to deal with unforeseen events, such as natural disasters, market breakdowns, and political instability.
The EU’s ad hoc €1 billion Food Facility, created in 2008 for rapid response to soaring food prices in developing countries, is a good example.
Its objectives also include boosting agriculture in the short to medium term in selected countries.
As part of an FAO project in Burkina Faso, the EU’s Food Facility has helped to provide high-quality seeds to 100,000 vulnerable farmers, benefiting roughly 700,000 people amid the growing food crisis in the Sahel region.
With EU support worth €18 million, this operation will improve food security for around 860,000 rural households, or more than six million people.
Similarly, two Food Facility projects in Mozambique, worth a total of €2.5 million, are benefiting almost 50,000 farmers and nearly 300,000 rural families by increasing agricultural production, improving conditions for commercializing products, and addressing food security issues that affect rural households.
Beyond these financial instruments, we need to improve on the status quo by investing in the research and development needed to modernize agriculture and reduce the risk of crop failures.
Better, environmentally sustainable livestock production systems need to be developed, and we must boost investment in capacity-building, services training, market access, and efforts to strengthen supply chains.
Equally important is research into the most effective measures to combat cross-border animal and plant diseases.
Agriculture, after all, must be viewed in the context of the wider eco-system, which also means developing improved methods for conserving resources such as soil, forests, and fisheries.
To tackle global food security successfully, we must change the way we treat rural development, which requires adopting a much more bottom-up approach.
Again, I think that the EU is leading the way in developing countries with development policies that promote broad-based rural economic growth by boosting primary production and increasing its efficiency. Indeed, by promoting agricultural practices and technologies that are environmentally sustainable and raise rural incomes, these policies also stimulate rural non-farm activities.
But problems at the top of the food system must be addressed as well.
An important step would be better regulation of global financial markets in order to end the derivatives speculation that forces food prices up.
Moreover, the World Trade Organization’s Doha Round of global trade negotiations desperately needs to be concluded, and the EU has made a number of positive moves in this direction by proposing vast changes to its export subsidies regime.
European spending on export refunds has declined considerably in recent years – from 30% of agricultural expenditure in the early 1990’s to less than 1% today (if rural development is excluded). This huge drop results from successive reforms of the EU’s Common Agricultural Policy, owing to commitments made by the EU to the WTO and to other developments on world markets.
Last year, Europe’s spending on export refunds dropped by more than 40% from 2009, to just €400 million.
With more and more subsistence farmers being driven off their land by pressures far beyond their control, we need to find better ways to balance the needs and rights of rural and urban populations.
Unless we begin to do so, succeeding generations will fail to realize an environmentally sustainable world where people live in dignity.
The Next Global Boom – and Bust
WASHINGTON, DC – The mood at the International Monetary Fund-World Bank spring meetings here earlier this month was grim.
The latest IMF forecast for global growth has been revised downward yet again – suggesting the world will grow at an annual rate of just over 3% this year and again in 2017.
If realized, this would be a dismal performance.
Before 2007, global growth (using the IMF’s methodology) was in the 4.5-5% range, based on steady productivity improvements in industrial countries and rapidly rising living standards in large emerging markets such as China, Brazil, and Russia.
Now the US faces the uncertainty of a presidential election, weaker parts of the eurozone continue to struggle, and Japan is teetering on the edge of outright economic contraction.
Brazil is in the midst of a political crisis, China is dealing with the aftereffects of prolonged fiscal expansion and explosive growth in its shadow banking system, and lower commodity prices are undermining economic performance in many other emerging markets.
On top of all this, the British may vote in June to leave the European Union.
Economic activity is affected by confidence: Do consumers believe their incomes are likely to rise (or even prove secure), and do companies believe that future growth will be buoyant enough to warrant current investment?
And today’s macro mood is shared pessimism.
Yet the medium-term scenario is unlikely to be global stagnation.
New technologies continue to be invented, and billions of people aspire to improve their standard of living through education and hard work.
Leading industrial economies have demonstrated remarkable resilience in the face of large negative financial-sector shocks over the past decade – as has China.
Unemployment in the United States is down to 5%, and parts of Europe are doing fine.
And the most important point about the commodity price cycle is that it is indeed a cycle: Demand for commodities rises and falls, while supply changes only slowly.
We should expect volatility in commodity prices – as well as in the price of oil.
The biggest question is whether we can get off the economic roller coaster and return to robust global growth without debt-fueled overconsumption (as seen in the pre-2008 US), overinvestment (as in China), and overexpansion of government spending (still an issue in some parts of Europe).
Debt can fund productive investments and improvement in human capital.
But why do we always seem to like it too much?
Part of the reason stems from tax systems, which in some countries allow some consumer interest payments (for example, mortgages in the US) to be deducted from taxable income.
Corporate interest payments are typically deductible, too.
But the main appeal of debt is that it is a very simple contract: Either you pay the agreed amount or you don’t.
And when things go well, a highly leveraged enterprise – a company or your house – will show a great return on equity.
But those returns are not risk-adjusted, which means that when the economy slumps, big losses are allocated – as American homeowners learned in 2008, Korean conglomerates learned in 1997, and governments in emerging markets learn repeatedly.
Policymakers know that excessive debt brings financial fragility, of course, and some efforts at reform over the past decade have aimed to scale back leverage.
But financial reform is hard to do during a slump, when the main task is to revive growth.
Official intentions often remain just that; time and again, political leaders find it easier simply to keep in place the existing system of rules, incentives, and guarantees.
And, because large financial firms do very well with a great deal of leverage, they continue to devote abundant lobbying resources to resisting efforts to ensure that they are better capitalized (with more shareholder equity relative to their total balance sheets).
Indeed, the largest banks in the US – but also in most other countries – are even bigger today than they were before 2008.
All candid accounts indicate their internal incentives are not much changed, and restrictions on their activities are unlikely to prove effective as global growth picks up.
In the US, officials hold out hope that the largest financial firms will eventually be forced to comply with a provision of the 2010 Dodd-Frank financial reform legislation requiring that they draw up credible “living wills.”
Yet most big banks have repeatedly failed to produce plausible plans explaining how they could fail in bankruptcy without any government assistance and without damaging the world economy, and none has faced meaningful consequences for noncompliance.
Growth will return.
Entrepreneurs will start new companies, and they will fund their risk-taking with equity investments provided by venture capital funds.
Established nonfinancial firms have learned the hard way that they need to be careful with leverage and keep large cash cushions.
It’s the big banks that continue to prefer being highly leveraged.
And too many policymakers are deferring to them.
Like it or not, that means we are in line for another stomach-turning round on the global economy’s wild ride.
Bankers without Borders
FRANKFURT – At the height of the financial crisis in 2008-2009, it seemed as if Western banks would pull up their foreign stakes and go home, leaving financial markets much more fragmented along national lines.
But, as a new report by Deutsche Bank Research shows, banks’ cross-border business – direct or via branches or subsidiaries – has now broadly stabilized.
During the crisis, the level of banking activity fell particularly strongly in capital-intensive areas such as traditional lending to the private sector.
The effect was especially pronounced in lending to non-financial companies, whereas lending to households – an area with traditionally lower internationalization – remained more robust.
In part, the decline was due to increased holdings of foreign public debt relative to private debt.
Prior to the crisis, banks had often been net sellers of foreign government bonds, but they significantly increased their purchases during 2008-2009.
With the onset of the European sovereign-debt crisis in 2010, banks’ appetite for public debt fell again.
In contrast to lending activities, banks’ commitment to foreign markets has remained virtually unaffected with respect to purely intermediary activities such as investment banking and asset management.
Interbank relationships, as well as investment-banking operations, are already highly international.
The deep cross-border links between financial institutions and the activity of globally active investment banks only took a brief hit from the crisis.
By contrast, the importance of foreign markets for asset managers remains very limited and has not changed significantly since 2007.
Despite the recent setback, banks’ presence in foreign markets today is much greater overall than it was a few years ago.
One reason is that revenue growth usually goes hand-in-hand with macroeconomic growth, which increasingly is found in emerging-market countries, rather than in many banks’ mature Western home markets.
Moreover, private and public-sector debt levels tend to be much lower in the emerging economies.
At the same time, geographically diversified institutions outperformed even during the recent global crisis, because they were less vulnerable to downturns in individual regions.
And, at least until a certain stage of growth, economies of scale and scope beckon, with expansion abroad often the only way to increase size, given already-saturated domestic markets.
Of course, integrated financial markets also benefit banks’ clients by enabling institutions to provide broader and higher-quality financial services at lower prices.
Furthermore, strong international financial partners are indispensable to multinational corporations, which often need global cash management or support for large-scale transactions.
Given these advantages, the pace of internationalization has been swift.
As recently as 2001, Europe’s top 20 banks still generated more than half of their revenues at home.
By 2010, this share had fallen by 10 percentage points, to 42% – a remarkable decline that was interrupted only briefly by the financial crisis.
Interestingly, most large European banks’ prime investment destination was other European markets, not other parts of the world, raising Europe’s contribution to total revenue to nearly 30%, from less than 20% a decade ago.
There may be two explanations for this: for one thing, Asia’s share in European banks’ revenues has probably risen.
But this may have been offset by a decline in the proportion of earnings coming from the US.
And, while this reflects changes in relative importance, European banks’ business volumes might have increased in absolute terms even in the US, though at a slower pace than elsewhere.
Overall, the outlook for post-crisis international banking has turned positive.
But regulation could change that.
In the current environment, with a renewed focus on regulating markets, institutions, and financial instruments, some international differences in scale, scope, and application of the new rules may be inevitable.
But, without a broadly consistent approach, the authorities risk creating a legal patchwork that would make cross-border banking less efficient, more expensive, and more difficult to conduct.
Apart from discouraging banks from investing abroad, outright restrictions on foreign banks’ market access cannot be ruled out, either.
The rapid growth in intra-European banking relations in the past decade was made possible to a large extent by the abolition of formal and informal barriers to foreign service providers.
Though this environment may not be fundamentally at risk, the current trend towards increasing capital requirements for international banks – reflected, for example, in calls for the establishment of independent subsidiaries with autonomous capital and liquidity pools – is clearly worrisome.
Nonetheless, given the relatively favorable outlook for cross-border banking, Western banks’ presence in emerging markets could strengthen further, while banks domiciled in these regions might start looking beyond national borders.
Traditional lending and deposit-taking still offers much growth potential – and may become more attractive relative to investment banking or asset management as a result of new regulation.
In that case, banking will become more like other industries that have benefited themselves and their customers by evolving into truly global networks.
Banking on the IMF
CHICAGO – The biggest financial nightmare looming over the world economy is the insolvency of a large international bank.
Be it because of a sovereign default or because of large losses accumulated under complacent accounting rules, the insolvency of a large bank (particularly a European bank) is far from a remote possibility.
Even if it were a remote possibility, the 2008 financial crisis has taught us that rare events occur.
What makes this possibility the financial nightmare of choice, worse than the collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008, is the fear that many sovereign states have already shot all their bullets and would thus be powerless to intervene.
Credit default swaps (CDS) of major southern European banks trade slightly lower than the CDS of their sovereign states, indicating that the market does not perceive the latter as able to support the former.
Unfortunately, almost two years after Lehman’s collapse, little has been done to address this risk.
The United States Congress is about to finalize a bill that will grant resolution authority over major US financial institutions to a newly formed systemic council.
The procedures to trigger this intervention, however, are complex and the funding is sufficiently opaque that the bill will not eliminate collateral damage from a large bank failure even for US institutions, let alone for international ones, whose unwinding would require coordination by several states, with varying degree of solvency.
To minimize the risk of an unruly collapse, it is necessary to approve an international resolution mechanism with authority over all major international financial institutions.
The goal would not be to rescue banks and their creditors, but to minimize the disruption that an uncontrolled default might cause.
This institution should be an international version of the US Chapter 11 Bankruptcy Code.
But, while the goal of Chapter 11 is to save the ongoing value of a firm, the goal of the international resolution mechanism should be to preserve the ongoing value of the counterparties of insolvent financial institutions.
The first problem to resolve in approving this mechanism is who should have this authority.
The obvious answer is the International Monetary Fund.
Created after WWII to finance temporary imbalances of the members of a fixed-exchange rate system, the IMF has been in search of a cause since the demise of the dollar exchange-rate system in 1971.
More importantly, through its numerous rescues of sovereign states, the IMF has acquired expertise in debt restructuring, while developing a reputation for toughness and impartiality, which would be very useful in these situations.
The IMF also has the unique advantage of being the only depositary of international reserves.
In the absence of an international fiscal authority, the IMF is the organization that comes closest to being one.
When a large financial institution is insolvent, the IMF should take it over, guaranteeing its short-term obligations, but wiping out the shareholders and repaying the long-term creditors only after all the other creditors (including the IMF itself) are repaid.
Some people would scream that this is tantamount to nationalization, but it is no more a nationalization that the US Chapter 11 bankruptcy process is.
Takeover by an international organization has three advantages over a domestic solution. First, it makes certain that the cost (if the losses exceed the combined value of equity and long-term debt) is shared by the international community and not only by the country where the institution is located, making the intervention credible even when the sovereign state is not.
Second, by removing decision-making power from the national government that hosts an insolvent institution, this solution minimizes the potential distortions created by the lobbying power of the incumbent bankers.
Would you trust the Greek government to run a Greek bank in a non-corrupt way after a government takeover?
The IMF would be better.
Finally, thanks to IMF involvement, even less advanced countries would be able to take advantage of the best international expertise to address the problem.
If a major oil spill in Haiti were threatening the Gulf of Mexico, wouldn’t we want the best technology (and not just the technology available in Haiti) to try to contain it?
Why should it be any different in financial markets?
The last problem to be resolved is the trigger.
In the case of the US resolution authority, this has been a very controversial issue.
The fear was that powerful banks would exploit national government help, asking for intervention too soon.
Two safeguards can avoid this problem in the international context.
First, rigid rules that wipe out shareholders and penalize long-term creditors are a clear deterrent from bankers’ point of view.
Second, because IMF intervention would reduce the influence of powerful domestic insiders, early intervention would be less attractive to them.
The trigger should be the domestic government itself. Refusing international help in such instances would mean electoral suicide for any government that faces a major bank collapse.
There are few areas in which government intervention is known to create value: reducing the devastating effects of a bank run is one.