If anything, too rapid a democratic transition may destabilize governments and enhance the extremists’ opportunities to wreak havoc.
But, in the longer term, the slow, steady progress of democratization can provide a sense of hope for moderates, creating a plausible vision of a better future – the essence of soft power – that undercuts the message of hate and violence promoted by the extremists.
Democratization can surely help remove some of the sources of rage that fuel terrorism, but it is only part of the solution.
Can Democracy Take Hold in Ukraine?
Certainly, the diversity of forms of governance used over the centuries by Russia, Poland, Lithuania, and Austria-Hungary when they ruled what is now Ukraine make creating a classic "nation state," with one dominant culture, difficult to imagine.
Consider, for example, the robustness of the Russian language and the strength of the Orthodox Church- Moscow Patriarchate - in Donetsk that is in eastern Ukraine and the robustness of the Ukrainian language and the influence of the Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church in Lviv in the west.
Yet Spain, India, Belgium, and Switzerland are all consolidated democracies that do not fit the classic model of the nation state.
Indeed, multiple but complementary identities are the norm in all four countries.
These multiple identities emerged because the democratic state provided a "roof" of equal rights above all citizens, whatever their religion, language, or culture.
This helped develop a strong sense of identity with the statewide political community.
These profoundly pluralistic countries are not classic "nation states," but rather what I call democratic "state nations."
During the recent presidential election, many suggested that reconciling the "two Ukraines" was impossible.
But polarization has not been a constant factor in the history of independent Ukraine.
On the contrary, Ukraine is closer to being a "state nation" than many people think.
Moreover, its prospects for becoming a consolidated democracy are enhanced by the fact that its political elites - and most ordinary Ukrainians - have eschewed the idea of being a classic "nation state."
Indeed, more than 80% of Ukraine's Russified eastern districts voted for independence in 1991, and the 1999 parliamentary and presidential elections did not split the country nearly as much as the 2004 presidential elections did.
A survey in 2001 of the two supposedly most polarized cities, Donetsk and Lviv, showed convergence in their approval of independent Ukraine, with only 1% of respondents in Lviv and 5% in Donetsk preferring that Ukraine be divided into two or more countries.
As in other "state nations," surveys in Ukraine indicate that common symbols have helped build elements of a common identity.
Both ethnic Russians and ethnic Ukrainians view the tenth-century feudal state known as "Kyiv Rus" very favorably.
Moreover, both groups share the seventeenth-century Cossack warrior Bohdan Khmelnytskyi as their most popular historical figure, and both revile Stalin due to the famines caused by his forced collectivization of agriculture in the 1930's (whereas most ethnic Russians in Russia view Stalin as the heroic state savior of WWII).
These shared attitudes toward Ukrainian symbols and statehood owe much to a recognition that independence will not be well protected by forging a classic nation state, that is, a "Ukrainian Only" state.
Thus, the country's declaration of independence 13 years ago was made in the name of "The people of Ukraine," and citizenship was offered to everyone who was born on the territory of Ukraine, regardless of nationality.
I was invited as an adviser to two constitutional committee meetings in Kyiv in the 1990's.
My impression from the discussions was that both Ukrainians and Russians in Ukraine were acutely aware of the need to avoid ethnic conflict.
In fact, an informal state-building alliance of convenience emerged between key non-communist Ukrainian nationalists and key pro-sovereignty, ethnic Russian communists.
The perception of "two Ukraines" emerged in the presidential election of 2004 partly due to the charge that Yushchenko would eliminate the constitutional guarantee that ethnic Russians could use Russian as their primary language of instruction in schools.
But during his campaign Yushchenko assured Russophones that he would uphold such rights.
Finally, much of what has been described as "secessionism" in the east is in fact regionalism.
Greater legally respected decentralization in Ukraine, especially in Crimea, would be a logical and overdue "state nation" policy.
The other major issue raised during the Orange Revolution concerns presidential powers.
Many Yushchenko loyalists are unhappy that, in exchange for the government agreeing to fairer election rules, Yushchenko agreed to transfer some presidential powers to the parliament.
Not withstanding the self-serving intentions of outgoing President Leonid Kuchma, this historic pact may in the long run produce positive results for Ukraine's democracy and prospects for joining the European Union.
The Ukrainian Constitution of 1996 adopted a model of governance close to the French style semi-presidentialism created by Charles de Gaulle for the Fifth Republic: a directly elected president with significant executive powers and a prime minister responsible to parliament.
This system works best when the president and the prime minister come from the same political party or coalition.
But, as in Russia under President Vladimir Putin, Kuchma vastly increased presidential powers in Ukraine.
Indeed, no real democracy in the world has such unchecked presidential authority.
A look at the eight postcommunist countries just admitted to the European Union is instructive.
Four - Hungary, the Czech Republic, Estonia, and Latvia - are parliamentary.
The other four - Slovenia, Poland, Lithuania, and Slovakia - have directly elected presidents, but none comes constitutionally and politically close to Kuchma's Ukraine.
Like Portugal in the 1980's, they adopted semi-presidential systems that so reduce presidential authority and increase the parliament's powers that they are most accurately described as "parliamentarized semi-presidential" systems.
This is the model toward which Ukraine could be moving, however unwittingly.
If so, the presidency would most likely cease to be a potential source of ethnic polarization, thereby strengthening the common identity that both Ukrainian and Russian citizens are committed to upholding.
Can Developing Countries Carry the World Economy?
CAMBRIDGE – In the early days of the global financial crisis, there was some optimism that developing countries would avoid the downturn that advanced industrial countries experienced.
After all, this time it was not they that had engaged in financial excess, and their economic fundamentals looked strong.
But these hopes were dashed as international lending dried up and trade collapsed, sending developing countries down the same spiral that industrial nations took.
But international trade and finance have both revived, and now we hear an even more ambitious version of the scenario.
Developing countries, it is said, are headed for strong growth, regardless of the doom and gloom that has returned to Europe and the United States.
More strikingly, many now expect the developing world to become the growth engine of the global economy.
Otaviano Canuto, a World Bank vice president, and his collaborators have just produced a long report that makes the case for this optimistic prognosis.
There are many reasons why such optimism is not unreasonable.
Most developing countries have cleaned up their financial and fiscal houses and do not carry high debt.
Governance is generally improving along with the quality of policymaking.
The possibilities of technology transfer through participation in international production networks are greater than ever.
Moreover, slow growth in the advanced economies need not exert a drag on developing countries’ performance.
Long-term growth depends not on foreign demand, but on domestic supply.
Sustained rapid growth is the result of poorer countries catching up to rich countries’ productivity levels – not of growth in the rich countries themselves.
For most developing countries, this “convergence gap” is wider now than it has been at any time since the 1970’s. So the growth potential is correspondingly larger.
But the good news stops right about there.
Sustained growth requires a growth strategy, and most developing countries do not yet have one that would put them irrevocably on the path of economic convergence.
For too many of these countries, economic growth in the last two decades relied on a combination of two factors: a natural rebound from previous financial crises (as in Latin America) or political conflicts and civil war (as in Africa), and high commodity prices.  Neither can be relied on for the productive transformation that developing countries need. 
Consider, for example, Latin America’s growth model of the last two decades. Global competition has whipped many of the region’s industries into shape and fostered significant productivity gains in advanced sectors, but these gains have remained limited to a narrow segment of the economy.
Worse still, labor has been displaced from more productive tradable activities (in manufacturing) to less productive informal activities (services).
In most Latin American countries, structural change has served to reduce rather than promote economic growth.
Because Asian governments have tended to support their modern, tradable sectors to a greater extent, most Asian countries have managed to avoid this malady, and have done much better as a result.
But even the Asian model may be reaching its limits.
China, in particular, needs to confront the fact that the rest of the world will not allow it to run a huge trade surplus forever.
An undervalued currency, which serves to subsidize China’s manufacturing industries, has been a key driver of the country’s economic growth for the last decade.
A significant appreciation of the renminbi will reduce or even eliminate that growth subsidy.    
Regardless of developing countries’ growth prospects, there is a deeper question.
Will a world economy in which developing countries have substantially greater weight foster the kind of global governance that sustains a hospitable economic environment?
Emerging-market economies have not yet shown the kind of global leadership that suggests an affirmative answer to this question.
The global institutions of our day – the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and the World Trade Organization – are still largely the creation of American leadership at the end of World War II (though they have obviously undergone considerable change since then).
These institutions reflected American interests, but they also codified certain norms of behavior – rule-based decision-making, non-discrimination, multilateralism, transparency – which eventually came to constrain American power as well.
Countries like Brazil, China, India, and South Africa, however, have so far shown little interest in contributing to the construction of global regimes, preferring to remain free riders.
Jorge Castañeda, a former foreign minister of Mexico, goes further, arguing that these countries have systematically opposed global rules, in areas ranging from climate change to international trade.
Lest we be too harsh on developing countries, however, let us also remember that political scientists have long worried that greater diffusion of economic power would produce a less stable world economy.
If the world economy’s center of gravity shifts substantially toward developing countries, this will not be a smooth – and possibly not even a benign – process.
We can be certain of two things: only those countries that adopt growth strategies based on stimulating domestic structural change will do well, and the conundrum of global governance – how to manage a world economy that has become unruly – will almost certainly get worse.
Candor on Cancer Screening
BOSTON – One of today’s most contentious medical debates centers on cancer screening, the benefits of which seem anything but debatable.
Indeed, earlier detection, many believe, logically must give patients an advantage in fighting the disease.
In fact, the evidence does not always support this assumption.
Prostate cancer is a case in point.
Screening entails the mass testing of individuals of a certain age and gender, regardless of family history or personal health, to identify a potential disease state.
For screening to be useful, the test or procedure must readily identify the disease in question, and the subsequent treatment must result in some measurable benefit.
In other words, the screened population must be better off than the non-screened population.
For some health issues – such as elevated cholesterol – screening yields positive results: a simple blood test measures the amounts of good and bad cholesterol in the blood, making it easier to detect related cardiovascular disease, which could lead to heart attacks or strokes.
Those who are screened, diagnosed, and treated experience a lower rate of cardiovascular events.
Screening for prostate cancer, too, requires a blood test – the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) test.
Elevated PSA levels would suggest the presence of prostate cancer, even if no physical abnormalities were detected, so a tissue biopsy would be conducted.
At this point, a diagnosis can be made.
If positive, cancer treatment, such as surgery or radiation, will follow.
And, one hopes, the individual will be cured.
Supporters of screening argue that it helps to detect and treat cancer earlier, when the chances of curing it are highest.
Moreover, younger patients, at least, can better withstand the side effects of cancer treatment.
Proponents also contend that the two-decade decline in the overall incidence of deaths from prostate cancer is the result of increasingly widespread PSA testing.
Indeed, they encourage more vigorous screening programs.
But screening’s benefits are not as straightforward as supporters claim.
To be sure, at-risk men – for example, those with a family history of prostate cancer, African-Americans, or men with enlarged prostates who are treated with 5-alpha-reductase inhibitors (whose failure to lower PSA levels could reflect increased risk of developing prostate cancer) – may want to consider getting tested.
For most healthy men, however, the United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) – a leading independent panel of experts on prevention and primary care – has publicly recommended against widespread PSA tests.
Several well-managed, randomized, long-term human trials have shown almost no survival benefit for those who are screened, diagnosed, and treated, compared to those who were never screened.
Of the studies cited by the USPSTF, one, conducted in Europe, showed a minor benefit in a subset of men, with no significant quality-of-life improvement.
Another, conducted in the US, showed no evidence that PSA screening improved prostate-cancer survival rates.
In addition, a recent study comparing outcomes for patients whose prostate gland was surgically removed to those for patients who underwent only observation found no differences in survival rates between the two groups.
Because the average age at diagnosis is 71-73, men are likely to die from other causes before prostate cancer claims their life.
And there is no credible evidence that low-grade prostate cancer uniformly progresses to higher-grade cancers, so early treatment is not essential.
Moreover, cancer treatment often carries serious side effects – including urinary incontinence, erectile dysfunction, and, in those who undergo radiation, inflammation of the lower rectum or bladder, as well as underreported effects like fecal incontinence – that can negatively affect patients’ quality of life.
Given that many patients diagnosed with prostate cancer as a result of the PSA test would never suffer any symptoms, such consequences are difficult to justify.
Yet many refuse to give up screening.
Given this, an active surveillance program could be the best way to address the most serious consequence of excessive screening: premature, overly aggressive treatment.
In an active surveillance program, a patient diagnosed with a PSA-prompted biopsy delays treatment. Instead, he is closely monitored with various follow-up tests.
Only when signs indicate that the cancer is becoming dangerous is treatment initiated. While this approach is still being studied, the results so far appear promising: men who participate in active surveillance programs are 14 times more likely to die of a cause unrelated to prostate cancer.
As evidence tilts the balance away from widespread PSA testing, a new screening test or biomarker is urgently needed that can distinguish effectively between potentially life-threatening prostate cancers and less dangerous forms.
Likewise, less risky treatments are crucial.
Active surveillance programs are an encouraging prospect for minimizing the negative consequences of PSA testing.
But, without vastly improved screening practices, prostate cancer screening is unlikely to help – and can even do serious harm.
Can Draghi Be Believed?
LONDON – Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, has repeatedly claimed that the ECB will do everything necessary to save the euro.
Nothing has been formally agreed yet, but the ECB is expected to announce a new government bond-buying program following next week’s meeting of its Governing Council.
Will it work?
To have a significant impact on Italian and Spanish borrowing costs, the latest effort must be big enough to dispel the convertibility risk that underlies the extreme polarization of government bond yields across the eurozone: investors are loathe to hold Spanish and Italian debt, because they fear that both countries might be forced to leave the currency union.
Unfortunately, it is highly unlikely that the ECB will do enough to persuade investors that membership is unequivocally forever, not least because Germany’s Bundesbank opposes any open-ended commitment to capping borrowing costs.
Spain, Italy, and the eurozone periphery face unprecedentedly high real borrowing costs, which are preventing a recovery in investment and hence economic growth.
Without a return to growth, they cannot quell investors’ doubts about their fiscal sustainability and their banks’ solvency.
The Italian and Spanish governments argue that their high borrowing costs largely reflect convertibility risks, and that the ECB should do as much as necessary to address them.
But eurozone members that currently benefit from exceptionally low borrowing costs – Germany, Austria, Finland, the Netherlands, and, to a lesser extent, France – maintain that Italian and Spanish borrowing costs largely reflect these countries’ failure to reform their economies and strengthen their public finances.
There is merit in both positions – but much more in the Spanish and Italian argument.
Opponents of open-ended ECB action argue that Italian and Spanish borrowing costs are not actually that high: interest rates have merely returned to levels seen in the run-up to the introduction of the euro, when investors distinguished properly between the countries that now share the euro.
High borrowing costs are needed to focus minds and instill discipline.
Were the ECB to take aggressive action to bring them down, moral hazard would result: countries would face no punishment for delaying reforms.
In nominal terms, Italian and Spanish borrowing costs are indeed comparable to the levels of the late 1990’s.
But it is the real (inflation-adjusted) cost of capital that is crucial, and for both countries it is much higher now than it was in the run-up to their adoption of the euro.
Moreover, it is erroneous to compare the present with the late 1990’s. Italy and Spain are at very different points in the economic cycle now than they were then.
In the late 1990’s, both economies were growing (rapidly in the Spanish case), whereas now they face hard times and a mounting risk of deflation.
And countries facing depressions and rapidly weakening inflation typically face very low borrowing costs: investors purchase government bonds for want of profitable alternatives. This is what we see in the United Kingdom and the United States, where borrowing costs remain at all-time lows, despite both countries’ weak public finances and poor growth prospects.
To be sure, investors must differentiate between eurozone governments, in order to ensure that risk is correctly priced.
The Italian and Spanish authorities acknowledge as much.
But the current spread between the yield on German sovereign debt and that of the Italian and Spanish governments far exceeds what is required to ensure that investors differentiate appropriately.
The polarization of borrowing costs has politically explosive distributional effects: Germany is borrowing and refinancing its existing debt at artificially low interest rates.
According to the Kiel Institute for the World Economy, investor flight from the government debt markets of the eurozone’s struggling members to Germany has already saved the German government almost €70 billion ($88 billion).
Other countries, by contrast, face ruinously high borrowing costs, which are simultaneously increasing the scale of their reform challenges and narrowing their political scope to address them.
The longer Italian and Spanish borrowing costs remain at such elevated levels, the greater the damage to those economies, and the harder it will become to marshal the necessary political support for further reforms.
The Italians and Spaniards are right: the principal reason for the size of the spread between the periphery and Germany is convertibility risk.
Investors are demanding a hefty premium to insure against the chance that Italy and Spain are ultimately forced out of the eurozone – thus bringing that day closer by weakening countries’ fiscal positions and raising their private-sector borrowing costs (which are set by government bond yields).
With private and public consumption in both Italy and Spain set to remain depressed for years to come, economic recovery requires stronger investment and exports.
But the steep fall in the value of Italian and Spanish banks’ holdings of government debt, combined with mounting bad loans as a result of recessions exacerbated by punitive borrowing costs, is forcing the banks to rein in business lending further.
The ECB’s latest program of bond purchases will be big enough to ensure that Draghi does not lose face.
But it will not be big enough to dispel convertibility risk and hence demonstrate the ECB’s credibility as a lender of last resort.
And it is the ECB’s credibility problem, not that of member states, that is the principal reason for unsustainably high borrowing costs in Italy, Spain, and other distressed eurozone countries.
Can East Asians Cooperate?
SEOUL – As China continues its unremitting rise, people throughout East Asia are wondering whether their states will ever be able to achieve the peaceful, stable relations that now characterize Europe.
Given the regularity of serious diplomatic spats – over everything from tiny atolls in the South China Sea to the legacy of World War II – this may sound like an elusive dream.
But, with nationalism and military budgets rising sharply, achieving consensual stability has become imperative for the region.
Can it be done?
The “liberal” view of international relations recommends three ingredients: political democratization, deeper economic interdependence, and viable institutions through which East Asia’s states can conduct their affairs in a multilateral way.
Because, as Immanuel Kant noted long ago, states with democratic political systems tend not to fight with each other, democracy should be encouraged in order to secure peace.
Pursuit of a Pax Democratia has long been embedded in American foreign policymaking.
And European states have, since 1945, made democracy a core element in their integration.
But East Asia’s wide variety of political systems makes such a democratic consensus highly unlikely, at least for now.
On the other hand, economic interdependence among East Asia’s states has been deepening.
For 30 years, East Asians have received the ample rewards of Adam Smith’s insight that free trade would bring material benefits to participating countries.
Regional policymakers nowadays are loath to risk this progress through hostile behavior.
Economic interdependence in East Asia gained momentum following the Asian financial crisis of 1997-1998.
But confrontations between the United States and China, the US and Japan, and China and Japan over the past year have left many wondering whether economic interdependence alone can bring about stable regional relations.
The third liberal route to peace – institutionalizing international relations – aims to regularize the behavior of states through a system of norms and rules, thereby creating order (and peace) out of quasi-anarchy.
Such thinking motivated US President Woodrow Wilson’s desire to establish the League of Nations after World War I, and it also underlay President Franklin Roosevelt’s push to create the United Nations and the Bretton Woods institutions after World War II.
Likewise, European states accept the common norms and rules of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, and are almost always prepared to be regulated by them.
Indeed, the European Union is the fruit of a long, continuous effort to strengthen common norms and rules among European states.
In contrast to Europe, East Asia is composed of states that are radically different in terms of their size, development, and political-economic systems.
East Asian policymakers understand that there is little that they can do to alter their neighbors’ political systems. Nor can they do much in an official way to deepen economic interdependence in the short term.
So it is natural for the region’s policymakers to focus more on institutionalization, with lively discussions regularly taking place about the region’s nascent constellation of groupings: ASEAN+3, the East Asian Summit, the East Asian Community, Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation, Asia-Pacific Community, etc.
But this process has been politicized and ridden by an acute behind-the-scenes competition for influence among the major powers.
Indeed, East Asia seems to lack the equivalent of major EU architects like Jean Monnet and Robert Schuman – visionaries with the stature and political support needed to begin building a framework for regional peace in a time, like today, of great change.
So, for now, East Asians should be very pragmatic about institutionalizing regional affairs.
Rather than spending energy on trying to build large-scale institutions covering the entire region, it would be better to focus more on smaller, issue-oriented institutions.
For example, the first successful step toward regional economic cooperation in East Asia was the Chiang Mai Initiative for international currency swaps, which followed the 1997-1998 crisis.
Similarly, the Six-Party Talks on the denuclearization of North Korea, though producing no significant results so far, remain the only useful mechanism for addressing the problem collectively.
The nuclear disaster in Fukushima, Japan, could give rise to another issue-specific regional institution, this one focused on nuclear safety.
For Japan’s neighbors, the International Atomic Energy Agency is not enough; their urgent worries are creating pressure to establish a regional mechanism.
The coming summit between South Korea, China, and Japan on May 21-22 in Tokyo, for example, will focus on nuclear safety and prepare a regime for closer regional cooperation.
With 88 nuclear power plants currently operating in South Korea, Japan, and China, the initiative is an important one.
What would happen if any of their reactors develops problems similar to those at Fukushima?
Moreover, North Korea has been running its Yongbyon nuclear facility without international inspection.
According to the wife of a North Korean defector who worked for 20 years as a nuclear scientist at Yongbyon, safety standards there are dangerously lax.
More broadly, only through the establishment of less ambitious, smaller-scale, and functionally oriented institutions can momentum be built for a regional framework for peace.
After all, Rome wasn’t built in a day, and the EU – rooted in the post-war European Coal and Steel Community – began with similar small steps toward integration.
Can Egypt Become a True Democracy?
WASHINGTON, DC – Hosni Mubarak’s resignation as President of Egypt marks the beginning of an important stage in that country’s transition to a new political system.
But will the political transition ultimately lead to democracy?
We cannot know with certainty, but, based on the history of democratic government, and the experiences of other countries – the subject of my book, Democracy’s Good Name: The Rise and Risks of the World’s Most Popular Form of Government – we can identify the obstacles that Egypt faces, as well as the advantages it enjoys, in building political democracy.
Understanding any country’s democratic prospects must begin with a definition of democracy, which is a hybrid form of government, a fusion of two different political traditions. The first is popular sovereignty, the rule of the people, which is exercised through elections.
In conditions of chaos, which Egypt could face, the best-organized and most ruthless group often gets control of the government.
This was Russia’s fate after its 1917 revolution, which brought Lenin’s Bolsheviks to power and condemned the country to 75 years of totalitarian rule.
In the same way, the Muslim Brotherhood could seize power in Egypt and impose a far more oppressive regime than Mubarak’s ever was.
Even if Egypt avoids control by religious extremists, democracy’s two-part anatomy makes swift and smooth progress to a democratic system problematic.
While elections are relatively easy to stage, liberty is far more difficult to establish and sustain, for it requires institutions – such as a legal system with impartial courts – that Egypt lacks, and that take years to build.
In other countries that have become democracies, the institutions and practices of liberty have often emerged from the working of a free-market economy.
Commerce fosters the habits of trust and cooperation on which stable democracy depends.
It is no accident that a free-market economy preceded democratic politics in many countries in Latin America and Asia in the second half of the twentieth century.
Here, too, Egypt is at a disadvantage.
Its economy is a variant of crony capitalism, in which economic success depends on one’s political connections, rather than on the meritocratic free-market competition from which liberty grows.
Egypt suffers from another political handicap: it is an Arab country, and there are no Arab democracies.
This matters, because countries, like individuals, tend to emulate others that they resemble and admire.
After they overthrew communism in 1989, the peoples of Central Europe gravitated to democracy because that was the prevailing form of government in the countries of Western Europe, with which they strongly identified.
Egypt has no such democratic model.
Egypt is, however, better placed to embrace democracy than the other Arab countries, because the obstacles to democracy in the Arab world are less formidable in Egypt than elsewhere.
Other Arab countries – Iraq, Syria, and Lebanon, for example – are sharply divided along tribal, ethnic, and religious lines.
In divided societies, the most powerful group is often unwilling to share power with the others, resulting in dictatorship.
Egypt, by contrast, is relatively homogeneous. Christians, who make up 10% of the population, are the only sizable minority.
The oil that the Arab countries of the Persian Gulf have in abundance also works against democracy, for it creates an incentive for the rulers to retain power indefinitely.
Oil revenues enable them to bribe the population to remain politically passive, while discouraging the creation of the kind of free-market system that breeds democracy.
Fortunately for its democratic prospects, Egypt has only very modest reserves of natural gas and oil.
The fact that the large protest movement that suddenly materialized has, until now, been a peaceful one also counts as an advantage for building democracy.
When a government falls violently, the new regime usually rules by force, not by democratic procedures, if only to keep at bay those it has defeated.
The cause of democracy in Egypt has one other asset, the most important one of all.
Democracy requires democrats – citizens convinced of the value of liberty and popular sovereignty and committed to establishing and preserving them.
The political sentiments of many of the hundreds of thousands of people who gathered in Cairo’s Tahrir Square over the last three weeks leave little doubt that they do want democracy, and are willing to work and even to sacrifice for it.  Whether they are numerous enough, resourceful enough, patient enough, wise enough, and brave enough – and whether they will be lucky enough – to achieve it is a question that only the people of Egypt can answer.
Can Energy Be Governed?
Energy lies at the heart of the world’s most pressing global challenges.
Yet at both the global and national levels, energy is poorly governed.
The fiasco of the Copenhagen climate summit is just one illustration of how far the world is from being able to bring about the desperately needed transition to a system of sustainable and secure provision of energy services.
The key role of energy in global problems is clear.
Some two-thirds of the greenhouse-gas emissions that are causing climate change trace back to fossil fuel use.
A renewed scramble for oil is raising fears of a new generation of geopolitical conflicts.
Global economic instability correlates strongly with energy-price volatility.
Economic development is in significant part defined by the process of overcoming energy poverty, yet 1.6 billion people still lack access to even the most basic energy services.
Only recently has it become clear that these seemingly disparate issues are a collective manifestation of a dysfunctional energy system.
Globally and at the national level, energy is still conceptualized and managed in terms of energy sources, not in terms of the energy services those sources provide.
Yet consumers of energy services have no particular interest in what sources of energy fuel their production, transportation, lighting, heating, air conditioning, or appliances.
The existing paradigm serves to rigidify decision-making at a time when extraordinary flexibility and rapid change are essential.
At the global level, a host of inter-governmental organizations is tasked with addressing various pieces of the energy puzzle.
Among these, the most conspicuous is the International Energy Agency (IEA). Created by oil consumers in the 1970’s in response to the OPEC price shocks and the embargoes by Arab oil exporters, the IEA has succeeded in establishing and supervising a system of national oil stockpiles, which has helped to prevent a recurrence.
With a small but highly competent professional staff, the IEA has also become the primary source for the world’s energy statistics and is playing a key role in the climate debate.
But it is nowhere near the truly international organization that its name implies.
The IEA was established by and for a small number of wealthy oil-importing countries, under the aegis of the OECD.
Its membership remains restricted to OECD countries, even though surging demand from non-member countries like China and India is rapidly undermining the IEA’s ability to speak for, and coordinate responses among, oil importers as a group.
Although the IEA’s mandate has expanded beyond oil since the early 1990’s to include broader energy policy, several of its own member governments, led by Germany, found its record on renewables so unsatisfactory that they recently established the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), whose membership is open to all.
Other key inter-governmental organizations face their own limits.
The International Energy Forum, which grew out of a series of meetings of energy ministers, is intended to provide a common forum for fossil-fuel producers and consumers.
It has taken some useful steps that may help to stabilize markets, such as the Joint Oil Data Initiative, but it plays a relatively minor role.
The Energy Charter Treaty has failed to bring Russia into a rule-based framework for international transit via oil and gas pipelines.
And, the World Bank’s energy financing remains overwhelmingly dedicated to fossil fuels, despite limited efforts to establish funding for low-carbon energy.
Numerous networks and partnerships have emerged in response to the gaps in global energy governance.
For example, the Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Partnership, founded in the United Kingdom, has grown into a multi-stakeholder body supporting renewables and efficiency in numerous countries.
So far, however, such initiatives remain quite small.
They will not, in the foreseeable future, operate on a scale that can foster a rapid transition away from fossil fuels or provide energy services to billions of new consumers.
As is true of other global problems, much depends on the capacity and willingness of the most powerful national governments to find ways to act collectively.
Yet these countries’ deeply flawed systems of national energy governance will make such collective action all the more challenging.
Indeed, in many ways, the situation has been getting worse. Over the past two decades, advocates of privatization have promised greater efficiencies and lower energy prices, but the failure to accompany privatization with appropriate regulation and enforcement has left many countries with poorly governed and often deeply corrupt energy sectors.
Moreover, given the vast profits available under the current system, the struggle to bring about a significant energy transition faces stiff resistance from deeply entrenched vested interests.
And market forces alone are unable to cope with major externalities such as greenhouse-gas emissions, with overwhelming government control over major energy sources such as oil, and with huge numbers of people too poor to constitute a market.
Our fractured landscape for energy governance was not planned. It has evolved piecemeal, with little coordination among its various parts.
If we are to avoid paying a high economic, strategic, and environmental price for its shortcomings, a better system of developing and enforcing internationally agreed energy rules is essential.
Can Europe Be Saved?
VIENNA – In 2011, Europe’s financial and banking crisis escalated into a sovereign-debt crisis.
A problem that began in Greece ended up raising doubts about the very viability of the euro – and even of the European Union itself.
A year later, those fundamental doubts remain undiminished.
But, if one compares the EU with the United States or Japan (where public debt equals 200% of GDP), the Union’s current poor image is unjustified.
Indeed, employment in the EU as a whole remains high, as do private savings rates.
Moreover, the Union’s trade is in balance with the rest of the world.
One reason for doubt about the euro and the EU is that, since the spring of 2010, Europe’s leaders have rushed from one crisis summit to the next, each time devising supposed solutions that provided too little and arrived too late.
Europe’s leaders have never fully deployed their economic and political firepower.
On the contrary, rather than taming the financial markets, as they once intended, Europe’s leaders continue to be besieged by them.
It should come as no surprise that, with national governments’ parochialism impeding joint EU action, financial markets are using what the communists used to call “salami tactics” to slice away at the Union by attacking its member countries one by one.
Indeed, the European Parliament and the European Commission have been sidelined, while a new management model for Europe has emerged: Germany makes the decisions, France gives the press conferences, and the rest nod in agreement (except the British, who have chosen isolationism once again).
This management structure is neither democratically legitimate nor justified by its performance (which appears to consist of mere reactions to pressure from financial markets).
Indeed, some estimate that, by 2050, Europe will produce only 10% of the world’s GDP, and will comprise just 7% of its population.
By then, not even Germany’s economy will be significant in global terms, to say nothing of the other European economies.
As early as 2012, when the world economy is expected to grow by only 2.5%, the battle for shares of the global pie will become fiercer.
Europe is fighting for its economic survival, but it does not seem to know it.
So, do we Europeans intend to remain relevant in the twenty-first century, which means strengthening our position?
Or are we prepared to undergo a painful decline brought on by nationalist infighting and complacency?
I advocate a strong Europe that embraces the challenges of a relentlessly changing world.
We need a new contract among European nations, generations, and social classes, which implies difficult choices.
We must bid farewell to national egoisms, vested interests, dirty tricks, and assumed certainties.
If Europe wants things to remain as they are, things will have to change dramatically.
First, the EU must become a true democracy – with a directly elected president and a stronger parliament – if pan-European decisions are going to have full legitimacy.
The fiscal pact to which EU members (except the United Kingdom and the Czech Republic) agreed in December 2011 cannot be left to bureaucrats and courts alone.
The European people, the true sovereigns, must ultimately gain the right to make Europe’s policy choices via elections.
Second, we must close the income gap.
The growing divide between rich and poor, stagnating real wages, and deep regional disparities in unemployment are both morally unacceptable and economically counterproductive.
The EU’s increasing income inequality misallocates the purchasing power that its economy desperately needs for growth and employment.
Finally, the welfare state needs a serious overhaul.
Today, the EU allocates a large part of its public spending to pensions and health care for the elderly, while education suffers from underfunding.
A welfare state that focuses mainly on the elderly, and does not provide sufficient opportunities for younger generations, is not sustainable.
Moreover, the inequities created by privilege, such as public-sector pension schemes and discretionary advantages for vested-interest groups, must be addressed.
In order to make these changes, higher taxation of wealth and capital income is inevitable.
But, while these additional tax revenues would improve Europe’s public finances, they would not obviate the need to reform the welfare state.
Indeed, at best, they could facilitate a socially responsible transition to more efficient forms of social protection.
It is also a mistake to believe that austerity measures – the prime focus of Europe’s leaders up to now – will consolidate public finances.
Europe is on the brink of recession.
Governments should therefore restrict spending cuts to those that will not cause the economy to contract.
Likewise, they should increase only those taxes that, when raised, do not reduce consumption, investment, or job creation.
In addition, a “European Marshall Plan” that provides investment in infrastructure, renewable energy, and energy efficiency is needed.
Such an initiative would not only foster growth, but would also lower current-account deficits (because expensive fossil-energy imports could be reduced).
Public finances would be consolidated only by growth, not by austerity.
The European Central Bank must adapt to the fiscal pact’s new rules.
National governments’ vulnerability to the financial markets and their exaggerated interest rates must be reduced.
Only the ECB, by taking on the role of lender of last resort, can stop the eurozone’s capital outflow and restore confidence in Europe’s capacity to solve its own problems.
Europe is running out of time.
The EU’s institutions must exercise their creativity to the fullest – conventional thinking will not be enough to save the Union.
Only when the EU has its head above water again can we embark on the difficult but necessary path of framing and adopting a new treaty for a new Europe.
Can Food Prices Be Stabilized?
CAMBRIDGE – Under French President Nicolas Sarkozy’s leadership, the G-20 has made addressing food-price volatility a top priority this year, with member states’ agriculture ministers meeting recently in Paris to come up with solutions. Small wonder: world food prices reached a record high earlier in the year, recalling a similar price spike in 2008.
Consumers are hurting worldwide, especially the poor, for whom food takes a major bite out of household budgets. Popular discontent over food prices has fueled political instability in some countries, most notably in Egypt and Tunisia.
Even agricultural producers would prefer some price stability over the wild ups and downs of the last five years.
The G-20’s efforts will culminate in the Cannes Summit in November.
But, when it comes to specific policies, caution will be very much in order, for there is a long history of measures aimed at reducing commodity-price volatility that have ended up doing more harm than good.
For example, some inflation-targeting central banks have reacted to increases in prices of imported commodities by tightening monetary policy and thereby increasing the value of the currency.
But adverse movements in the terms of trade must be accommodated; they cannot be fought with monetary policy.
Producing countries have also tried to contain price volatility by forming international cartels.
But these have seldom worked.
In theory, government stockpiles might be able to smooth price fluctuations. But this depends on how stockpiles are administered.
The historical record is not encouraging.
In rich countries, where the primary producing sector usually has political power, stockpiles of food products are used as a means of keeping prices high rather than low.
The European Union’s Common Agricultural Policy is a classic example – and is disastrous for EU budgets, economic efficiency, and consumer pocketbooks.
In many developing countries, on the other hand, farmers lack political power.
African countries adopted commodity boards for coffee and cocoa.
Although the original rationale was to buy the crop in years of excess supply and sell in years of excess demand, thereby stabilizing prices, in practice the price paid to cocoa and coffee farmers, who were politically weak, was always below the world price in the early decades of independence.
As a result, production fell.
Politicians often seek to shield consumers through price controls on staple foods and energy.
But artificially suppressing prices usually requires rationing to domestic households.
(Shortages and long lines can fuel political rage just as surely as higher prices can.)
Otherwise, the policy satisfies the excess demand via imports, and so raises the world price even more.
If the country is a producer of the commodity in question, it may use export controls to insulate domestic consumers from increases in the world price.
In 2008, India capped rice exports, and Argentina did the same for wheat exports, as did Russia in 2010.
Export restrictions in producing countries and price controls in importing countries both serve to exacerbate the magnitude of the world price upswing, owing to the artificially reduced quantity that is still internationally traded.
If producing and consuming countries in grain markets could cooperatively agree to refrain from such government intervention – probably by working through the World Trade Organization – world price volatility might be lower.
In the meantime, some obvious steps should be taken.
For starters, bio-fuel subsidies should be abolished.
Ethanol subsidies, such as those paid to American corn farmers, do not accomplish policymakers’ avowed environmental goals, but do divert grain and thus help drive up world food prices.
By now this should be clear to everybody.
But one cannot really expect the G-20 agriculture ministers to be able to fix the problem.
After all, their constituents, the farmers, are the ones pocketing the money.
(The US, it must be said, is the biggest obstacle here.)
It is probably best to accept that commodity prices will be volatile, and to create ways to limit the adverse economic effects – for example, financial instruments that allow hedging of the terms of trade.
What the G-20 agriculture ministers have agreed is to forge a system to improve transparency in agricultural markets, including information about production, stocks, and prices.
More complete and timely information might indeed help.
But the broader sort of policy that Sarkozy evidently has in mind is to confront speculators, who are perceived as destabilizing agricultural commodity markets.
True, in recent years, commodities have become more like assets and less like goods.
Prices are not determined solely by the flow of current supply and demand and their current economic fundamentals (such as disruptions from weather or politics).
They are increasingly determined also by calculations regarding expected future fundamentals (such as economic growth in Asia) and alternative returns (such as interest rates) – in other words, by speculators.
But speculation is not necessarily destabilizing.
Sarkozy is right that leverage is not necessarily good just because the free market allows it, and that speculators occasionally act in a destabilizing way.
But speculators more often act as detectors of changes in economic fundamentals, or provide the signals that smooth transitory fluctuations.
In other words, they often are a stabilizing force.
The French have not yet been able to obtain agreement from the other G-20 members on measures aimed at regulating commodity speculators, such as limits on the size of their investment positions.
I hope it stays that way.
Shooting the messenger is no way to respond to the message.
Can France Make Middle East Peace?
RAMALLAH – Since the beginning of the year, the French government has been building support for an international conference to restart the Israel-Palestine peace process.
France deserves applause for its brave effort to revive a process that has been going nowhere for the better part of a decade.
But success will require more than courage.
Any international bid to resolve the problem of Palestine depends on six factors.
The first is seriousness.
When France first made its plans known in January, many dismissed the idea as little more than a diplomatic stunt.
Palestinian officials were at first suspicious of the initiative.
They feared that it would merely give the Israelis another photo opportunity: After the handshakes, ordinary Palestinians would continue to suffer under the occupation.
When it became clear that the French effort was in earnest, and a date was announced for preparatory talks on May 30, the clear timelines encouraged Palestinian officials to sign up to the process.
This good faith must continue no matter what obstacles arise.
The second key ingredient is multilateralism.
Israel, the stronger party in the conflict, prefers bilateral talks, which put it in a better position to dictate terms.
The weaker side in such talks does, of course, have a sort of power: the power to say no.
But the exercise of that power usually comes at a high price.
The five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council plus Germany were able to work together to forge the Iranian nuclear deal.
Similar success can be obtained in the Middle East only if all parties focus on finding a solution, and do not let the strong Israelis dictate to the weak Palestinians.
The third essential factor is a clear timetable.
For Israelis and Palestinians, decades of open-ended negotiations have produced little.
If the French want this process to succeed, they must set out clear timelines, and a date by which the talks must yield results.
After all, the outlines of what is required for a settlement are fairly well understood.
What is missing is the will for peace.
Once there is a deadline, procrastination can’t be part of the negotiating tactics.
And once a timeline is set, the price of failure must be made clear.
This is a crucial fourth ingredient.
Any negotiator knows that the parties to a conflict will be reluctant to make compromises unless there is a price to pay if the talks fail.
When he first announced the French initiative, Laurent Fabius, France’s former foreign minister, said that if the talks break down, France will recognize Palestine (though his successor, Jean-Marc Ayrault, has backed away from this position, saying that recognition would not be automatic).
As a permanent UN Security Council member, France’s recognition of Palestine could be crucial.
The pressure on Israel might become even greater if, by November or December, it became clear that it was not negotiating in good faith.
US President Barack Obama’s administration, by that point in its final weeks, could then play a decisive role, by making the costs of intransigence clear to Israel.
The fifth condition for success is that justice must be seen to be done.
Even if Israeli and Palestinian leaders can be persuaded to sign some kind of deal, it will not stand the test of time unless it is generally regarded as fair.
Deals do require compromises, but no deal will stick if the compromises by one side seem so overwhelming that the resulting agreement is perceived as unjust.
There is considerable regional and international agreement on what would count as a just solution: an independent state of Palestine, roughly around the 1967 borders, a resolution of the refugee problem, and an arrangement to share Jerusalem.
Moreover, it is impossible for the negotiations to be seen as fair if Israel maintains its brutal occupation and continues to build settlements on Palestinian lands.
Finally, the success of the talks requires public support, which can be obtained only if the leaders genuinely give peace a chance.
The average Palestinian – and Israeli, too – needs to believe that peace is possible.
This means changes in Israeli military policy, travel restrictions, and political posturing, and an end to one-upmanship by both sides.
Pierre Vimont, the French special envoy, has been charged by his government with an enormous task, one that he cannot possibly accomplish on his own.
He will need an earnest multilateral effort, clear timelines, a commitment to justice on all sides – and perhaps a miracle.
Can Green Trade Tariffs Combat Climate Change?
BERKELEY – In recent months, China has taken center stage in the international debate over global warming.
After the inconclusive end of the UN led Bali talks on the global environment, worry has grown among US and European industries – especially iron, steel, cement, glass, chemicals, and pulp and paper – that any new climate treaty would put them at a big disadvantage against their fast-growing competitors in China.
In response, the US Congress is moving to create a system of trade sanctions that would levy heavy taxes on imports from other major greenhouse gas emitters.
Ironically, the American plan is taking shape even before the US takes any action to reduce its own emissions, inviting charges of hypocrisy, violation of international law, and threatening a major trade war.
The tariff proposal – contained in the central piece of global warming legislation now before Congress – would impose emission controls on domestic industries starting in 2012.
It would also levy punitive tariffs on greenhouse-gas-intensive products imported from countries that lack “comparable action” to that of the US, starting in 2020.
Industrial lobbies and labor unions are pushing hard for these sanctions to take effect more quickly.
European Commission President José Manuel Barroso, French President Nicolas Sarkozy and industrial chambers of commerce strongly advocate a similar tariff system, leading many analysts to predict that the EU will also adopt some sort of green tariff system in the next few years.
In February, China’s top climate negotiator, Yu Qingtai, said at the UN that rich nations, which “caused the problem of climate change in the first place,” must be treated as “culprits,” and developing countries as “victims.”
Despite China’s official hard line, some Chinese environmental officials privately express alarm at run-away carbon emissions, and suggest that foreign green tariffs would actually strengthen their hand in domestic policy struggles over controlling greenhouse gases by helping to win political support for emissions cuts.
Pan Yue, vice-director of the State Environmental Protection Administration, recently argued in a China Daily article in favor of stronger emissions regulations and a more “green-oriented China,” warning that “China’s image among the international community” was in jeopardy.
The growing dispute over trade sanctions brings to the fore not only the fundamental ethical question of whether wealthy nations should bear the burden of emissions reduction alone, but also the strategic question of whether sticks as well as carrots should be used to induce green behavior in developing countries.
Although China may not like it, the international trading system may provide more leverage than any other post-Kyoto mechanism over developing countries’ environmental policies.
Despite the threat of trade wars, trade sanctions could emerge as the most effective means of forcing international action on global warming.
Can Hamas Stay in Power?
With one-third of the Palestinians’ Hamas-led government now under arrest by Israel, the escalation in Israeli-Palestinian relations has moved beyond military confrontation.
A far more fundamental question has come into view: can a Palestinian government that draws its authority from an agreement with Israel stay in power when it is led by an organization committed to the destruction of Israel?
The abduction of an Israeli soldier in the Gaza Strip, as well as the abduction and subsequent murder of an 18-year old Israeli civilian in the West Bank, have brought to the fore that question, which has haunted Israeli-Palestinian relations since Hamas won parliamentary elections in January.
The international community, led by the “Quartet” (the United States, the European Union, the United Nations, and Russia), has put three conditions to the Hamas government if it wishes to achieve international legitimacy and continue to be supported financially.
Hamas must recognize Israel’s right to exist, stop all terrorist activities, and commit itself to carry out all previous international agreements signed by the Palestinian Authority.
These look like reasonable conditions to any outside observer.
To Hamas, however, they appear to undermine its very raison d'etre.
After all, this is an organization committed to the destruction of Israel – its charter calls for a holy war against all Jews – and the establishment of an Islamic state in all of historical Palestine.
Indeed, Article 22 of that charter reveals that Hamas views the Jews (together with the Freemasons and other nefarious organizations like Rotary International and the Lions Club), as responsible for the French and Bolshevik Revolutions, World War I, and World War II.
So it is no great surprise that Hamas rejected the Quartet’s conditions.
At the same time, Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen), who represents Fatah, which lost the January elections, has tried in vain to find common ground with Hamas through an ambiguous text known as “The Prisoners’ Document.”
This document was intended to serve as an implicit acceptance of Israel’s right to exist.
But nothing of the sort appears in the truncated text approved by Hamas.
On the contrary, the text legitimizes continuing attacks against Israeli civilians in the West Bank, making it unacceptable to Israel – and to the international community.
But the current crisis cannot be solved by words alone.
One of the paradoxical results of America’s almost messianic belief in elections as a panacea for all the ills of the Middle East is that Hamas – the winner of democratic elections – has gained a degree of legitimacy that it never had before.
On the other hand, Hamas’s history and current behavior clearly indicate that it regards elections as merely a political tool, and that it is devoid of any commitment to the norms and values underlying democracy.
Fascist and communist regimes of the past, which followed a similar instrumentalist approach to democracy, come to mind here.
Yet, at the same time, the US supports Abu Mazen, trying to undermine the Hamas government, thus casting a shadow on the credibility of its own commitment to democracy.
The current violence may escalate further, and could bring down the Hamas government.
On the other hand, diplomatic means may bring about the release of the Israeli soldier and put a stop to the firing of Qassam rockets from Gaza into Israel – a daily occurrence that has challenged the credibility of the new Israeli government under Prime Minister Ehud Olmert.
But the fundamental problem is that, until now, at every historical juncture, the Palestinians refused to accept a compromise and consequently failed in nation-building.
In 1947, they refused the UN partition plan, which called for the establishments of two states in British Palestine.
In 1993, after the Oslo agreements, the Palestinian Authority established under Yasir Arafat became another militarized authoritarian regime, very much like Syria and Egypt, and did nothing to alleviate the suffering of the Palestinian refugees.
It was this failure that brought Hamas to power.
The current crisis is obviously the first serious test for Olmert and his plans for further withdrawal from Israeli-occupied territories.
But it is an even greater test for the Palestinians: will they once again be led by a radical and fanatical leadership into another national catastrophe?
Or will they finally realize that a future of independence, sovereignty, and dignity is open to them – but only if they grant the Israelis what they rightly claim for themselves?
The international community can urge the Palestinians toward a decision.
But that decision, and its moral costs, remains in the hands of the Palestinians alone.
Can Hezbollah Weather the Arab Spring?
BEIRUT –Three years ago, regional opinion polls showed that the Middle East’s most popular leaders were Hezbollah leader Sayed Hassan Nasrallah, Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, and Iran’s President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.
People at the time appreciated that they were standing up to Israel in Lebanon and Gaza, and pushing back against aggressive American policies in the region.
With the Arab Spring, regional public opinion has shifted toward prioritizing civil rights and democratic reform over foreign policy.
Today, Assad is reviled, Ahmadinejad’s government is accused of violently suppressing its own pro-democracy protestors, and both Hezbollah and Iran are condemned for continuing to back Assad as he slaughters his own population.
As a result, Hezbollah is no longer the widely popular movement that it once was across the Arab and Muslim worlds, but it remains a highly effective and heavily armed force.
And, in politics, as Machiavelli pointed out long ago, it is more important to be feared than loved.
To be sure, Hezbollah is still grudgingly respected for its ability to stand up to Israel.
But it has lost its halo as a voice for the oppressed and downtrodden, and has exposed itself as a partisan and sectarian party that will side with Iran and its allies even at the expense of human rights and human lives in neighboring Syria.
But Hezbollah’s hard power has, up to now, not been affected by developments in the Arab Spring or Syria.
Its deployment in Lebanon, its fighting capacity, and its thousands of missiles are all still intact.
Hezbollah was initially thrilled at the outbreak of popular revolts against rulers closely allied with the US and the West.
Even Libya’s Colonel Muammar el-Qaddafi was considered a foe for having allegedly ordered the killing of Lebanese Shiite leader Imam Musa Sadr in 1978.
Hezbollah had been in a virtual cold war with Hosni Mubarak’s Egypt since January 2009, when Nasrallah had effectively accused Mubarak’s government of collusion in Israel’s intervention in Gaza, and had called for the “Egyptian people to take to the streets in their millions.”
But, as the revolts proceeded, it emerged that people wanted good government and social justice, and were not enamored of Iran or interested in joining an axis of resistance.
Furthermore, as the Muslim Brotherhood rose in Egypt, Hezbollah’s erstwhile ally, Hamas, drifted away from it and its Syrian and Iranian backers, and found a new footing in Egypt and the Gulf.
But Hezbollah’s disappointment turned to intense concern when Syrians rebelled against Assad.
If his regime falls, Hezbollah is at risk of losing its arms-supply bridge to Iran.
It would be unable to compensate for that loss by relying on Lebanese seaports or Beirut’s airport, because both could easily be blockaded.
It would still have its full first-strike and retaliatory capacity, but, like a bee, it would be able to sting only once.
Without the ability to resupply itself, Hezbollah would emerge from any future war a significantly weakened force.
Within Lebanon itself, Hezbollah is still strong, but its comfort level has declined.
In May 2008, it demonstrated its domestic dominance by taking over the capital, Beirut.
In January 2011, it brought down Saad Hariri’s government and installed one more to its liking.
But, in just the last few weeks, parts of the Sunni north have erupted in armed defiance of Hezbollah and the government that it dominates, and are openly supporting the Syrian rebels.
In a sense, these Sunni groups are creating an armed enclave in northern Lebanon to counterbalance the armed Shia enclaves in Beirut, the south, and the Bekaa region.
Hezbollah has also been shaken by the abduction and continued detention of a dozen Lebanese Shiites – some close to Nasrallah –&nbsp;by opposition forces in Syria.
Hezbollah faces parliamentary elections in the spring of 2013.
If its Christian ally, Michel Aoun’s Free Patriotic Movement, does poorly, or if the ever-shifting Druze leader Walid Jumblatt returns his Progressive Socialist Party to the anti-Syrian alliance of which it was once a part, Hezbollah would lose its parliamentary majority, and hence its ability to form and topple governments.
Perhaps anticipating these domestic vulnerabilities, Hezbollah encouraged and joined the resumption of National Dialogue discussions involving all of Lebanon’s main communities.
Strategically, Hezbollah fears that if Assad falls, and if it loses the ability to resupply itself rapidly and effectively as a result, Israel will take advantage by unleashing another war against it.
With tensions between Israel and Iran, Hezbollah’s patron, unresolved, this fear cannot be discounted.
Even if Hezbollah can adjust to the Arab Spring, it fears the winter with Israel that might follow.
Can High Oil Prices Be Good?
World oil prices crossed $40 a barrel in mid-summer, and have since climbed to the mid-$50's.
Today's oil prices are still only two-thirds the real peak reached during the Iranian Revolution of 1979, and future markets expect the oil price to fall back and settle at perhaps $45 a barrel.
But the current high level of oil prices has led forecasters to start reining in their expectations for economic growth.
"Higher oil prices are here to stay," says the American economic forecaster Allen Sinai.
"[T]hat has to subtract growth and could cause core inflation to pick up."
Indeed, according to Sinai, higher oil prices are "the biggest risk...since the bursting of the stock-market bubble in 2000-2001."
Sinai is hardly alone.
If the oil price stays at $40 a barrel, expect it to have next to no effect on short-term world GDP growth.
But if the oil price remains at or near $60 a barrel, expect everyone's forecasts of GDP growth to be reduced by 1% per year.
High oil prices also threaten to slow long-term productivity growth.
With high - and volatile - oil prices, businesses will focus their investments less on boosting productivity and more on maintaining flexible energy usage.
At $40 a barrel, expect oil prices to slow the long-run growth rate of the world's potential output by 0.1% per year.
At $60 a barrel, expect the "measured" long-term rate of potential world output growth to slow by roughly 0.3% per year.
With most shocks to the world economy, we expect central banks to take steps to offset their effects.
When business investment committees become more cautious, we expect to see the Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank, the Bank of England, and others lower interest rates to make the numbers more attractive.
If consumers go on a spending binge, we expect the world's central banks to raise interest rates to cool off construction spending and free up the resources needed to prevent shortage-inducing inflation.
But this economic logic does not apply in the case of increases in oil prices.
Although high oil prices look like a tax on business activity that depresses aggregate demand, they also raise inflation, both directly and indirectly.
Central banks respond to lowered demand by reducing interest rates and to higher expected inflation by raising interest rates.
Because high oil prices both lower demand and raise inflation, central banks respond by doing little or nothing.
The effects of high oil prices thus flow through to the economy without being moderated by the world's central banks leaning against the wind.
Yet if we take a very long-term view, it is not so clear that high oil prices are bad for the world as a whole.
For example, if high oil prices were the result of taxes that were then redistributed to oil users, they would be unambiguously good.
To be sure, most taxes entail heavy "excess burdens": the cost is significantly greater than the value of the revenue raised because of potential taxpayers' myriad attempts at evasion and avoidance.
A tax on oil, however, does not entail excess burdens.
On the contrary, it implies excess benefits .
Shifts to more energy-efficient means of transportation ease congestion. Attempts to shave costs by economizing on energy use reduce pollution.
Higher prices for oil substitutes spur research into other energy technologies - research that is much needed today if we are to tackle the problems of global climate change tomorrow.
A well-designed tax on oil would also reduce demand, thereby lowering the potential for windfall profits for those who rule or own the ground over the oil deposits.
A little more than a decade ago, Lloyd Bentsen, President Bill Clinton's first Treasury Secretary, tried to ensure precisely that, proposing to use a "BTU tax" to close America's fiscal deficit.