Kini, standar-standar kami diberlakukan terhadap pembiayaan proyek di seluruh dunia.
Standar tersebut menciptakan kesempatan yang sama (level the playing field) di dalam industri perbankan.
Selain itu, melalui Jaringan Perbankan Berkelanjutan (Sustainable Banking Network) – perkumpulan asosiasi bank sentral, regulator, dan keuangan perdagangan – kami membantu negara merumuskan kebijakan nasional untuk mendorong keuangan hijau (green finance).
Kami melihat kenaikan permintaan atas keahlian ini, baik dari pemerintah maupun sektor swasta.
Dunia memiliki momentum – dan alat – untuk menciptakan pasar massal bagi keuangan berkelanjutan (sustainable finance), yakni sebuah pasar yang mana keputusan investasi didorong oleh prinsip-prinsip E&amp;S dan kriteria tata kelola yang baik, selain dari kelayakan kredit.
Perusahaan yang sudah menandatangani Prinsip-prinsip PBB untuk Investasi Bertanggung Jawab (UN Principles for Responsible Investment) memiliki jumlah dana kelolaan (assets under management) gabungan sebanyak 60 triliun dolar AS.
Semakin banyak perusahaan menyadari bahwa kunci keberhasilan masa kini juga termasuk fokus pada kebutuhan-kebutuhan masyarakat yang mendesak.
Sebagaimana dipelajari Musk, kiatnya adalah memenuhi kebutuhan tersebut melalui cara yang menguntungkan dan berkelanjutan, kemudian ketika solusi bisnis yang menguntungkan sudah dikenali, baru lah dilakukan kerja sama untuk memfasilitasi pengerahan berskala besar.
Dengan adanya kemauan untuk menyanggah asumsi-asumsi dan mengubah persepsi konvensional, kita bisa mengubah dunia menjadi lebih baik.
An Optimistic Case for the Euro
CAMBRIDGE – The prospects for the euro and the eurozone remain uncertain.
But recent events at the European Central Bank, in Germany, and in global financial markets, make it worthwhile to consider a favorable scenario for the common currency’s future.
The ECB has promised to buy Italian and Spanish sovereign bonds to keep their interest rates down, provided these countries ask for lines of credit from the European Stability Mechanism and adhere to agreed fiscal reforms.
New legislation will slow the growth of pension benefits substantially, and the Monti government’s increase in taxes on owner-occupied real estate will raise significant revenue without the adverse incentive effects that would occur if rates for personal-income, payroll, or value-added taxes were raised.
Reflecting these reforms, the International Monetary Fund recently projected that Italy will have a cyclically adjusted budget surplus of nearly 1% of GDP in 2013.
Unfortunately, because Italy will still be in recession next year, its actual deficit is expected to be 1.8% of GDP, adding to the national debt.
But economic recovery will come to Italy, moving the budget into surplus.
When the markets see that coming, they will drive Italy’s sovereign interest rates even lower.&nbsp; Given Italy’s very large national debt, interest payments add more than 5% of GDP to the fiscal deficit.
The combination of economic recovery and lower interest rates would produce a virtuous dynamic in which falling interest rates and a rising budget surplus are mutually reinforcing.
The situation in Spain is not as good.
Despite cuts in government spending and increases in taxes, the IMF still projects the cyclically adjusted fiscal deficit to exceed 3.2% of GDP in 2013 and 2.3% of GDP in 2015.
The key to solving Spain’s fiscal problem lies in the semi-autonomous regions that generate spending and shift the financing burden to Madrid.
Perhaps Italy’s success will help to convince Spain to adopt the tough measures that reduce projected future deficits without more current austerity.
If Italy and Spain have budget surpluses and declining debt/GDP ratios, financial markets will reduce the interest rates on their bonds without the proposed ECB purchases.
That would remove the serious risk that the ECB could start buying bonds on the basis of agreed fiscal packages, and then be forced to react if governments fall short on implementing them.
None of this would be enough to save Greece, where the fiscal deficit is 7.5% of GDP, or Portugal, where it is 5% of GDP.
But if Italy and Spain are no longer at risk of default, or of abandoning the euro, Germany and other eurozone leaders will have room to decide whether to continue funding these very small states or politely invite them to leave the euro and return to national currencies.
Moreover, even under this optimistic scenario, the problem of the current-account deficits of Italy, Spain, and the other peripheral countries will remain.
Differences among the eurozone countries in growth rates of productivity and wages will continue to cause disparities in international competitiveness, resulting in trade and current-account imbalances.
Germany now has a current-account surplus of about $215 billion a year, while the rest of the eurozone is running a current-account deficit of about $140 billion.
Italy, Spain, and France all have current-account deficits equal to 2% or more of their GDP.
As they come out of their cyclical recessions, incomes will rise, leading to increased imports and even larger current-account deficits.
Those deficits must be financed by net inflows of funds from other countries.
If Italy, Spain, and France were not part of the eurozone, they could allow their currencies to devalue; weaker exchange rates would increase exports and reduce imports, eliminating their current-account deficits.
Moreover, the increase in exports and the shift from imports to domestically produced goods and services would strengthen their economies, thereby reducing their fiscal deficits as tax revenues rose and transfers declined.
And a stronger economy would help domestic banks by reducing potential bad debt and mortgage defaults.
But, of course, Italy, Spain, and France are part of the eurozone and therefore cannot devalue.
That is why I believe that these countries – and the eurozone more generally – would benefit from euro depreciation.
Although a weaker euro would not increase their competitiveness relative to Germany and other eurozone countries, it would improve their competitiveness relative to all non-eurozone countries.
If the euro falls by 20-25%, bringing it close to parity with the dollar and weakening it to a similar extent against other currencies, the current-account deficits in Italy, Spain, and France would shrink and their economies would strengthen.
German exports would also benefit from a weaker euro, boosting overall economic demand in Germany.
It is ironic that the ECB’s offer to buy Italian and Spanish debt has exacerbated external imbalances by raising the value of the euro.
Perhaps that is just a temporary effect and the euro will decline when global financial markets recognize that a weaker exchange rate is needed to reduce current-account deficits in the eurozone’s three major Latin countries.
If not, the ECB’s next challenge will be to find a way to talk the euro down.
Overcoming the Public-Sector Coordination Problem
CAMBRIDGE – Public-private cooperation or coordination is receiving considerable attention nowadays.
A plethora of centers for the study of business and government relations have been created, and researchers have produced a large literature on the design, analysis, and evaluation of public-private partnerships.
Even the World Economic Forum has been transformed into “an international organization for public-private cooperation.”
Of course, private-private coordination has been the essence of economics for the past 250 years.
While Adam Smith started us on the optimistic belief that an invisible hand would take care of most coordination issues, in the intervening period economists discovered all sorts of market failures, informational imperfections, and incentive problems, which have given rise to rules, regulations, and other forms of government and societal intervention.
This year’s Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences was granted to Oliver Hart and Bengt Holmström for their contribution to understanding contracts, a fundamental device for private-private coordination.
But much less attention has been devoted to public-public coordination.
This is surprising, because anyone who has worked in government knows that coordinating the public and private sectors to address a particular issue, while often complicated, is a cakewalk compared to the problem of herding the cats that constitute the panoply of government agencies.
The reason for this difficulty is the other side of Smith’s invisible hand.
In the private sector, the market mechanism provides the elements of a self-organizing system, thanks to three interconnected structures: the price system, the profit motive, and capital markets.
In the public sector, this mechanism is either non-existent or significantly different and less efficient.
The price system is a decentralized information system that reveals people’s willingness to buy or sell and the wisdom of buying some inputs in order to produce a certain output at the going market price.
The profit motive provides an incentive system to respond to the information that prices contain.
And capital markets mobilize resources for activities that are expected to be profitable; those that adequately respond to prices.
By contrast, most public services have no prices, there is not supposed to be a profit motive in their provision, and capital markets are not supposed to choose what to fund: the money funds whatever is in the budget.
In the budget process, the finance ministry estimates revenues, targets a certain fiscal deficit, and deduces the overall spending level consistent with these numbers.
It then proceeds to allocate funds to all existing commitments and entitlement programs.
The remainder is assigned for discretionary spending across various ministries in proportions often related to past budgets.
Typically, ministers fight jealously over these spoils, as their ability to leave a mark in their respective fields often depends on it.
Under this system, why would a minister spend money on another minister’s priorities?
But addressing most problems in government involves multiple agencies.
For example, bottlenecks in the tourism industry may involve airports, tourist visa requirements, or hotel construction permits, none of which falls under the tourism ministry.
Organizing the public-private dialogue to identify problems and propose solutions is eminently doable, as Piero Ghezzi, Peru’s former minister of production has shown.
But organizing the public agencies to respond in a coordinated manner, given existing budgetary procedures, is a different matter: the ministry of foreign affairs may not give much importance to tourist visas.
With separate and relatively independent budgets, coordination becomes very difficult.
One solution is to create a market-like mechanism within the government.
The idea is to assign a portion of the budget, say 3-5%, to a central pool of funds to be requested by one ministry but to be executed by another, as if one was buying services from the other.
These resources would allow the demand for public goods to permeate the allocation of budgetary resources across ministries.
Two metaphors may help clarify the idea.
Universal banks offer deposit accounts, credit cards, mortgages, business loans, and other products.
At the front end, an account executive manages the relationship with the client.
At the back end, a different department produces each service.
The amount of resources that the back end gets depends on the demand for services identified at the front end.
A similar situation arises in international financial institutions like the World Bank.
At the front end, country directors manage the relationship with the “client,” meaning the country government.
At the back end, experts in education, roads, electricity, water, and health care design and analyze project loans.
The budget is given to the front end and the back end must “sell” their services to the front end, thus creating an internal market, so that resources are allocated based on client needs.
While all ministries have their external constituencies, some ministries have more of a front-end, “account executive” nature: their core mission involves coordinating the provision of public goods to different parts of the economy.
Ministries of agriculture, industry, tourism, and urban development, are some examples.
By contrast, finance and infrastructure ministries of have more of a back-end character.
The central pool of resources is designed to increase the responsiveness of one ministry’s back end to the demands of society as identified by another ministry’s front end, without these resources competing with the priorities that each ministry has for its “own” budget.
By allocating a small proportion of each year’s budget to priorities identified in this way, we may find that, over time, budgets become more responsive and better reflect society’s evolving needs.
And public-private coordination may flourish once the public-public bottlenecks are removed.
In Cautious Praise of Latin America
BUENOS AIRES/WASHINGTON, DC – US President Barack Obama’s trip this month to Brazil, Chile, and El Salvador is a good opportunity to assess the recent performance of Latin America’s economies, and to analyze their prospects and risks going forward.
Latin America showed strong resilience during the international financial crisis.
While aggregate output fell in 2009, it recovered extremely fast.
As the crisis hit, stronger banking systems and effective macroeconomic policies – including fiscal responsibility and low public debt, exchange-rate flexibility, and a large accumulation of international reserves – allowed Latin American countries to implement unprecedented countercyclical policies.
Political peace was also preserved through social policies that reduced organized conflict.
In short, while Latin America’s economies were helped by high commodity prices, it is indisputable that the significant economic reforms adopted in most countries enabled them to have a “good crisis.”
But this successful performance, together with high growth rates from 2004 to 2010, seems to have led to an unhealthy level of self-satisfaction among observers and policymakers in some countries.
Indeed, many now apparently assume that their countries have become immune to future shocks.
Such complacency is unwarranted.
Although growth has indeed been significantly above trend in recent years, performance over the entire decade was unimpressive.
Second, although countries have laid the groundwork for sustainable growth in a number of areas, the reform agenda remains vast, and most countries are not yet able to avoid the boom-and-bust cycles that have long plagued them.
When it comes to GDP growth, most countries recorded 3-4% annual rates on average in the period between the crises of 1999 and 2009.
Countries like Uruguay, Mexico, and        El Salvador grew at a mere 2-2.5% rate.
Only the Dominican Republic, Peru, and Panama attained 6-7% growth.
And, on a per capita basis, Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Uruguay, El Salvador, and Mexico eked out less than 2% annual growth on average.
But it is the agenda of pending reforms that should stifle excessive complacency.
That agenda, with obvious country differences, spans five important areas, which together should be the focus of policy attention aimed at solidifying the region’s transformation.
First, governments need to adopt urgent business-climate reforms in order to foster investment, entrepreneurship, and innovation.
Latin America currently lacks a level playing field for entrepreneurship.
Without it, the region will not be able to overcome its low levels of productivity and competitiveness.
Second, Latin America needs to overhaul its weak health and education systems.
Rapidly expanding demand for skilled workers cannot be satisfied as long as average schooling still totals eight years.
Third, despite some significant improvements, major deficiencies in the coverage and quality of infrastructure are clearly affecting competitiveness and increasing costs.
The private sector needs to become more involved in infrastructure, which requires the adoption of adequate public-private partnerships.
Fourth, the social gains of the recent past, while important, are far from sufficient.
Although the region’s poverty rate has decreased by 10 percentage points in the last decade, 180 million people remain below the line, more than 70 million are still indigent, and a large percentage remains just above the poverty line.
Thus, soaring food and fuel prices are likely to upset efforts by governments to improve income distribution and social cohesion.
Finally, while Latin America’s resource-based economic model and the increasing importance of China in the region catalyzed the growth spurt that began in 2004, the share of high-technology manufacturing and services exports has decreased.
Unless this trend is reversed, it will be difficult to improve the quality of jobs in the region, which could jeopardize social and political stability.
Latin America has come a long way.
It passed the crisis test with flying colors, and the future is promising.
But the region’s success should be seen as a base for cementing progress, rather than as an end in itself.
Otherwise, countries risk losing their hard-won gains.
Insentif Tepat untuk Masa Depan Rendah Karbon
BERLIN – Perjanjian iklim yang berhasil disepakati oleh pemimpin dunia di Paris bulan lalu telah dikenal secara luas karena menetapkan target ambisius untuk membatasi kenaikan suhu global di bawah 2ºC dibandingkan dengan tingkat pra-industri.
Tetapi perjanjian ini hanya satu langkah, meskipun salah satu yang terpenting.
Kini pembuat kebijakan harus mencari cara mewujudkan tujuan ini – tentu tidak mudah, apalagi mengingat bahwa bertentangan dengan kebijaksanaan konvensional, kenaikan harga energi konvensional secara terus-menerus tidak dapat diandalkan untuk mendorong terjadinya pergeseran yang diperlukan menuju masa depan rendah karbon.
Secara sekilas, logika insentif ekonomi negatif terlihat dapat diterima.
Jika, katakanlah, mengemudikan mobil yang menggunakan banyak BBM menjadi lebih mahal, orang akan cenderung lebih jarang memakainya.
Tetapi dampak dari perubahan harga bahan bakar sifatnya parsial dan menunda.
Ketika pengguna kendaraan mampu membeli mobil yang hemat bahan bakar dalam jangka panjang, besar kemungkinannya mereka akan mengurangi jenis konsumsi lainnya dalam jangka pendek untuk mengimbangi kenaikan biaya.
Bicara tentang pemecahan masalah sebesar perubahan iklim, diktum yang dipopulerkan oleh Keynes – “In the long run, we are all dead” – jelas berlaku.
Selain itu, walaupun konsumen menanggapinya secara efisien, harga bahan bakar fosil sangat bergantung pada pasar yang heavily financialized, yang cenderung sangat fluktuatif.
Turunnya harga minyak secara tajam selama 18 bulan terakhir merupakan contoh nyata.
Tidak hanya harga minyak sendiri gagal memicu pengurangan konsumsi; tapi juga melemahkan insentif untuk mengembangkan sumber energi alternatif.
Contohnya investasi pada tenaga surya mungkin terkesan berharga ketika harga minyak $100 per barel, namun daya tariknya merosot ketika harga jatuh di bawah $50.
Mungkin pembuat kebijakan bisa menaikkan pajak untuk mengimbangi penurunan tersebut.
Tetapi terkadang kenaikan tersebut (seperti sekarang) harus cukup besar dan penerapan kebijakan yang tidak menentu yang mencerminkan ketidakstabilan pasar bukanlah gagasan yang baik.
Sistem carbon pricing bisa mengalami nasib yang serupa.
Di Uni Eropa, harga karbon selama beberapa tahun sudah cukup rendah dan saat ini pelaku pasar nampaknya mengikuti perilaku kawanan dan percaya bahwa harga karbon akan tetap seperti itu.
Namun tidak ada jaminan bahwa perdagangan emisi bebas tidak akan berfungsi seperti pasar keuangan lainnya, mengakibatkan fluktuasi tajam pada harga CO2.
Ketika ekspektasi tiba-tiba berubah, “kawanan” ini mungkin berbalik dan lari ke arah berlawanan, menyebabkan harga CO2. melambung.
Namun permasalahan lain terkait dengan pendekatan berbasis harga untuk memitigasi perubahan iklim adalah pendekatan ini gagal memperhitungkan potensi pasar untuk menciptakan insentif yang menyimpang.
Ketika harga energi konvensional naik, pemasok-pemasok baru melihat adanya peluang; dengan demikian, sebelum bulan Juni 2014, ketika harga minyak tinggi, investor mengerahkan sumber daya untuk mengembangkan minyak dan gas shale di Amerika Serikat.
Namun pasokan tambahan ini akhirnya menyebabkan harga merosot, mengurangi insentif untuk berinvestasi pada sumber-sumber energi alternatif atau efisiensi energi.
Ini adalah reaksi pasar yang wajar, tapi tidak memperkuat perjuangan melawan perubahan iklim, yang akan membutuhkan biaya yang terus meningkat.
Alasan terakhir mengapa insentif negatif saja tidak cukup untuk memitigasi perubahan iklim mungkin alasan yang paling tidak rasional: setelah beberapa tahun mengalami kenaikan pajak, masyarakat bertekad menentang kebijakan apapun yang dapat menaikkan harga energi, terlepas dari apakah harga saat ini tinggi atau rendah.
Masyarakat begitu yakin bahwa harga energi “meledak”, jadi meskipun harga minyak baru-baru ini merosot, setiap proyek baru yang menyiratkan harga yang sedikit lebih tinggi – walaupun harga energi secara keseluruhan masih lebih rendah dibandingkan lima tahun lalu – kini akan sangat sulit dilakukan.
Konsekuensinya jelas: Ketika pembuat kebijakan mulai merancang strategi untuk melaksanakan isi perjanjian Paris, mereka tidak boleh bergantung sepenuhnya pada menaikkan harga energi demi mencapai tujuan.
Sebuah strategi yang mengasumsikan bahwa pasar akan menghukum siapapun yang tidak berinvestasi di masa depan rendah karbon adalah strategi yang tidak realistis.
Masih dimungkinkan adanya pendekatan yang lebih baik: Langsung memberi penghargaan (reward) kepada orang-orang yang berinvestasi pada masa depan rendah karbon, baik itu dengan meningkatkan efisiensi energi atau mengembangkan sumber-sumber energi bersih.
Misalnya, pemerintah bisa menerapkan skema penyusutan yang dipercepat (accelerated depreciation) untuk investasi bisnis rendah karbon; memberikan subsidi untuk investasi bangunan hemat energi; dan membuat kebijakan yang mendukung inovasi industri yang bertujuan untuk mengurangi emisi dan meningkatkan daya saing.
Semua hal ini akan membuat daya tarik bahan bakar fosil berkurang di hadapan investor dan konsumen.
Meskipun pendekatan berdasarkan insentif positif tersebut membutuhkan biaya lebih tinggi dibandingkan kenaikan pajak dalam jangka pendek, manfaat jangka panjangnya tidak dapat dipungkiri lagi.
Di saat terjadinya penolakan keras terhadap harga energi yang meningkat, hal ini mungkin salah satu mekanisme yang paling efektif – dan tepat secara politik – untuk mewujudkan tujuan-tujuan yang ditetapkan di Paris.
The Inclusive Road to Growth
GENEVA – There is no bigger policy challenge preoccupying leaders around the world than meeting the need to expand participation in the benefits of economic growth and globalization.
Indeed, a geographically and ideologically diverse consensus has emerged that a new – or at least much improved – model of economic development will be required if truly greater inclusiveness is to be achieved.
Unfortunately, this political consensus has so far remained aspirational, rather than prescriptive.
Policymakers have yet to develop an internationally recognized policy framework – with a corresponding set of indicators and measurable milestones – to guide countries targeting broad-based improvements in living standards, rather than simply continuing to use GDP growth as the bottom-line measure of national economic performance.
The extent to which growth creates opportunities and improves living standards depends on an array of structural and institutional economic policies, including many in areas outside of education and redistribution (the areas most commonly featured in discussions about inequality).
There is a growing recognition of the importance of institutions – particularly legal frameworks and public agencies that administer rules and incentives – in the development process.
But this recognition has yet to penetrate fully the approach to economic growth that most economists and policymakers take.
The role that institutions play in shaping economic growth was a key finding of the landmark 1993 World Bank study, The East Asian Miracle, which examined how eight countries in the region achieved “high growth and declining inequality” from 1965 to 1990.
The Commission on Growth and Development, chaired by the Nobel laureate economist Michael Spence, reached a similar conclusion in its 2008 report, The Growth Report: Strategies for Sustained Growth and Inclusive Development.
The lesson is also apparent in the economic history of the twentieth century, when – especially in the decades following the Great Depression – most of today’s advanced industrialized countries underwent a sustained process of institutional deepening that broadened the base and strengthened the resilience of their economies.
Reforms targeting labor policy, the investment climate, social insurance, competition, education, and infrastructure created a more inclusive and more sustainable growth model by spreading purchasing power, which supported aggregate demand and reduced vulnerability to investment-driven booms and busts.
It is a lesson that needs relearning today, as the world economy continues to struggle to find a more solid foundation for growth and escape the shadow of the 2008-2009 crisis.
Adopting a more socially inclusive model of growth and development will require widening the lens through which priorities are set when shaping national economic strategies.
Appropriate policies regarding macroeconomics, trade, and financial stability will remain crucial to establishing the basic conditions for the efficient allocation of resources underpinning growth.
But such policies are only part of the solution.
Developing domestic institutions and appropriate incentives in a broad range of other areas that are relevant for social inclusion will be vital to improving living standards, while reinforcing the growth process itself.
Both types of policies – macroeconomic management and measures that boost inclusiveness – deserve equal attention in national economic strategies.
It is important not to underestimate the cultural change that this will require of governments and economic advisers.
The concept of “structural reform” usually refers to measures aimed at boosting economic growth by sharpening market signals and restoring the health of public finances.
Such policies are often implemented in response to fiscal or balance-of-payments crises and frequently squeeze living standards in the short term.
But the strengthening of institutions in areas that promote social inclusion is also a form of structural reform, in this case aimed at maximizing the contribution of growth to broad living standards and strengthening its resilience.
Our research has identified 15 domains that are important for promoting social inclusion.
These include educational opportunity and performance, the relationship between productivity and wage growth, the concentration of economic rents, the effectiveness of the financial system’s intermediation of investment in the real economy, physical and digital infrastructure, and the coverage and adequacy of basic social protections.
They also include areas not traditionally considered equality-enhancing – such as facilitating asset-building through small-business and home ownership and combating corruption – but that are just as important as education or redistribution for improving living standards.
There is no single ideal institutional mix for inclusive growth, but all countries should begin to think more systematically about strengthening their institutions and creating incentives to promote inclusive growth.
There is much room for improvement.
In cross-country comparisons, no country outperforms its peers in every domain.
Indeed, not a single country scores above average across all 15.
It is possible, indeed essential, to be pro-equality and pro-growth, to advocate strengthening social inclusion while promoting the efficiency of markets.
An inclusive model for growth and development is inherently pro-labor and pro-business.
It is time to put our aspirations to work.
Economics in a Time of Political Instability
MILAN/STANFORD – Over the last 35 years, Western democracies have seen a rapid rise in political instability, characterized by frequent shifts in governing parties and their programs and philosophies, driven at least partly by economic transformation and hardship.
The question now is how to improve economic performance at a time when political instability is impeding effective policymaking.
In a recent article, one of us (David Brady) shows the correlation between rising political instability and declining economic performance, pointing out that countries with below-average economic performance have experienced the most electoral volatility.
More specifically, such instability corresponds with a decline in the share of industrial or manufacturing employment in advanced countries.
Though the extent of the decline varies somewhat across countries – it has been less sharp in Germany than in the United States, for example – the pattern is fairly ubiquitous.
Over the last 15 years, in particular, increasingly powerful digital technologies enabled the automation and disintermediation of “routine” white- and blue-collar jobs.
With advances in robotics, materials, 3D printing, and artificial intelligence, one can reasonably expect the scope of “routine” jobs that can be automated to continue expanding.
The rise of digital technologies also boosted companies’ ability to manage complex multi-source global supply chains efficiently, and thus take advantage of global economic integration.
As services became increasingly tradable, manufacturing declined steadily as a share of employment, from 40% in 1960 to about 20% today.
But, in most advanced countries, the tradable sector did not generate much employment, at least not enough to offset declines in manufacturing.
In the United States, for example, net employment generation in the third of the economy that produces tradable goods and services was essentially zero over the last two decades.
Partly driven by these trends, the share of national income going to labor, which rose in the early post-war period, began falling in the 1970s.
While globalization and digital technologies have produced broad-based benefits, in the form of lower costs for goods and an expanded array of services, they have also fueled job and income polarization, with a declining share of middle-income jobs and a rising share of lower- and higher-income jobs splitting the income distribution.
The magnitude of this polarization varies by country, owing to disparate social-security systems and policy responses.
Until 2008, when economic crisis roiled much of the world, the concerns associated with rising inequality were at least partly masked by higher leverage, with government expenditures and wealth effects from rising asset prices supporting household consumption and propping up growth and employment.
When that growth pattern broke down, economic and political conditions deteriorated rapidly.
Most obvious, the drop in growth and employment has amplified the adverse effects of job and income polarization.
Beyond the obvious practical problems this has raised, it has impinged on many citizens’ sense of identity.
In the post-war industrial era, one could reasonably expect to earn a decent living, support a family, and contribute in a visible way to the country’s overall prosperity.
Being shunted into the non-tradable service sector, with lower income and less job security, caused many to lose self-esteem, as well as fostering resentment toward the system that brought about the shift.
(It did not help matters that the same system bailed out the main driver of the economic crisis, the financial sector – a move that exposed a stark disparity between exigency and fairness.)
While technology-driven economic transformation is not new, it has never occurred as rapidly or on as large a scale as it has over the last 35 years, when it has been turbocharged by globalization.
With their experiences and fortunes changing fast, many citizens now believe that powerful forces are operating outside the control of existing governance structures, insulated from policy intervention.
And, to some extent, they are right.
This has several economic consequences.
One is policy-induced uncertainty, which, by most accounts, amounts to a major impediment to investment.
Another is the distinct lack of consensus on an agenda to restore growth, reduce unemployment, reestablish a pattern of inclusiveness, and retain the benefits of global interconnectedness.
On one level, it is hard not to see this as a self-reinforcing destructive cycle.
Political instability reduces the likelihood of defining and implementing a reasonably comprehensive, coherent, and sustained economic-policy agenda.
The resulting persistence of low growth, high unemployment, and rising inequality fuels continued political instability and fragmentation, which further undermines officials’ capacity to implement effective economic policies.
But on another level, these trends may actually be healthy, as they bring concerns about globalization, structural transformation, and governance – which have so far been expressed mainly in the streets – into the political process.
This kind of direct connection between citizens’ concerns and governance is, after all, a core strength of democracy.
When a developing country gets stuck in a no-growth equilibrium, building a consensus on a forward-looking vision for inclusive growth is always the critical first step toward achieving better economic performance and the policies that support it.
That is what the most effective leaders have done.
The principle is the same for developed countries.
Our best hope is that today’s leaders understand it and will adhere to it, thereby putting their creative energies to work on a new vision that places their countries on a path to greater prosperity and equity.
The Economics of Inclusion
CAMBRIDGE – Many people find economic growth to be a morally ambiguous goal – palatable, they would argue, only if it is broadly shared and environmentally sustainable.
But, as my father likes to say, “Why make something difficult if you can make it impossible?”
If we do not know how to make economies grow, it follows that we do not know how to make them grow in an inclusive and sustainable way.
Economists have struggled with the tradeoff between growth and equity for centuries.
What is the nature of the tradeoff?
How can it be minimized?
Can growth be sustained if it leads to greater inequality?
Does redistribution hamper growth?
I believe that both inequality and slow growth often result from a particular form of exclusion.
Adam Smith famously argued that, “It is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or the baker that we expect our dinner, but from their regard to their own interest.”
So why would growth not include people out of self-interest, rather than requiring deliberate collective action?
For example, GDP per worker in the State of Nuevo León in Mexico is eight times that of Guerrero, while output per worker in the Department of Chocó in Colombia is less than one-fifth that of Bogotá.
Why would capitalists extract so little value from workers if they could get so much more out of them?
The answer is surprisingly simple: fixed costs.
Modern production is based on networks of networks.
A modern firm is a network of people with different expertise: production, logistics, marketing, sales, accounting, human-resource management, and so on.
But the firm itself must be connected to a web of other firms – its suppliers and customers – through multi-modal transportation and telecommunication networks.
To form part of the modern economy, firms and households need access to networks that deliver water and dispose of sewage and solid waste.
They need access to the grids that distribute electricity, urban transportation, goods, education, health care, security, and finance.
Lack of access to any of these networks causes enormous declines in productivity.
Just think of how your life would change if you had to walk two hours each day to obtain drinking water or wood for fuel.
But connecting to these networks involves fixed costs.
Before anyone can consume a kilowatt-hour, a liter of water, or a bus ride, somebody has to get a copper wire, a pipe, and a road to their house.
These fixed costs need to be recouped through long periods of use.
If income is expected to be low (perhaps because of other missing networks), it does not pay to connect a firm or a household to the network, because the fixed costs will not be recouped.
Growth is not inclusive because fixed costs deter markets from extending the networks that underpin it.
Changes in these fixed costs have outsize effects on who is included.
For example, the first telephone company started operations in 1878, while mobile phones are barely 25 years old.
One might expect that the former would have diffused more than the latter, just because of the time advantage.
Yet, in Afghanistan, there are 1,300 mobile phones for every landline.
In India, there are 72 cellphone lines&nbsp;per 100 persons, but only 2.6 landlines.
In fact, many Indians with mobile phones must defecate in the open because the median Indian does not have piped water in his house.
In Kenya, where there are 50 mobile phones per 100 people, only 16% of the population has access to electricity.
This reflects the fact that cellphone towers and handsets are much cheaper than pipes and copper wires, making it possible for the poor to pay the fixed costs.
It is the fixed costs that limit the diffusion of the networks.
So, a strategy for inclusive growth has to focus on ways of either lowering or paying for the fixed costs that connect people to networks.
Technology can help.
Clearly, cellphones have done wonders.
Cheaper photovoltaic cells may enable remote villages to get electricity without the fixed costs of long transmission lines.
Mobile banking may lower the fixed costs faced by traditional banks.
But in other areas, the issue involves public policy.
From its beginning in 1775, the US Postal Service was based on the principle “that every person in the United States – no matter who, no matter where – has the right to equal access to secure, efficient, and affordable mail service.”
A similar logic led to the expansion of the interstate highway system.
Obviously, all of this costs money, and it is here that priorities matter.
Poor countries lack the money to connect every person to every network at once, which explains the huge regional differences in income.
But too many resources are often allocated to palliative redistributive measures that address the consequences of&nbsp;exclusion rather than its causes.
Countries such as Brazil, South Africa, Peru, Uganda, Guatemala, Pakistan, and Venezuela spend substantially more money on subsidies and transfers than on public investment to expand infrastructure networks, education, and health care.
A strategy for inclusive growth must empower people by including them in the networks that make them productive. Inclusiveness should not be seen as a restriction on growth to make it morally palatable.
Viewed properly, inclusiveness is actually a strategy that enhances growth.
New Light on Income Inequality
ABU DHABI – Speeches by politicians on inequality tend to be short on facts and long on ideological assertion.
In developing and emerging economies, one charitable explanation for the poor quality of public discourse about income inequality is that data on income distribution are often unavailable or dubious.
On this most important of subjects, debates tend to generate more heat than light.
A new set of studies could help put an end to all that.
Led by Nora Lustig, a professor of economics who specializes in Latin America, a team at Tulane University’s Commitment to Equity Institute created comprehensive databases on both the state of income distribution and the effects of government policies on that distribution.
Crucially, the figures are comparable across a large set of middle- and low-income countries and also with data available for advanced countries.
Preliminary conclusions emerging from these studies will illuminate political debates – and likely annoy ideologues of both the right and the left.
Start, Lustig argues in a recent paper, with the fact that world income inequality is not rising.
Consider the Gini coefficient, the most common measure of inequality, which runs from a value of zero for perfect equality to 100 for perfect inequality (one person receives all the income).
In Sub-Saharan Africa, where data are more fragile, it seems to have remained roughly constant.
Moreover, inequality seems to be dropping precisely where it was most acute to begin with.
This is true both for regions, particularly Latin America, and for countries, such as Brazil and South Africa.
So the often-heard assertion that rising inequality is the central economic fact of our times is probably due to a disparity of a different kind: the outsize impact of rich-country pundits and news outlets on international debates.
Another set of findings is sure to upset zealots from the right: tax-and-transfer schemes can have, and are having, a significant impact in reducing inequality.
In one comparison of middle-income countries in Asia, Africa, and Latin America, Lustig shows that Gini coefficients after taxes and transfers (including the cash value of education and health services) are significantly lower than those for initial market incomes.
The average drop for the nine emerging countries – including the still hugely unequal South Africa – that she compares is more than three points (55.7 to 52.5).
The same exercise, which treats pensions as deferred consumption and therefore abstracts from the redistributive role of pensions among the older populations of the advanced economies, yields a drop of seven points in the United States and a bit more than nine points in the European Union.
So emerging countries are doing better – but could improve considerably.
But this does not mean that activists should demand higher taxes and public spending under all circumstances.
The quality of government programs makes a big difference.
Brazil has a public sector that is roughly twice the size of Chile’s – total tax revenue is approximately 20% of GDP in the latter and somewhere around 40% (estimates differ) in the former.
And social expenditure (again treating pensions as deferred consumption) is also twice as large in Brazil: 16% versus 8% of GDP.
But, according to Lustig, the effect of government redistribution on inequality is the same in both countries: a nearly four-point drop in the Gini score.
What Lustig does not explore is that the contrast is even sharper if one recalls that Brazil’s government spends a great deal less than Chile’s on infrastructure, relative to GDP.
It is hard to escape the conclusion that some public expenditure in Brazil serves little purpose other than keeping certain political constituencies conveniently quiet.
A case also worth noting is that of Bolivia, where left-wing administrations have significantly expanded social-welfare spending.
But, because cash transfers are universal, rather than targeted at the poor, the overall effect is not progressive but neutral, another paper finds.
Crucially, taxes and transfers are not the only way to fight inequality.
Earlier work by Lustig and her coauthors found that a declining wage premium – that is, a drop in the wage gap between workers with high and low education – explained part of the decline in the Gini coefficient in Latin American countries.
It is not easy to disentangle the role of supply and demand factors in the reduction of the wage premium, but both seem to have played a role.
On the demand side, exchange-rate devaluations made non-traditional exports more competitive and helped boost demand for relatively unskilled labor.
On the supply side, a sharp increase in years of schooling, and especially in access to higher education, swelled the ranks of professionals and other skilled workers and helped lower their relative wages.
This is all good for income distribution, but the resulting politics remains fraught.
Student activists demanding (along with the rest of society) a fairer distribution of resources may not wish to hear that the growing numbers of professionals often resulted from the rapid and controversial expansion of private – and sometimes for-profit, universities – and that this accounts for part of the drop in inequality.
Similarly, young men and women who worked hard to get to university with the expectation of very high relative compensation are not happy to find that the wages of, say, journalists and psychologists, are rising much more slowly than those of computer technicians or machine operators.
Indeed, this frustration is behind (though not always overtly) many of the recent university student protests in Latin America and elsewhere.
So income inequality is bound to prove politically controversial when it is worsening, and also when it tends to decline.
Studies like those led by Lustig can illuminate the inevitable controversies, so that they yield better policies rather than simple acrimony.
Redistribution or Inclusion?
RIYADH – The issue of rising income inequality loomed large at this year’s World Economic Forum in Davos.
As is well known, the United States’ economy has grown significantly over the past three decades, but the median family’s income has not.
The top 1% (indeed, the top .01%) have captured most of the gains, something that societies are unlikely to tolerate for long.
Many fear that this is a global phenomenon with similar causes everywhere, a key claim in Thomas Piketty’s celebrated book Capital in Twenty-First Century.
But this proposition may be dangerously misleading.
It is crucial to distinguish inequality in productivity among firms from unequal distribution of income within firms.
The traditional battle between labor and capital has been about the latter, with workers and owners fighting over their share of the pie.
But there is surprisingly deep inequality in firms’ productivity, which means that the size of the pie varies radically.
This is especially true in developing countries, where it is common to find differences in productivity of a factor of ten at the provincial or state level and many times higher at the municipal level.
These two very different sources of inequality are often conflated, which prevents clear thinking on either one.
Both are related to a similar feature of modern production: the fact that it requires many complementary inputs.
This includes not only raw materials and machines, which can be shipped around, but also many specialized labor skills, infrastructure, and rules, which cannot be moved easily and hence need to be spatially collocated.
A shortage of any of these inputs can have disastrous effects on productivity.
This complementarity makes many parts of the developing world unsuitable for modern production, because key inputs are missing.
Even within cities, poor areas are so disconnected and inadequately endowed that productivity is dismal.
As a result, there are huge disparities among firms in terms of efficiency – and hence in the income they can distribute.
Given productivity constraints, redistribution is only palliative, not curative.
To address the problem requires investing in inclusion, endowing people with skills, and connecting them to the inputs and networks that can make them productive.
The dilemma is that poor countries lack the means to connect all places to all inputs.
They are faced with the choice of connecting a few places to most inputs and getting high productivity there, or putting some of the inputs in all places and getting very little productivity growth everywhere.
That is why development tends to be unequal.
The other problem of modern production is how to distribute the income generated by all of the complementary inputs.
Today, production is carried out not just by individuals, or even by teams of people within firms, but also by teams of firms, or value chains.
Just look at the credits at the end of any contemporary film.
Complementarity thus creates a problem of attribution.
How should credit for the final product be allocated, and to whom?
Economists have traditionally believed that each team member is paid her opportunity cost, that is, the highest income she could receive if she were kicked off the team.
In this context, if markets are characterized by what economists call perfect competition, once the opportunity cost of all inputs has been paid, there is nothing left to distribute.
But in real life, the team is worth more – often much more – than the opportunity cost of its members.
Who gets to pocket this “team surplus”?
Traditionally, the assumption has been that it accrues to shareholders.
But the rise of extreme CEO compensation in the US, documented by Piketty and others, may reflect CEOs’ ability to disrupt the team if they do not get part of the surplus.
After all, CEOs experience precipitous income declines when they are kicked out, indicating that they were paid far more than their opportunity cost.
In the case of successful start-ups, the money paid when they are acquired or go public accrues to those who put the team together.
For more conventional value chains, the surplus tends to go to the inputs that have greater market power.
Business schools teach their students to capture the maximum surplus in the value chain by focusing on inputs that are difficult for others to provide while ensuring that other inputs are “commoditized” and hence cannot capture more than their opportunity cost.
The gains do not accrue to the most deserving.
The rise of “capital,” which Piketty documents in France and other countries, is caused mostly by the appreciation of real estate, simply because good locations become more valuable in an increasingly networked economy.
As with land, the current intellectual property-rights regime, by over-protecting old ideas, may provide market power that not only exacerbates income inequality but also hurts innovation.
This means that policies aimed at ensuring an equitable outcome should rely on either owning or taxing the inputs that capture the “team surplus.”
One reason why Singapore has a well-funded government, despite low taxes, is that its successful policies caused the land and real estate it owned to explode in value, generating a huge revenue stream.
Similarly, the Colombian city of Medellín funds itself from the profits of its successful utility company, which is now a multinational player.&nbsp;The economist&nbsp;Dani Rodrik recently suggested&nbsp;that governments should fund themselves from the dividends earned by investing in public venture funds, thus socializing the gains from innovation.
Of course, capturing this surplus may allow for income redistribution, as many suggest; but a much bigger and sustainable bang can be achieved if the proceeds go instead to financing inclusion.
In the end, inclusive growth may generate a more prosperous and egalitarian society, whereas redistribution may fail to benefit either inclusion or growth.
China’s Multilateral Financial Mobilization
LONDON – The board of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development recently approved China’s application to join – an application a decade in the making – and sent it on to member governments for final approval.
But EBRD membership is only one expression of China’s rapidly growing role in the world’s international financial institutions.
The question now is whether China will spur change within them, or vice versa.
The global financial crisis shook up the international financial architecture, catching many institutions off guard.
The International Monetary Fund, for example, had actually pursued sharp downsizing in the preceding years.
But it also allowed them to prove their mettle.
Many of them – not least the IMF, but also the EBRD and the European Investment Bank – eventually showed that they could respond flexibly and, as a result, have gained expanded mandates and more capital.
The crisis also undermined the legitimacy of the G-7 – the countries at the root of the problem – while invigorating the G-20.
Amid these transformations, China gained an opening to boost its global influence – one that it is determined to exploit, despite resistance from some corners.
It plans to use its presidency of the G-20 in 2016, for example, to advance an ambitious agenda.
In fact, Chinese international engagement is now occurring on a scale and at a rate never seen before.
China is a member of many multilateral institutions – including several regional players like the African Development Bank (AfDB) and the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) – with which it is deepening its relationships, especially through co-investment in projects around the world.
For example, China significantly ratcheted up its commitment to the AfDB last year through the $2 billion Africa Growing Together Fund.
Similarly, China’s sovereign wealth funds have served as important anchor investors in the vehicles designed by the World Bank’s International Finance Corporation and the EBRD to bring long-term institutional capital into their projects.
One of those funds, SAFE, is currently the only investor in the EBRD vehicle – and China has not even formally joined the organization yet.
China is also forging new institutions.
The establishment of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) captured global headlines earlier this year, not just because of strong US resistance, but also because countries like Britain and Germany joined anyway.
China also played a leading role in the formation, with its BRICS counterparts (Brazil, Russia, India, and South Africa), of the New Development Bank (NDB), now headquartered in Shanghai.
Then there is China’s $40 billion Silk Road Fund, intended to support the infrastructure projects needed to underpin President Xi Jinping’s “one belt, one road” strategy, which aims to improve trade and communication linkages across Eurasia.
China’s most ambitious effort to date, the Silk Road Fund dwarfs the activities of the more traditional international financial institutions, in terms of both scale and range of activities.
The Fund’s first initiative, the $1.65 billion Karot hydropower dam in Pakistan, will entail both direct lending to the project and equity investment in the company responsible for building the dam and managing it for 30 years.
As it stands, the Silk Road Fund is unilateral, placing it in the same category as the China Development Bank and the state-owned investment conglomerate CITIC.
But the Chinese authorities have said that it is open for others to join, though that seems unlikely, given the scale of the Chinese commitment.
Despite the remarkable size of China’s investment projects, the country’s leaders have so far remained relatively conservative in terms of institutional innovation.
Over the last year, however, Chinese Communist Party officials have mooted a proposal for a more experimental new multilateral financial institution geared toward “restoring the environment” – that is, supporting large projects aimed at land reclamation, water purification, and improvements in air quality.
Getting such an institution off the ground will not be easy, given the need for global coordination to bring potential shareholders together and for large subsidies to make investments viable.
But that kind of bold institutional innovation could fill an important gap in the global financial architecture, and cement China’s leadership in financing environmental remediation.
In the meantime, Chinese institutions are innovating on a smaller scale, as they spearhead a leaner and faster approach to financing.
For example, the AIIB’s inaugural president, Jin Liqun, has announced plans to eliminate some of the most inefficient features of existing institutions, like the resident board and nationality restrictions on hiring.
Nonetheless, China’s growing global financial role is not likely to change profoundly how existing institutions operate.
Of course, as efforts like Jin’s highlight the flaws in existing structures, they may help to inspire reform.
And the EBRD can undoubtedly benefit from China’s experience with experimentation and scaling up.
But the main aim of the AIIB and the NDB seems not to be to transform the multilateral financial landscape, but to add capacity, while showing that China can build state-of-the-art institutions.
And when it comes to the EBRD, China’s stake will be tiny, at least at first; the Chinese say they are there to learn.
Indeed, co-investment with the EBRD can provide Chinese companies with local knowledge – and potentially even protection – as they navigate new markets.
For now, increased engagement in multilateral institutions seems likely to change China more than it changes the institutions, even as China’s voting power increases to reflect better its growing contributions.
A closer look at the experiences of long-standing institutions – including working with civil-society groups and promoting local ownership of policies – will help China hone its strategy for engagement in Africa and elsewhere.
It may even enable China to improve its own development model.
In the longer term, however, the development challenges that China faces at home – particularly rapid environmental deterioration – could drive it to take a more transformative role, pushing for institutional innovation globally.
In Darwin’s Place
BERKELEY – Imagine that, as a young scientist, you spent years collecting information about the foundations of how nature works.
You built your reputation by collecting plants, animals, fossils, and geological samples from around the world, and sending back letters that tracked your development into a first-rate scientist.
By the time you returned from a great five-year voyage, you were surprised to find that you were a rising star.
Throughout your trip, and in the years afterward, the mists that had obscured some incredibly simple yet powerful natural explanations lifted.
These were the circumstances in which Charles Darwin found himself in the late 1830’s and early 1840’s, when he developed the principle of natural selection and its revolutionary implication: all the Earth’s life forms could have evolved from a single common ancestor.
His was one of the most brilliant insights in the history of science: a mechanism that enabled the principle of evolution to unify and inform all of biology.
Just for a minute, put yourself in his place.
How would you feel?
(“It is like confessing a murder,” he wrote at the time.)
Here’s the translation to today’s world: your discovery might win you the Nobel Prize, but it also might get you a bullet in the brain from a religious fundamentalist.
How do you feel about publishing now?&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; 
But then, at roughly the same time you finish drafting the first summary of your ideas, a book, written by an anonymous author, appears that also purports to explain how life might have changed through time, and considers some of the mechanisms that may underlie this grand history.
Have you been “scooped”?&#160; 
No, the author has many of his facts wrong and goes beyond reasonable speculation, which brings him disdain from scientists.
Predictably, he fares as poorly with religious leaders, some of whom accuse him of blasphemy.
And he hasn’t independently reached your new ideas – the ideas that matter. 
But you empathize with his position: you will be pilloried in the same way if you don’t nail down your theory with the best arguments possible and marginalize your opponents so that they have neither theological nor scientific reasons to attack you.
So you wait to publish.
Years roll by.
You gather data, do experiments, read, and write.
Your book becomes bigger.&#160; Impossibly big.
It is a good thing you do not have to work for a living.
Then, a bolt from the blue.
You don’t want to lose your investment.
You want credit where it’s due, and you want to control the game, because you have so much more to show and to support your arguments.&#160; 
So you consult scientific colleagues who have known for years how you’ve been developing your theory.
They agree that it is fair to broker an arrangement with your correspondent to publish together.
This appears to satisfy everyone, but it puts you in panic mode. 
And yet: the genius of the argument is seen. 
Natural selection as a theory becomes a proposition in play, needing much more work.
An Argentine naval officer who had resettled in Mexico under an assumed name was wanted by Spain on charges of genocide, torture, and terrorism.
The officer, Ricardo Miguel Cavallo, was implicated in abuses committed in 1977 and 1978 at the notorious Naval Mechanics School in Buenos Aires.
According to the Spanish indictment, Cavallo belonged to the operations unit of a group actively involved in kidnapping and torturing people whom the military regime perceived as leftist.
The question before me was whether to extradite Cavallo to Spain, a third country, to face trial for human rights abuses committed in Argentina.
Signing the papers would be groundbreaking, as it would signal for the first time that suspected rights abusers might face trial anywhere in the world if justice was not likely at home.
For me, the decision was straightforward: the crimes demanded justice, and Cavallo was more likely to be held to account in Spain than in Argentina.
Amnesty laws in Argentina at the time shielded him from prosecution.
I signed the extradition papers.
Since then, many inroads have been made to ensure that the world’s most serious crimes no longer go unpunished.
The International Criminal Court is up and running, and 107 states, including Mexico, have ratified the treaty establishing the court and acceded to its jurisdiction.
National courts, such as those in Spain, play an increasingly strong role in combating impunity through the exercise of universal jurisdiction.
The rise of these types of prosecutions has in turn motivated countries, including Argentina and Chile, to repeal their amnesty laws so that suspected war criminals can be prosecuted at home.
The trials of Slobodan Milosevic and Charles Taylor have demonstrated that even heads of state are no longer safe from prosecution.
The comfort level for perpetrators of these crimes is shrinking as the options for prosecution expand.
Whether the progress in this battle against impunity continues or slides backwards is now in the hands of the United Nations Security Council.
On July 14, the ICC prosecutor, Argentine lawyer Luis Moreno Ocampo, announced that he was seeking an arrest warrant for Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir for orchestrating the atrocities in Darfur.
Immediately after the announcement, Sudan’s government and its allies began a diplomatic campaign aimed at securing a Security Council deferral of the investigations for 12 months.
They are attracting wider support than they should – in part because of fear of retaliation against UN peacekeepers and humanitarian workers.
But the Security Council must be extremely cautious in considering any suspension of ICC proceedings.
Such a decision would be a serious setback to the movement to end impunity for the most serious crimes.
It would show that indicted warlords and dictators can avoid justice by holding the Security Council hostage to threats of more violence.
Suspending the ICC’s work in this way would undermine its potential for deterrence, one of the purposes for which it was established. Postponing the case against al-Bashir would seriously undercut the important principle – which has gradually been taking root worldwide – that no one is above the law.
The Security Council’s decision to refer the situation in Darfur to the ICC prosecutor in March 2005 was itself a major milestone in the battle against impunity.
That decision demonstrated, for the first time, that there was an institution that could investigate and prosecute the most serious international crimes regardless of where they occur.
Apart from being a victory for international justice, the referral was also a promise to victims of the horrific crimes in Darfur that the perpetrators of the crimes against them would one day be held accountable.
For the Security Council to step back from that commitment would do more than abandon the victims in Darfur. It would be a major blow to those around the world who have struggled to put an end to impunity for perpetrators of humanity’s most terrible crimes.
In Defense of Polish Plumbers
Supporters of Europe’s social model claim that what distinguishes it is the importance placed on “social cohesion.”
And, of course, it is as difficult to be against cohesion as it is to be against friendship.
But the real question is which policies work best.
Existing policies to achieve social cohesion are based on the belief that, if uncorrected, the free play of market forces will lead to wide disparities in income and thus intensify social conflict.
But studies tend to show that the majority of income transfers by government occur within the middle class, while only a relatively small proportion are from rich to poor.
In fact, some transfers flow the other way.
For example, many pension systems transfer money from the poor to the middle class, simply because richer people usually live longer.
What most European countries get for their social expenditure is a lot of state provision of services, and not much reduction in social inequality.
So lower levels of social expenditure could involve only a relatively small increase in inequality and social conflict.
Moreover, if Europeans target social expenditure better, they might achieve a greater reduction in inequality with a lower level of social transfers.
Indeed, some policies aimed at achieving cohesion may well reduce it.
Restriction on firing employees, for example, may protect people who have jobs, but often at the expense of the unemployed, thus increasing social exclusion.
Even where high levels of social transfers actually do reduce inequality (and therefore presumably increase cohesion), they may undermine inter-communal relations if ethnic minorities are perceived as being strong net beneficiaries.
The European Union resulted from the tragic lessons of the first half of the twentieth century, when giving free rein to national egoism led to continental catastrophe, and increasing globalization means that economic, internal, foreign, and defense policies are unlikely to be successful when pursued exclusively at national level.
Yet we continue to believe that social cohesion can be limited to that of the nation.
European cohesion funds account for only a fraction of a percent of European GDP, whereas about 10% of national income is typically spent on social transfers.
A massive increase in European Commission spending power to achieve greater pan-European social cohesion would be politically unacceptable to the richer members, who would have to pay for it.
But neither can we accept a situation in which vast resources are spent on national cohesion, while European cohesion lags so woefully behind.
Fortunately, inequalities can often be reduced considerably without spending much money.
Nothing that the EU or its individual members can do would have as great an impact on reducing income inequality in Europe than eliminating national protectionist barriers to migration, movement of capital, and provision of services.
Doing so would reduce inequalities not only between EU member states, but also within the poorer ones.
The poorest of the poor would gain the most, while the rich member states would lose little, despite their popular fear of open borders.
For example, during the referendum campaign in France for the European constitution, the “Polish plumber” became a symbol of the threat that European integration was supposed to pose to French workers’ standards of living.
But the impact of free migration (when allowed) on French plumbers’ incomes is in fact minimal, not least because of the smallness of the new member states compared to the whole of Western Europe.
Workers’ incomes in Britain and Ireland have not fallen measurably, despite both countries’ openness to immigration from the enlarged EU.
Free migration in the EU means that Polish plumbers will not only catch up with French plumbers, but also with Polish bankers.
Middle-class people in Poland are being hit by the increased cost of the services of skilled workers, such as plumbers, and also of the less skilled, such as decorators, and the highly skilled but low paid, such as doctors.
Why, then, was the European Commission’s proposed services directive, which would ensure freedom to supply services across the Union to all EU companies, vilified as the “Frankenstein directive”?
Why was it fatally diluted by the European Parliament?
Why have demands by the EU’s new member states for freer access to Western Europe’s labor and services markets, and for the right to compete with “old Europe” for investment, been stigmatized as social dumping?
Why are policies that would do the most to reduce inequality in Europe being presented as anti-social?
What motivates the opponents of free service provision and labor movement in Europe is not a desire to ensure social cohesion, but a wish to maintain the status quo.
To be sure, change creates discomfort, and may even cause tension and conflict.
But the conservative attitudes underlying opposition to change are anything but “social,” for they would deny the poorest of Europe’s poor a chance to improve their lot.
Indeed, such attitudes are potentially disastrous.
If they came to be accepted as the guiding principles of European policy, Europe’s economy would become petrified, with stagnant growth making it impossible to afford even modest levels of social transfers.
India at Play
New Dehli – On June 1, the Indian Premier League came to a thundering climax with a cliffhanger final match, watched by 60,000 cheering fans in a new stadium and an estimated 300 million television viewers around the world.
As cheerleaders danced and waved brightly colored pom-poms, and star sportsmen from across the globe, clad in their teams’ multi-hued regalia, looked forward to a $2.5 million payday, black-market tickets changed hands for as much as $2,500.
Football?
Basketball?
No, the IPL is the newest Indian innovation revolutionizing that most staid of Victorian sports – cricket.
As the globalizing world discovers a twenty-first-century India full of high-tech computer geeks, efficient businessmen, colorful fashions, and glitzy entertainment – a far cry from the old stock images of fakirs on beds of nails, maharajahs on elephants, and mendicants with begging bowls – it is also finding an India obsessed with what most regard as a nineteenth-century sport.
Cricket has seized the Indian national imagination like no other sport.
An international match can fill 100,000-seat stadiums, while attracting TV audiences of 350 million.