Nonetheless, the evidence clearly suggests that high debt/GDP ratios eventually impede long-term growth; fiscal consolidation should be phased in gradually as economies recover; and the consolidation needs to be primarily on the spending side of the budget.
Finally, the notion that we can wait 10-15 years to start dealing with deficits and debt, as economist Paul Krugman has suggested, is beyond irresponsible.
Understanding America’s Electoral College
WASHINGTON, DC – Anyone watching the United States’ presidential race needs to understand that national opinion polls do not provide an accurate picture of how the election might turn out.
Thanks to America’s Electoral College, it’s not who wins the most votes nationwide that matters in the end, but who wins in which states.
Each state is awarded a certain number of votes in the Electoral College, depending on the size of its population.
The candidate who crosses the threshold of 270 electoral votes wins the presidency.
In almost every state, a candidate who wins 50.1% of the popular vote is awarded 100% of its electoral votes.
(Only Maine and Nebraska don’t follow the winner-take-all rule; they divide the Electoral College vote by congressional district.)
As a result, the votes of millions of people who cast their ballot end up not counting.
If you’re a Republican in New York or California, which are dominated by the Democrats, or a Democrat in Wyoming or Mississippi, which are reliably Republican, you can forget about your vote for president mattering.
One peculiar result of this peculiar system is that a candidate can win a majority of the national popular vote but lose in the Electoral College, by losing narrowly in populous states and winning in some smaller states.
It doesn’t happen often, but whenever it does, the US goes through a paroxysm of hand-wringing over this seemingly undemocratic mechanism.
In the most recent case, Al Gore won a majority of the popular vote in 2000, but George W. Bush won the presidency.
Due to the Electoral College, voters cast their ballots not for a candidate but for a slate of electors – party activists, including friends and allies of the contender – who will support their choice.
The role of the electors is a brief formality; they meet in their state capitol and cast the vote.
But we already know how it’s going to turn out, because the presidential election results are reported at the time in terms of who won each state.
At this point, the national vote count is meaningless.
Congress convenes and “counts” the electoral votes; but this, too, is a mere formality.
(The Bush-Gore contest was unusual in that it wasn’t settled until December 12, more than a month after the election, when the Supreme Court, in a partisan and highly controversial decision, voted 5-4 to end the recount in Florida, handing the presidency to Bush.)
Now, here’s where it can get convoluted, and possibilities for mischief arise: if no one wins 270 Electoral College votes, the election goes to the House of Representatives, where each state delegation casts a single vote, regardless of how many voters the delegation represents.
Wyoming (population 585,000) and California (population 39 million) each get one vote.
And the delegations aren’t bound to vote for the candidate who won the most votes in their state.
Then, after the House elects the president, the Senate picks the vice president, with each senator getting one vote.
It’s theoretically possible that Congress could elect a president and vice president from different parties.
This labyrinthine system for choosing the president reflects the ambivalence of America’s founders about popular democracy.
They were suspicious of the rabble – the public – having its way on the basis of misinformation or a lack of understanding of the issues.
The United Kingdom’s vote in June to leave the European Union – against the advice of experts and allies – appears to validate this concern.
From the outset, America’s founders were aware of the dangers of government by plebiscite.
Alexander Hamilton worried about giving power to the people because “they seldom judge or determine right.”
Fearing “an excess of democracy,” they interposed institutional buffers between the popular will and government decisions.
Until 1913, senators were chosen by state legislatures, not directly elected by the voters.
And they gave us the Electoral College.
This system has an enormous impact on the actual campaign for the presidency, because it determines where the candidates spend their time and money.
Only about ten states are considered “swing” states that could go for either party; the rest are considered “safe” states for one party or the other.
Of course, sometimes the political wisdom can be wrong and a state bounces out of its category.
But these ten “battleground” states are the ones to watch for clues as to how the election will turn out.
They are much more indicative of the final result than national polls.
For example, California and New York are so routinely Democratic that the only reason candidates turn up in either one is to raise money.
By contrast, Ohio – the jewel in the crown of swing states, because tradition has it that no Republican can win the presidency without winning there – is well trodden by the candidates.
The other states considered most important to victory for either side are Florida and Pennsylvania.
Because such populous states, along with a handful of others, routinely go Democratic, the Democrats have a built-in advantage in the Electoral College.
So Donald Trump is widely believed to have more limited options for accumulating 270 votes.
Maybe the Electoral College isn’t such a peculiar idea, after all.
Unfreezing Credit
CHICAGO – Little political enthusiasm exists for further support to the banking sector.
One reason is that banks that received money in the initial rescues do not seem to have increased their lending, without which monetary and fiscal stimulus are unlikely to be effective.
For banks to start lending again, even more intervention may be needed.
To see why, we need to understand why banks are still so reluctant.
One possibility is that they worry about borrowers’ credit risk, though this would have to be extremely high to justify the complete cessation of long-term lending.
A second possibility is that banks worry about having enough resources to meet their own creditors’ demands if they lock up funds in long-term loans.
But the many central bank lending facilities that have been opened around the world should assuage these concerns, especially for large and well-capitalized banks.
On the other hand, perhaps banks’ reluctance to lend reflects a fear of being short of funds if investment opportunities get even better.
Citicorp CEO Vikram Pandit said as much when he indicated that it was cheaper to buy loans on the market than to make them.
And buying may get cheaper still!
Consider, for example, the real possibility that a large indebted financial institution faces a run on its deposits, as Lehman did, and starts dumping loans onto the market.
Not only will those loans’ price fall if only a few entities have the spare funds to buy them, but other distressed entities’ scramble to borrow also will make it hard for any institution without funds to obtain them.
Anticipating the prospect of such future fire sales (of loans, financial assets, or institutions), it is understandable that even strong banks will restrict their lending to very short maturities, and their investments to extremely liquid securities.
This may also explain why markets for some assets have dried up.
Some distressed banks clearly possess large quantities of mortgage-backed securities, and are holding onto them in the hope that their prices will rise in the future, saving them from failure.
At the same time, buyers expect even lower prices down the line.
While there is a price today that reflects those expectations, it is not a price at which distressed banks want to sell.
As a result, there is an overhang of illiquid financial institutions, whose holdings could be unloaded if they run into difficulties.
For some, low prices would render them insolvent.
For others, low prices would be a tremendous buying opportunity, whose prospective return far exceeds returns from lending today.
Political exhortations to lend can have some, albeit limited, impact.
Any voluntary resumption of lending will necessitate reducing both fears and potential opportunities.
Here are some ways to reduce the overhang.
First, the authorities can offer to buy illiquid assets through auctions and house them in a government entity, much as was envisaged in America’s original Troubled Asset Relief Program.
This can reverse a freeze in the market caused by distressed entities that are unwilling to sell at prevailing market prices.&nbsp;
The fact that the government is willing to buy in the future (and now) should raise prices today, because it reduces the possibility of low prices in a future fire sale.
Moreover, once a sufficient number of distressed entities sell their assets, prices will rise simply because there is no longer a potential overhang of future fire sales.
Both effects can lead to increased trade in illiquid assets today, and unlock lending, though this outcome may require significant government outlays.
A second approach is to have the government ensure the stability of significant parts of the financial system that hold illiquid assets by recapitalizing regulated entities that have a realistic possibility of survival, and merging or closing those that do not.
For those entities that are closed down, this would mean moving illiquid assets into a holding entity that would gradually sell them off.
One problem is that the public’s appetite for a bailout of the unregulated and hemorrhaging “shadow” financial system, consisting of institutions like hedge funds and private equity firms, is rightly small, yet it too can serve to hold back bank lending if a large proportion of the distressed assets are held in weak institutions there.
Perhaps, therefore, a mix of the two approaches can work best, with the authorities buying illiquid assets, which can help even unregulated entities, even while cleaning up the regulated financial sector, focusing particularly on entities that are likely to become distressed.
This differs substantially from the current approach (in which well-capitalized entities are given even more capital), which does not deal with the overhang of illiquid assets that more distressed entities hold.
Unless the regulated financial system is systematically audited, with weak entities stabilized through capital injections, asset purchases, or mergers, or liquidated quickly, the overhang of distressed institutions will persist, constraining lending.
One lesson from Japan’s experience in the 1990’s is that the sooner the authorities bite the bullet and clean up the financial system, the sooner the economy will be on the road to recovery.
The longer officials remain paralyzed, hoping that the financial system will right itself, the higher the eventual cost of the cleanup will be. &nbsp;
Masa Depan penuh Kebahagiaan, Toleransi, dan Pemuda
DUBAI – Selama dua minggu terakhir, saya mendengar dan membaca banyak pertanyaan, komentar, dan pemberitaan tentang perubahan terbaru yang diberlakukan terhadap pemerintah Uni Emirat Arab (UEA).
Mengapa semua orang bertanya-tanya, apa alasan kami membentuk Kementerian Negara Urusan Kebahagiaan, Toleransi, dan Masa Depan, dan kenapa kami menunjuk seseorang yang berusia 22 tahun sebagai Menteri Pemuda?
Perubahan ini mencerminkan hal-hal yang kami pelajari dari peristiwa di kawasan Timur Tengah selama lima tahun terakhir.
Terutama, kami belajar bahwa kegagalan merespon aspirasi pemuda secara efektif, ketika jumlahnya lebih dari setengah populasi penduduk di negara-negara Arab, ibarat berenang melawan arus.
Tanpa energi dan optimisme pemuda, masyarakat tidak dapat tumbuh dan berkembang, justru terancam hancur.
Ketika pemerintah memandang rendah pemuda dan menghambat jalan mereka menuju kehidupan yang lebih baik, pemerintah seperti membanting pintu di hadapan seluruh warga.
Kami tidak lupa bahwa asal-usul terjadinya ketegangan di kawasan ini, peristiwa yang dijuluki “Arab Spring”, berakar dari terbatasnya kesempatan yang diberikan pada pemuda untuk mewujudkan mimpi dan ambisi mereka.
Kami bangga bahwa UEA adalah negara yang muda.
Dan kami bangga atas para pemuda di negara ini.
Kami berinvestasi dan memberdayakan mereka terutama karena mereka adalah masa depan kita.
Kami yakin bahwa mereka mampu memperoleh dan memproses pengetahuan lebih cepat, karena mereka tumbuh dengan alat-alat dan teknik yang tidak kita miliki ketika seusia mereka.
Kami mempercayakan mereka untuk mengarahkan negara menuju pertumbuhan dan perkembangan, itu sebabnya kami menunjuk seorang pemuda sebagai menteri di kabinet dan membentuk suatu dewan khusus urusan pemuda.
Kami juga belajar dari ratusan ribu orang yang tewas dan jutaan yang menjadi pengungsi di kawasan ini bahwa konflik sektarian, fanatisme ideologi, budaya, dan agama hanya memicu api kemarahan.
Kita tidak boleh membiarkan hal ini menimpa negara kita.
Kita harus mempelajari, mengajarkan, dan menerapkan toleransi – dan menanamkannya pada anak-anak kita, baik melalui pendidikan dan teladan kita sendiri.
Itu sebabnya kami menunjuk Menteri Negara untuk Toleransi.
Kami percaya bahwa kerangka hukum harus mengesahkan toleransi yang diamalkan warga dan setiap kebijakan dan inisiatif kita akan memberi contoh luar biasa bagi negara-negara tetangga.
Ketika negara-negara Arab bersikap toleran dan menghargai orang lain, mereka mampu memimpin dunia: dari Baghdad hingga Damaskus ke Andalusia dan bahkan lebih jauh, dunia Arab bagai lentera yang menerangi ilmu, pengetahuan, dan peradaban, sebab nilai-nilai kemanusiaan adalah dasar hubungan kita dengan semua peradaban, budaya, dan agama.
Bahkan ketika nenek moyang kami keluar dari Andalusia, pemeluk agama lain mengikuti mereka.
Toleransi bukan slogan, tapi itu sebuah kualitas yang harus dijaga dan ditunaikan.
Toleransi harus ditenun menjadi kain masyarakat yang akan menjaga masa depan dan memelihara kemajuan yang telah dicapai.
Masa depan Timur Tengah tidak akan cerah tanpat rekonstruksi intelektual yang membangun kembali nilai-nilai keterbukaan ideologi, keberagaman, dan penerimaan pendapat orang lain, baik itu terkait dengan intelektual, budaya, atau agama.
Dari setiap pembelajaran yang kita petik, diperoleh keputusan yang merancang masa depan.
Kita juga sadar bahwa kita bisa mendapat pelajaran dengan melihat ke depan, tidak hanya bercermin dari masa lalu atau sekarang.
Sederhananya, kita harus memikirkan seperti apa kehidupan kita kelak di era ekonomi pasca bonanza minyak.
Itu sebabnya kami berinvestasi besar – mengeluarkan lebih dari 300 miliar dirham ($81,5 miliar) – dalam membangun fokus arah UEA selanjutnya, dengan tujuan menyiapkan diversifikasi ekonomi yang membebaskan generasi mendatang dari jeratan ketergantungan pada pasar minyak yang selalu fluktuatif.
Pencapaian tujuan ini mengharuskan kita untuk mempertimbangkan ulang sistem legislatif, administratif, dan ekonomi secara utuh agar bisa keluar dari ketergantungan pada minyak.
Kita memerlukan infrastruktur perundang-undangan yang kuat dan sesuai untuk membangun keberlanjutan dan diversifikasi pada perekonomian negara, bagi anak-cucu kita.
Melalui tulisan ini saya ingin mengirim pesan yang jelas kepada penduduk di kawasan ini bahwa perubahan hanya akan terjadi jika anda bertindak.
Kawasan kita ini tidak memerlukan kekuatan eksternal yang sakti, justru yang diperlukan adalah kekuatan dari dalam yang bisa mengalahkan kebencian dan sikap tidak toleran yang merusak kehidupan di banyak negara tetangga.
Saya menulis untuk mengirim pesan bahwa pemerintah negara-negara di Timur Tengah atau mana pun juga, perlu mengubah perannya.
Pemerintah berperan untuk menciptakan kondisi agar warganya bisa mencapai mimpi dan ambisi mereka, bukan kondisi yang bisa dikontrol oleh penguasa.
Intinya adalah memberdayakan mereka, bukan menguasai atau mengendalikan.
Singkatnya, pemerintah harus memupuk kondisi agar setiap warganya bisa menemukan dan menikmati kebahagiaan.
Sejak dahulu kami sudah terlibat dalam pembahasan tentang peran pemerintah untuk menggalakkan upaya mengisi kebahagiaan.
Sejak dahulu, kebahagiaan adalah tujuan yang ingin dicapai semua manusia di setiap peradaban.
Aristoteles mengatakan negara/pemerintah seperti makhluk hidup yang berkembang dalam pencarian demi mencapai kesempurnaan moral dan kebahagiaan bagi individu.
Ibnu Khaldun mengatakan hal yang sama.
Demikian pula Deklarasi Kemerdekaan Amerika Serikat menjunjung tinggi hak setiap warga untuk mengejar kebahagiaan (the pursuit of happiness).
Ketika sudah siap, PBB kini menyerukan perubahan pada kriteria yang digunakan untuk mengukur keberhasilan pemerintah, yang semula indikator-indikator ekonomi menjadi ukuran berkaitan dengan kebahagiaan dan kesejahteraan.
PBB telah mendedikasikan Hari Kebahagiaan Sedunia (International Day of Happiness) untuk menekankan pentingnya perubahan ini.
Berfokus pada kebahagiaan sepenuhnya dibenarkan dan dapat dilakukan.
Kebahagiaan dapat diukur dan cara menilainya sudah dikaji dalam beberapa studi. Selain itu, kebahagiaan dapat ditingkatkan dan pemenuhannya terkait dengan tujuan yang bersifat material.
Beberapa studi menunjukkan bahwa seseorang yang bahagia akan lebih produktif, panjang umur, dan mampu menggerakkan pembangunan ekonomi yang lebih baik, bagi komunitas dan negara.
Kebahagiaan seseorang, keluarga, dan karyawan, kepuasan mereka akan kehidupan dan optimisme mereka terhadap masa depan, sangat penting dalam tugas dan fungsi pemerintah yang sifatnya lintas sektoral.
Itu sebabnya perlu dibentuk satu kementerian yang berfungsi memandu dan mengupayakan tindak lanjut bersama semua lembaga pemerintahan (serta memberi contoh pada sektor swasta).
Kami tidak memberikan janji-janji palsu.
Kami akan berusaha membangun masyakarat di mana kebahagiaan dianggap utama, dengan memelihara lingkungan agar mereka bisa tumbuh berkembang.
Kami berharap rumus ini akan memberi manfaat bagi negara-negara lain di kawasan ini.
Rumusnya sederhana: pembangunan nasional yang berdasarkan nilai-nilai dasar, dipimpin oleh pemuda, dan berpusat pada masa depan di mana semua orang bisa memperoleh kebahagiaan.
The UN at 70
NEW YORK –The United Nations will mark its 70th anniversary when world leaders assemble next month at its headquarters in New York.
Though there will be plenty of fanfare, it will inadequately reflect the UN’s value, not only as the most important political innovation of the twentieth century, but also as the best bargain on the planet.
But if the UN is to continue to fulfill its unique and vital global role in the twenty-first century, it must be upgraded in three key ways.
Fortunately, there is plenty to motivate world leaders to do what it takes.
Indeed, the UN has had two major recent triumphs, with two more on the way before the end of this year.
The first triumph is the nuclear agreement with Iran.
Sometimes misinterpreted as an agreement between Iran and the United States, the accord is in fact between Iran and the UN, represented by the five permanent members of the Security Council (China, France, Russia, the United Kingdom, and the US), plus Germany.
An Iranian diplomat, in explaining why his country will scrupulously honor the agreement, made the point vividly: “Do you really think that Iran would dare to cheat on the very five UN Security Council permanent members that can seal our country’s fate?”
The second big triumph is the successful conclusion, after 15 years, of the Millennium Development Goals, which have underpinned the largest, longest, and most effective global poverty-reduction effort ever undertaken.
Two UN Secretaries-General have overseen the MDGs: Kofi Annan, who introduced them in 2000, and Ban Ki-moon, who, since succeeding Annan at the start of 2007, has led vigorously and effectively to achieve them.
The MDGs have engendered impressive progress in poverty reduction, public health, school enrollment, gender equality in education, and other areas.
Since 1990 (the reference date for the targets), the global rate of extreme poverty has been reduced by well over half – more than fulfilling the agenda’s number one goal.
Inspired by the MDGs’ success, the UN’s member countries are set to adopt the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) – which will aim to end extreme poverty in all its forms everywhere, narrow inequalities, and ensure environmental sustainability by 2030 – next month.
This, the UN’s third triumph of 2015, could help to bring about the fourth: a global agreement on climate control, under the auspices of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, in Paris in December.
The precise value of the peace, poverty reduction, and environmental cooperation made possible by the UN is incalculable.
If we were to put it in monetary terms, however, we might estimate their value at trillions of dollars per year – at least a few percent of the world economy’s annual GDP of $100 trillion.
Yet spending on all UN bodies and activities – from the Secretariat and the Security Council to peacekeeping operations, emergency responses to epidemics, and humanitarian operations for natural disasters, famines, and refugees – totaled roughly $45 billion in 2013, roughly $6 per person on the planet.
That is not just a bargain; it is a significant underinvestment.
Given the rapidly growing need for global cooperation, the UN simply cannot get by on its current budget.
Given this, the first reform that I would suggest is an increase in funding, with high-income countries contributing at least $40 per capita annually, upper middle-income countries giving $8, lower-middle-income countries $2, and low-income countries $1.
With these contributions – which amount to roughly 0.1% of the group’s average per capita income – the UN would have about $75 billion annually with which to strengthen the quality and reach of vital programs, beginning with those needed to achieve the SDGs.
Once the world is on a robust path to achieve the SDGs, the need for, say, peacekeeping and emergency-relief operations should decline as conflicts diminish in number and scale, and natural disasters are better prevented or anticipated.
This brings us to the second major area of reform: ensuring that the UN is fit for the new age of sustainable development.
Specifically, the UN needs to strengthen its expertise in areas such as ocean health, renewable energy systems, urban design, disease control, technological innovation, public-private partnerships, and peaceful cultural cooperation.
Some UN programs should be merged or closed, while other new SDG-related UN programs should be created.
The third major reform imperative is the UN’s governance, starting with the Security Council, the composition of which no longer reflects global geopolitical realities.
Indeed, the Western Europe and Other Group (WEOG) now accounts for three of the five permanent members (France, the United Kingdom, and the US).
That leaves only one permanent position for the Eastern European Group (Russia), one for the Asia-Pacific Group (China), and none for Africa or Latin America.
The rotating seats on the Security Council do not adequately restore regional balance.
Even with two of the ten rotating Security Council seats, the Asia-Pacific region is still massively under-represented.
The Asia-Pacific region accounts for roughly 55% of the world’s population and 44% of its annual income but has just 20% (three out of 15) of the seats on the Security Council.
Asia’s inadequate representation poses a serious threat to the UN’s legitimacy, which will only increase as the world’s most dynamic and populous region assumes an increasingly important global role.
One possible way to resolve the problem would be to add at least four Asian seats: one permanent seat for India, one shared by Japan and South Korea (perhaps in a two-year, one-year rotation), one for the ASEAN countries (representing the group as a single constituency), and a fourth rotating among the other Asian countries.
As the UN enters its eighth decade, it continues to inspire humanity.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights remains the world’s moral charter, and the SDGs promise to provide new guideposts for global development cooperation.
Yet the UN’s ability to continue to fulfill its vast potential in a new and challenging century requires its member states to commit to support the organization with the resources, political backing, and reforms that this new era demands.
The Children’s Revolution
LONDON – Two tragic and haunting images have emerged this year: hooded Islamic State executioners holding their knives to the necks of innocent victims, and masked medical workers bravely fighting an uphill battle against an Ebola outbreak for which the world was not prepared.
But the year’s lasting legacy will be an even more extensive disaster, with recovery taking years, if not decades: nearly two million newly displaced children, trapped in conflict zones across Iraq, Syria, Gaza, the Central African Republic, and elsewhere.
These children have joined the ranks of 25 million displaced boys and girls worldwide – a number equivalent to the population of a midsize European country and the largest in the 70 years since the end of World War II.
Images of vulnerable, desolate refugee children – likely to be displaced for a decade or more – have become so common that the world seems unable to comprehend what it is seeing.
But the plight of child refugees is only one reason why a new approach to children’s rights is needed.
This year, an estimated 15 million school-age girls will become child brides, forced into marriage against their will.
Some 14 million boys and girls below the age of 14 are child laborers, many forced to work in the most hazardous of conditions.
And 32 million girls are denied the basic right to attend school, owing to gender discrimination; around 500,000 of them are trafficked each year.
In the 1950s, the fight against colonialism dominated world politics.
In the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s, great civil-rights battles were waged against racial discrimination and apartheid, followed by struggles to advance the rights of the disabled and sexual minorities.
It is our generation’s task to tackle the civil-rights movement’s unfinished business, by ending the exploitation of children, especially girls, and ensuring compulsory universal education.
To mark the 25th anniversary of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), I, along with this year’s Nobel Peace Prize winner, Kailash Satyarthi, and the head of the United Kingdom’s Overseas Development Institute, Kevin Watkins, am calling on the world community to offer practical support to the burgeoning civil-rights struggle of young people.
We can do more to end child labor, child marriage, child trafficking, and discrimination against girls, by not only demanding the proper policing of domestic laws, but also by establishing a new International Children’s Court, buttressed by a credible reporting and sanctions system.
Violations of children’s rights are now so rampant that there simply is no alternative.
Indeed, though no human-rights treaty has been more widely ratified than the CRC, which requires governments to report on their compliance once every five years, its work lacks adequate resources and enforcement.
Only one in seven countries submit compliance reports on time, and one-third do not submit even a year late.
Meanwhile, the scantly funded offices that manage the information have a two-year backlog.
Another promising initiative – the “optional protocol on communications,” aimed at enabling children and their advocates, for the first time, to bring cases before the UN Human Rights Committee – has been similarly weakened by a lack of strong support, authority, and resources.
Indeed, only 14 countries have ratified the protocol since it was agreed in 2011.
Moreover, states are not legally bound to change the policies or laws that are deemed to be violating their international human-rights obligations.
And a shortage of investigative resources has led to an emphasis on problematic legislation, instead of the larger issue of inadequate enforcement of laws that promote the CRC’s principles.
So there is a case not only for an International Children’s Court, but also for children and their representatives to be granted the right to petition it.
Such a court should have the capacity to receive and investigate individual complaints, the power to monitor independently the enforcement of laws, and the resources to devote to investigations into relevant areas, including child labor, child marriage, child slavery, genital mutilation, and child rape.
Over time, a reporting system could be implemented to facilitate an examination of the impact of health and education policies on the world’s most marginalized boys and girls.
Such research could provide compelling evidence to support compulsory universal education as the ideal mechanism not just for ending educational exclusion, but also for bringing an end to child labor and trafficking, early marriage, and discrimination against girls.
Another advance could follow, based on Graça Machel’s victory a decade ago in convincing the UN Security Council to implement a system for reporting violence against children in conflict zones.
At the time, it was agreed that a Special Representative on Children and Armed Conflict, whose work is backed by the threat of sanctions, would also be established.
Today, a similar post – underpinned by the same system of reporting and sanctions – should be created to focus on children’s other rights.
Next month, Satyarthi and the girls’-rights leader Malala Yousafzai will receive this year’s Nobel Peace Prize, reminding the world that a children’s-rights struggle is underway – one that is increasingly being led by young people.
Indeed, frustrated with adults’ failure to discharge what should be their duties toward children, young people are forming child-marriage-free zones, launching anti-slavery groups, and organizing education-rights campaigns.
Such initiatives – including Bangladesh’s 20 child marriage-free zones, Nepal’s Kamlari Forum, and Ethiopia’s Yellow Movement of university students – may not yet be trending on Twitter and Facebook, but they are engaging millions of young people worldwide.
Now, the Global March Against Child Labor and A World at School have come together to support the #UpForSchool petition, which links the universal provision of education to ending child exploitation.
Over the next several months, youth groups in 190 countries will be collecting, it is hoped, a record number of signatures.
But we must do more than read and sign the petition.
We must recognize that today’s movement to ensure children’s rights is the civil-rights struggle of our generation – and do whatever it takes to support it.
Recovering Humanitarian Law
MADRID – Even amid the chaos and catastrophes caused by war, there are internationally recognized limits on combatants’ behavior.
And yet recent deliberate attacks on refugee camps and hospitals, in Syria and elsewhere, demonstrate an absolute disdain for basic humanitarian norms.
Indeed, such behavior – which also includes obstruction of humanitarian aid and attacks on medical and humanitarian personnel – has become all too common.
Today, the United Nations estimates that approximately 125 million people are in need of humanitarian aid – a number that increases every year.
More than 60 million people – half of them children – are currently displaced as a result of violence or conflict.
While the needs caused by natural disasters (some related to climate change) or epidemics are pressing, those related to conflicts are no less urgent.
Given the length and the magnitude of many of today’s conflicts – in which great powers are frequently involved – a bold and comprehensive international commitment is urgently needed for prevention and humanitarian response.
In addition to heads of state and government from all over the world, the summit will bring together civil-society and private-sector organizations, because, when it comes to meeting humanitarian needs, everyone must be involved.
But while the responsibility for upholding humanitarian norms does not concern only governments, they are essential in enforcing them.
In order to prevent humanitarian disasters resulting from war, the first priority is to respect the norms aimed at safeguarding civilians.
The Geneva Conventions concern those people and areas that should remain beyond the scope of armed conflict and that should be guaranteed aid.
The fact that non-governmental actors, such as terrorists, disregard this law of war should under no circumstances be a pretext for countries to behave similarly.
What is at stake are both the lives of thousands of civilians and the enduring effectiveness of the multilateral system, by which these norms have been agreed and mechanisms to enforce them established.
On May 3, the UN Security Council adopted a resolution calling for the protection of civilians in conflicts and strongly condemning recent violations of international humanitarian law.
These messages must be implemented concretely, especially among members of the Security Council.
This summit must, at a minimum, serve as a powerful call to states to uphold the established norms, but also to impel others to do so.
If we are to avoid losing a century of progress in promoting respect for human dignity, we must recognize that a country’s responsibility cannot be limited to its own behavior in conflicts; it should extend to the actions of its allies.
We embraced these norms to avoid barbarism; if we want them to be respected, we need unflinching commitments from the great powers, such as a pledge not to support or remain in coalitions with those who hold humanitarian norms in contempt.
One of the measures, proposed in the summit’s preparatory report and aimed at effective enforcement of the norms, is the creation of a specialized monitoring body.
Moreover, all countries should recognize the authority of the international courts, such as the International Criminal Court, to facilitate prosecution of those who violate humanitarian law.
The report also supports a request made some time ago: that the Security Council’s five permanent members renounce their right to veto when measures to avoid mass atrocities are being decided.
This proposal is crucial to making the Security Council an essential and effective body in matters of global security.
It is vital that countries take advantage of the opportunity offered by the Istanbul summit to reaffirm their legal commitments to safeguard civilians in conflicts and to expedite the development of new mechanisms to prevent the victims of catastrophes from being abandoned.
Respecting the most fundamental norms that we have given ourselves to guarantee the protection of humanity is a serious matter.
It is our task as citizens to demand that our national leaders uphold these principles, so that the agreements reached in Istanbul do not remain utopian wishes.
The protection of human life – even in the midst of war and disasters – should be a concern for all of us, as global citizens.
Over the next three years, progress toward fulfilling the commitments made at the upcoming summit will be evaluated.
During this time, we must not let ourselves become accustomed to images of people drowning when they flee persecution, or hospitals and refugee camps razed.
The measure of human progress is whether such behavior is regarded – by anyone – as normal or inevitable.
The Refugee Problem in New York
NEW YORK – Every September, many of the world’s presidents, prime ministers, and foreign ministers descend on New York City for a few days.
They come to mark the start of the annual session of the United Nations General Assembly, to give speeches that tend to receive more attention at home than they do in the hall, and – in the diplomatic equivalent of speed dating – to pack as many meetings as is humanly possible into their schedules.
There is also a tradition of designating a specific issue or problem for special attention, and this year will be no exception.
September 19 will be devoted to discussing the plight of refugees (as well as migrants) and what more can and should be done to help them.
It is a good choice, as there are now an estimated 21 million refugees in the world.
Originally defined as those who leave their countries because of fear of persecution, refugees now also include those forced to cross borders because of conflict and violence.
This number is up sharply from just five years ago, owing primarily to chaos across the Middle East, with Syria alone the source of nearly one in every four refugees in the world today.
The attention of the UN and its member states does not reflect only the increase in numbers or heightened humanitarian concern over the suffering of the men, women, and children who have been forced to leave their homes and their countries.
It also stems from the impact of the flow of refugees on destination countries, where it has upended politics in one country after another.
In Europe, the rise of political opposition to German Chancellor Angela Merkel, the Brexit vote, and the growing appeal of nationalist parties on the right can all be attributed to real and imagined fears stemming from refugees.
The economic and social burden on countries such as Jordan, Turkey, Lebanon, and Pakistan, all of which are being asked to house large numbers of refugees, is immense.
There are also security concerns about whether some of the refugees are actual or potential terrorists.
In principle, there are four ways to do something meaningful about the refugee problem.
The first and most fundamental is to take steps to ensure that people need not flee their countries or, if they have, to create conditions that permit them to return home.
But this would require that countries do more to end the fighting in places like Syria.
Alas, there is no consensus on what this would require, and even where some agreement exists, sufficient will to commit the required military and economic resources does not.
The result is that the number of refugees in the world will grow.
The second way to help refugees is to ensure their safety and wellbeing.
Refugees are particularly vulnerable when they are on the move.
And after they arrive, many fundamental needs – including health, education, and physical safety – must be met.
Here, the challenge for host states is to guarantee adequate provision of essential services.
A third component of any comprehensive approach to refugees involves allocating economic resources to help deal with the burden.
The United States and Europe (both European Union member governments and the EU itself) are the largest contributors to the UN High Commission on Refugees, but many other governments are unwilling to commit their fair share.
They ought to be named and shamed.
The final aspect of any refugee program involves finding places for them to go.
The political reality, though, is that most governments are unwilling to commit to take in any specific number or percentage of the world’s refugees.
Again, those who do their fair share (or more) should be singled out for praise – and those who do not for criticism.
All of which brings us back to New York City.
Sadly, there is little reason to be optimistic.
The 22-page draft “outcome document” to be voted on at the September 19 High Level meeting – long on generalities and principles and short on specifics and policy – would do little, if anything, to improve refugees’ lot.
A meeting scheduled for the next day, to be hosted by US President Barack Obama, may accomplish something on the funding side, but little else.
The refugee issue provides yet another glaring example of the gap between what needs to be done to meet a global challenge and what the world is prepared to do.
Alas, the same holds true for most such challenges, from terrorism and climate change to weapons proliferation and public health.
We can expect to hear a lot of talk in New York next month about the international community’s responsibility to do more to help existing refugees and address the conditions driving them to flee their homelands.
But the cold truth is that there is little “community” at the international level.
So long as that remains the case, millions of men, women, and children will face a dangerous present and a future of little prospect.
Obama’s Cuban Breakthrough
MADRID – Too frequently, leaders become hostages, rather than shapers, of their sociopolitical environment.
Too seldom does the world see history-changing steps like Richard Nixon’s trip to China in 1972 or Egyptian President Anwar el-Sadat’s visit to Jerusalem in 1977.
That is why conflicts like that between Cuba and the United States persist for so long.
For more than a half-century, no US president was willing to pay the political price for admitting failure and resuming diplomatic relations with the island.
But, as his tenure enters the home stretch, Barack Obama seems to have been released from such constraints.
A US president can challenge political constraints only by taking on powerful lobbies.
President Jimmy Carter’s success in mediating the Israeli-Egyptian peace settlement, and his bold call for a “Palestinian homeland” (making him the first US president to do so), had much to do with him being deaf to Jewish voices and organizations.
Likewise, President George H.W. Bush could not have dragged the recalcitrant Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir to the Madrid Peace Conference in October 1991 had he not been willing to take on what he described as “some powerful political forces” made up of “a thousand lobbyists on the Hill.”
Obama is no stranger to pressure – and opposition – from interest groups.
But, with the end of his presidency in view, he finally seems to recognize that securing his legacy requires overcoming not just interest groups, but the structure of interest-group politics in America.
He is now at loggerheads with the Republican congressional majority over his landmark climate-change agreement with China and his controversial amnesty plan for illegal immigrants.
Likewise, if Obama still hopes to be remembered as the redeemer of the two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, he will have to take on the American Israel Public Affairs Committee next.
This would represent a departure from early in his presidency, when, in his bid to broker a settlement, he failed to confront AIPAC.
Perhaps his effort to change America’s Cuba policy – which means challenging the highly disciplined lobby opposing the rule of Fidel Castro and his brother Raúl – will show the way.
In the meantime, normalizing relations with Cuba could have far-reaching benefits.
Throughout Latin America, Cold War-era resentment of America is likely to ease, and its standing may improve in countries like Bolivia, Ecuador, Nicaragua, and especially Venezuela, which has been a Cuban ideological satellite and the Castro regime’s major economic lifeline.
Indeed, it would be unsustainable for Venezuela, nearly bankrupt owing to falling oil prices, to remain on its anti-American course, while the Castro brothers themselves have reconciled with the “gringos.”
Conspicuously, Latin America’s last Marxist insurgent group, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Columbia (FARC), declared a unilateral cease-fire just hours after the announcement that the US and Cuba would restore diplomatic ties.
Over the last two years, Cuba has hosted peace negotiations between FARC and the Colombian government, with full US support.
As the world’s biggest consumer of illicit drugs supplied by Colombian producers, the US has a vital interest in a peace deal, which could help reduce, if not end, the traffic.
To be sure, though America’s policy toward Cuba has been one of the Cold War’s last vestiges, Obama’s move will not be a game changer in America’s competition with China and Russia to shape the new world order.
But it certainly boosts Obama’s international credibility and improves his prospects of deterring other global rivals.
Suddenly, his tough line on Iran and Russia sounds more credible.
Cuba also offers an opportunity to expand the reach of Western liberal values.
By maintaining Cold War-era financial subsidies to Cuba, Russia has tried to ensure that the island remained a geopolitical flashpoint, as it was for the Soviet Union.
This is no longer an option.
In fact, even if the US were not attempting to normalize relations, Russia’s current economic woes probably would have doomed its long-standing – and already much-reduced – support for the Castro government.
Normalization of relations with the US is key to liberalization in Cuba.
After all, such changes are best served not by imposing stifling sanctions, or through military “shock and awe” tactics, as in Iraq, but by socioeconomic improvement and diplomatic engagement by external powers.
Indeed, predictions that Cuba might now shift toward a Chinese-style model of political autocracy and economic opening might be accurate only in the short term.
In the longer term, the end of the Castro era, together with improved relations with the US, is likely to bring about a repeat of Spain’s transition toward full-fledged liberal democracy after the fall of Francisco Franco.
In Cuba, Obama has shown that transcending the politics of confrontation and sanctions requires diplomatic initiative.
It is not too late for him to address other longstanding tensions, such as with Iran and North Korea – not to mention the festering conflict between Israel and Palestine – with similar boldness.
And, of course, he should work to mitigate the risk that Russia creates a permanent zone of military tension along its borders with NATO.
Ultimately, world peace is in the hands of leaders.
History honors those who dare to challenge the politics of inertia by opening, through inspired diplomacy, new paths to progress.
Uniting Asia
North Korea’s nuclear ambitions seem to have died down, at least for now.
The Six-Party Talks have, at long last, succeeded – thanks, apparently, to China’s solid opposition to the nuclearization of northeast Asia.
Under the aegis of the Six-Party umbrella, the United States and North Korea have even held the bilateral talks that North Korea’s Kim Jong Il has long coveted.
So, for now, northeast Asia is temporarily calmer and less unstable than it has been for almost two decades.
Yet it remains a potential flashpoint.
During this time of tension, an increasingly self-confident South Korea began to chart a course independent of its American patron.
In November 2005, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) accused the South Korean government of having enriched a tiny amount of uranium – to a level close to what could be used in an atomic weapon.
The government denied this, claiming that the experiments were conducted without its knowledge by academic researchers “for scientific interest.”
South Korea’s evolving foreign policy also may involve moving closer to China, as Korean nationalists join the Chinese in resisting Japan’s rival claims to potential hydrocarbon deposits in the East China Sea and the Sea of Japan.
New generations of South Koreans, who have no personal recollections of – and perhaps only casual interest in – the Korean War, apparently resent what they regard as America’s undermining South Korea’s “sunshine policy” toward North Korea.
For Japan, North Korea’s missile capability is the most immediate concern.
A sweeping defense review that Japan recently carried out reaffirms that it will continue to oppose its immediate neighbors’ possession of nuclear arms.
Of course, Japan itself already possesses both nuclear technology and solid-fuel missiles.
But the core of Japan’s defense strategy remains strong ties with the US, not military self-sufficiency.
All in all, the calmer situation in Northeast Asia might seem to be a fragile basis for creating long-term peace and prosperity in the region.
But the basic lesson from Western Europe, whose greatest powers, France and Germany, fought three great wars in 70 years, is that the only lasting solution to conflict is to embed neighboring countries in dense networks of economic, political, and security relationships, and in regional institutions that serve their mutual interests.
Of course, the creators of today’s united Europe did not start by calling for national sovereignty to be abrogated.
Indeed, Robert Schuman once declared that “Europe will not be built in a day, nor as part of an overall design.
It will be built through the practical achievements that first create a sense of common purpose.”
Accordingly, what became the European Union started inconspicuously, with the integration of French and German industries that had been most directly associated with war production – coal and steel.
Only after economic integration had progressed did the first serious efforts at political integration take place.
In today’s East Asia, too, the market is fostering integration.
Now that the 10 southeast Asian states have been gathered into ASEAN – and are promulgating an ASEAN Charter – the concept of an East Asian Economic Grouping (EAEG) that would incorporate ASEAN and China, Japan, and (a presumably unified and nuclear-free) Korea is moving forward steadily.
The initial phase of this grand ambition, a free-trade area (FTA) between ASEAN and China, began in 2004 and should be completed by 2010.
Concurrently, an FTA comprising ASEAN, Japan, and also with South Korea is being negotiated.
Since 2005, India, too, has expressed interest in such an arrangement with ASEAN-10.
But northeast Asia, alone among the Asian regions, has no regional organization.
This is why it needs a concert of powers to sustain its fragile stability.
North and South Korea must begin the work of reconciliation and community-building on their own initiative, as France and Germany did in 1952.
Economics must once again outflank politics, with trade, investment, tourism, and technology transfer intensifying across the 38th Parallel.
Meanwhile, the instruments for a larger Asia-Pacific economic community are already in place, starting with the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum, with the ultimate goal being to meet the imperative for durable peace and security.
Over the next decade, our statesmen must replace the Pax Americana that has enforced stability in the Asia-Pacific region with a Pax Asia-Pacifica, in which the major countries and sub-regional blocs contribute to and share in the maintenance of Asia-Pacific security in the face of our common geopolitical threats.
These include international terrorism, nuclear proliferation, the instability arising out of the Arab-Israel conflict and the Iraq war, and the weakness of the United Nations.
As regional neighbors and partners, we should exploit the convergence of interests that the US, Japan, China, India, Russia, ASEAN, Canada, a unified, nuclear weapon-free Korea, Pakistan, Australia-New Zealand, and others share – just as Western European exploited the Cold War stalemate between the US and the Soviet Union to consolidate and expand the EU.
America’s overstretched military provides the irrefutable rationale for a deep restructuring of Asia-Pacific security.
But trans-Pacific peace must be based on a balance not of power but of mutual benefit.
Clearly, this will involve burden-sharing by all nations in the Asia-Pacific region, and a cooperative understanding among the most affluent and powerful countries in our part of the world – the US, Japan, China, and South Korea.
Uniting Europe’s Fleets
PARIS – Of Europe’s 23 naval forces, only France’s possesses a fully operational aircraft carrier, the 40,000-ton flagship Charles de Gaulle.
Although the United Kingdom is currently building two carriers of its own, the Royal Navy is years away from the capability to deliver instant airpower from the sea.
Nevertheless, Europe is reasonably equipped to defend itself against external threats. It is less able, however, to withstand looming budget cuts.
Europe’s maritime-security strategy has long been founded on two key tenets. First, sea-borne trade routes, which account for nearly 85% of the European Union’s total exports and imports, must be kept free and safe.
And, second, European countries must maintain the capacity to deal with any major security crisis.
International events highlight these priorities’ relevance.
For example, rising tensions with Iran could compel Europe to deploy its navies to form a blockade around the Persian Gulf, in order to ensure the transit of oil.
Similarly, piracy in the Gulf of Guinea and the Indian Ocean, particularly along the coast of Somalia, threatens Europe’s maritime activities, including its extensive sea-borne commerce.
Indeed, growing concerns over piracy led to the launch in 2008 of the EU’s first naval response within the framework of the Common Security and Defense Policy (CSDP) – Operation Atalanta.
The operation, held annually and comprising 5-10 combat vessels, 1-2 auxiliary ships, and 2-4 maritime-patrol aircraft, includes forces from 26 European navies, and has undoubtedly helped to discourage, if not end, pirate attacks.
Atalanta’s success, combined with European naval forces’ leading role in last year’s operations in Libya, shows that Europe possesses much of the naval infrastructure that it needs to ensure its maritime security.
But the Libyan crisis also revealed that Europe’s naval security is limited and easily overstretched.
More than half of French naval forces were deployed during the Libyan crisis, during which their normal activity rate increased by 10-40% – at a cost of €40 million ($50 million), not to mention disruptions of standard training and maintenance.
Naval assets are not only expensive to build; they are extremely costly to operate, as each unit requires specialized equipment and highly trained personnel.
As a result, navies are often among the first to be targeted by cuts in defense budgets.
And yet, while naval deployments do not always end conflicts, they are a vital component of the military response to any crisis, and are critical to guaranteeing Europe’s security.
Given this, it is imperative that European governments adopt cost-cutting measures that do not jeopardize their naval assets.
First, the EU should take a leading role in maximizing the efficiency of each member state’s navy, by creating mechanisms that would facilitate the exchange of information between governments, maritime agencies, and navies.
Indeed, sound political decisions can achieve just as much as buying new ships – and at a far lower cost.
Adopting a comprehensive legal framework would be a useful first step.
Indeed, improved coordination between countries would contribute to more cost-efficient use of resources and equipment.
Surveillance strategies, for example, are often more expensive than necessary, owing to poor communication.
Information-sharing among Europe’s navies would also help to identify and fill existing gaps, thus paving the way for a more efficient European maritime-security infrastructure.
At the same time, in order to maintain a security framework fit to confront any conceivable security threat, Europe’s governments should preserve the entire spectrum of their naval assets.
Mothballing ships for the sake of saving money could have dire consequences for Europe’s security.
Rather than focusing on shrinking the size of existing fleets, European leaders should focus on getting more out of them.
To this end, Europe’s navies and maritime agencies should merge their capabilities, especially those related to defense and security missions.
This would bring massive savings, which could be reinvested in technological advances, thereby further equipping Europe’s navies to meet future threats.
Accurately assessing maritime operations’ success requires time and care, because naval capabilities cannot be built up quickly.
While reducing such capabilities might seem like an expedient way to cut costs, European governments must not lose sight of their long-term security priorities.
Above all, European leaders must promote increased naval cooperation.
After all, naval capacities are essential to the projection of European power – and crucial to maintaining geopolitical stability around the world.
Unity is Not Enough
The reconciliation between the leaders of the two major Palestinian groups, Hamas and Fatah, that has just been negotiated in Saudi Arabia is being hailed as a major political breakthrough.
But the national unity government created as a result of this agreement faces many daunting challenges.
The agreement needs to be followed by an effort to end the economic and administrative siege of Palestine, as well as serious peace talks with Israel aimed at ending the 39-year occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
At home, the new government needs to pay its civil servants, restore law and order, and end the chaos that has become the norm in the Palestinian territories.
The internal fighting in Palestine began in part as a result of the political impasse caused after Israel and the international community imposed an economic embargo on the Palestinian Authority.
This economic siege, zealously enforced even by Arab and Islamic banks, followed the new Hamas-led government’s refusal to accept the demand by the “quartet” – the United States, the European Union, the United Nations, and Russia – that it recognize Israel, accept all previous agreements with Israel, and renounce terrorism.
Palestinians complained that the international community acted unjustly, simply because they were unhappy with the result of a free and fair election in the Palestinian territories, which Hamas won overwhelmingly.
The government created after the January 2006 elections has been unable to pay civil servants because of the international banking blockade and the refusal of Israel to transfer millions of tax dollars collected on behalf of the Palestinian people.
After months without pay, the government, headed by Hamas’s Ismael Haniyeh, was confronted with a serious challenge in September, when civil servants went on strike, demanding to be paid.
The differences between the Fatah-led presidency of Mahmoud Abbas and Hamas’s Islamist government spilled into the streets.
Threats by Abbas to hold elections to resolve the deadlock seemed to add oil to the fire.
With unemployment rising, income dropping to record low levels, and internal tensions escalating, fighting between supporters of Hamas and Fatah began.
Attempts to reconcile the parties began in Gaza, before moving to Cairo, Damascus, and finally Mecca under the supervision of Saudi King Abdullah, whose country has been a financial backer of the Palestinians for decades.
One of the first challenges for the new government will be to convince the international community that it respects previous Palestinian agreements.
This includes the mutual recognition agreed by the PLO and Israel, as well as the Oslo Accords.
By announcing the acceptance of previous agreements and supporting the Arab peace initiative, the new government should be able to bring economic normalcy to the cash-strapped Palestinian Authority.
Money, however, is not the only need.
The ceasefire understanding between Palestinian factions and Israel will need to be honored through the commitment of both sides and a parallel political process.
The international community, especially the US, is giving verbal support to launching serious Palestinian-Israeli talks, and the Mecca Agreement paves the way for Abbas to negotiate an end to the occupation.
This will test the resolve of Israel and the international community to achieve tangible progress on re-starting negotiations.
But the newly established national unity government faces yet another daunting challenge.
If resumption of political violence and property destruction is to be avoided, a new internal security policy will be needed.
The numerous militias, groups, gangs, and individuals who own and use weapons must be controlled.
The new unity government must insist on the creation of a single, united armed force.
In order to end lawlessness, the Palestinian security leadership will need to lift the protection given to armed individuals who have been using their weapons with impunity to injure, kill, and destroy property.
Indeed, law and order must be the top priority of the unity government, owing to the need to restore the Palestinian public’s faith in Palestinian leaders from all factions.
The past year has been one of the most difficult years in modern Palestinian history.
For years, the world envied the Palestinian people’s strong social fiber, as they held together despite the occupation.
With a strong sense of national identity, Palestinians boasted that they had a clear unifying purpose: ending the Israeli occupation and establishing an independent and democratic state.
But the recent months of infighting have left a deep wound among Palestinians.
If that wound is to heal, much effort must be exerted to restore a functioning economy, strengthen internal security, and improve Palestinians’ relations with their neighbors and the international community.
No Child Left Out
SEOUL – On a recent visit to a camp for Syrian refugees in Turkey, I witnessed some of the most powerful displays of human endurance that anyone can imagine.
And yet, amid all the stories of trauma and loss, what affected me the most was these refugee families’ unquenchable thirst for education.
The children I spoke to told me of their continued desire to learn in the camp’s makeshift schools, crammed into classes and taught in shifts running from before dawn until after dark.
Their parents spoke of the hope they place in the transformative power of education.
Syria once boasted universal education.
Now, with more than four million people forced to flee their homes because of the violence wracking the country, it has become one of the world’s many places suffering from what can only be described as a global education crisis.
There are an estimated 58 million primary-school-aged children out of school worldwide, and those affected by conflict and natural disasters are among the hardest to reach.
Worse, the number of child refugees cut off from school – in places like Nepal, Myanmar, and Yemen – is increasing at an alarming rate.
If the international community does not act to nurture and educate these children, the cycle of poverty and conflict will be reproduced for generations to come.
The fact that so many children are cut off from education constitutes a clear failure on the part of the world’s governments, which promised in 2000, when the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) were adopted, to ensure primary schooling for all children by 2015.
To achieve this, it is not enough to enroll children in school; they must be kept there and provided a quality education.
UNESCO estimates that at least 250 million of the world’s children of primary-school age are unable to read, write, or do basic arithmetic.
This week, the international community will have a chance to do something about this scandalous state of affairs.
Policymakers from around the world will meet in South Korea at the World Education Forum to agree on the global education targets that are set to replace the MDGs.
It is truly fitting that South Korea is hosting this forum, because it is so often seen as a model of what investment in education can deliver.
Some 8% of South Korea’s GDP is spent on education, and UNESCO estimates that every dollar invested in primary schools generates $10-$15 in economic returns.
South Korea, which has lifted itself up from the ranks of the world’s poorest countries to among its richest in just two generations, is living proof that education pays off.
The new Sustainable Development Goals that are to be agreed this year underscore the challenges that world governments must address by 2030.
I insist that quality universal primary education must be one of the SDGs’ top priorities.
The emphasis here is on quality.
Success is measured not only by the number of children we enroll, nor by their achievements on standardized tests; the most important outcomes are the tangible and intangible impacts of education on the quality of students’ lives.
This is the unfinished business of the MDGs.
Wherever I travel with the Education Above All foundation, I encounter bright, motivated children who have been denied the chance to learn.
As the world moves on to new priorities, we cannot forget our responsibility to those who have been failed by our complacency.
The job is not done.
We must remain committed to achieving the goal of quality primary education for all children – not some, and not even most – wherever they live.
Universities: Renaissance or Decay?
“Europe’s universities, taken as a group, are failing to provide the intellectual and creative energy that is required to improve the continent’s poor economic performance.”
This dramatic statement introduces a new pamphlet whose subtitle, “Renaissance or Decay,” I have borrowed for this reflection.
The pamphlet’s two authors, Richard Lambert, a former editor of the Financial Times and future Director General of the Confederation of British Industry, and Nick Butler, the Group Vice President for Strategy and Policy Development at British Petroleum do not represent vested academic interests.
What they say about Europe probably applies to most other parts of the world as well, though not to the United States.
greater diversity in place of today’s conformity; incentives for universities to succeed, which implies the need to set their ambitions higher; less bureaucracy and more freedom and accountability; above all, more adequate funding to bring European universities close to the US level of 2.6% of GDP, from less than half on average. Not everyone will consider the underlying assumption of this analysis compelling.
Why is this attention to universities necessary?
Because, it is said, we now live in a “knowledge society.”
Perhaps.
It is also a fact that a university education is the best guarantee for young people to find jobs in a globalized environment in which information is a key to success.
Yet it is by no means certain that education systems in which 50% or more of each generation strive to attain a university degree are best suited to cope with the exigencies of the twenty-first century.
Many jobs are, in fact, not “high tech,” but, in the words of Britain’s Adair Turner, “high touch” – service-sector jobs that do not require a university education.
Even more jobs are somewhere between the two.
Thus, a flexible system of varied educational institutions may be preferable to a system that leads one out of two students to an academic degree.
Were we to settle for, say, 25% of each generation on the academic track, universities in Europe, and indeed in many other parts of the world, would still have to overcome their unfortunate tendency to define their purposes against the business world.
This tendency has been detrimental both for the business world, which is deprived of the cultural wealth provided by higher education, and for universities, because it removes them from their proper setting in the real world.
There is a strong case for more adequate funding of higher education, including student fees, which are still unpopular in many countries outside the US.
But money is not all that is needed.
One of the greatest comparative strengths of American universities lies in the nature of human relations.
Teachers take their job seriously.
They engage with students rather than eagerly awaiting breaks and holidays to pursue their own projects.
They are true university teachers rather than people who invoke the “unity of teaching and research” in order to concentrate on research subjects and hope that teaching will take care of itself.
Moreover, the research atmosphere of American universities is characterized by a great deal of informal cooperation.
People meet in laboratories and seminars, but also in common rooms and cafeterias.
They are not obsessed with hierarchical status or surrounded by assistants.
Nor are they tied to narrow projects and the project groups formed around them.
Despite fierce competition for academic tenure, for space in journals and in other media, and for advancement in general, people talk to each other as colleagues.
This is what doctoral and postdoctoral students like when they go to American – and, to a lesser extent, British – universities.
This is also what they miss even as they relapse into the bad old habits at home.
As in so many other respects, universities not only in Europe, but also in Japan, South Korea, and developing parts of the world, including China and India, need to loosen rigid structures and habits to avoid decay and nurture a renaissance.
Unleashing Africa’s Girl Power
MAPUTO – Sub-Saharan Africa’s economies have boomed in recent years.
But the headline figures often mask longer-term problems – not least, an over-reliance on natural resources and chronic inequalities.
Inclusive, sustainable growth is achievable, but only by tapping the continent’s greatest reserve of energy and creativity: African women and girls.
Health and development experts, economists, non-governmental organizations, United Nations agencies, and banks agree that the key to unlocking Africa’s potential lies in expanding women’s education, freedom, and job opportunities.
Today, many African women are not only expected to fulfill traditional roles, such as raising children and caring for the elderly; they also face legal and social discrimination regarding land and property ownership, inheritance, education, and access to credit and technology – in addition to oppressive sexual mores and violence.
Yet gender equality is necessary for the continent’s well-being.
Consider the pressing issue of food security.
Women comprise half of the agriculture sector’s workforce, growing, selling, buying, and preparing food for their families.
Studies suggest that equal access to resources would increase farm yields by 20-30%, offsetting the effects of drought and climate change.
Access to education, capital, markets, and technologies would allow women to process, package, and market their products, especially for Africa’s growing middle class, bolstering both earnings and food supplies.
Agriculture is but one example.
Greater female participation in male-dominated occupations across the board would increase overall labor productivity by up to 25%.
The same is true of politics, where more female participation and leadership would improve governance and public services, as promising experiences in some parts of Africa and elsewhere have shown.
The first step to improving conditions for women must be to strengthen their sexual and reproductive health and rights – an issue concerning which Africa has some of the world’s worst indicators.
Simply put, women must be allowed to decide, free of coercion or violence, about their sexuality and health; if, when, and whom to marry; and whether and when to become a parent.
This cannot happen without providing women and girls with the information, education, and services they need to make their own decisions.
Sexual and reproductive health issues exact a huge yet largely avoidable toll on African women, their families, and communities.
The costs usually strike in the prime of women’s economically productive lives, devaluing their future contributions to society.
At the extreme, more than 400 African women and girls die every day during pregnancy or childbirth, scarring families and plunging surviving children into hardship.
Many of these deaths are caused by the estimated five million unsafe abortions carried out annually in Sub-Saharan Africa.
The cost to society in lost income from death and disability is nearly $1 billion.
Almost all of these deaths occur in countries with restrictive abortion laws, which African leaders should consider reforming as a matter of common sense and social justice.
A prime focus should be on protecting the most vulnerable – adolescent girls.
More than one-third of African girls marry before the age of 18, which threatens their health, truncates their education, and lowers their aspirations for the future.
They are also more likely than older women to die of birth-related complications, and are more prone to abuse.
Though most African states outlaw early or forced marriages, enforcement is weak.
African girls are also disproportionately vulnerable to contracting HIV.
Roughly 90% of the world’s pregnant women and children with HIV live in Africa, and, despite notable recent reductions in HIV transmission rates, adolescent girls are still more than twice as likely as boys of the same age to carry the virus.
Yet barely a third of young Africans know how to prevent HIV – another reason for urgent and comprehensive sexuality education.
Another epidemic afflicting African women is violence, all too often perpetrated with impunity.