Cyprus’s Last Best Chance
NICOSIA – It is tempting to see the results of the recent parliamentary elections in northern Cyprus as a blow for the peace process.
Voters in the Turkish Cypriot north rejected the party of their leader, Mehmet Ali Talat, who has been meeting almost weekly for eight months with his Greek Cypriot counterpart, Demetris Christofias, to work out the terms of a settlement to reunify the island.
But the election result has more to do with the dire state of the economy than it does with the peace process.
Voters are feeling the pain of economic isolation, made worse by the global downturn.
While he has lost his parliamentary majority, Talat is still head of the Turkish Cypriot administration and will continue to lead negotiations on behalf of the north.
Both he and Christofias remain committed to finding a solution, despite the difficulties they face.
The election result nonetheless underscores the fact that time is running out to find a solution to the Cyprus problem.
Talat has set the presidential election in early 2010 as a deadline for agreement, while Christofias is not without political challenges within his own coalition.
Cyprus presents visitors with a deceptive image.
The sunny climate of the eastern Mediterranean draws a steady stream of tourists, and European Union membership in the south has pushed income levels for Greek Cypriots higher than the EU average.
The island might be divided, but life for many is comfortable.
However, Cyprus remains a conflict zone: there are still fortified streets in Nicosia, a United Nations peacekeeping operation patrols the buffer zone, and there is a substantial Turkish military force in the north.
This is all the more reason to make sure that the energy and courage of Talat and Christofias are not squandered.
These two leaders have limited political capital, and they need more than their own goodwill to succeed.
First, they need their own people to join them in the peace process.
An overwhelming majority of Cypriots are unhappy with the status quo, believe a settlement is possible, and reject any return to violence, but are deeply distrustful of each other and of the peace process.
They have seen too many previous efforts fail.
A culture of cynicism and complacency seems to be the default position, especially among politicians and the media.
Opening up the debate about what peace could look like would help.
When we visited Cyprus late last year, we noticed how few women and young people were engaged in politics.
Old men (like us) dominate public debate, and we strongly urge Cyprus’s leaders to make more space for those whose voices are not so readily heard.
Second, strengthening links between the two communities is essential.
The island has been split for so long that generations have grown up with no idea of life on the other side.
It is very difficult for schools, law enforcement agencies, soccer clubs, and telephone, electricity, and water companies to cooperate across the Green Line.
Teenagers can’t even send text messages across the divide.
Trade between the communities is limited.
Lowering these barriers with respect and sensitivity would help to heal the wounds of the past and, importantly, to build trust.
Researchers already estimate that reunification could raise annual incomes by about €1.8 billion – more than €5,500 per household.
Everyone needs to see that there are benefits to reunification that will simplify life, strengthen the economy, and outweigh the compromises that any settlement will require.
Third, the major regional powers, whose presence hangs heavily over the island, need to play their part.
Greece is urgently called upon to play a more constructive role in the peace process by explaining the benefits of its own normalization of relations with Turkey and its support for that country’s EU membership.
And Turkey could give a tremendous boost to confidence in the peace process by announcing a symbolic withdrawal of some troops from northern Cyprus as a goodwill gesture – a move that would also greatly assist Turkey’s convergence with Europe.
Finally, explicit international expressions of support for a settlement would help to persuade the leaders of both communities that success would bring proper recognition and reward.
It would certainly help if the EU promised substantial development funds, including for resolution of property issues, once an agreement is in place.
This is the best chance in 30 years for a federal settlement in Cyprus, and it may be the last.
If these talks fail, partition will probably be permanent, and, no matter how benign the environment today, geopolitics will catch up with the island over time.
Failure to resolve the Cyprus problem is a potentially serious threat to good relations between NATO, Turkey, and the EU.
Cypriots must seize this chance to build a healthy, reunited country that can make the most of its economic potential in the region, and play its part in world affairs with confidence and security.
Damaged Democracy
New York – Even before the Supreme Leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, decided to throttle what little legitimacy was left of Iran’s “managed democracy,” it was a peculiar system, indeed.
Although Iranian citizens had the right to elect their president, the candidates had to be vetted by the Council of Guardians, half of whom were picked by the unelected Supreme Leader.
The only candidates allowed to run were men with impeccable religious credentials, loyal to a regime whose most important decisions are made by unelected clerics.
Mir-Hossein Mousavi, chosen by the late Ayatollah Khomeini to be prime minister in 1981, was such a figure.
Mousavi ran as a reformist who said he would strive for greater freedom of the press, more rights for women, and fewer restrictions on the private lives of Iranians.
He also hinted at more flexibility in negotiations with the United States.
Yet Mousavi’s defeat by the hardliner, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, in what looked like a rigged electoral process, was greeted by some neo-conservatives in the US with relief.
One prominent commentator, Max Boot, took “some small degree of satisfaction from the outcome of Iran’s elections,” because Obama would now find it harder to stand in the way of an Israeli attack on Iran’s nuclear installations.
Since Iran is the enemy (remember George W. Bush’s “axis of evil”?), it is better to deal with a president who talks and acts like a crazy thug, than with a reasonable-sounding figure who promises reforms.
This would seem like the height of cynicism, which of course it is.
It reminds us of the closeness, in spirit, between extreme neo-cons and communist idealogues.
Compromise is anathema to the radical mind.
Some radical leftist Muslims, obsessed with their opposition to Western “imperialism” and Israel, saluted Mousavi’s defeat, for, as one such activist put it, “the [anti-Zionist] resistance cannot afford a pro-American velvet revolution.”
Communists always had a tendency to dismiss the differences between candidates in liberal democracies (let alone “managed” ones).
They were just different faces of the same rotten system.
In fact, social democrats were regarded as more dangerous than hard-line conservatives, because their moderate left-wing talk only served to postpone the revolution.
This kind of thinking helped the Nazis destroy German democracy in the 1930’s.
The reaction of Boot, and others of his persuasion, points to a genuine dilemma that always occurs in authoritarian systems that use some semblance of democracy to bolster their legitimacy.
What are opposition candidates to do when they are asked to take part in elections that they know they cannot win, or that, even when they can win, will give them only minimal authority?
If they agree, they help to legitimize a system in which they do not really believe. If they refuse, they have no influence at all.
There are valid arguments to made for either course.
Any chance for people to voice their views, even in rigged elections, is a good thing.
And, because democracy is about institutions as much as about individual candidates, it is also good for citizens to exercise their right to vote.
Then, when real change does occur, no one can claim that the people “are not ready for it.”
Still, if voting confers dignity on citizens, participation in a fraud is humiliating.
There is no absolute yardstick on how to behave in these impossible circumstances, so people must judge every election on its merits.
Since 85% of Iranian voters decided that it was worth taking part in the last election, their decision must be respected.
Although their options were limited, many of them had enough confidence that the reformist candidate would not only get elected, but also make life a little better.
This is also why 70% voted for Mohammed Khatami, the reformist president, in 1997.
Khatami, too, had good ideas about press freedom, individual rights, and democratic reforms.
They were mostly quashed by the clerics who held ultimate power.
It probably did not help that the Bush administration gave up on Khatami.
Like some neo-cons today, Bush’s foreign policy advisers saw no difference between reformists and hardliners.
This undermined Khatami’s authority even further.
Mousavi was regarded by many Iranians as a second chance.
Unfortunately, Khamenei thought so, too, and made sure that Ahmadinejad held onto his presidency.
This was a sickening blow to all Iranians who crave the dignity of democratic politics.
But it does not mean that they were wrong, or naïve, to try.
Mousavi’s campaign, and its aftermath, showed clearly that those who professed to see no difference between the candidates, except in style and presentation, were wrong: even if the election was rigged, the voices of opposition to clerical authoritarianism were heard.
The quiet dignity of the protests that followed did more for Iran’s standing in the world than any amount of belligerent posturing by a populist president.
There may have been a more important consequence.
The election, the fraud, and the violent crackdown on the subsequent protests revealed, and clearly widened, deep rifts inside the regime.
This is the best reason why in most cases it is best to contest elections, even in unpromising circumstances.
They expose cracks in the wall of dictatorial power.
Ahmedinejad won the election, but the regime is weakened as a result.
Terror can prolong the agony, but in the end an illegitimate regime is doomed.
To persist in the belief that reformists and hardliners are just masks of the same enemy, and to take pleasure in the victory of the latter, is not merely cynical, but is an added insult to a people that has already been humiliated enough.    
A Grand Unified Economic Theory?
NEW YORK – Last month’s US government shutdown – the result of a partisan standoff in congressional budget negotiations – epitomizes the polarization that prevails in modern economic-policy debates.
On one side, John Maynard Keynes’s cohort argues that government intervention can help any economy grow its way out of crisis by spurring aggregate demand and, in turn, raising the employment rate.
A country’s government, Keynesians contend, has the capacity – and responsibility – to solve many, if not all, of its economic problems.
On the opposite side, followers of the Austrian School of economic thought, especially the ideas of Friedrich Hayek, assert that limited government and free enterprise form the only viable path to liberty and prosperity.
The market is the best arbiter of how to allocate scarce resources, and thus should serve as an economy’s main driver.
In recent years, this long-running debate has become increasingly contentious – and the costs of stalemate are mounting.
In order to restore growth in developed economies, while sustaining strong GDP growth and reducing poverty in the developing world, a more unified approach to economic policymaking that draws from both traditions is needed.
Official responses to the global economic crisis highlight the interventionist model’s merits, proving that decisive government action can help to enhance efficiency and clear unbalanced markets, thereby protecting the economy from the demand shortfall caused by falling investment and rising unemployment.
But the free market also has a crucial role to play, with longer-term, incentive-based policies catalyzing scientific and technological advancement – and thus boosting economies’ growth potential.
In determining how to promote innovation without sacrificing social protection, economists and policymakers should take a lesson from the field of physics.
For nearly a century, physicists have attempted to merge the competing ideas of the field’s titans, including Wolfgang Pauli, the first physicist to predict the existence of neutrinos (the smallest particles of matter), and Albert Einstein, who explained the curvature of space-time.
The so-called “theory of everything” would reconcile the inconceivably small with the unimaginably large, providing a comprehensive understanding of the universe’s physical properties.
Policymakers should be working to unite seemingly disparate theories to align policy decisions with the business cycle and the economy’s level of development.
Such an approach should seek to protect economies from the destabilizing impacts of politically motivated policy changes, without impeding governments’ ability to correct dangerous imbalances.
Officials must be at least as vigilant about reducing expenditure and withdrawing stimulus measures during periods of growth as they are inclined to introduce such policies during downturns.
To the extent that this approach reflects the view that policymaking is an art, not a science, that is a good thing: the world needs more flexibility in economic policymaking.
But some might consider it a cause for concern, especially given growing suspicion of incentive-based economic policies in the wake of the global economic crisis.
Many blame the crisis on the decades-long ascendancy of a laissez faire approach to economic policymaking, and rightly credit government intervention with facilitating recovery.
The tremendous economic success of countries like China, where hundreds of millions of people have escaped abject poverty in a single generation, has reinforced support for state-led systems.
In developed countries, too, many advocate a greater role for the state, in order to ensure that promised social benefits are delivered to rapidly aging populations.
In fact, in many countries, the government’s capacity is already strained.
As German Chancellor Angela Merkel has pointed out, though Europe is home to just 7% of the world’s population and produces 25% of the world’s wealth, it accounts for 50% of global welfare payments.
When the United States is included, 11.5% of the global population receives 88% of the world’s welfare payments.
But relegating free-market principles to the past would simply create a new set of imbalances.
Rather than allow extremists to continue to hijack economic-policy debates, policymakers must work to bridge competing schools of thought.
Only then will productive discourse – the kind that does not end in government shutdown – be possible.
Keynes once wrote that he agreed with “almost all” of Hayek’s ideas.
And Hayek found it “reassuring” to know that he and Keynes agreed “so completely.”
This raises the question: What is really preventing economists and policymakers from devising – or even seeking – a unified theory of economics?
Damming China’s Rivers
Of all China’s problems, none will be more critical over the long run than how it resolves the tension between economic development and environmental protection.
Nowhere are consequences of this struggle clearer than in the Himalayan foothills of the southwestern province of Yunnan.
Yunnan is home to three great Asian rivers: the Mekong, the Salween (or Nu), and the Jinsha.
All start on the great Tibetan Plateau and flow in parallel through the northwest corner of the province into Southeast Asia.
They are China’s last pristine rivers, but are now slated for sacrifice to satisfy the country’s insatiable thirst for power.
Plans call for dozens of dams to be placed along their serpentine courses through the mountains of Yunnan.
I had the chance to see one of these rivers – and the proposed site of one of the country’s most controversial dams – on a recent trek through the stunning Tiger Leaping Gorge, north of the town of Lijiang in northern Yunnan.
On its descent from the roof of the world, the Jinsha River, tributary of the mighty Yangtze, cascades through this ten-mile gorge on its way to Shanghai and the East China Sea.
If, or rather when, the river is dammed, it will help power the cities and factories of coastal China.
The sun was high above white-crowned Jade Dragon Snow Mountain when my guide pointed down the gorge at the brown waters churning thousands of feet below.
“That’s where they will build the dam,” Xiao Chun, a 17-year-old Naxi, one of Yunnan’s 22 ethnic minorities, said.
“It will be very bad for us.
There will be a lot of pollution.
I hope it doesn’t happen.”
The dam will have its uses.
Dianchi Lake near the provincial capital, Kunming, is so shrunken and polluted that the city faces a serious water shortage.
Water from the Tiger Leaping Gorge will be diverted to flush out Dianchi Lake, without which Kunming will not prosper.
As China seeks to keep its economic engine running, dams and hyrdopower do represent a cleaner alternative to coal.
China plans to double its hydropower capacity to over 120 GW by 2010 and to build more hydropower-projects for at least another 20 years.
Experts reckon that only a quarter of China’s hydropower has yet been tapped.
Yet the costs may outweigh the benefits.
Northwestern Yunnan is one of the world’s most biologically diverse areas, home to half of China’s animal species and a quarter of its plant species.
Whatever portions of this ecosystem that the dams don’t submerge are certain to be disrupted in potentially disastrous ways.
A more immediate concern is the immense number of people who will need to be resettled when reservoirs inundate the region’s densely populated valleys.
Since 1949, 16 million people have been displaced by reservoirs.
Some 10 million of them still live in poverty.
At Tiger Leaping Gorge, where a mere 100,000 residents will have to be relocated, residents fear that they will be ordered to move up the steep mountainsides to open marginal land at 6,000 to 9,000 feet.
Dam opponents, including vocal indigenous environmental groups, have waged a seemingly successful battle to protect Tiger Leaping Gorge and the Salween (the Nu River).
In early 2005, three years after a new law on environmental impact assessments (EIA’s) was passed, the State Environmental Protection Bureau (SEPA), ordered the halt of 30 large projects, including 26 hydropower plants that had failed to submit proper EIA’s.
Among the suspended projects was the first dam across the Nu/Salween.
These efforts appear to have catalyzed greater environmental sensitivity among the country’s leaders.
The government recently called for more balanced development, even proposing a “green index” to measure growth.
Indeed, Prime Minister Wen Jiabao has declared that he wants to see more “scientific development” in China’s approach to its problems, and even called for a temporary halt of the Salween (Nu) River dam.
Environmentalists were even permitted to take part in a public hearing on the Tiger Leaping Gorge project, a first for China.
Unfortunately, the Communist Party’s tolerance of such civic activity blows hot and cold.
The Party, alarmed by the “color revolutions” that toppled post-Soviet leaders in Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan, is cracking down on domestic non-government organizations for fear that they, too, might become catalysts for popular uprisings.
Support for “green development” inside central government organizations like SEPA offers little assurance of an effective countervailing force.
“We must sharpen our teeth,” Pan Yue, SEPA’s deputy director, said when the agency halted the dam projects.
But China has seen a steady decentralization of power in recent years, making it harder for SEPA to affect policies at the regional and local levels.
Indeed, local governments appear less afraid of Beijing’s bite than before.
When boundaries were negotiated for Three Parallel Rivers Park – designated a UNESCO World Heritage site in 2003 – local authorities won a fight to exclude Tiger Leaping Gorge, knowing that a dam there would triple tax revenues.
China urgently needs to maintain an annual growth rate of over 9% as a bulwark against social disorder.
As a result, however, China is slowly consuming itself, and no major part of China may remain pristine.
The Danger of a Weak Europe
CAMBRIDGE – In 1973, US Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, following a period of American preoccupation with Vietnam and China, declared a “year of Europe.”
More recently, after President Barack Obama announced a US strategic “pivot,” or rebalancing, toward Asia, many Europeans worried about American neglect.
Now, with an ongoing refugee crisis, Russia’s occupation of eastern Ukraine and illegal annexation of Crimea, and the threat of British withdrawal from the European Union, 2016 may become, by necessity, another “year of Europe” for American diplomacy.
In terms of military resources, Europe spends less than half of what the US allocates to defense, but has more men and women under arms.
Britain and France possess nuclear arsenals and a limited capacity for overseas intervention in Africa and the Middle East.
Both are active partners in the airstrikes against the Islamic State.
As for soft power, Europe has long had wide appeal, and Europeans have played a central role in international institutions.
According to a recent study by the Portland Group, Europe accounted for 14 of the top 20 countries.
The sense that Europe was uniting around common institutions made it strongly attractive for the EU’s neighbors, though this eroded somewhat after the financial crisis.
The key question in assessing Europe’s power resources is whether the EU will retain enough cohesion to speak with a single voice on a wide range of international issues, or remain a limited grouping defined by its members’ different national identities, political cultures, and foreign policies.
The answer varies by issue.
On questions of trade, for example, Europe is the equal of the US and able to balance American power.
Europe’s role in the International Monetary Fund is second only to that of the US (although the financial crisis dented confidence in the euro).
On anti-trust issues, the size and attractiveness of the European market has meant that American firms seeking to merge have had to gain approval from the European Commission as well as the US Justice Department.
In the cyber world, the EU is setting the global standards for privacy protection, which US and other multinational companies cannot ignore.
But European unity faces significant limits.
National identities remain stronger than a common European identity.
Right-wing populist parties have included EU institutions among the targets of their xenophobia.
Legal integration is increasing within the EU, but the integration of foreign and defense policy remains limited.
And British Prime Minister David Cameron has promised to reduce the powers of EU institutions and to subject the results of his negotiations with the Union’s leaders to a popular referendum by the end of 2017.
If Britain votes no and exits the EU, the impact on European morale will be severe – an outcome that the US has made clear should be avoided, though there is little it could do to prevent it.
In the longer term, Europe faces serious demographic problems, owing to low birth rates and unwillingness to accept mass immigration.
In 1900, Europe accounted for a quarter of the world’s population.
By the middle of this century, it may account for just 6% – and almost a third will be older than 65.
Although the current immigration wave could be the solution to Europe’s long-term demographic problem, it is threatening European unity, despite the exceptional leadership of German Chancellor Angela Merkel.
In most European countries, the political backlash has been sharp, owing to the rapid rate of the inflows (more than a million people in the past year) and the Muslim background of many of the newcomers.
Again, an important American diplomatic interest is at stake, but there is not much the US can do about it.
There is little long-term danger that Europe could become a threat to the US, and not only because of its low military expenditure.
Europe has the world’s largest market, but it lacks unity.
And its cultural industries are impressive, though, in terms of higher education, whereas 27 of its universities are ranked in the global top 100, the US accounts for 52.
If Europe overcame its internal differences and tried to become a global challenger to the US, these assets might partly balance American power, but would not equal it.
For US diplomats, however, the danger is not a Europe that becomes too strong, but one that is too weak.
When Europe and America remain allied, their resources are mutually reinforcing.
Despite inevitable friction, which is slowing the negotiation of the proposed Trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, economic separation is unlikely, and Obama will travel to Europe in April to promote the TTIP.
Direct investment in both directions is higher than with Asia and helps knit the economies together.
And while Americans and Europeans have sniped at each other for centuries, they share values of democracy and human rights more with each other than with any other regions of the world.
Neither a strong US nor a strong Europe threaten the vital or important interests of the other.
But a Europe that weakens in 2016 could damage both sides.
The Case Against Cash
CAMBRIDGE – The world is awash in paper currency, with major country central banks pumping out hundreds of billions of dollars’ worth each year, mainly in very large denomination notes such as the $100 bill.
The $100 bill accounts for almost 80% of the US’s stunning $4,200 per capita cash supply.
The ¥10,000 note (about $100) accounts for roughly 90% of Japan’s per capita cash holdings at almost $7,000.
And, as I have been arguing for two decades, all this cash is facilitating growth mainly in the underground economy, not the legal one.
I am not advocating a cashless society, which will be neither feasible nor desirable anytime soon.
But a less-cash society would be a fairer and safer place.
With the growth of debit cards, electronic transfers, and mobile payments, the use of cash has long been declining in the legal economy, especially for medium and large-size transactions.
Central bank surveys show that only a small percentage of large-denomination notes are being held and used by ordinary people or businesses.
Cash facilitates crime because it is anonymous, and big bills are especially problematic because they are so easy to carry and conceal.
A million dollars in $100 notes fits into a briefcase, a million dollars in €500 notes (each worth about $565) fits into a purse.
Sure, there are plenty of ways to bribe officials, engage in financial crime, and evade taxes without paper currency.
But most involve very high transaction costs (for example, uncut diamonds), or risk of detection (say, bank transfers or credit card payments).
Yes, new-age crypto-currencies such as Bitcoin, if not completely invulnerable to detection, are almost so.
But their value sharply fluctuates, and governments have many tools with which they can restrict their use – for example, by preventing them from being tendered at banks or retail stores.
Cash is unique in its liquidity and near-universal acceptance.
The costs of tax evasion alone are staggering, perhaps $700 billion per year in the United States (including federal, state, and local taxes), and even more in high-tax Europe.
Crime and corruption, though difficult to quantify, almost surely generate even greater costs. Think not just of illegal drugs and racketeering, but also of human trafficking, terrorism, and extortion.
Moreover, cash payments by employers to undocumented workers are a principal driver of illegal immigration.
Scaling back the use of cash is a far more humane way to limit immigration than building barbed-wire fences.
If governments were not so drunk from the profits they make by printing paper currency, they might wake up to the costs.
There has been a little movement of late.
The European Central Bank recently announced that it will phase out its €500 mega-note.
Still, this long overdue change was implemented against enormous resistance from cash-loving Germany and Austria.
Yet even in northern Europe, reported per capita holdings of currency are still quite modest relative to the massive outstanding supply in the eurozone as a whole (over €3,000 per capita).
Southern European governments, desperate to raise tax revenue, have been taking matters into their own hands, even though they do not control note issuance.
For example, Greece and Italy have been trying to discourage cash use by capping retail cash purchases (at €1,500 and €1,000, respectively).
Obviously, cash remains important for small everyday transactions, and for protecting privacy.
Northern European central bankers who favor the status quo like to quote Russian novelist Fyodor Dostoevsky: “Money is coined liberty.”
Of course, Dostoevsky was referring to life in a mid-nineteenth century czarist prison, not a modern liberal state.
Still, the northern Europeans have a point.
The question is whether the current system has the balance right. I would argue that it clearly does not.
A plan for reining in paper currency should be guided by three principles.
First, it is important to allow ordinary citizens to continue using cash for convenience and to make reasonable-size anonymous purchases, while undermining the business models of those engaged in large, repeated anonymous transactions on a wholesale level.
Second, any plan should move very gradually (think a decade or two), to allow adaptations and mid-course corrections as unexpected problems arise.
And, third, reforms must be sensitive to the needs of low-income households, especially those that are unbanked.
In my new book, The Curse of Cash, I offer a plan that involves very gradually phasing out large notes, while leaving small notes ($10 and below) in circulation indefinitely.
The plan provides for financial inclusion by offering low-income households free debit accounts, which could also be used to make government transfer payments.
This last step is one that some countries, such as Denmark and Sweden, have already taken.
Scaling back paper currency would hardly end crime and tax evasion; but it would force the underground economy to employ riskier and less liquid payment devices.
Cash may seem like a small, unimportant thing in today’s high-tech financial world, but the benefits of phasing out most paper currency are a lot larger than you might think.
Europe’s Lessons for China’s Reformers
BRUSSELS – The most important economic-policy decision of 2013 might well have been taken in November at the Third Plenum of the Chinese Communist Party’s Central Committee, which pledged that the market should be given a “decisive” role in guiding China’s economy.
Because China is now the world’s largest exporter after the European Union, and accounts for about half of global growth, decisions taken in Beijing could have a more important impact on the world economy than those taken in Berlin, Brussels, or Washington, DC.
But, while China’s embrace of the market and opening to the outside world has enabled it to achieve astonishing economic progress over the last three decades, the country might now have reached a level of income at which the problem is no longer “too little market.”
On the contrary, some of China’s key problems today require a stronger role for government.
Air and water pollution, for example, can be addressed only by more state intervention, at both the central and local levels.
The authorities have now made solving the problem a high priority, and there can be little doubt that China has the resources to do so – much as it created the world’s largest manufacturing sector.
The fight against smog and water pollution plays to the country’s strength: the availability of huge domestic savings to finance the necessary investment in pollution-abatement equipment.
The dilemma for China’s leaders is that meeting the need for more in pollution control and infrastructure makes it more difficult to achieve their goal of shifting the country’s economic-growth model from one based on investment and exports to one based on consumption.
But more consumption today would further aggravate the pollution problem.
As a result, economic rebalancing may be delayed by the more urgent need for environmental investment.
Other areas of the economy require greater government oversight as well.
Network industries like telecoms, gas, electricity, and water tend to become monopolistic or oligopolistic if left to market forces alone.
Well-run economies achieve higher levels of welfare not because there is less regulation of these sectors, but because more efficient regulation prevents the emergence of cartels, thereby protecting consumers.
Similar reasoning applies to reform of the state-owned-enterprise (SOE) sector.
The key problem is less the form of ownership (state or private) than it is the need to ensure that these enterprises operate according to market principles and within a competitive environment.
The European experience confirms this.
The Treaty of Rome, which established the common market back in 1957, did not distinguish between state-owned and private enterprises, though vast sectors of the economy (most of the coal and steel industry, and in many countries banking) were in state hands at the time.
Instead, the treaty established internal-market rules that barred governments from giving their companies unfair advantages.
The prohibition of state aid was a game changer for Europe, because it forced SOEs to operate on a level playing field and thus to become as efficient as their domestic or foreign competitors.
Once local politicians could no longer use the SOEs for their own goals, most member countries decided that they might as well privatize many of them.
Of course, downsizing the SOE sector took time; but the direction of the process was never in doubt, because the SOEs’ foreign and domestic competitors naturally provided strong political support for the European Commission’s vigorous policing of state aid.
In China, too, the key issue today is the rules under which the SOEs’ operate.
Instead of large-scale privatization, it might be better to limit state aid and give competitors legal recourse to seek redress if state aid distorts competition.
The area that has attracted the most attention is finance, and for good reason.
In most of the advanced world, investment amounts to little more than 15% of GDP, compared to close to 45% for China.
Financial markets are thus even more important for China than for the US or Europe, and there are clear signs that the productivity of investment has been declining rapidly in China.
The lynchpin of the China’s planned financial-sector reforms – interest-rate liberalization – might not address the problem.
In principle, higher interest rates on lending should help to reduce over-investment.
But, in a system with many – often implicit – government guarantees, it is not always the most efficient enterprises that are willing and able to pay more to borrow.
Liberalizing lending rates might merely lead those with government guarantees to outbid smaller and more efficient enterprises, resulting in more misallocation of capital.
This suggests that financial liberalization might be dangerous until even SOEs are subject to a hard budget constraint.
The global economy’s most powerful growth engine does not need simply “more market.”
It needs a stronger regulatory framework to ensure that its markets maximize efficiency and social welfare.
What Makes Greece Special?
BRUSSELS – The euro crisis seems to be largely over.
Risk premiums continue to fall across the board, and two countries – Ireland and Portugal – have already exited their adjustment programs.
They can now finance themselves in the market, and their economies seem to have started growing again.
By contrast, Greece is still having problems fulfilling the goals of its adjustment program and is engaged in seemingly endless negotiations over yet another multilateral financing package.
The problem can be summed up in one word: exports (or, rather, lack of export growth).
The news from Greece these days has been dominated by the announcement that the government achieved a primary budget surplus (the fiscal balance minus debt service) in 2013.
For the first time in decades, the Greek government has been able to pay for its expenditure with its own revenues.
This is indeed a milestone.
But another, much more important news item has received much less attention: Greece exported less in 2013 than in 2012.
This lackluster performance, which followed years of decline in market shares, is difficult to explain, given that all other countries on the eurozone periphery recorded solid export growth.
For example, Portuguese exports increased by about 5-6% per year over the last years, despite challenging external conditions (Spain is its biggest market) and a credit crunch, which made it difficult for exporters to obtain financing.
Neither weak foreign demand nor a lack of financing, therefore, can be the reason for Greece’s poor export performance.
Low competitiveness, too, is not an explanation, as real (inflation-adjusted) wage costs have declined by more in Greece in recent years than in any other eurozone country, with the exception of Ireland.
But it would be strange to conclude from Greece’s experience that wage deflation is a useless tool for improving competitiveness, given the widespread assumption that Germany benefited massively from it.
So the only explanation for Greece’s poor export performance must be that the Greek economy has remained so distorted that it has not responded to changing price signals.
This lack of adjustment capacity is crucial.
In Ireland, Spain, and even Portugal, exports grew strongly when the domestic economy collapsed and wages adjusted.
But these countries were already more flexible and, in some cases, undertook strong reforms.
In Greece, by contrast, there is no evidence that the many structural reforms imposed by the “troika” (the European Commission, the European Central Bank, and the International Monetary Fund) have led to any real improvement on the ground.
On the contrary, many indicators of efficiency of the way the government and the labor market work have actually deteriorated.
The facile argument that Greece has little to export is irrelevant here.
The problem is not that Greek exports are low, but rather that they have failed to grow, which should have been possible, especially from a low base.
Several years ago, Greek exports of goods and services were equal to those of Portugal.
Today, Portugal is ahead by almost €20 billion ($27.5 billion).
This represents a potential loss of more than 10% of output for Greece.
Lack of export growth thus has made the recession in Greece much longer and deeper than it would have been otherwise.
If Greek exports had increased at the same rate as those of Portugal (or Spain), the recession would have ended by now.
Moreover, the lack of export growth made the fiscal adjustment much more difficult.
Higher exports would not only have yielded directly higher revenues; they would have had a multiplier effect on the domestic economy as well, thereby increasing consumption tax revenues.
Greece now has a balanced current account – quite an achievement after double-digit deficits (as a percentage of GDP) a few years ago.
But, in contrast to other economies on the eurozone periphery, this improvement was achieved entirely through import compression.
This implies that there cannot be any hope for a sustained recovery unless exports start growing.
It is often argued that with less austerity, domestic demand would be stronger.
That might be true, but stronger domestic demand would lead to higher imports, which would need to be paid for with higher export revenues, because the country cannot afford to accumulate more foreign debt.
No exports, no growth: Greece’s debt sustainability ultimately depends on this key parameter.
What went wrong in Greece was not the fiscal adjustment.
On the contrary, austerity was perhaps too successful (and painful).
But it was the wrong target.
The really important target for any country starting an adjustment program with a double-digit current-account deficit must be export growth.
Missing this target is what has set Greece apart.
Unfortunately, there is very little the outside world can to do to ensure that the Greece exports more.
The government can be forced to pass decrees, and Parliament can be pressured to adopt all the reform legislation known to humanity. But, in the end, it is how reform is applied on the ground, and how the economy responds, that counts.
An adjustment program succeeds or fails at home, not in Brussels or Washington.
The Transatlantic Growth Gap
BRUSSELS – The global financial crisis that erupted in full force in 2008 affected Europe and the United States in a very similar way – at least at the start.
On both sides of the Atlantic, economic performance tanked in 2009 and started to recover in 2010.
But, as the financial crisis mutated into the euro crisis, an economic gulf opened between the US and the eurozone.
This might appear to be somewhat surprising in light of all of the talk about Brussels imposed austerity.
In fact, public consumption in the eurozone has de facto remained fairly constant over the last three years, whereas it has declined substantially in the US.
(The same is true of public investment, though this constitutes such a small proportion of GDP that transatlantic differences could not have had a large impact on growth over a three-year horizon.)
The contraction of private investment in Europe accounts for only a small part (one-third) of the growth gap.
Though the financial-market tensions that accompanied the euro crisis had a strong negative impact on investment in the eurozone periphery, investment demand has also remained weak in the US, minimizing the overall difference.
The resilience of private consumption in the US, the key to the growth gap, is not surprising, given that American households have reduced their debt burden considerably from the peak of more than 90% of GDP reached just before the crisis.
The lower debt burden is also a key reason why consumption is expected to continue to grow much faster in the US than in the eurozone this year and next.
But the crucial question – and one that is rarely asked – is how US households were able to reduce their debt burden during a period of high unemployment and almost no wage gains while sustaining consumption growth.
The answer lies in a combination of “no recourse” mortgages and fast bankruptcy procedures.
Millions of American homes that were purchased with subprime mortgages have been foreclosed in recent years, forcing their owners, unable to service their debt, to leave.
But, as a result of no-recourse mortgages in many US states, the entire mortgage debt was then extinguished, even if the value of the home was too low to cover the balance still due.
Moreover, even in those states where there is full recourse, so that the homeowner remains liable for the full amount of the mortgage loan (that is, the difference between the balance due and the value recovered by selling the home), America’s procedures for personal bankruptcy offer a relatively quick solution.
Millions of Americans have filed for personal bankruptcy since 2008 , thereby extinguishing their personal debt.
The same applies to hundreds of thousands of small businesses.
Of course, there has also been a surge of bankruptcies in the eurozone’s periphery.
But in countries like Italy, Spain, and Greece, the length of a bankruptcy proceeding is measured in years, not months or weeks, as in the US.
Moreover, in most of continental Europe a person can be discharged of his or her debt only after a lengthy period, often 5-7 years, during which almost all income must be devoted to debt service.
In the US, by contrast, the corresponding period lasts less than one year in most cases.
Moreover, the terms of discharge tend to be much stricter in Europe.
An extreme case is Spain, where mortgage debt is never extinguished, not even after a personal bankruptcy.
This key difference between the US and (continental) Europe explains the resilience of the US economy to the collapse of its credit boom.
The excessive debt accumulated by households has been worked off much more rapidly; and, once losses have been recognized, people can start again.
The cause of the transatlantic growth gap thus should not be sought in excessive eurozone austerity or the excessive prudence of the European Central Bank.
There are structural reasons for the eurozone economy’s slow recovery from the financial meltdown in its periphery.
Most important, compared to the US, the excess debt created during the boom years has been much more difficult to work off.
European officials are right to promote structural reforms of EU countries’ labor and product markets.
But they should also focus on overhauling and accelerating bankruptcy procedures, so that losses can be recognized more quickly and over-indebted households can start afresh, rather than being shackled for years.
Restarting Ukraine’s Economy
BRUSSELS – In capitals East and West, one question currently looms large: “Who lost Ukraine?”
Unfortunately, that is not the most important question to be asking right now.
The more relevant question is how to stabilize the situation in Ukraine.
Given that little can be done in practice to dislodge Russia from Crimea, the key challenge now is to keep the rest of the country united and to restart its economy, which is now in a state of suspended animation, owing to unsustainable fiscal and external deficits.
The key reform issues are well known: the price of gas must be increased substantially to reflect its cost, subsidies for domestic coal production must be stopped, and governance of the country’s pipelines, which still earn huge royalties for carrying Russian gas to Western Europe, must be overhauled.
Ever since these pipelines were effectively handed over to nominally private companies in murky deals, earnings from transit fees have gone missing, along with vast amounts of gas, while little maintenance has been carried out.
All three of these issues are crucial to the fight against corruption.
An energy ministry that decides who can obtain gas at one-fifth of its cost and who cannot is obviously subject to irresistible pressures to distribute its favors to whomever offers the largest bribes or kickbacks.
The same applies to coal subsidies, except that the subsidies go to the most inefficient producers.
The International Monetary Fund will certainly require Ukraine to reform its gas and coal subsidies as a precondition for implementing its package of financial support (of which a substantial contribution comes from the European Union).
The first steps are already being taken, with the authorities recently announcing that household gas prices will rise by 50% next month.
But, while abolishing energy subsidies is absolutely essential to balance the budget and put the economy on a sound footing, these steps also risk hitting eastern Ukraine, which contains a substantial Russophone minority, particularly hard.
Some there might be tempted by the allure of a better life in “Mother Russia,” with its vast resources of cheap energy.
Eastern Ukraine is dominated by old-fashioned energy-intensive coal and steel industries.
But it also harbors some centers of technological excellence, such as the factories that produce important spare parts for Russian military helicopters.
The challenge for policymakers will thus be to ensure that the creation of new jobs in these competitive enterprises keeps pace with the job losses arising from higher gas prices and the elimination of subsidies for coal production.
The EU should support this in two ways.
It should provide special marketing assistance to enterprises that have suddenly lost their Russian markets.
And it should open its markets, not only by abolishing its import tariffs on Ukrainian products, which has already been decided, but also by granting a temporary exemption from the need to meet all of the EU’s complicated technical standards and regulations.
Winning the people’s “hearts and minds” is the key to victory in an insurgency.
In the case of eastern Ukraine, winning the support of those who are still nostalgic for the “good old days” must go beyond creating productive jobs that fill their wallets.
Here, too, the EU could help this process along.
For starters, it could alleviate the social hardship that will arise when the price for heating alone exceeds household income.
At the same time, the EU should help to address the cause of extraordinary heating costs: the woeful energy inefficiency of most of the existing housing stock.
The EU should thus quickly implement a targeted program of social support for the “energy poor,” coupled with financial support for investment in energy efficiency.
Experience in Eastern Europe, where energy prices had to be increased substantially in the 1990’s, demonstrated that simple measures – such as better insulation, together with maintenance and repair of the region’s many long-neglected central heating systems – yield a quick and substantial payoff in reducing energy intensity.
Even a slight improvement in Ukraine’s energy efficiency would contribute more to reducing greenhouse-gas emissions than the vast sums currently being spent to develop renewable energy sources.
But, given widespread government corruption and inefficiency, such a program would have to be administered directly by a joint EU-Ukrainian task force.
Nearby member states, especially those whose languages are similar to Russian and Ukrainian, should be able to mobilize quickly the required technical expertise.
Finally, the revenues from the gas pipelines must be returned to the state’s coffers.
Here the EU can also play a prominent role by recognizing Russia’s special interest in proper pipeline maintenance and a proper accounting for the gas they carry.
Of course, no one should expect the Ukrainian government to trust the word of a country that has just annexed part of its territory.
But, as a confidence-building measure, Russia should be invited into a tripartite agreement under which operational control over the pipelines would be entrusted to the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, an institution in which all parties have a stake.
The EBRD would safeguard the legitimate interests of all parties (including Russia), ensuring the proper operation and maintenance of the pipelines and overseeing the distribution of transit fees.
Regardless of whether Ukraine is “lost,” or who lost it, the country can still offer an attractive future for all of its citizens if unavoidable economic reforms can be made compatible with regional cohesion.
The EU can play an important role by opening its market and providing funding and technical assistance in crucial areas.
The Government Europe Deserves?
BRUSSELS – With the final allocation of portfolios within its executive branch, the European Commission, the European Union has completed its change of guard.
The process took almost four months, following the European Parliament election in late May, and the end result was inevitably based on a series of compromises – to be expected for an EU of 28 prickly nation-states.
Indeed, the proper functioning of EU institutions requires that no important constituency (left or right, East or West, and so forth) feels left out.
And the new European Commission looks rather strong, given that more than 20 of its 28 members previously served as prime ministers, deputy prime ministers, or ministers.
People who have held high political office at home find it worthwhile to come to Brussels.
But most attention has focused on the EU’s three top positions: the President of the European Commission, the President of the European Council, and the High Representative for external affairs.
The Commission’s new president, Jean-Claude Juncker, was the first ever to be selected based on his faction’s strong showing in the European Parliament election.
As a seasoned Brussels insider, he was not one to move the crowds.
But sometimes this can be an advantage.
An insider knows best how to reconcile contrasting interests and how to get the institutional machinery moving again, as Juncker showed with his deft handling of the distribution of tasks among the individual Commissioners.
Selecting the president of the European Council required considerable time and horse-trading, with Polish Prime Minister Donald Tusk emerging as the final choice.
But, though Tusk now has an important-sounding position, the European Council President decides nothing.
The president mainly presides over the meetings of the EU’s national leaders, and an incumbent’s influence depends on his or her ability to set the agenda and facilitate compromises.
The experience of the previous incumbent, former Belgian Prime Minister Herman van Rompuy, in dealing with his own country’s fractious coalitions proved very useful when he had to persuade national leaders to make decisions during the euro crisis.
Tusk will have to achieve something similar in the face of the new challenges confronting Europe today, which include Russian aggression in Ukraine, the rise of terrorism in the Middle East, and a stagnant economy at home.
On the EU’s most immediate challenge, posed by Russia, Tusk will have to broker decisions with leaders from countries that feel immediately threatened (like his own) and those for which economic ties with Russia outweigh any threat to European security, which they feel to be remote.
On the economy, he must reconcile the priorities of full-employment Germany with those of Greece and Italy, which remain in the grip of recession and sky-high unemployment.
Being able to converse directly with the Council’s members, mostly in English, might be the biggest immediate challenge, as he admitted immediately.
The appointment of the Italian foreign minister, Federica Mogherini, as High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy has been widely questioned, owing to her limited executive experience in foreign policy.
But, since the de facto invasion of Ukraine in late August, her government has changed its position on Russia, and she has sought to convince many critics that she knows the problems facing Europe well (her university thesis, for example, was about political Islam).
But can she lead?
Europe’s foreign service, the European External Action Service (EEAS), is a huge bureaucracy, which must be managed well if it is to be effective.
And, though the head of the EEAS has been dubbed the “EU’s foreign-policy chief,” Mogherini should be seen as its CEO, with key decisions taken by the member states’ leaders when they convene in the European Council.
Her lack of managerial experience is thus her key weakness, and she will have to find a strong team to support her.
But there is at least one encouraging, if hidden, signal from Mogherini’s appointment: The fact that the European Central Bank President Mario Draghi is also an Italian was not an impediment.
This implies that the ECB presidency is not counted among the posts to be distributed according to nationality quotas, and that Draghi’s nationality is not regarded as having influenced his decisions in any way.
Leaders of the EU’s institutions have to be political entrepreneurs if they are to leave a mark on history.
Their decision-making power is limited.
But they can often frame the choices and broker coalitions to push the existing boundaries of European integration.
None of the EU’s top three new faces (Juncker, Tusk, and Mogherini) has a track record in this sense.
Evidently the national bosses like it that way.
The most sobering message from the appointment process is thus that the member states’ leaders will not suffer anyone who might rock the boat and push integration forward.
There will be little movement toward the “ever closer union” envisioned in the Treaty of Rome.
That might come as a relief for those in the United Kingdom and elsewhere who fear domination by Brussels, but it can only dismay those who hope that, despite its sluggish economy and declining population, Europe can become a relevant global actor.
Sanctions and Solidarity
BRUSSELS – The European Union has finally agreed on its “third-level sanctions” against Russia for its actions in Ukraine.
As is usual for the EU, arriving at this point has been a long and difficult process.
A key problem all along has been that, though sanctions serve a common purpose, the costs of implementing them are borne by individual member states.
Moreover, the costs are very concrete and visible, as jobs in enterprises that depend on exports to Russia seem to be at stake.
So it was not surprising that many member states were more concerned about the potential cost of the sanctions on their economies than they were about the overall foreign-policy goal of signaling to Russia that its disregard of international law and norms has consequences.
That is why a common fund to provide compensation for the economic costs of sanctions should be an integral part of the EU’s emerging foreign-policy stance toward Russia.
Creating such a fund would provide a potent symbol of solidarity within the EU, while providing an ideal opportunity to reflect on the nature of the sanctions’ costs.
From an economist’s perspective, a key point is that losing export sales does not represent a cost per se.
For example, if a company that produces a generic consumer good like food, or even cars, sells less in Russia than it did before, one should not necessarily count the reduction as a loss.
After all, if such goods have a global market, a loss of sales in one market can be compensated by higher sales in another.
In fact, a large proportion of Russian imports from the EU are precisely of these generic consumer goods, which are not affected by sanctions.
Thus, reports claiming that sanctions imply a high cost – because EU exports to Russia amounted to €120 billion ($161 billion) last year and represent tens of thousands of jobs – are highly misleading.
An economic loss arises only if a firm produces some specialized good that can be sold only in Russia using labor and capital that are also specialized and cannot be employed to produce something else.
This applies especially to Germany: The famous German Mittelstand often does produce highly specialized goods; but it also prides itself on its flexibility and adaptability.
Given this, there might be a case for compensation in some cases, but it should be strictly limited in time.
It would not be difficult to develop objective criteria for access to an EU “Sanctions Compensation Fund.”
A firm could be eligible for compensation if it operated in the sectors covered by sanctions, and if the product in question had special characteristics that prevented sales from being redirected elsewhere.
A quantitative test of eligibility could be that sales to Russia over the previous three years accounted for more than one-quarter of total sales and diminished by more than a certain percentage this year.
Compensation would take the form of retraining programs for personnel, and maybe refinancing of loans taken to finance specialized machinery.
But there are two sectors in which no compensation is needed: energy and finance.
Why?
For starters, the risk to Europe’s energy imports from Russia is negligible.
Should Russia demand a higher price for its oil, Europe could simply turn to the global market.
Likewise, Russian gas giant Gazprom could increase the price it charges its European customers only by breaking existing contracts.
Moreover, Europe is the only customer for a large share of Russian gas exports, which, at least in the short run, must be transported through the existing pipelines.
Given this, the case for compensation in the energy sector is exceptionally weak.
Only the makers of highly specialized equipment, perhaps for exploration under Siberian conditions, might have grounds for drawing on the compensation fund.
The case for compensation is even weaker in the European financial sector.
Providing the kind of medium- to long-term financing that is now subject to sanctions constitutes an infinitesimal fraction of European banks’ business.
Moreover, as Russia’s political system becomes ever more oppressive, and its legal system ever more arbitrary, rich Russians will be more inclined than they already are to establish a safe base abroad for their wealth and families.
The freedom and rule of law provided by financial centers such as London will become even more attractive.
In 2006, the EU established a “Globalization Adjustment Fund” to cushion those sectors hardest hit by rising imports.
Though the Fund initially was allocated only €500 million, a rather modest sum compared to the overall annual EU budget of around €100 billion, its creation was an important signal of the EU’s readiness to compensate those who lose out from a common policy.
A similar political signal is needed today to overcome EU member states’ resistance to decisions that advance a common foreign policy.
Here, too, the sum needed would probably be rather small compared to the overall EU budget.
Who Won Europe?
BRUSSELS – The fight over who will be the European Commission’s next president is heating up.
Several European Union leaders were recently spotted in a small rowboat on a Swedish lake, reportedly scheming against the frontrunner, and British Prime Minister David Cameron has launched a public campaign to reassert the right of EU member states’ governments to decide who will occupy the EU’s executive arm.
The process of choosing the Commission’s president appears to be a conflict between the voice of the people, as expressed in the results of last month’s European Parliament election, and backroom deal-making by governments.
But reality is more complex, and the genuine democratic mandate did not go to the person who claims to have “won” the election.
In the run-up to the election, the major European party “families” (there are no pan-European parties, only loose alliances of national parties) each nominated a Spitzenkandidat as their choice for President of the European Commission.
The center-right European People’s Party, which gained a narrow plurality of 221 seats in the 751-seat parliament, has claimed victory in the election; and many others, including socialists, greens, and liberals, concur that the EPP’s Spitzenkandidat, Jean-Claude Juncker, has a moral right to be selected as President of the Commission.
In fact, though the EPP won 29% of the seats, versus 24% for the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats (S&D), the S&D can claim victory.
The most extreme example is Luxembourg, Juncker’s home country, where the EPP received almost 38% of the popular vote, versus 11% for the S&D – a difference, in absolute terms, of only about 52,000.
But the EPP obtained two more MEPs than the S&D, which implies a per seat cost of roughly 26,000 votes.
The other extreme is Italy, where the S&D won 41% of the votes, versus 22% for the EPP.
In absolute terms, the difference was more than five million votes, but the S&D won only 14 more MEPs than the EPP.
In Italy, the S&D needed about 370,000 voters to gain one MEP, more than 14 times as many as the EPP needed in Luxembourg.
The EPP’s “victory” was thus due mainly to the fact that the ratio of voters per MEP varies greatly across countries.
A single vote in Italy (and in other large countries) is worth much less than a vote in smaller countries.
The German Constitutional Court recently relied on this fact in a controversial decision striking down the 3% electoral threshold for parties to gain European Parliament seats in Germany (the small far-right National Democratic Party picked up one seat in the European Parliament as a result).
The German court’s rationale was that the European Parliament election is not a true election, because the principle of “one person, one vote” is not respected.
This is not only a problem from the standpoint of democratic principles; the results of the recent election have shown the extent to which it can influence political outcomes.
Juncker came out ahead in the MEP count for only one reason: he obtained his votes in small countries, and votes are de facto weighted by country size.
Thus, the claim that the European Parliament directly represents Europe’s people and that the people have given the EPP’s candidate a direct popular mandate that the member states’ representatives in the European Council should respect rings hollow.
The S&D obtained more votes, giving its Spitzenkandidat, Martin Schulz, a claim to greater democratic legitimacy.
Europe Is Still Standing
BRUSSELS – Judging from the headlines, one might get the impression that the 400 million citizens eligible to participate in the recent European Parliament elections voted massively against the European Union.
True, anti-establishment, mostly Euroskeptic, parties won about one-fifth of the vote.
But to characterize the election result as a rejection of Europe simply is not quite accurate (or fair).
For starters, although much has been made of the argument that the EU is too far removed from its citizens, opinion polls have shown consistently that public trust in the major European institutions remains higher than trust in national institutions.
Across the EU, the European Parliament still has higher approval ratings, on average, than national parliaments.
Although the trust gap has narrowed somewhat in recent years, even the continuing recession, which is often blamed on EU-imposed austerity and the crisis in the eurozone, has only marginally reduced the European Parliament’s advantage over national parliaments.
Recent polls suggest that, across Europe, about 40% of the population still trust the European Parliament, whereas only 25% trust their national parliaments.
Moreover, the European Parliament retains much higher trust than the US Congress, which has approval ratings that are now below 10%.
Given the general loss of trust in parliamentary institutions on both sides of the Atlantic, the European Parliament is doing relatively well.
Moreover, not all protest parties reject the EU.
In Europe’s crisis-affected countries, young people, who have been hardest hit, voted en masse for leftist “anti-austerity” parties, most notably in Greece.
But these parties do not reject the EU.
On the contrary, they want more solidarity from the EU, which would enable their governments to spend more.
The anti-austerity protest vote is strongest where governments have been unable to implement reforms effectively (for example, in Greece), in contrast to Portugal and Spain, whose economies are recovering on the back of strong exports.
In Italy, Prime Minister Matteo Renzi’s new government has been able to stem the tide of Euroskepticism by undertaking concrete reforms and not blaming the EU for every problem the country faces.
The rejection of the EU seems more fundamental in parts of northern Europe, where the elderly tend to vote for right-wing populist parties.
Especially in the United Kingdom and France, unemployment and a perceived lack of control over borders have played a large role in fostering disaffection with the EU.
This is particularly worrying, given that both countries’ problems have little to do with EU policies.
France’s economic malaise cannot be blamed on austerity imposed from Brussels, and the UK is not even in the eurozone.
Populists in both countries campaigned successfully on non-issues.