Despite privatization, there are roughly 119,000 state-owned enterprises today, with a book value of about $4 trillion.
State-owned land is valued at more than $7 trillion.
Combined, these state-owned assets total almost three-quarters of China’s national productive wealth.
With the state owning so much, most of the gains in asset values experienced over the past 30 years have gone into the government’s coffers.
When most households own no productive assets, they cannot share any of the asset appreciation or property income.
For most citizens, wages are the only source of income.
But wages have grown at a far slower pace than GDP.
No wonder domestic consumption cannot grow in a manner commensurate with GDP.
Transforming China from an export-driven economy to one that relies on domestic consumption requires two fundamental reforms.
First, ownership rights to the remaining state assets should be distributed equally to China’s 1.3 billion citizens.
This can be done by putting these assets into national wealth funds and distributing the funds’ shares to citizens at no cost.
Second, the government budgeting process must be opened up through both public hearings in the national legislature and public participation via the media.
Such increased accountability will shift government spending toward programs related to people’s needs and away from physical structures. 
Without such structural reforms or returning fiscal surpluses to families through tax cuts and rebates, government investment-based stimulus efforts can provide, at best, a short-term economic boost.
They cannot transform China’s export- and investment-oriented political-economic system.
Indeed, even after the new stimulus package, China will still depend on investment and export for growth.
For 30 years, concentrating resources in the government’s hands through state ownership and taxes has served China well.
It provided a basis for China’s nation-building policy of “Concentrate Resources and Do Big Things.”
Today, however, China has decent infrastructure, impressive buildings, and an excessive industrial base.
What is missing is sufficient private consumption to power endogenous growth.
To correct this, China needs to boost its people’s sense of future financial security and affect a rise in private income commensurate with GDP growth.
Building a nation demands more than steel and concrete.
China’s Consumer Communism
China has changed dramatically since the mid-1980’s.
It’s not just the increase in the number of freeways, billboards, and skyscrapers that disorient long-time visitors.
Even a visit to a bookstore can shock anyone who first came to know China decades ago, when it seemed inconceivable that works by non-Marxist theorists would ever outnumber those by Marxists.
A theatre company has even been allowed to stage “Animal Farm,” George Orwell’s famous anti-authoritarian allegory, once known to socialist-bloc readers only via underground editions.
The changes run deeper, of course.
In the 1980’s, there were no beggars on city streets, and the main social cleavage divided the small number of politically well-connected people, who enjoyed a privileged lifestyle, from everyone else.
Now, there are both beggars and a burgeoning middle class.
It used to be difficult to find anything to do on a Saturday night in Shanghai.
Now, Time magazine calls the city the “most happening” place on earth.
While preparing for my first trip to China twenty years ago, George Orwell’s dark masterpiece, Nineteen Eighty-Four, seemed a useful lens through which to view this “people’s republic.”
Control in China was not nearly rigid enough to make it the embodiment of an all-embracing, authoritarian Big Brother state, but there were parallels, from the disparagement of many forms of “bourgeois” enjoyment and entertainment to periodic propaganda campaigns insisting that two plus two equaled five.
Still, despite all the changes, when foreign commentators nowadays want to spice up a China piece with a literary allusion, Orwell remains the seasoning of choice.
Big Brother is invoked in stories about Internet censorship.
When the authorities issue a White Paper on human rights, references are made to Newspeak.
But is this really the best lens through which to see China now?
It is worth considering whether Aldous Huxley, who taught Orwell at school and who wrote another great and portentous piece of political fiction, Brave New World, provides a more relevant perspective.
Huxley’s masterpiece, which had more to say about materialism, mood-control, mass-distraction, and social fragmentation than Orwell’s, offers a new kind of insight into what is really happening in twenty-first-century China.
With its bliss-inducing drug “soma” and sensuous entertainments known as “feelies,” which provided the sort of engrossing distraction now offered by video games and iPods, Brave New World’s perspective adds a new dimension to understanding the durability of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) as a protean ruling party.
Of course, Newspeak is alive and well in many places, and there are certainly Orwellian echoes in the authorities’ pronouncements and actions.
But Orwell’s critique doesn’t help in explaining the CCP’s surprising ability to retain power long after the demise of most of the socialist bloc, even in the face of widespread protests, including an estimated 74,000 separate incidents across China in 2004 alone.
After reading Nineteen Eighty-Four in 1949, the year of the founding of the People’s Republic of China, Huxley sent his former pupil a letter praising the novel.
He noted the emphasis that it put on rule via “boot-on-the-face” techniques and puritanical distaste for pleasure.
But wasn’t it more likely, Huxley mused, that future ruling elites would strive to keep the governed in line by distracting them with sexual allurement, entertainment, and other forms of pleasure, à la Brave New World?
In many ways, today’s Chinese consumer culture is precisely the kind of palliative that Huxley described.
Another of Brave New World’s strategies for control was to maximize divisions among the populace.
Whereas the main distinction in Nineteen Eighty-Four is between rulers and ruled, in Brave New World, people are divided into different social orders defined by disparate tastes and lifestyles.
The same could be said of China today, where the gaps between rich and poor, urban and rural populations, and coastal and inland culture are so great that it is much harder than before for people from varied walks of life to feel that they share common plights and goals.
Of course, no single novel provides a perfect lens through which to view any society.
Sometimes, such as when violence was recently used to quell South Chinese peasants protesting official land grabs, the CCP still shows its willingness to use “boot-on-the-face” suppression.
Still, there have been more moments lately that favor Huxley’s vision of political order over that of Orwell.
During my first post-1989 trip to China, a bartender introduced me to a phrase that perfectly characterized the new official mood: “Meiyou yundong, shenme dou keyi” (As long as there are no political movements, anything goes).
Orwell’s Big Brother would not have been amused by this remark.
But a member of Brave New World’s ruling elite would have taken it in stride.
China’s Crippled Financial Sector
BEIJING – Even in the best of times, it is difficult for China’s small and medium-size enterprises to get bank loans.
But with the current regimen of credit austerity, imposed to contain economic overheating and inflationary pressure, making conditions for SMEs worse, the financial sector – the least reformed sector in China – now is suffocating the beating heart of the country’s economic dynamism.
In normal times, the informal financial market helps SMEs to get by; but the recent woes of Wenzhou, a city in southern Zhejiang province renowned for its freewheeling private economy, have shown that the informal financial market can be very volatile and undependable.
Several major lenders absconded with large amounts of deposits, and defaults by ordinary companies have become a serious concern.
Things have gotten so bad as to warrant a visit by Premier Wen Jiabao.
China’s official foreign reserves are increasing at a rate of about $1 billion per business day, almost all of which is used to buy US Treasury bonds and other international assets that carry a minimal rate of return.
At the same time, about 40% of China’s bank savings are not lent out.
One might thus think that returns to capital are low in China.
But one would be wrong: studies have consistently shown that the rate of return to capital has been more than 10% since the late 1990s.
Why then, can’t China’s SMEs rely on the formal financial sector to finance their daily operations?
To be sure, it is not easy for SMEs in other countries to get formal financing.
But not many countries are experiencing the same level of difficulties; surveys consistently show that only about 10% of Chinese SMEs’ finance comes from banks, while the global average doubles.
Moreover, none of these countries has a capital surplus of China’s magnitude.
The main impediment in China is local governments, which compete with SMEs for bank loans and inevitably crowd them out from the formal banking sector.
Local governments rely on bank credit to invest in infrastructure and real-estate development.
A report released early this year by the People’s Bank of China showed that close to one-third of the country’s total outstanding loans, or 14 trillion renminbi ($2.2 trillion), were owed by local governments.
In the last few years, 30-40% of bank credits went to government infrastructure projects.
Another impediment is the dominance of large banks.
The four largest banks in China account for 60% of the country’s total bank lending.
While the US banking sector is similarly concentrated, it has far more financial institutions – roughly 18,000 commercial banks, savings and locals associations, mutual savings banks, and credit unions, compared to only around 400 commercial banks and 3,000 rural credit unions and township banks in China.
This means that banks in China on average are larger than in the US, especially in view of the difference in the size of the two countries’ GDP.
Large banks tend to lend to large companies in order to save costs.
This bias is mitigated in advanced economies by various flexible financing tools offered by large banks.
For example, a small business with a decent credit history can borrow large amounts with a major credit card.
This is absent in China.
In the end, it is the crippled financial system that is driving the wedge between China’s large surplus of capital and formal financing for the country’s SMEs.
Indeed, in some parts of southern China, the informal financial sector is growing to match the size of the formal financial sector.
From depositors’ point of view, participating in the informal sector is a rational choice.
Bank interest rates on savings are lower than the inflation rate – and many multiples lower than the rates promised by the informal sector.
Default rates in the informal sector are high, and lenders may disappear with depositors’ money, as happened in Wenzhou.
But, despite these risks, investing in the informal market can still be a better choice than keeping one’s money in the bank.
The record of the last 20 years shows that the Chinese monetary and banking authorities have a habit of taking an ostrich approach to the informal financial sector, pretending that they are regulating the sector until serious problems emerge.
This approach cannot last forever, and changing it means acknowledging the backwardness of the formal financial sector and taking remedial action.
An immediate step that the authorities should take, as many economists have argued for years, is to allow the saving rate to reflect the cost of investment.
That way, ordinary depositors would put their savings back into banks, because the formal financial sector would offer them a way to tap into the benefits offered by China’s phenomenal growth.
With more deposits at their disposure and a more flexible interest rate policy, banks would be able to price risks more easily and thus lend more to SMEs.
China’s Cyber-Warriors
NEW DELHI – The world now accepts that protecting our atmosphere, hydrosphere, lithosphere, and biosphere – the “global commons” – is the responsibility of all countries.
The same norm must apply to cyberspace, which is critical to our everyday life, economic well-being, and security.
At a time when cyber attacks are increasing worldwide, US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton was right to declare that an attack on one nation’s computer networks “can be an attack on all.”
Indeed, the attacks are a reminder that, as a new part of the global commons, cyberspace already has come under threat.
Cyberspace must be treated, along with outer space, international waters, and international airspace, as property held in common for the good of all.
And, like ocean piracy and airplane hijacking, cyber-crime cannot be allowed to go unpunished if we are to safeguard our common assets and collective interests.
Naming China among a handful of countries that have stepped up Internet censorship, Clinton warned that “a new information curtain is descending across much of the world.”
Her statement, with its allusion to the Cold War-era Iron Curtain, amounted to an implicit admission that the central assumption guiding US policy on China since the 1990’s – that assisting China’s economic rise would usher in greater political openness there – has gone awry.
The strategy of using market forces and the Internet to open up a closed political system simply is not working. Indeed, the more economic power China has accumulated, the more adept it has become in extending censorship to cyberspace.
If anything, China has proven that a country can blend control, coercion, and patronage to stymie the Internet’s politically liberalizing elements.
Through discreet but tough controls, Beijing pursues a policy of wai song, nei jin – relaxed on the outside, vigilant internally.
Google is now crying foul over “ a highly sophisticated and targeted attack on our corporate infrastructure originating from China.”
But, despite its corporate motto – “Don’t be evil” – Google itself was instrumental in aiding online censorship in China, having custom-built a search engine that purges all references and Web sites that the Chinese government considers inappropriate.
Now Google itself has become a victim of China’s growing cyber prowess, in the same way that appeasement of Hitler boomeranged onto France and Britain.
China deploys tens of thousands of “ cyber police” to block Web sites, patrol cyber-cafes, monitor the use of cellular telephones, and track down Internet activists. But the threat to the new global commons comes not from what China does domestically.
Rather, it comes from the way in which the know-how that China has gained in fashioning domestic cyber oversight is proving invaluable to it in its efforts to engage in cyber intrusion across its frontiers.
Canadian researchers have discovered a vast Chinese surveillance system called “GhostNet,” which can compromise computers in organizations abroad through booby-trapped e-mail messages that automatically scan and transfer documents to a digital storage facility in China. This is what happened when computers of the Tibetan government-in-exile in Dharamsala, India, were attacked last year.
India’s national security adviser recently complained that his office was targeted yet again by hackers.
“People seem to be fairly sure it was the Chinese,” he said. Officials in Germany, Britain, and the US have acknowledged that hackers believed to be from China also have broken into their government and military networks.
The state-sponsored transnational cyber threat is at two levels.
The first is national, with the hackers largely interested in two objectives. One is to steal secrets and gain an asymmetrical advantage over another country.
Cyber intrusion in peacetime allows the prowler to read the content and understand the relative importance of different computer networks so that it knows what to disable in a conflict situation.
The other objective is commercial: to pilfer intellectual property.
The second level of cyber threat is against chosen individuals.
The most common type of intrusion is an attempt to hack into e-mail accounts.
The targets also can face Trojan-horse attacks by e-mail intended to breach their computers and allow the infiltrators to corrupt or transfer files remotely.
To be sure, if a cyber attack is camouflaged, it is not easy to identify the country from which it originated.
Through the use of so-called “false-flag espionage” and other methods, attacks can be routed through the computers of a third country.
Just as some Chinese pharmaceutical firms exported to Africa spurious medicines with “Made in India” labels – a fact admitted by the Chinese government – some Chinese hackers are known to have routed their cyber intrusion through computers in Russia, Iran, Cuba, and other countries.
But, like their comrades in the pharmaceutical industry, such hackers tend to leave telltale signs.
Then there are many cases in which the attacks have originated directly from China.
It seems unlikely that these hackers, especially those engaged in cyber espionage, pilferage, and intimidation, are private individuals with no links to the Chinese government.
It is more likely that they are tied to the People’s Liberation Army.
In war, this irregular contingent of hackers would become the vanguard behind which the PLA takes on the enemy.
Systematic cyber attacks constitute a new frontier of asymmetrical warfare at a time when the world already confronts other unconventional threats, including transnational terrorism.
With national security and prosperity now dependent on the safekeeping of cyberspace, cybercrime must be effectively countered as an international priority.
If not, cyberspace will become the new global-commons battlefield.
China’s Decrepit Population
China’s government finally appears to be acknowledging the urgent challenges presented by the country’s aging population.
On December 12, it released a cabinet-level White Paper on the problem – the first of its kind ­– in an effort to grapple with the prospect of rising social-security and healthcare costs, a tightening labor market, and other potential obstacles to continue rapid economic growth.
Looking back, it is ironic that the Chinese government’s draconian “one-child” policy, imposed in 1979, was implemented at the same time as the “open door” policy, aimed at capturing labor-intensive foreign manufacturing investment.
While both policies must be regarded as successes, over the years the family planning program has contributed to an aging population that may diminish China’s attractiveness as a low-cost, labor-intensive manufacturing hub.
With fewer children to replenish the workforce, the working-age cohort of those 15-64 years old would shrink from 68.4% to 60.7%.
The elderly would thus account for a far greater share of China’s population than in other large emerging economies, such as Brazil, India, Indonesia, and Mexico.
China’s demographic trends hold several adverse implications for its economy.
With a rapidly aging population and a shrinking workforce, tax revenue will contract, while expenditure on pensions and health care will expand, undermining the fiscal position.
Various estimates by private-sector economists and World Bank officials suggest that the government’s accumulated “net implicit pension debt” could balloon to 75-110% of GDP.
Furthermore, the decline in the working-age cohort would squeeze labor supply, fueling wage growth and eroding the country’s economic competitiveness.
Already, in the Yangtze and Pearl River Deltas, where manufacturing activity is the densest, labor shortages have appeared.
In 2004, for example, Guangdong Province had to raise the mandatory minimum wage by as much as 20% to attract workers from other regions.
To hire and retain skilled workers, many foreign-invested enterprises routinely pay above the minimum wage.
But some foreign manufacturers, seeking to cap rising labor costs, are shifting production from China to cheaper destinations such as Vietnam, where average monthly wages for factory workers is $50-60 – half that of China.
Aside from abandoning the “one-child” policy, China could avoid this outcome by climbing the value chain in manufacturing and services, as Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea, and Taiwan have done.
Although the government recently announced that it intends to increase R&amp;D spending to 2% of GDP by 2010, this remains below the OECD average of 2.2%.
As for China’s backward educational system, the large number of university graduates is offset by their overall sub-standard quality.
According to a recent survey by McKinsey &amp; Company, of the more than three million graduates churned out by China’s universities and colleges every year, less than 10% are suitable for employment with international companies, owing to their deficiencies in practical training and poor English.
In view of these systemic weaknesses, China’s ability to overcome its labor deficit by shifting to an innovation- and productivity-driven economy remains dubious.
A Chinese Pivot?
NEW DELHI – Is China, under its new president, Xi Jinping, undertaking its own diplomatic pivot, parallel to the United States’ “pivot to Asia”?
Xi’s first significant international initiatives – making Russia his first official visit abroad, followed immediately by his attendance at the BRICS summit in South Africa – suggest that China may be seeking to place its relations with the world’s most powerful emerging countries on a par with its US diplomacy.
Indeed, this possibility is supported by Xi’s recent statement about relations with India, which he termed “one of the most important bilateral relationships” for China.
Xi’s early focus on Sino-Indian relations is unusual for a Chinese leader.
He enunciated a five-point platform, rather like Jawaharlal Nehru’s “five principles of peaceful coexistence,” implemented in the two countries’ Panchsheel Treaty of 1954.
According to Xi’s platform, pending a final settlement of territorial issues, the two countries should cooperate to maintain peace and tranquility and prevent border disputes from affecting the overall relationship.
China and India should maintain close strategic communications in order to keep bilateral relations on the “right track.”
Moreover, the two countries should harness each other’s comparative strengths and expand mutually beneficial cooperation in infrastructure, investment, and other areas; strengthen cultural ties to advance an expanding friendship; and enhance their cooperation in multilateral forums to safeguard the legitimate rights and interests of developing countries in tackling global challenges.
Finally, they should accommodate each other’s core concerns.
While Xi has been preoccupied with his country’s domestic challenges since becoming Chinese Communist Party (CCP) General-Secretary last November, and now as president since March, relations with India can have a direct impact on internal conditions.
For example, China’s desire to prevent drug trafficking in its southern province of Yunnan means that its police and security forces are taking a keen interest in what happens in Myanmar, a country that is also of special interest to India.
Then, of course, there is Tibet, perhaps China’s greatest domestic security concern, and also a perennial source of tension with India, owing to territorial disputes.
China’s recent anger over a visit by the Dalai Lama to the Tawang monastery in Arunachal Pradesh, Indian territory claimed by China, suggests just how potent this issue remains.
Hu Shisheng, a leading South Asia strategic analyst at the China Institutes for Contemporary International Relations, has suggested that such visits do not mean that “India-China relations are [in a state of] disturbance,” though the potential for trouble remains high.
Under Xi, however, China seems to be accentuating the positive.
The CCP’s official newspaper, the People’s Daily, recently identified the “two areas of interest with India” that matter most.
With the border issue “effectively controlled,” there should be greater focus on “trade and multilateral issues,” where success could bring about a “new” and welcome “chapter” in bilateral ties.
So is “mistrust” between the two powers diminishing?
The People’s Daily seems to consider bilateral relations as normal at this point.
India appears to be equally hopeful.
Indeed, a senior Indian official,speaking about tensions in the South China Sea, was recently quoted as saying: “You can’t assume that India-China maritime rivalry is inevitable.”
The “Indo-Pacific is one geopolitical area,” the official reportedly said, “but look at the situation in the Indian Ocean.
The situation near China, whether in the East China Sea, near Japan, or in the West Pacific, is completely different.
India, China, and the US – everyone needs sea links; everybody’s energy goes through it.”
A classified report from India’s defense ministry, however, emphasizes the “increasing number of Chinese submarines venturing into the Indian Ocean region, thus posing [risks] to India’s security interests.”
The report indicated that at least “22 contacts were recorded with vessels suspected to be Chinese attack submarines patrolling outside Beijing’s territorial waters last year,” and warned that the “implicit focus” of China’s navy appears to be “to control highly sensitive sea lines of communication.”
Xi’s efforts to cement ties with China’s other huge neighbor, Russia, should be seen as complementing his outreach to India.
China is the world’s largest energy consumer, while Russia is the biggest energy provider.
And bilateral trade is booming, worth $88 billion per year.
Xi’s own regional pivot should be viewed as part of his grand vision of a “revitalization of the Chinese nation,” which essentially calls for China to resume the paramount leadership in Asia that it has exercised for much of its history.
His ambitions are vast, yet he, and the Chinese people, appear determined to achieve them.
That is far more than can be said of India’s rather wooly strategic meanderings.
China’s Evolving Web
HONG KONG – In a recent article, the economist Axel Leijonhufvud defines the market system as a web of contracts.
Because contracts are linked with each other, one default can trigger an avalanche of broken promises, “[making] it possible to destroy virtually the entire web of formal and informal contracts which the market system requires for its functioning.”
The state’s role is to protect, enforce, and regulate these contracts and related property rights, as well as to intervene to prevent systemic failure.
This web of contracts – often taken for granted in mainstream economics, to the extent that it becomes almost invisible – embodies the formal and informal rules embedded in the market system that shape and constrain individual and social behavior.
They form the fabric of all human institutions.
Advanced economic systems have very complex webs of contracts, such as financial derivatives.
For Europe, Leijonhufvud argues, this implies a three-pronged approach that focuses on “levels of leverage,” “maturity mismatches,” and “the topology of the web,” – that is, “its connectivity and the presence of critical nodes that are ‘too big to fail.’”
This is because “[t]he web of contracts has developed serious inconsistencies.”
To insist that all contracts be fulfilled would “cause a collapse of very large portions of the web,” with “serious economic and incalculable social and political consequences.”
By contrast, emerging markets like China have less sophisticated systems and evolve more complex contractual/institutional links over time, particularly through globalized transactions.
Under China’s planned economy, most contracts were between individuals and the state, whereas more sophisticated market contracts have emerged or re-emerged only over the last 30 years.
Indeed, the widespread use of market contracts with publicly-owned companies was a recent and important adaptation in the move toward a “socialist market economy.”
The web of contracts, however, can also be understood as complex adaptive market systems, which encompass the state and family relations as well.
To understand China’s socialist market economy, it is essential to examine systematically these different forms of contracts and their institutional structures.
Family and kinship contracts, which govern marriage, adoption, cohabitation, inheritance, etc., form the basic unit of human society.
These contracts are the most ancient and remain the foundation of social relationships in China today.
Corporate contracts place the profit-oriented legal person at the center of the transaction and bind all of its stakeholders.
Chinese corporate contracts have grown exponentially over the last 30 years, but they have special characteristics that reflect the primary role of Chinese state-owned enterprises.
Market contracts between producers and consumers – and/or among producers in supply chains – link individuals, families, firms, governments, and public organizations through local or global markets.
Over the last few decades, China has begun to practice modern contract law and joined the World Trade Organization, committing itself to international rules governing trade and investment.
Non-governmental and non-profit civil contracts bind people together for communal, religious, social, and political activities.
These contracts are still relatively new and evolving in China.
Social contracts created by constitutional and administrative laws define the powers and responsibilities of the state and its constituent bodies vis-à-vis individuals and the private sector.
They include the authority to impose taxes and restraints on individuals and private entities through criminal, administrative, and civil law, as well as the state’s obligation to provide public goods and services.
China has strengthened its unitary state with important institutional innovations that have delivered growth and middle-income prosperity, but it still retains the basic five-level administrative structure – central government on top, with provincial, city, town, and village bodies below – that first emerged two millennia ago.
Deciphering the structure of the web of contracts holds the key to understanding how an economy behaves, including its dynamic non-linear adaptation to internal and external forces.
Following the physicist Fritjof Capra, one should regard living organisms, social systems, and ecosystems as an interconnected and interdependent, complex adaptive system.
This means that we should view the economy and society not as rigid hierarchies or mechanical markets, but as networks or webs of life, in which contracts, formal and informal, fulfilled or violated, are the essence of human activity.
Examining webs of contracts should be similar to a biologist’s examination of cell structure and DNA.
China has created four functioning global-scale modern supply chains in manufacturing, infrastructure, finance, and government services, thanks to its evolving, expanding, and complex web of contracts.
But how was China able to build a modern industrial base within a relatively short period of time from its traditional, patrimonial family contracts and archaic constitutional structures?
Through experimentation, adaptation, and evolution – a process that has been described as “crossing the river by feeling the stones” – China has been able to evolve a higher-order, or fifth, supply chain in political decision-making.
This “top-level governance architecture,” as it is known in China, has been essential for coordinating and orchestrating the different supply chains and the overall web of contracts to achieve the delicate balance among individual, family, corporate, social, and national objectives.
This top-level governance architecture is analogous to a computer’s operating system, which orchestrates the other software and hardware components to form a holistic unity.
Such a structure exists in many economies, but, in the Chinese context, where the state plays a central role in the economy, it is critical to the system’s effectiveness.
How it is shaped will depend on how China’s history, culture, institutional context, and evolving web of contracts affect the country’s social fabric.
China’s Excess-Capacity Nightmare
SHANGHAI – Back in 1958, the year of China’s ill-fated “Great Leap Forward,” Chairman Mao had big plans for the steel industry.
While production had been just over five million tons in 1957, he expected the country to catch up with or even surpass the United States by 1962, producing 80-100 million tons per year, and to reach 700 million tons per year by the mid-1970’s, making China the undisputed world leader.
All this was to be accomplished using small “backyard steel furnaces” operated by ordinary people with no particular technical expertise.
Today, Mao’s dream of catching up with the rest of the world has been realized, albeit a bit behind schedule, not only in steel making, where annual capacity has reached 660 million tons, but in many other sectors as well.
In 2008, China ranked first in steel (about half of world production), cement (also about half), aluminum (about 40%), and glass (31%), to take just a few examples.
The country topped the US in auto production in 2009, and remains second only to South Korea in shipbuilding, with 36% of global capacity.
For Beijing’s central planners, however, the size of China’s industrial base has become a cause for alarm rather than celebration.
In a document approved by the State Council on September 26, the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) warned of serious excess capacity in a wide variety of sectors.
(The State Council, which includes the premier, vice premiers, and heads of ministries and commissions, is China’s highest executive authority.)
Based on the NDRC’s figures, 2008 capacity utilization rates were just 76% for steel, 75% for cement, 73% for aluminum, 88% for flat glass, 40% for methanol, and 20% for poly-crystalline silicon (a key raw material for solar cells). The current project pipeline also implies less than 50% utilization for wind-power equipment manufacturers in 2010.
Excess capacity has been a priority for the State Council since 2005, when it issued industry-by-industry restrictions on new projects and targets for shutting down inefficient production.
Since that time, however, the situation has in many cases only gotten worse.
The problem is that much of the so-called “blind” and “redundant” investment that Beijing would like to eliminate has the strong support of local governments, whose primary concern is with generating GDP growth in their jurisdictions, regardless of whether the means of achieving it make any economic sense.
Consider cement production, where, according to the China Cement Association, 38% of capacity consists of “shaft” kilns. These have been obsolete in most of the rest of the world for over a century, and accounted for less than 3% of production even in 1957, when most of China’s cement plants were imports from Eastern Europe.
Nowadays, however, shaft kilns are a favorite of local governments because they can be built cheaply and quickly and generate growth and employment.
Achieving economies of scale and lessening environmental impacts simply are not priorities.
A similar situation exists in the steel industry, where the central government has made repeated unsuccessful attempts to close small furnaces.
In 2006, for example, the NDRC produced a list of plants that were required to cease operations by the end of the following year.
As the deadline approached in December 2007, a correspondent from Mysteel , a leading local source of information on the sector, visited a number of these mills to see first-hand how they were progressing with the government-mandated dismantling of their equipment.
What he found was a great example of how any such program is likely to work in practice.
One site was still operating 24 hours a day; in others production had been temporarily halted until the deadline passed.
In only a very few cases had any machinery actually been removed.
Local officials and managers had a variety of reasons for not complying with the NDRC’s order.   Some expected to expand their plants so that they would no longer be counted as inefficient – a stratagem explicitly prohibited by the regulations.
Where facilities were privately owned, it was felt, perhaps not unreasonably, that removing assets would violate China’s property-rights law.
One formerly state-run enterprise was being operated under a 2001 lease specifying that no workers could be laid off for the next ten years.
And there were also jurisdictions that had canceled the licenses of the operators in question, so that, as one regulator put it, they simply “didn’t exist.”
China ’s excess-capacity problem reveals a serious defect in its “socialist market economy.”
In many industries, neither market forces nor central planning are strong enough to bring about the “creative destruction” of inefficient producers.
As a result, the dream of catching up with the developed countries has to a surprising extent been realized much as Mao imagined – by lower-level cadres using small-scale technology.
If simply leading the world in output is the goal, the Chairman’s vision has been resoundingly vindicated.
But if product quality, environmental protection, and economic efficiency are important as well, this state of affairs is little short of nightmarish.
China’s Expanding Core
TOKYO – China is now engaged in bitter disputes with the Philippines over Scarborough Shoal and Japan over the Senkaku Islands, both located far beyond China’s 200-mile-wide territorial waters in the South China Sea.
Indeed, so expansive are China’s claims nowadays that many Asians are wondering what will satisfy China’s desire to secure its “core interests.”
Are there no limits, or does today’s China conceive of itself as a restored Middle Kingdom, to whom the entire world must kowtow?
So far, China has formally referred to Taiwan, Tibet, and Xinjiang province as “core interests,” a phrase that connotes an assertion of national sovereignty and territorial integrity that will brook no compromise.
Now China is attempting to apply the same term to the Senkaku Islands in its dispute with Japan, and is perilously close to making the same claim for the entire South China Sea; indeed, some Chinese military officers already have.
The Senkaku Islands, located to the west of Okinawa in the East China Sea and currently uninhabited, were incorporated into Japan by the Meiji government in 1895.
At one time, there were regular residents working at a bonito-drying facility.
In 1969, the United Nations Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East (ECAFE) completed a seabed survey of the East China Sea, and reported the possible presence of vast underground mineral resources, including abundant oil and natural gas reserves near the Senkakus.
Two years passed before Taiwan and China claimed sovereignty over the islands, in 1971, but the Japanese government’s stance has always been that Japan’s sovereignty is not in question.
In April, Tokyo Governor Shintaro Ishihara, a famous and articulate patriot, announced that the metropolitan government that he leads plans to acquire four of the Senkaku Islands, which are currently privately owned by Japanese citizens.
Donations for the purchase from the people of Japan now exceed ¥700 million ($8.4 million).
China reacted to Ishihara’s proposal with its usual sensitivity: it refused to receive the scheduled visit of Ishihara’s son, who is Secretary-General of Japan’s Liberal Democratic Party, the country’s main opposition party.
Moreover, at a meeting in Beijing earlier this month between Japanese Prime Minister Yoshihiko Noda and Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao during a trilateral summit with South Korea, Wen mentioned the independence movement in the Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region and the Senkaku Islands in the same breath.
“It is important to respect China's core interests and issues of major concern,” he emphasized.
Until that moment, the Chinese government had never applied the term “core interest” to the Senkaku Islands.
Following Wen’s statement, the trilateral summit deteriorated.
While South Korean President Lee Myung-bak held bilateral talks with Chinese President Hu Jintao, talks between Noda and Hu, and a scheduled meeting between Keidanren Chairman Hiromasa Yonekura and Chinese Foreign Minister Yang Jiechi, were also canceled.
The joint declaration issued at the summit was delayed a day, and omitted all references to North Korea – a prime concern of both Japan and South Korea.
China’s brusque treatment of Japan’s leaders probably was intended as a rebuke not only over the Senkaku Islands issue, but also for hosting the Fourth General Meeting of the World Uyghur Congress in Tokyo in May.
Previously, such meetings had been held in Germany and the United States, and this one, which stressed the importance of protecting human rights and preserving the traditions, culture, and language of the Uyghur people, received no official sanction or endorsement from the Japanese government.
If gruff diplomacy was the only manifestation of China’s expansive territorial claims, Asian leaders could sleep more peacefully.
But the fact is that China’s navy is becoming increasingly active in the South China Sea, at the Senkaku Islands and Scarborough Shoal in particular, but also around the Spratly Islands claimed by Vietnam.
Given China’s mushrooming military budget and secretiveness, that assertiveness has set off alarm bells among the other countries bordering the South China Sea.
Moreover, China’s bullying of the Philippines included not only the dispatch of warships to Scarborough Shoals, but also the sudden imposition of import restrictions on Filipino produce.
And China’s reactions toward Japan are far more paranoid since a non-LDP government took power.
The struggles for power within China’s ruling Communist Party over the purge of Bo Xilai, and the blind activist Chen Guangcheng’s escape from detention during economic talks with the US, have made Chinese leaders’ nationalist assertions even more strident than usual.
No official wants to appear soft where China’s supposed “core interests” are concerned.
So far, China has not unleashed the sort of mass demonstrations against Japan and others that it has used in the past to convey its displeasure.
But that probably reflects the jittery state of China’s leaders in the wake of the Bo purge: they cannot guarantee that an anti-Japan demonstration would not turn into an anti-government protest.
China’s real core interests are not in territorial expansion and hegemony over its neighbors, but in upholding the human rights and improving the welfare of its own citizens, which is the world’s core interest in China.
But until China accepts that its territorial claims in the South China Sea must be discussed multilaterally, so that smaller countries like the Philippines and Vietnam do not feel threatened, China’s ever expanding “core interests” will be the root of instability in East Asia.
China’s Fair-Weather American Friends
MUNICH – Because China has pegged its undervalued currency, the renminbi, to the dollar, every weakening of the dollar in the wake of America’s financial crisis has also meant a weakening of the renminbi vis-à-vis other world currencies.
But is China really to blame for the eruption of a global currency war?
The central banks of South Korea, Brazil, Taiwan, Japan, Switzerland, and many other countries are now buying dollars in order to protect their own currencies against revaluation and thus to defend their exports.
Europe also became nervous after the euro exchange rate rose to more than $1.40, far beyond the purchasing power parity (PPP) rate of $1.17.
The United States is now taking drastic steps against China, and is making provisions for a trade war.
Congress has authorized the President to impose import duties on Chinese products if China remains unwilling to increase the value of its currency substantially against the dollar.
But the undervaluation of the renminbi, which is currently 45%, has persisted for many years.
So why is the US suddenly acting so aggressively?
Why didn’t America take action much earlier?
The reason lies in capital movements.
The US accepted the lower valuation of the renminbi as long as China returned the dollars that it earned from bilateral merchandise trade by financing America’s budget deficit.
Now that the Chinese prefer to invest that money in raw materials in Africa and elsewhere, they have aroused the full ire of American policymakers.
China’s shift has been dramatic.
In 2008 and 2009, the Chinese purchased US government bonds at a rate of $17 billion a month.
But China reversed course in November 2009.
During the first seven months of 2010, China not only refrained from buying any more US government paper, but even began to sell its holdings.
Each month, China sold a net sum of about $7 billion in US government bonds.
That nerves are now on end in America is perfectly understandable.
The City of London has jumped into the breach, increasing its purchases, which in 2008 and 2009 amounted to only about $1 billion monthly, to an average of $28 billion in the first seven months of this year.
Since the United Kingdom itself is a large capital importer, we can assume that the City is not holding the paper itself but merely restructuring it and then selling it to the world under a new name and with the London stamp on it.
Despite its withdrawal from financing the US government, China remains the world’s largest net capital exporter, a position that it has held since 2006.In2007 and 2008, China exported on average about $400 billion of capital annually.
The US, which at the time needed annual capital imports of $800 billion in order to offset the near total cessation of private savings, received the lion’s share of this capital.
The unwillingness of the Chinese to consume enabled Americans to build new houses for many years on borrowed money and to maintain a level of consumption that the US economy was unable to finance on its own.
To be sure, the Chinese always restrained themselves from private real-estate financing in the US.
They bought only government paper and securitized real-estate instruments that were issued by the semi-public bodies Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.
Direct real-estate finance via private channels came mainly from other countries – Germany, for example.
Nevertheless, China helped the US to achieve a higher standard of living by making money available to government authorities that would otherwise have had to come from American taxpayers.
Given this history, it is a bit shabby to reproach China now for its exchange-rate policy – a policy that enabled the US to live beyond its means for so long.
Rather than coming at the expense of the US, as is constantly claimed, it was the renminbi’s low valuation that allowed Americans to dream their American dream of universal homeownership.
Imports of inexpensive Chinese products freed up capital and labor in the US for a dramatic expansion of the housing stock – which led to a sharp rise in the American standard of living.
It is understandable that the Chinese are now reluctant to invest more money in the US.
They tried to enter the US energy market with the purchase of Unocal, but were blocked by politicians.
Other direct investments were also stopped by Congress on the pretext of national security.
One need only recall the bidding for Emcore or Firstgold.
The US wanted the Chinese money, but it was not prepared to offer anything more than structured securities of questionable creditworthiness, as well as government paper that is now clearly exposed to the risk of inflation and devaluation.
It would be a service to world peace if the US stopped making cheap moral accusations against China.
The truth is much more subtle than naked political interest.
China’s Financial Fetish
With the drum beating for the development of the costal areas of Tianjin near Beijing, the curtain seems to be rising on yet another “financial center” in China.
When Shanghai sought a similar role several years ago, bankers and investors around the world wondered whether the aim was really for Shanghai to replace Hong Kong as China’s financial heart.
In the current pilot project, Tianjin in China’s north and Shanghai in the south are competing against each other, prompting even more second-guessing.
Once upon a time, no one had any idea about how to create a “financial center.”
A financial center was simply a great metropolis where enormous financial dealings took place.
Cities such as London and New York became known as financial centers only after they had proved themselves in the role.
Policymakers in China seem to be unaware that many major cities have not had the luck to become financial centers.
There is no economic or other theory that explains why a city called a “financial center” should be more valuable or lovely than others.
Why, then, should China make developing global financial centers a vital national goal?
Does China really need its own financial centers of world standing?
Does the world need China to have them?
Or is such a goal necessary because a financial center can determine the fate of a great metropolis?
Nothing in the history of finance, the evolution of cities, or modern economics provides a clear answer.
It is the Chinese who have endowed the term “financial center” with such weight and meaning by trying to dissect the functions of such cities and quantify every detail.
As a result, politicians are prepared to pick a city and order it to create the functions of a financial center, as if such a thing can be constructed like a building – a concept that could not be more off the mark.
Indeed, according to modern development models of finance, whether or not a physical center of finance exists is no longer a meaningful issue.
Owing to historical factors and opportunities, financial transactions were concentrated in cities that were traditionally closely linked to the rise of European and American capitalism.
But what counts nowadays is not where financial transactions physically take place, but rather the growing importance and globalization of finance in the operation of the world economy.
Cities do not become financial centers because they are more “excellent” than other cities, or because they have done something that other cities failed to do.
Instead, once financial transactions begin to concentrate in a place, it becomes hard to move them to other places.
A free-market economy and its legal traditions &#45;&#45; both indispensable to the survival of financial centers – certainly helps them to rise, but that initial rise has always been attributable to historical evolution, not government strategy.
In this sense, China’s effort to deliberately create, through government fiat, global financial centers is both exacting and dogmatic.
There is no doubt that China needs its financial sector to develop soundly in order to ensure sustained economic growth.
And there is now a common understanding in China that meeting this objective requires that the government safeguard financial liberalization.
But progress has been slow, because China’s politicians have put nurturing financial centers – which should be the objective of local governments – at the heart of the country’s financial development.
Indeed, equating financial liberalization with privileges for cities designated as “financial centers” undermines the very goals of liberalization – namely, to reduce government control and to accelerate the development of financial markets.
China’s financial system is failing in that respect, owing to frequent administrative and political intervention.
As a result, Shanghai has been restricted from making the best of its financial functions, and Hong Kong, Asia’s acknowledged financial center, from assisting China’s financial modernization.
What China needs most is a financial sector capable of harnessing the forces of liberalization and globalization to drive economic growth in the decades ahead.
The time has come to cast off the burden of building financial centers, and focus instead on advancing the modernization of Chinese finance.
China’s Five-Year Plan and Global Interest Rates
CAMBRIDGE – China’s new five-year plan will have important implications for the global economy.
Its key feature is to shift official policy from maximizing GDP growth toward raising consumption and average workers’ standard of living.
Although this change is driven by Chinese domestic considerations, it could have a significant impact on global capital flows and interest rates.
China’s high rate of GDP growth over the past decade has, of course, raised the real incomes of hundreds of millions of Chinese, particularly those living in or near urban areas.
And the funds that urban workers send to relatives who remain in the agricultural sector have helped to raise their standard of living as well.
But real wages and consumption have grown more slowly than China’s total GDP.
Much of the income from GDP growth went to large state-owned enterprises, which strengthened their monopoly power.
And a substantial share of China’s output goes abroad, with exports exceeding imports by enough to create a current-account surplus of more than $350 billion over the past year.
China now plans to raise the relative growth rate of real wages and to encourage increased consumer spending. There will also be more emphasis on expanding service industries and less on manufacturing.
State-owned enterprises will be forced to distribute more of their profits.
The rising value of the renminbi will induce Chinese manufacturers to shift their emphasis from export markets to production for markets at home.
And the government will spend more on low-income housing and to expand health-care services.
All of this will mean a reduction in national saving and an increase in spending by households and the Chinese government.
China now has the world’s highest saving rate, probably close to 50% of its GDP, which is important both at home and globally, because it drives the country’s current-account surplus.
A country that saves more than it invests in equipment and structures (as China does) has the extra output to send abroad as a current-account surplus, while a country that invests more than it saves (as the United States does) must fill the gap by importing more from the rest of the world than it exports.
And a country with a current-account surplus has the funds to lend and invest in the rest of the world, while a country with a current-account deficit must finance its external gap by borrowing from the rest of the world.
More precisely, a country’s current-account balance is exactly equal to the difference between its national saving and its investment.
The future reduction in China’s saving will therefore mean a reduction in China’s current-account surplus – and thus in its ability to lend to the US and other countries.
If the new emphasis on increased consumption shrank China’s saving rate by 5% of its GDP, it would still have the world’s highest saving rate. But a five-percentage-point fall would completely eliminate China’s current-account surplus.
That may not happen, but it certainly could happen by the end of the five-year plan.
If it does, the impact on the global capital market would be enormous.
With no current-account surplus, China would no longer be a net purchaser of US government bonds and other foreign securities.
Moreover, if the Chinese government and Chinese firms want to continue investing in overseas oil resources and in foreign businesses, China will have to sell dollar bonds or other sovereign debt from its portfolio.
The net result would be higher interest rates on US and other bonds around the world.
Whether interest rates do rise will also depend on how US saving and investment evolves over the same period. America’s household saving rate has risen since 2007 by about 3% of GDP.
Corporate saving is also up. But the surge in the government deficit has absorbed all of that extra saving and more.
Indeed, the only reason that America’s current-account deficit was lower in 2010 than in previous years is that investment in housing and other construction declined sharply.
If Americans’ demand for housing picks up and businesses want to increase their investment, a clash between China’s lower saving rate and a continued high fiscal deficit in the US could drive up global interest rates significantly.
China’s Flood Of Protests
Protests in China are nothing new.
By some accounts, Chinese officials currently negotiate upwards of 50,000 “major incidents” annually.
Widespread corruption has bred deep discontent: workers protest the Enron-like bilking of their life savings, townspeople fight against illegal land seizures, and villagers battle injustices – small and large – on a daily basis.
Typically, these protests are local in nature and generally resolved with a combination of payoffs, arrests, and promises of future improvement.
Occasionally, China’s government takes action against local officials whose crimes are considered egregious.
As long as protests remain local, however, they can be managed as isolated cases that won’t pose a broader challenge or spark a movement toward systemic change.
Yet the government’s days of putting out protests like brush fires may be ending.
Over the past year and a half, China’s environmental non-governmental organizations (NGO’s) have organized protests that reach across provincial boundaries, engage Chinese from all social strata, garner support from China’s media, and directly address the issue of failed governance on a national scale.
The catalyst for these broad-based protests is the proposed construction of hundreds of dams throughout western China.
Dam construction in China has never been open to public debate.
China’s environmental activists, meanwhile, have focused on the “politically safe” issues of protecting biodiversity, recycling, and environmental education.
Now, however, these activists have become more assertive, launching campaigns against a number of proposed dams along the Nu and Jinsha Rivers in Yunnan and the Min River in Sichuan.
They still raise traditional issues of biodiversity loss, destruction of sites of natural beauty and cultural importance, and social justice issues surrounding resettlement.
But now they also challenge the shoddy governance and corruption that allow dam construction to proceed unchecked, without environmental impact assessments, as local officials siphon off resettlement funds and ignore the claims of local villagers.
The political stakes are high, and China’s hydropower interests are strong.
Environmental activists who are currently battling to halt damming and flooding in the culturally and scenically renowned region of the Tiger Leaping Gorge in Yunnan are battling hydropower kingpin Li Xiaopeng, son of former Premier Li Peng.
Dam protests can often be volatile.
In October, tens of thousands of villagers protesting inadequate resettlement compensation held a local official captive for several hours before ten thousand People’s Armed Police officers rescued him.
These protests are striking not only for the sensitive nature of the issues they address, but for the broad-based support they have elicited.
While spearheaded by Beijing-based NGO’s, the dam protests involve Chinese from all parts of the country, employ all means of communication, and engage the support of central government officials.
Beijing-based NGO’s are allying with local Sichuan NGO’s to launch Internet campaigns, distribute petitions, and mobilize villagers.
In one case, environmental activists took villagers from a proposed dam site to another town to see firsthand how poorly others had fared in the dam resettlement process.
University students in the regions of the proposed dams have also become engaged through Internet chat groups.
Environmental activists have found allies among officials within China’s State Environmental Protection Administration, Meteorological Administration, and Forestry Bureau.
The dam projects have also become a focal point for a broader political debate within the Chinese media.
Newspapers such as Southern Weekend , China Youth Daily , and even the traditionally conservative China Daily call directly for greater political openness, increased political participation, and for strengthening the rule of law.
Similar environmental protests have evolved into demands for broader political change in other countries.
In the former Soviet Union and its satellite states, environmental activism contributed dramatically to regime change.
In countries like Thailand, Indonesia, and the Philippines, environmental protest has helped spur political reform.
The same may happen in China.
Many of China’s leading environmentalists are former students and intellectual leaders from the Tiananmen protests of 1989 who believe that environmental activism offers an avenue for advancing broader political reform.
Others began apolitically, but have come to believe that there can be no environmental protection without political change.
This shared commitment to systemic reform is putting China’s government to the test.
China’s leaders recognize that their policy options are limited: business as usual, repression, or reform.
Thus far, the government has demonstrated some flexibility while trying to manage this new challenge with traditional means.
Premier Wen Jiabao has stayed the construction of a number of dams until environmental and social impact assessments could be undertaken.
Some have been approved while others have not.
With hundreds of dams still likely to become targets for protest, pressure will only intensify for a more significant response.
The government could launch a broad crackdown on such protests, although this would risk damaging China’s prestige internationally and provoking larger, more violent protests.
The third option is to use environmental protection to justify moving China ahead with real political reform sooner rather than later.
While this is currently an unlikely outcome, as the anti-dam protests gather strength, China’s leaders may realize that if they do not move quickly, they risk being swept away.
China’s Green Debt
For a decade, the world has wondered when China’s leaders will recognize the staggering environmental crisis confronting their country.
This year, we got an answer: a new Five-Year Plan that makes environmental protection a priority.
A storm of green propaganda has followed, and the government now talks about using “Green GDP” to measure development.
But will all this talk amount to real progress?
While the central government admits to some of the environmental degradation caused by rapid economic growth, the picture it paints is incomplete.
Consider “Green GDP.”
This spring, the State Environmental Protection Administration produced the country’s first official estimate of GDP adjusted downward for environmental losses.
According to these calculations, it would cost $84 billion to clean up the pollution produced in 2004, or 3% of GDP for that year.
But more realistic estimates put environmental damage at 8-13% of China’s GDP growth each year, which means that China has lost almost everything it has gained since the late 1970’s due to pollution.
China’s environmental problems, complex as the causes may be, can ultimately be attributed to our understanding of Marxism.
For most of our recent history, we saw in Marxism only a philosophy of class struggle.
We believed that economic development would solve all our problems.
In the reform period, this misreading of Marx morphed into an unrestrained pursuit of material gain devoid of morality.
Traditional Chinese culture, with its emphasis on harmony between human beings and nature, was thrown aside.
As a result, China’s economy is dominated by resource-hungry and inefficient polluters, such as coal and mineral mines, textile and paper mills, iron and steel makers, petrochemical factories, and building material producers.
Our cities are exploding in size, depleting water resources and creating horrific traffic congestion.
One-quarter of China’s people drink substandard water; one-third of urbanites breathe badly polluted air.
Moreover, the country recently witnessed a spate of environmental accidents.
Indeed, on average, China suffers a major water pollution accident every other day.
Although China has signed the Kyoto Protocol and some 50 other international environmental accords, we do little to honor them.
If we are not serious about upgrading our industrial structure, we will fail when it comes time to fulfill our commitments to cut emissions.
And while the new Five-Year Plan sets fine goals, many provinces have failed even to meet the major environment protection targets of the last Five-Year Plan.
True, China has made the kind of economic advances in three decades that required 100 years in Western countries.
But China also has suffered a century’s worth of environmental damage in 30 years.
Unfortunately, unlike Western countries, we cannot afford to wait until our per capita annual GDP reaches $10,000 before tackling our environmental problems.
Our experts predict that the environmental crisis will intensify to a critical stage by the time China’s per capita annual GDP reaches just $3,000.
Making matters worse, while we discarded the finer elements of our traditional culture, we failed to absorb the better aspects of modern civilization.
The concept of a “social contract” based on rights and obligations – the essential values that constitute the most important precondition for effective environmental protection – goes largely ignored.
As a result, environmental protection projects often fail to be included in calculating production costs.
Scarcely anyone bothers to consider the environmental costs to – or rights of – the country’s poor and powerless.
It is imperative that environmental factors figure in China’s macroeconomic planning in a real way.
This requires that a more rational strategy be mapped out in the planning of major industrial projects and energy-hungry enterprises.
Careful studies need to be done to determine available energy, land, mineral, and biological resources before projects proceed.
Land planning must be overhauled, with industrial monopolies broken up and development goals set according to population, resource volume, and the capacity to absorb pollution.
Finally, China needs a new energy strategy.
Industrialized nations have developed and made great use of nuclear, solar, wind, and bio-gas, and other renewable energy resources.
China’s technological capacities in this sector lag behind even other developing nations such as India and Pakistan, and its reliance on coal is one of the greatest threats to the global climate.
For now, there is simply no alternative.
But in the long run, clean energy will be the only way to bring economic growth without doing irreparable environmental damage.
Government cannot solve these problems on its own.
China’s people have the biggest stake in environmental protection, and so must become the driving force.
Local communities, non-governmental organizations, and businesses all must do their part.
They cannot limit themselves simply to “supervision” and appeals to the authorities.
They must expand into other avenues of appeal: public hearings, welfare lawsuits, enhanced media coverage, and other voluntary activities.
But ultimate power does rest with the government.
China’s leaders need to make several concrete moves in order to move beyond rhetoric.
They must give real power to environmental officials to implement existing laws and close gaping legal loopholes.
This can only be done by introducing legal mechanisms to reward those who protect the environment, while making polluters pay, and by helping to unify the environmental watchdogs scattered across different sectors.
Above all, a system needs to be established to monitor officials’ performance in environmental as well as in economic terms.
China is dangerously near a crisis point.
The country’s enormous environmental debt will have to be paid, one way or another.
China must exercise the foresight needed to begin paying this debt now, when it is manageable, rather than allowing it to accumulate and, ultimately, threaten to bankrupt us all.
China’s Growing Growth Risks
BEIJING – If everything goes right for China, it will surpass the United States as the world’s largest economy, in current dollar terms (and more quickly in real terms), by 2021.
Its per capita income will reach that of today’s lower tier of high-income countries.
But, despite its forward momentum, the Chinese economy faces looming risks in the coming decade.
The immediate risk is continuing stagnation, or recession, in Europe.
In the last decade, export growth has accounted for roughly one-third of China’s overall economic growth, and about one-third of Chinese exports went to the European Union.
If the situation in Europe continues to deteriorate, China’s growth will be dragged down.
Over-tightening of domestic macroeconomic policies, especially those aimed at the real-estate market, could heighten the risk of a slowdown, with house prices currently falling across China, owing to stringent government measures.
Indeed, the situation is much like that of the 1997 Asian financial crisis.
In the several years before that crisis hit, China had been combating inflation, and appeared to be headed for a soft landing.
But the combination of crisis and austerity condemned China to several years of deflation and considerably slower growth.
Today, as China looks to the medium term, the government must face the problems created by its pervasive role in the economy.
A new World Bank report singles out lack of reform of state-owned enterprises as the most important impediment to the country’s economic growth.
But that is only a symptom of a deeper problem: the government’s dominant role in economic affairs.
In addition to controlling 25-30% of GDP directly, the government also takes a lion’s share of financial resources.
In recent years, more than one-third of total bank lending has gone to infrastructure, most of which has been built by government entities.
Indeed, recognizing its over-investment in infrastructure, the government recently abandoned several high-speed rail projects that were already under construction.
But government over-investment is also evident in numerous industrial parks and high-tech zones.
China’s investment frenzy reminds many people of Japan in the 1980’s, when high-speed rail links were extended to Japan’s remotest corners.
Most rely on government subsidies to this day.
And, while the subsidies may improve the quality of life for ordinary people in some respects, they also detract from it by suppressing domestic consumption.
Infrastructure investment will inevitably run up against the law of diminishing marginal returns, but consumption growth does not have a limit.