Middle East Integration
The attempts now being made to revive the “road map” to a final settlement of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict and the creation of a Palestinian state are at only a preliminary stage.
The recent international conference in London, aimed at supporting reforms in the Palestinian Authority and shoring up support for renewed negotiations with Israel, is one of those preliminary efforts.
I suggest, however, that it is not mediation that is needed: what the Palestinians need now are partners.
In their conflict with Israel, their natural and historical partner has always been Jordan.
That partnership was never broken.
Articles 3 and 8 of Jordan’s peace treaty with Israel refer explicitly to the refugee problem as one of the major issues still to be resolved, as well as citing the unresolved status of trans-border arrangements and of Jerusalem.
Jordan is not outside the peace process, but an essential part of it.
The original road map sketched out at the Madrid Conference in 1991 envisaged two stages: the final settlement of disputes between the Palestinians and Israel, and the permanent settlement of regional conflicts.
Jordan’s participation in both stages is crucial.
Indeed, the interests of the inhabitants of the three areas – Palestine, Jordan, and Israel – are so intertwined that their representatives will have no choice but to come to terms with one another if negotiations are to succeed.
For example, the refugee problem cannot be separated from wider problems concerning the integration of all inhabitants of Palestine, Jordan, and Israel – where the refugees are most numerous – into civil societies where they may enjoy equal legal status and equal access to economic and cultural opportunities.
Such integration cannot be achieved on a unilateral basis but only by programs adopted by the host and donor countries in co-operation with each other; nor can it be achieved in conditions where there is complete political and administrative separation between the populations which places them under exclusive controls and fails to acknowledge the human needs of community and conviviality.
The economic and social development of the three areas demands an integrated approach to the exploitation of energy and other natural resources, particularly water.
Without agreements on the conditions of such exploitation there will remain imbalances of living conditions and the persistence of rival claims with their potential for future conflicts.
A recognized community of water and energy interests and programs for their joint exploitation, for example in the rift valley, may lead, as was the motivation for the first stage of European integration, to a wider integration on a wider scale in the region.
The status of Jerusalem is still an unresolved question on both the local and international scenes.
That question was specifically listed in the Jordanian-Israel Peace Treaty.
The recognition by the three parties of the primacy of the moral and spiritual over the political importance of the city could lead to arrangements on the ground which satisfy the legitimate claims of the three Abrahamic faiths, and subsume the eventual political status of the city to this moral authority.
The alternative to an accepted resolution of their problems by the three parties is the permanent fragmentation of the Holy Land, which can only lead to more confrontation and violent conflicts.
The shadow of such fragmentation, with its unfathomable perils, now hangs over Iraq.
In this troubled part of the world, the choice is, quite simply, one between regionalism and barbarism.
Revolusi Pelayanan Kesehatan di Timur Tengah
KAIRO – Pada kunjungan terkini ke Yordania dan Mesir, sebagai bagian dari misi dagang yang dipimpin oleh Departemen Perdagangan Amerika Serikat, saya terkesan dengan potensi kawasan tersebut untuk menjadi pusat pengobatan yang terdepan.
Dengan menggabungkan kebijakan yang tepat dan kemauan politik yang cukup, Timur Tengah bisa menjadi kawasan penting di dunia dalam hal penelitian pelayanan kesehatan.
Pada khususnya, kawasan ini memiliki peran penting terkait dengan uji klinis mengenai farmasi yang dirancang untuk memeriksa pengaruh garis keturunan pasien terhadap keamanan, manfaat, dan efektivitas pengobatan.
Seiring dengan meningkatnya pemahaman kita akan genetika, semakin jelas bahwa garis keturunan kita berperan dalam menentukan khasiat obat-obatan tertentu.
Misalnya, banyak studi menunjukkan bahwa pasien keturunan Eropa merespon beta blockers dan ACE inhibitors lebih baik dibandingkan pasien keturunan Afrika.
Asal-usul benua (continental origins) sering menjadi pertimbangan dalam pemilihan pengobatan tekanan darah tinggi dan obat kardiovaskuler yang optimal.
Contoh lainnya adalah warfarin, obat antikoagulan.
Sebuah penelitian menemukan bahwa para pasien keturunan Afrika membutuhkan dosis lebih tinggi daripada mereka yang keturunan Eropa; pasien dengan nenek moyang dari Asia membutuhkan dosis yang lebih rendah.
Penelitian-penelitian mengenai tacrolimus, sebuah obat yang digunakan untuk mencegah penolakan organ pada pasien transplantasi organ, mengindikasikan bahwa para pasien Amerika keturunan Afrika membutuhkan dosis yang lebih tinggi dari pada mereka yang berkulit putih
Penelitian genetik juga telah memperluas pemahaman kita tentang penyakit.
Contohnya, sebuah riset oleh US Agency for International Development (USAID) menemukan bahwa epidermolysis bullosa, sebuah kelainan genetika pada kulit yang dapat melemahkan penderita, memiliki tanda genetik yang berbeda antara pasien dari Timur Tengah dibandingkan dengan mereka yang berasal dari belahan bumi lain.
Dengan bertambahnya pemahamanan kita akan berbagai jenis penyakit, dibutuhkan lebih banyak riset untuk menentukan efektivitas pengobatan baru yang mumpuni untuk kelompok pasien yang spesifik di seluruh dunia.
Penelitian ini sudah dilaksanakan di beberapa kawasan.
Di Asia, Human Genome Organization mendirikan Pan-Asian Population Genomics Initiative untuk mempelajari keberagaman genetika dan mengevaluasi variasi respon terhadap pengobatan di kawasan tersebut.
Di Meksiko, Institute for Genomic Medicine melakukan genotyping terhadap seluruh populasi negara.
Membangun upaya serupa di Timur Tengah membutuhkan kerjasama antara perusahaan farmasi, lembaga pendidikan, organisasi nirlaba, pemerintah, dan penyedia layanan kesehatan.
Organisasi seperti USAID dan US Naval Medical Research Center, yang sudah melakukan riset klinis di kawasan tersebut, dapat menjadi mitra yang berharga dalam mengkoordinasikan dan mengatur berbagai percobaan.
Langkah pertama yang dapat diambil oleh Timur Tengah adalah menyelaraskan peraturan di seluruh wilayah, dengan adanya kesepakatan antar negara tentang parameter pengujian keamanan dan manfaat obat pada populasi lokal.
Aktivitas klinis sedang meningkat di Timur Tengah, dan ekosistem pelayanan kesehatan yang dibutuhkan untuk mendukung penelitian juga berkembang dari segi jumlah dan kecanggihannya.
Namun, bicara mengenai pengobatan baru, berbagai badan pengatur di kawasan tersebut biasanya mengikuti keputusan yang dibuat oleh US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) dan European Medicines Agency (EMA), tanpa terlebih dulu mempelajari keamanan dan manfaat obat tersebut untuk pasien-pasien lokal secara mendalam.
Persetujuan harus dilakukan pada tingkat nasional, namun kepemimpinan di kawasan juga diperlukan.
Yordania, misalnya, memiliki sistem pelayanan kesehatan yang canggih dan sektor pariwisata medis yang terus berkembang.
Hal ini dapat menjadi tempat percobaan klinis yang jumlahnya semakin meningkat.
Dengan demikian, Yordania layak menetapkan standar penelitian yang baik yang diperlukan untuk mempelajari keamanan dan khasiat obat pada pasien keturunan Timur Tengah.
Kita perlu bergerak cepat.
Angka kejadian penyakit-penyakit kronis meningkat dengan cepat di Timur Tengah.
Menurut International Diabetes Federation, laju angka diabetes di Timur Tengah dan Afrika Utara akan meningkat sekitar 96.2% pada tahun 2035, sementara Uni Emirat Arab, Oman, dan Qatar diperkirakan akan mengalami peningkatan jumlah terbesar.
Begitu juga, World Health Organization memperkirakan bahwa lebih dari seperempat orang dewasa di Mesir menderita hipertensi, sedangkan penyakit kardiovaskuler menyebabkan 35% dari angka kematian di Yordania.
Pengembangan pengobatan yang baru dan efektif wajib dilakukan untuk mengatasi tantangan-tantangan ini sebelum biaya pelayanan kesehatan meningkat tajam.
Timur Tengah terkenal akan tempat-tempat bersejarah dari masa lampau, ketidakstabilan politik, dan sumber daya alam yang melimpah.
Namun, dengan meningkatkan kemampuan kawasan ini untuk memajukan penemuan-penemuan medis yang mutakhir, kawasan ini dapat menjadi pemimpin di dunia dalam menguatkan pemahaman kita atas peran genetika untuk menjamin keamanan dan manfaat pengobatan.
The Middle East Meltdown and Global Risk
NEW YORK – Among today’s geopolitical risks, none is greater than the long arc of instability stretching from the Maghreb to the Afghanistan-Pakistan border.
With the Arab Spring an increasingly distant memory, the instability along this arc is deepening.
Indeed, of the three initial Arab Spring countries, Libya has become a failed state, Egypt has returned to authoritarian rule, and Tunisia is being economically and politically destabilized by terrorist attacks.
The violence and instability of North Africa is now spreading into Sub-Saharan Africa, with the Sahel – one of the world’s poorest and most environmentally damaged regions – now gripped by jihadism, which is also seeping into the Horn of Africa to its east.
And, as in Libya, civil wars are raging in Iraq, Syria, Yemen, and Somalia, all of which increasingly look like failed states.
The region’s turmoil (which the United States and its allies, in their pursuit of regime change in Iraq, Libya, Syria, Egypt and elsewhere, helped to fuel) is also undermining previously secure states.
The influx of refugees from Syria and Iraq is destabilizing Jordan, Lebanon, and now even Turkey, which is becoming increasingly authoritarian under President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan.
Meanwhile, with the conflict between Israel and the Palestinians unresolved, Hamas in Gaza and Hezbollah in Lebanon represent a chronic threat of violent clashes with Israel.
In this fluid regional environment, a great proxy struggle for regional dominance between Sunni Saudi Arabia and Shia Iran is playing out violently in Iraq, Syria, Yemen, Bahrain, and Lebanon.
And while the recent nuclear deal with Iran may reduce the proliferation risk, the lifting of economic sanctions on Iran will provide its leaders with more financial resources to support their Shia proxies.
Further east, Afghanistan (where the resurgent Taliban could return to power) and Pakistan (where domestic Islamists pose a continued security threat) risk becoming semi-failed states.
And yet, remarkably, even as most of the region began to burn, oil prices collapsed.
In the past, geopolitical instability in the region triggered three global recessions.
The 1973 Yom Kippur War between Israel and the Arab states caused an oil embargo that tripled prices and led to the stagflation (high unemployment plus inflation) of 1974-1975.
The Iranian revolution of 1979 led to another embargo and price shock that triggered the global stagflation of 1980-1982.
And the Iraq invasion of Kuwait in 1990 led to another spike in oil prices that triggered the US and global recession of 1990-1991.
This time around, instability in the Middle East is far more severe and widespread.
But there appears to be no “fear premium” on oil prices; on the contrary, oil prices have declined sharply since 2014.
Why?
Perhaps the most important reason is that, unlike in the past, the turmoil in the Middle East has not caused a supply shock.
Even in the parts of Iraq now controlled by the Islamic State, oil production continues, with output smuggled and sold in foreign markets.
And the prospect that sanctions on Iran’s oil exports will be phased out implies significant inflows of foreign direct investment aimed at increasing production and export capacity.
Indeed, there is a global glut of oil.
In North America, the shale-energy revolution in the US, Canada’s oil sands, and the prospect of more onshore and offshore oil production in Mexico (now that its energy sector is open to private and foreign investment) have made the continent less dependent on Middle East supplies.
Moreover, South America holds vast hydrocarbon reserves, from Colombia all the way to Argentina, as does East Africa, from Kenya all the way to Mozambique.
With the US on the way to achieving energy independence, there is a risk that America and its Western allies will consider the Middle East less strategically important.
That belief is wishful thinking: a burning Middle East can destabilize the world in many ways.
First, some of these conflicts may yet lead to an actual supply disruption, as in 1973, 1979, and 1990.
Second, civil wars that turn millions of people into refugees will destabilize Europe economically and socially, which is bound to hit the global economy hard.
And the economies and societies of frontline states like Lebanon, Jordan, and Turkey, already under severe stress from absorbing millions of such refugees, face even greater risks.
Third, prolonged misery and hopelessness for millions of Arab young people will create a new generation of desperate jihadists who blame the West for their despair.
Some will undoubtedly find their way to Europe and the US and stage terrorist attacks.
So, if the West ignores the Middle East or addresses the region’s problems only through military means (the US has spent $2 trillion in its Afghan and Iraqi wars, only to create more instability), rather than relying on diplomacy and financial resources to support growth and job creation, the region’s instability will only worsen.
Such a choice would haunt the US and Europe – and thus the global economy – for decades to come.
Middle East Peace by Any Means Available
RAMALLAH – Something is happening with the Middle East conflict, but it is hard to say what. A breakthrough appears to be at hand, though all the parties still seem to be clinging to their traditional positions.
The Arab League gave the go-ahead to indirect Palestinian-Israeli talks, and the various Palestinian leadership forums have approved the resumption of talks.
Even the usually boisterous Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erekat has toned down his rhetoric, and Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas gave an optimistic interview to Israel TV.
But Israel has not publicly agreed to the American and Palestinian request to rescind the settlement construction in Jerusalem approved during US Vice President Joe Biden’s recent visit to Israel.
On the contrary, Israeli officials, denying the Palestinians’ assertion that a secret US-Israel agreement exists, clearly intend to continue building Jewish homes in occupied East Jerusalem.
So what is going on?
For starters, we are again moving into what Henry Kissinger called the realm of “constructive ambiguity.”
Palestinians have been assured via a message from President Barack Obama, delivered by his special envoy George Mitchell, that the Israelis will not carry out any “provocations” during the coming four months of indirect negotiations.
Pressed to clarify, the Palestinians admitted that there is no written promise to this effect.
But, on a recent trip to Israel, White House adviser Dan Shapiro is said to have been reassured that the Israelis will not embarrass their American friends.
In exchange, Shapiro handed the ultra-orthodox leader of Israel’s Shas party an invitation to the White House. Mitchell gave a similar invitation to Abbas.
Palestinians understand that without pressure little change will take place. They have also clearly understood the folly of violent resistance, and have made a dramatic shift to nonviolent action – with the acceptance (and possibly encouragement) of the international community – in order to maintain pressure on the occupiers.
The PLO’s main faction, Fatah, made this shift at their sixth congress, held in Bethlehem last winter after a 20-year hiatus.
Senior PLO officials have participated in demonstrations and protest activities, with some being injured and Executive Committee member Abbas Zaki imprisoned for a couple of days.
Other senior Fatah officials have been banned from travel outside the West Bank, owing largely to their involvement in nonviolent protests.
In addition to nonviolent activities, Palestinian state-building efforts have been put in high gear.
Salam Fayyad, the energetic Western-trained Palestinian prime minister, has implemented a detailed blueprint for declaring a de facto Palestinian state by August 2011.
While state-building is handled by the civilian Palestinian Authority, political efforts are handled by the PLO, whose chairman, Abbas, is the head of Fatah as well as the Palestinian Authority’s president.
Abbas and his negotiating team, headed by Erekat, have been successful in securing the support of all members of the Arab League.
The PLO has succeeded in obtaining European support for a unilateral Palestinian declaration of statehood.
The only obstacle remaining to Palestinian leaders are the Americans.
When Palestinians asked Mitchell for assurances that the US would support such a statehood declaration if talks failed, Mitchell responded that such a commitment would make negotiations pointless.
Instead, the Americans have their own ideas about how to achieve a breakthrough, especially with Israel, which the Obama administration believes is now the major obstacle.
To effect change in Israel, the Americans are launching various trial balloons.
One is that, if the current process fails, Obama might issue his own plan, which many expect would be a near-carbon copy of the proposal made by Bill Clinton’s administration in its last days ten years ago. At the time, Palestinian and Israeli negotiators were quoted as saying that the two sides had never been closer to an agreement.
A US peace plan that is fair and reasonable would certainly have many ordinary Israelis and Palestinians cheering.
It could cause some major damage to right-wing Israeli political forces that came to power as a result of eight years of former US president George Bush’s so-called war on terror.
Hiding behind that anti-Islamic façade, the Israelis have found it easy to stonewall all reasonable peace efforts, including the 2002 Arab peace plan, according to which Arab states and Muslim-majority countries agreed to normalize relations with Israel if it withdrew from areas occupied in 1967. The plan also gave Israel a role equal to that of the Palestinians in resolving the refugee issue.
It called for the “achievement of a just solution to the Palestinian refugee problem to be agreed upon in accordance with UN General Assembly Resolution 194.”
Yet another US trial balloon has been the suggestion that if all of the above fails, the Americans might suggest that the Arab-Israeli conflict be resolved through the convening of an international conference.
Such a conference is in fact listed in the “road map” as part of phase III in the talks.
Until now, Israelis and Palestinians have insisted on various “red lines” that they proclaimed they would never cross.
The coming months will show whether these public postures are negotiable, with obvious consequences for both parties and their relationship with the international community, especially the US.
Mendidik Tenaga Medis Profesional Masa Depan di Timur Tengah
BOSTON – Sejumlah kendala di bidang kesehatan masyarakat yang dihadapi negara-negara di Timur Tengah terlampau besar, terutama berkaitan dengan pengungsi dan pekerja asing.
Jumlah pengungsi saja sudah mencapai jutaan dan melemahkan sistem pelayanan kesehatan di Yordania, Lebanon, dan Turki hingga terancam jatuh ke titik nadir.
Negara-negara kaya yang tergabung dalam Dewan Kerja Sama Negara Teluk (Gulf Cooperation Council atau GCC ) tentu salah apabila berasumsi negaranya aman dari masalah-masalah kesehatan masyarakat yang dialami tetangganya.
Meskipun negara-negara anggota GCC sudah meraih kemajuan besar dalam kebersihan dan kesehatan ibu dan anak, mereka menjadi episentrum global atau jantung penyakit-penyakit tidak menular kronis di dunia – seperti obesitas, diabetes, penyakit kardiovaskuler, dan kanker – akibat gaya hidup dan pola makan.
Lebih parahnya lagi, sistem kesehatan nasional di negara-negara GCC mengalami keterbatasan dokter dan tenaga medis terdidik untuk bekerja di fasilitas kesehatan setempat.
Sebagai akibatnya, angka keluar-masuk (turnover) yang tinggi disebabkan kelebihan jam kerja dan terdapat kebutuhan mendesak atas tenaga kerja asing di bidang kesehatan untuk mengisi posisi-posisi yang sangat dibutuhkan.
Tepat bagi pembuat kebijakan di negara-negara GCC untuk berfokus pada perluasan akses dan pemberian subsidi layanan kesehatan yang berkualitas.
Namun pemerataan layanan kesehatan secara adil bagi penduduk asli dan migran sering menjadi isu kebijakan yang kontroversial.
Kini pembuat kebijakan harus mengucurkan perhatian lebih kepada tenaga kerja di sektor kesehatan, agar pendidikan dan pelatihan bagi mereka terjamin dan cukup untuk menghadapi tantangan di kemudian hari.
Program-program pelatihan yang diadopsi sistem kesehatan nasional di negara-negara GCC saat ini belum cukup berfokus pada inovasi atau pemikiran holistik untuk meningkatkan efisiensi dan efektivitas.
Jika dokter dan tenaga medis lainnya tidak mendapat pelatihan multi disipliner, mereka tidak siap mengenali dan memenuhi kebutuhan kesehatan masyarakat di seluruh kawasan.
Dengan demikian, guna menyempurnakan pelayanan, negara-negara GCC harus merumuskan kerangka kebijakan baru yang mencakup sektor pendidikan sekaligus kesehatan masyarakat.
Pendidikan tinggi berkembang dengan cepat di Timur Tengah selama 10 tahun terakhir.
Sejumlah pemerintah menetapkan zona perdagangan bebas untuk pendidikan – seperti “Knowledge Villages” dan “Education Cities” di Uni Emirat Arab dan Qatar – dan mengeluarkan miliaran dolar bagi perguruan tinggi baru dan lama, seperti di Arab Saudi.
Hasilnya, universitas baru, lembaga riset, dan program-program pendidikan menarik banyak akademisi dan profesional lainnya ke Timur Tengah.
Akan tetapi, jumlah mahasiswa – dan pemuda – yang mengejar karir di bidang kesehatan masyarakat masih sangat kecil.
Meskipun secara keseluruhan jumlah mahasiswa yang mempelajari ilmu kesehatan masyarakat semakin bertambah, mayoritas berasal dari luar kawasan, lagi-lagi ini hanya akan memperburuk ketergantungan negara-negara GCC terhadap tenaga kerja asing.
Beberapa universitas di kawasan ini sudah mengedepankan inovasi, berarti sejalan dengan komitmen untuk penguatan sistem pelayanan kesehatan.
Walaupun kesehatan masyarakat adalah tantangan regional terbesar, sejauh ini universitas masih memprioritaskan perkuliahan di ranah engineering dan teknologi.
Dalam pendidikan kedokteran dan kesehatan masyarakat, berdasarkan analisis pribadi saya atas lembaga-lembaga lokal, siswa belajar mengobati kondisi medis namun tidak cukup mempelajari isu-isu kesehatan masyarakat yang lebih luas, dan kurikulum sekarang tidak membuka cakrawala siswa terhadap isu-isu yang berdampak pada pengungsi, penduduk migran, atau publik secara luas.
Meskipun lembaga-lembaga seperti Weill Cornell di Qatar dan Gulf University of Science and Technology di Kuwait sudah meluncurkan penelitian inovatif dan program pelatihan yang berfokus pada berbagai jenis tantangan di sektor kesehatan, prakarsa serupa masih perlu digiatkan.
Permasalahan lainnya adalah program pendidikan dan pelatihan di kawasan tidak merangsang pemikiran yang holistik.
Di tingkat global, kebijakan kesehatan masyarakat sedang mengarah menuju integrasi multi disipliner yang menggabungkan ilmu engineering, kedokteran, sosial dan manajemen, serta humaniora.
Lembaga-lembaga di kawasan Timur Tengah terancam tertinggal dari standar global apabila tidak mengikuti pendekatan terpadu tersebut.
Teknologi dan pendekatan baru dalam kesehatan masyarakat tentu penting; tapi upaya apapun pasti gagal jika tidak dirancang untuk memenuhi kebutuhan warga setempat yang sebenarnya.
Itu sebabnya negara-negara GCC harus mendorong dan berinvestasi pada pengembangan teknologi di tingkat lokal dan menciptakan ruang bagi insinyur untuk bekerja dengan profesional bidang kesehatan.
Kerja sama tersebut sangat diperlukan untuk memberantas penyakit-penyakit menular dan kronis yang mengancam warga di kawasan, di luar dari manfaat kerja sama untuk menghasilkan peluang usaha bagi pemuda.
Negara-negara di Timur Tengah memerlukan kerangka kerja yang terintegrasi dan berorientasi pada inovasi untuk melatih tenaga medis profesional, agar mereka mampu mengatasi tantangan-tantangan kesehatan masyarakat saat ini dan siap menghadapi kejadian tak terduga, seperti sindrom pernafasan Timur Tengah (MERS), ebola, dan penyakit menular yang muncul secara tiba-tiba.
Jumlah penduduk di Timur Tengah akan terus meningkat, namun apakah pertumbuhan tersebut juga disertai dengan pertumbuhan di kawasan sebagai pusat perdagangan dan ekonomi dunia yang diakui secara global, jawabannya bergantung pada kemampuan pemerintah untuk melakukan reformasi pada pendidikan dan sistem kesehatan nasional.
Timur Tengah Diminta Aktif Atasi Krisis Pengungsi
FEZ – Sejak tahun 2012, lebih dari 12 juta migran dan pengungsi telah membanjiri Eropa, Timur Tengah, dan Afrika Utara.
Migrasi tersebut mengakibatkan krisis politik dan kemanusiaan yang berkepanjangan, serta perdebatan sengit tentang cara penyelesaiannya.
Di Eropa, perdebatan tersebut ditandai dengan perbedaan pendapat dan perpecahan, kondisi yang diperparah dengan hasil referendum Inggris untuk hengkang dari Uni Eropa – keputusan yang dipengaruhi besar oleh ketakutan berlebihan atas perpindahan penduduk.
Hingga saat ini negara-negara anggota EU belum juga menyepakati cara menjaga keamanan di perbatasan, apalagi tindakan yang harus diambil terhadap pengungsi yang sudah memasuki Eropa. Respon terpadu dan efektif masih sulit digapai.
Di Timur Tengah, perdebatan tentang pengungsi kurang bergema, meskipun tetap relevan.
Yordania, negara berpenduduk 6,5 juta jiwa kini menjadi rumah bagi 1,4 juta pengungsi yang mayoritas berasal dari Suriah.
Jumlah pengungsi asal Suriah yang ada di Lebanon bahkan mencapai sepertiga populasi penduduk yang berjumlah 4,7 juta orang.
Turki, dengan populasi lebih besar yang mencapai 75 juta penduduk, kini memiliki 2,7 juta pengungsi Suriah dan 30% diantaranya tinggal di kamp-kamp yang dikelola pemerintah di dekat perbatasan dengan Suriah.
Mengingat mayoritas pengungsi berasal dari Timur Tengah – terutama Suriah, tapi juga Afghanistan, Irak, Yaman, dan Libya – fakta bahwa kawasan ini memikul beban berat memang tidak mengejutkan.
Namun tidak semua negara di Timur Tengah sudah mengerahkan yang terbaik.
Negara-negara Teluk, walaupun dianugerahi dengan kekayaan dari minyak, tidak menerima pengungsi; mereka berdalih, karena negaranya bukan negara peserta Konvensi PBB 1951 tentang Pengungsi, tidak ada kewajiban untuk menampung para pengungsi.
Uni Emirat Arab, misalnya, hanya menampung sekitar 200.000 pengungsi Suriah sejak krisis di Suriah meletus pada tahun 2011.
Mesir, Tunisia, Maroko, dan Aljazair membolehkan para pengungsi memasuki negaranya tapi tidak memberikan bantuan; negara-negara tersebut tidak memiliki satu pun kamp pengungsi.
Sementara itu, negara-negara tetangganya semakin kesulitan menanggung beban dari krisis yang ada.
Bahkan, anggaran kesejahteraan sosial di Yordania sudah mencapai titik henti (breaking point) dan memicu ketegangan sosial.
Sebelum tibanya para pengungsi, sekolah-sekolah di Yordania dan Lebanon pun sudah kelebihan kapasitas, yang kini semakin membludak.
Timbul permasalahan lain akibat pengungsi yang bekerja di Yordania dan Lebanon, karena tanpa disengaja mereka menekan bayaran yang diterima dari pekerjaan dengan keterampilan rendah.
Pemerintah Turki sendiri telah mengeluarkan bantuan lebih dari 8 miliar dolar AS, jauh dibandingkan Uni Eropa yang baru mengucurkan sebagian kecil dari dana yang dijanjikannya pada November lalu (3,2 miliar euro atau 3,6 miliar dolar AS).
Mengingat betapa kewalahannya negara-negara penampung, tidak mengejutkan ketika pengungsi hidup dalam kondisi sulit, baik itu di kamp atau pemukiman sangat miskin, tanpa fasilitas yang memadai atau sanitasi.
Ratusan ribuan pengungsi terpaksa menjadi pengangguran, meskipun diantaranya banyak yang memiliki keterampilan tinggi, kualifikasi mereka sering terabaikan.
Akibatnya, praktik buruh paksa, perbudakan, prostitusi, dan penyingkiran sosial semakin meluas.
Menjaga agar migran tidak keluar dari Timur Tengah sangat penting – terutama supaya tidak lagi ada korban jiwa akibat tenggelam di laut Mediterania dalam perjalanannya ke Eropa.
Perjanjian Turki-UE yang disetujui bulan Maret lalu – bahwa semua migran Suriah yang mencapai Eropa harus dikirim ke Turki jika mereka tidak mengajukan permohonan suaka atau permohonan mereka ditolak – telah membantu penurunan jumlah migran yang tiba di daratan Yunani.
Tapi ini tidak cukup, negara-negara di Timur Tengah harus menunjukkan kepemimpinannya.
Yang terpenting, negara-negara kaya di kawasan Teluk harus mengeluarkan dana lebih besar kepada negara-negara yang paling banyak menampung pengungsi, sehingga mampu memperbaiki kondisi penduduk yang rentan.
Selain itu, guna mengembangkan solusi yang lebih komprehensif dan mempertahankan stabilitas negara, serta menjamin perlindungan yang layak bagi para pengungsi, dibutuhkan suatu kolaborasi antar pemerintah, serta sektor swasta dan masyarakat sipil yang bergerak di kawasan Timur Tengah.
Masalahnya adalah belum tercipta konsensus di Timur Tengah, baik antar pemerintah atau masyarakat sipil, tentang penanganan krisis.
Supaya kebuntuan ini terpecahkan, perlu ada pemimpin yang tegas dan visioner yang bisa mengingatkan kembali warganya atas kewajiban hukum dan moral yang diemban setiap negara terhadap pengungsi.
Tradisi yang diajarkan Islam untuk melindungi dan menyantuni orang miskin dapat digunakan dalam menyampaikan pesan dan memberi legitimasi yang akan menginspirasi warganya untuk turut berperan.
Dalam buku karangan saya New Horizons of Muslim Diaspora in North America and Europe, saya menyanggah kebijaksanaan konvensional yang mengklaim bahwa migran dan pengungsi adalah ancaman bagi keamanan dan pembangunan Timur Tengah.
Sama halnya dengan para imigran di negara-negara maju di Barat, kontribusi mereka bagi Timur Tengah bisa sangat berharga.
Mereka pantas diberikan kesempatan.
Yang terutama, segala kebutuhan dasar pengungsi harus dipenuhi.
Kondisi hidup layak – termasuk tempat tinggi, gizi, dan layanan kesehatan – harus diberikan, selain dari pendidikan dan kesempatan kerja.
Namun, jika sebagian kecil negara terus-menerus memikul semua beban ini, mustahil kebutuhan pengungsi bisa terpenuhi.
Dengan demikian, kawasan ini perlu membangun sistem distribusi pengungsi yang lebih adil, barangkali mencontoh sistem kuota yang diberlakukan UE.
Prosedur-prosedur yang seragam dan sederhana dalam penanganan pengajuan suaka juga harus diterapkan.
Meskipun semua upaya tersebut dicapai, solusi yang betul-betul berkelanjutan yang akan menjawab krisis pengungsi tidak akan terwujud kecuali Suriah dalam kondisi damai, dan ketertiban kembali berfungsi pada negara-negara konflik yang ada di Timur Tengah.
Itu sebabnya peran pemerintah negara-negara di kawasan harus semakin digiatkan demi melawan kekerasan dan ketidakstabilan yang menjadi akar penyebab krisis saat ini.
Jangan menunggu kekuatan eksternal untuk menyelesaikan masalah-masalah yang paling mendesak.
Pemerintah negara-negara Timur Tengah harus berupaya sekeras mungkin untuk mengembalikan stabilitas di negara tetangganya, termasuk meneruskan proses perdamaian di Suriah hingga selesai, dan menjaga kesejahteraan semua warganya.
Abad Baru bagi Timur Tengah
NEW YORK – Amerika Serikat, Uni Eropa, dan beberapa lembaga yang dipimpin negara Barat seperti Bank Dunia berulang kali bertanya mengapa Timur Tengah tidak bisa memerintah sendiri.
Pertanyaan ini sifatnya jujur namun diajukan tanpa kesadaran diri yang tinggi.
Bagaimanapun juga, satu hambatan terbesar bagi terbentuknya tata kelola pemerintahan yang baik di kawasan tersebut adalah rendahnya self-governance: lembaga-lembaga politik di kawasan ini telah lumpuh akibat intervensi Amerika Serikat dan Eropa yang berulang dimulai sejak Perang Dunia I, dan bahkan lebih awal di beberapa tempat.
Satu abad sudah cukup.
Tahun 2016 harus menandai awal abad baru politik homegrown (dalam negeri) Timur Tengah yang berfokus langsung pada tantangan-tantangan pembangunan berkelanjutan.
Nasib Timur Tengah selama 100 tahun terakhir ditentukan pada bulan November 1914 ketika kekaisaran Ottoman memihak pada pihak yang kalah dalam Perang Dunia I. Hasilnya adalah kekaisaran pun dibubarkan, dengan kekuatan kemenangan lalu Inggris dan Perancis meraih kendali hegemoni atas sisa-sisa peperangan.
Inggris, yang sudah menguasai Mesir sejak tahun 1882, memegang kendali efektif atas pemerintahan sekarang di sejumlah negara seperti Irak, Yordania, Israel dan Palestina, dan Arab Saudi, sementara Perancis, yang sudah mengendalikan sebagian besar Afrika Utara, lalu menguasai Lebanon dan Suriah.
Kewenangan formal Liga Bangsa-Bangsa dan instrumen hegemoni lainnya diterapkan untuk memastikan agar Inggris dan Perancis menguasai minyak, pelabuhan, jalur pelayaran, dan kebijakan luar negeri pemimpin lokal.
Sebelum berdirinya negara Arab Saudi, gerakan fundamentalisme Wahabi yang dipimpin Ibnu Saud mendapat dukungan Inggris melawan nasionalisme Arab berdasarkan Bani Hashim di Hijaz.
Setelah Perang Dunia II, Amerika Serikat menjalankan dominasinya dan melakukan operasi CIA lain untuk menggulingkan Mohammad Mossadegh di Iran tahun 1953 (untuk mempertahankan kendali Barat atas minyak di Iran) setelah sebelumnya mensponsori kudeta militer di Suriah tahun 1949 yang juga didukung CIA.
Perilaku yang sama masih dijalankan sampai hari ini: pencopotan pemimpin Libya, Muammar Khadafi di tahun 2011, penggulingan pemimpin Mesir, Mohamed Morsi di tahun 2013, dan kini perang di Suriah melawan Presiden Bashar al-Assad yang masih berlangsung.
Hampir selama tujuh dekade, Amerika Serikat dan sekutunya telah berulang kali melakukan intervensi (atau mendukung kudeta internal) untuk menggulingkan pemerintah yang kurang berhasil mereka kendalikan.
Negara-negara Barat juga mempersenjatai seluruh kawasan melalui penjualan senjata senilai ratusan miliar dolar.
Lalu apa yang harus dilakukan untuk menciptakan Timur Tengah yang baru?
Saya mengusulkan lima prinsip. 
Pertama dan terpenting, Amerika Serikat harus mengakhiri operasi-operasi rahasia CIA yang bertujuan menggulingkan atau melemahkan pemerintah negara manapun di dunia.
CIA dibentuk pada tahun 1947 dengan dua kewenangan, satu diantaranya sah (pengumpulan intelijen) dan lainnya bersifat bencana (operasi-operasi rahasia untuk menggulingkan rezim-rezim yang dianggap “musuh” (hostile) bagi kepentingan Amerika Serikat).
Presiden Amerika Serikat, bisa dan harus, berdasarkan perintah eksekutif (executive order), menghentikan operasi-operasi rahasia CIA – dengan demikian mengakhiri warisan efek “blowback” dan kekacauan yang diciptakan, terutama di Timur Tengah.
Kedua, Amerika Serikat harus mewujudkan tujuan-tujuan kebijakan luar negeri yang terkadang sah di kawasan ini melalui Dewan Keamanan PBB.
Pendekatan yang diterapkan sekarang melalui pembentukan koalisi yang dipimpin Amerika Serikat disebut “coalitions of the willing” tidak hanya gagal; tapi berarti bahkan tujuan-tujuan yang valid seperti menghentikan ISIS (Islamic State) dihambat oleh persaingan geopolitik.
Amerika Serikat akan memperoleh banyak hasil dengan membiarkan inisiatif-inisiatif kebijakan luar negerinya diuji oleh pengambilan suara di Dewan Keamanan.
Ketika Dewan Keamanan menolak perang di Irak pada tahun 2003, Amerika Serikat seharusnya cukup bijaksana untuk tidak melakukan invasinya.
Ketika Rusia, salah satu anggota tetap Dewan Keamanan yang memiliki hak veto, menolak upaya penggulingan yang didukung oleh Amerika Serikat terhadap Presiden Suriah, Bashar al-Assad, seharusnya Amerika Serikat cukup bijaksana untuk tidak menjalankan operasi rahasia yang menggulingkan rezimnya.
Sekarang, seluruh anggota Dewan Keamanan akan bergabung dalam rencana global (bukan Amerika Serikat saja) untuk melawan ISIS.
Ketiga, Amerika Serikat dan Eropa harus menerima kenyataan bahwa demokrasi di Timur Tengah akan menghasilkan tingginya kemenangan Islamist di kotak suara.
Sebagian besar rezim Islamist yang terpilih akan gagal, sama halnya dengan pemerintah yang memiliki kinerja buruk.
Rezim-rezim ini akan digantikan pada pemilihan berikutnya, atau di jalanan, atau bahkan oleh jenderal-jenderal lokal. namun upaya berulang yang dilakukan Inggris, Perancis, dan Amerika Serikat untuk menghalangi semua pemerintah Islamist agar tidak berkuasa, hanya menghambat kedewasaan politik di kawasan dan tidak sepenuhnya berhasil atau menghasilkan manfaat jangka panjang apapun.
Keempat, pemimpin lokal (homegrown) dari kawasan Sahel hingga Afrika Utara dan Timur Tengah ke Asia Tengah harus mengakui bahwa tantangan terbesar yang dihadapi dunia Islam saat ini adalah kualitas pendidikan.
Kawasan ini tertinggal jauh dibandingkan negara-negara berpendapatan menengah dalam hal ilmu pengetahuan, matematika, inovasi teknologi, kewirausahaan, pengembangan usaha kecil, dan (oleh karena itu) penciptaan lapangan kerja.
Tanpa pendidikan berkualitas tinggi, sedikit peluang bagi terwujudnya kemakmuran ekonomi dan stabilitas politik di negara manapun.
Akhirnya, kawasan harus mengatasi kerentanan yang luar biasa terhadap kerusakan lingkungan hidup dan kebergantungan yang berlebihan pada hidrokarbon, terutama mengingat pergeseran global menuju energi rendah karbon.
Kawasan dengan mayoritas penduduk muslim dari Afrika Barat hingga Asia Tengah adalah wilayah kering terbesar yang padat penduduk, dengan luas 5.000 mil (8.000 kilometer) yang menderita krisis air, desertification, kenaikan suhu, dan kerawanan pangan.
Ini merupakan tantangan-tantangan nyata yang dihadapi Timur Tengah.
Perpecahan Sunni-Syiah, masa depan politik Assad, dan perselisihan doktrinal jelas sekali merupakan kebutuhan jangka panjang yang kurang penting dibandingkan rendahnya pemenuhan atas pendidikan yang berkualitas, keterampilan kerja, teknologi canggih, dan pembangunan berkelanjutan.
Banyak pemikir berani dan progresif harus membantu membangkitkan masyarakat agar sadar akan kenyataan ini dan orang-orang yang beritikad baik dari seluruh dunia harus membantu mereka melalui kerjasama damai dan mengakhiri perang dan manipulasi yang bersifat imperialis.
Escaping the Middle East’s Violence Trap
OXFORD – The Arab world and its neighbors are stuck in a violence trap.
The fighting in Libya, Syria, Yemen, and Iraq, together with the predations of groups like the Islamic State, is destroying the economic links needed to ensure long-term political stability.
Indeed, by redrawing the region’s economic boundaries, the latest wave of violence has brought about a veritable trade shock, the true scale and significance of which has largely gone unnoticed.
Even as the proliferation of armed groups makes borders more porous to conflict, it is hardening them against trade.
The consequences are being felt most acutely in the Levant, where improved transport and trade reforms had strengthened economic ties between Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, and Syria.
Trade among these countries had been higher, on average, than among their Arab peers, but it has collapsed as violence has mounted.
Syria’s border closures, in particular, have impeded regional trade, by cutting off a key route connecting the wider Levant, the Gulf States, and Turkey.
The unnoticed casualties include Lebanon’s apple growers, who survive on exports.
Since 2011, Lebanon has lost almost all of its export markets in Jordan, Iraq, and the Gulf.
With the closure of Jordan’s last border crossing with Syria, that country faces a similar fate.
Iraq and Syria were key export markets for Jordan, and border closures have wreaked economic havoc among its farmers and manufacturers.
Farms in northern Jordan, effectively disconnected from Syria, can no longer sell their produce.
Turkey’s growing trade linkages with the Levant and the Arabian Peninsula have suffered as well.
Five years ago, Syria’s northern border towns were reaping the dividends of Turkey’s fast-growing economy.
Now they are effectively cut off.
Turkish imports from Syria have fallen by some 74% since 2010.
The region desperately needs new trade opportunities to address unemployment; instead, what it is getting is trade diversion.
Turkish exports have been bypassing the conflict zones by using alternative routes, relying, for example, on the Suez Canal.
A recent World Bank study estimates that the Greater Levant region has lost nearly $35 billion over the first three years of Syria’s civil war.
The consequences for the region’s political economy are profound.
Whatever weak constituency existed in support of regional trade has been marginalized by conflict.
For example, the closure of the last border crossing between Syria and Jordan means that the free-trade zone that thrived along the frontier is facing dissolution.
Warehouses and factories – investments worth millions of dollars – are being dismantled, and nearby communities confront the specter of mass unemployment and rapid economic decline.
This poses a fundamental dilemma for policymakers.
As conflict destroys local economic linkages and unravels well-established supply chains, it is also demolishing the very foundation on which a peaceful and prosperous social order can be built.
As the Nobel laureate economist Douglass North has argued, long-term conflict resolution usually requires enduring economic relations, which are best cultivated through specialization and trade.
This dynamic is easy to grasp: By increasing the cost of violent conflict, dense economic networks and multiple exchange relationships provide powerful incentives for actors to prefer peaceful solutions.
A new economic order will therefore be necessary to create and sustain a stable new political order in the region.
Such a scenario might appear to be a distant dream today, given the region’s myriad conflicts.
But the ruthless logic of survival is already pushing many in the region toward cooperation with their neighbors on issues such as water, energy, and trade.
In Kurdistan, for instance, authorities are setting aside political, ideological, and historical animosities to engage with Iraq’s central government, Iran, and Turkey.
Similarly, economic self-interest has forced the government of South Sudan to cooperate with Sudan, from which it gained independence, following a brutal civil war, in 2011.
In today’s turbulent Middle East, economic cooperation is no longer a matter of choice; it has become a necessity.
The well-recognized relationship between economic cooperation and political stability will be crucial for charting a way out of the current quagmire.
Ignoring it is a recipe for continued violence and fragmentation.
Darurat Air di Dunia Arab
BERLIN – Saat ini kelangkaan air tawar terburuk terjadi di dunia Arab.
Mayoritas negara atau daerah termiskin di dunia dalam hal sumber daya air berada di Timur Tengah, termasuk Bahrain, Djibouti, Gaza, Yordania, Kuwait, Libya, Qatar, Arab Saudi, dan Uni Emirat Arab.
Kelangkaan itu – diperburuk dengan ledakan penduduk, penipisan dan pengrusakan ekosistem alami, dan ketidakpuasan publik – menghambat masa depan negara-negara tersebut.
Namun bukan itu saja kesulitan yang dihadapi dunia Arab.
Mengingat bahwa sebagian besar negara Arab bersifat modern constructs yang tercipta dari berhentinya kekuasaan kolonial, sehingga lemah atas identitas historis yang kohesif, maka struktur negara mereka kurang memiliki fondasi kuat.
Belum lagi adanya tekanan-tekanan eksternal dan internal – termasuk dari meluasnya gerakan Islamisme, perang saudara, dan perpindahan penduduk secara massal dari wilayah konflik – tampak bahwa masa depan negara-negara Arab mengalami ketidakpastian,
Satu hal yang dikenali beberapa pihak ialah betapa kelangkaan air berdampak pada siklus kekerasan yang terjadi.
Satu pemicu utama meletusnya Arab Spring – kenaikan harga pangan – berhubungan langsung dengan krisis air yang memburuk di Timur Tengah.
Ketersediaan air juga memicu ketegangan antar negara.
Arab Saudi dan Yordania, contohnya, memperebutkan akuifer al-Disi yang digunakan bersama oleh dua negara.
Air pun bisa digunakan sebagai senjata.
Di Suriah, ISIS sudah mengendalikan aliran sungai Efrat dan Tigris.
Fakta bahwa hampir setengah penduduk Arab bergantung pada aliran air tanah dari negara-negara non-Arab, termasuk Turki dan negara-negara di hulu sungai Nil, bisa memperparah darurat air.
Tingkat kesuburan yang meroket juga menjadi sumber ketegangan.
Menurut laporan PBB, rata-rata ketersediaan air tahunan di dunia Arab bisa turun hingga 460 meter kubik per kapita – lebih rendah dari setengah batas kritis kelangkaan air yaitu 1.000 meter kubik.
Dalam kondisi ini, ekstraksi air yang saat ini tidak berkelanjutan akan semakin parah, apalagi dengan semakin cepatnya deplesi penyimpanan air – sebuah kondisi yang bisa memicu kerusuhan lainnya.
Akhirnya, banyak negara menerapkan subsidi air, selain subsidi BBM dan makanan, demi “membiayai” perdamaian sosial.
Namun subsidi tersebut merangsang praktik pemborosan yang memperburuk penipisan sumber daya air dan pengrusakan lingkungan.
Singkatnya, dunia Arab semakin terjebak dalam lingkaran setan.
Tekanan-tekanan  ekonomi, lingkungan hidup, dan demografis semakin memperberat kelangkaan air dan mengakibatkan pengangguran serta perasaan tidak aman yang memicu keresahan sosial, kerusuhan politik, dan ekstremisme.
Respon pemerintah melalui peningkatan subsidi air dan sumber daya lainnya justru memperdalam kendala-kendala lingkungan yang memperparah kelangkaan dan mengarah pada keresahan.
Aksi urgen diperlukan untuk menghentikan siklus ini.
Pertama, negara secara bertahap harus menghentikan (phasing out) produksi panen yang menggunakan banyak air.
Biji-bijian, biji penghasil minyak, dan daging sapi harus diimpor dari negara yang kaya akan sumber daya air, supaya produksinya bisa dilakukan secara lebih efisien dan berkelanjutan.
Terhadap jenis panen yang terus diproduksi negara-negara Arab, penerapan teknologi lebih mutakhir dan praktik-praktik terbaik dari seluruh dunia bisa membantu mengurangi penggunaan air.
Teknologi membran dan distilasi bisa dipakai untuk pemurnian air tercemar atau mengalami degradasi, pengolahan air limbah (reclaim wastewater), dan desalinasi air payau atau air laut.
Irigasi tetes dengan efisiensi tinggi bisa menaikkan produksi sayur dan buah di kawasan, tanpa penggunaan air yang berlebihan.
Salah satu langkah penting lainnya adalah perluasan dan penguatan infrastruktur air untuk menanggulangi ketidakseimbangan musiman dalam ketersediaan air, mengatur distribusi lebih efektif, dan menampung air hujan, sehingga diperoleh sumber pasokan tambahan.
Yordania, melalui kerja sama Israel dan bantuan Uni Eropa, tengah membuat jaringan pipa untuk menghubungkan Laut Merah dan Laut Mati dan mengalirkan air dari Laut Merah yang akan didesalinasi, lalu hasil olahannya akan bisa dikonsumsi warga di Yordania, Israel, dan Palestina, dan mengalirkan air garam yang tertinggal menuju Laut Mati yang sudah sekarat.
Penyempurnaan pengelolaan air juga krusial.
Satu cara mencapainya adalah menetapkan harga air yang lebih tepat, agar menghasilkan insentif untuk menghindari pemborosan dan melestarikan pasokan air.
Walaupun subsidi tidak perlu dihapuskan seluruhnya, subsidi haruslah ditargetkan kepada petani kecil atau kelompok pekerja lain yang berkebutuhan tinggi dan merancang ulang subsidi tersebut agar menghasilkan insentif serupa untuk konservasi dan efisiensi penggunaan air.
Tentu saja, negara-negara yang lebih stabil dan kaya, seperti Arab Saudi, Kuwait, dan Uni Emirat Arab, berada dalam posisi lebih baik untuk mengatasi krisis air yang memburuk dengan cepat, bila dibandingkan dengan negara-negara yang menderita akibat konflik seperti Yaman, Libya, dan Irak.
Akan tetapi, untuk memutus siklus kekerasan dan rasa tidak aman, semua negara pada akhirnya harus bangkit untuk memperbaiki pengelolaan air dan melindungi ekosistem. Jika tidak, defisit air yang menyengsarakan ini – ditambah dengan keresahan dalam negeri – akan terus memburuk.
Memenuhi Kebutuhan Air di Timur Tengah
FEZ – Temuan World Water Development Report keluaran PBB menegaskan kekhawatiran banyak pihak: ratusan ribu penduduk Timur Tengah dan Afrika Utara (Middle East and North Africa/MENA) – terutama Aljazair, Yordania, Libya, Maroko, Palestina, Sudan, Suriah, dan Yaman – menghadapi kelangkaan air terburuk dalam sejarah pada tahun 2016 ini. Alih-alih berkah, justru tertimpa musibah.
Padahal negara-negara tersebut mengupayakan pertumbuhan ekonomi dan diversifikasi.
Banyak faktor berkontribusi pada situasi sekarang, diantaranya perubahan iklim, desertifikasi, polusi air, dan penyalahgunaan sumber daya alam.
Keterbatasan informasi, pendidikan, dan komunikasi semakin memperburuk kendala-kendala yang ada, karena ini menonjolkan rendahnya kesadaran dan komitmen terhadap praktik-praktik ramah lingkungan.
Belum lagi ditambah dengan penanggulangan dan manajemen risiko oleh pemerintah yang sangat lemah – umumnya terkait dengan konflik dan krisis lain – mengakibatkan situasinya menjadi teramat suram.
Aljazair, misalnya, menghadapi kekeringan terburuk dalam 50 tahun terakhir.
Sebagai negara dengan pertanian yang sangat mengandalkan curah hujan, akibat infrastruktur yang masih terbelakang, tahun ini hasil panen serealia merosot 40%.
Meski kaya akan minyak dan gas, Aljazair gagal menjamin ketersediaan sumber-sumber air yang terjangkau bagi warganya, hanya salah satu dari masalah-masalah lain seperti langkanya kesempatan kerja.
Akibatnya, negara ini diguncang dengan protes keras oleh warganya.
Libya dilanda ketidakstabilan yang lebih parah sebagai hasil dari konflik internal yang berlangsung tahunan.
Konsekuensi yang berupa pemadaman listrik dan kelangkaan bahan bakar telah menghambat distribusi air.
Musim panas lalu, PBB harus membeli lima juta liter air dari negara-negara tetangganya untuk memenuhi kebutuhan air di Libya.
Di Yordania, kelangkaan air terjadi terlampau sering, terutama di kota-kota besar seperti Amman.
Yordania diperkirakan memiliki cadangan air cukup untuk menyokong kehidupan dua juta orang.
Akan tetapi populasi penduduk kini lebih dari enam juta jiwa, belum termasuk 1,5 juta pengungsi asal Suriah yang hidup di penampungan-penampungan di Yordania.
Di tengah krisis air, sudah hampir pasti pengungsi lah yang merasakan dampak pertama.
Pasokan air di sebagian besar kamp pengungsi, di Yordania dan Lebanon, dipangkas habis –keputusan yang menyengsarakan jutaan orang yang sudah berjuang menghadapi suhu panas.
Di Rukban, sebuah kamp pengungsi di perbatasan Yordania dengan Suriah dan Irak, lebih dari 85.000 penduduknya hanya memperoleh jatah masing-masing 5 liter per hari untuk dikonsumsi, keperluan memasak, dan mencuci.
Kondisi di Yaman juga sama buruknya.
Dilanda konflik akibat kekerasan kekerasan dan perang saudara, Yaman tidak mampu mengelola sumber-sumber air karena tidak dilengkapi dengan pemerintah yang efektif.
Sumber-sumber air di kota Sanaa, ibukota negara, diperkirakan habis dan mengering dalam waktu 10 tahun.
Ketika lebih dari setengah penduduknya kekurangan akses pada air bersih, tidak heran kalau Yaman juga mengalami gagal panen dan penyebaran sejumlah penyakit.
PBB memperkirakan 14.000 anak-anak usia di bawah 5 tahun meninggal dunia akibat gizi buruk dan diare setiap tahunnya.
Sementara itu, para petani menggali sumur semakin dalam demi mencari air – kedalamannya bahkan mencapai 500 meter – tanpa kendali atau pembatasan apapun.
Intervensi pemerintah yang efektif akan sulit atau bahkan mustahil diterapkan di Yaman, namun layak dan patut – bahkan wajib dilakukan – di negara-negara Timur Tengah dan Afrika Utara lainnya.
Pertama, pemerintah pusat harus mengupayakan modernisasi pada praktik-praktik pertanian, termasuk pelatihan bagi petani dan pengenalan alat-alat irigasi lebih efisien.
Wajib sifatnya untuk mengurangi ketergantungan petani pada curah hujan.
Sejumlah negara – seperti Maroko dan Yordania – telah menjalankan beberapa tindakan modernisasi.
Pemerintah Maroko, contohnya, mengerahkan upaya besar untuk mengembangkan sumber-sumber air, termasuk pembangunan bendungan.
Tapi jalan masih panjang.
Efisiensi distribusi air di Maroko masih rendah – hanya 60% untuk irigasi.
Bagi negara yang sudah menderita lebih dari 20 kekeringan dalam 35 tahun, ini masalah serius.
Berita bagusnya adalah African Development Bank baru-baru ini menyetujui pengucuran pinjaman lebih dari 88 juta euro (98,7 juta dolar AS) untuk mendanai proyek perbaikan mutu distribusi air.
Ini menyadarkan kita akan satu kesimpulan pokok: negara tidak bisa melakukannya sendiri.
Kerja sama regional dan internasional sangat diperlukan.
Negara-negara di kawasan MENA harus saling mendukung dalam penerapan program-program yang dirancang berdasarkan keberhasilan di lokasi lain.
Selain itu, investasi tambahan – pendanaan dari dalam atau luar negeri – perlu dialokasikan untuk memperbaiki infrastruktur air yang menua, serta proyek-proyek baru untuk membangun bendungan dan reservoir air.
Upaya lebih solid juga perlu dikedepankan dalam pengamanan sumber-sumber air yang sudah ada.
Disini lah peran publik sangat dibutuhkan.
Namun masyarakat harus sadar, bukan hanya tahu pengggunaan air yang baik, tapi juga tahu dan mampu melindungi dari risiko-risiko bencana terkait perubahan iklim.
Bagi sektor swasta dan LSM, pemutakhiran pengelolaan air di kawasan MENA menjadi peluang besar untuk investasi pada penyediaan air bersih dan teknologi terkait.
Pasar regional untuk perbaikan mutu sanitasi lokal dan layanan pengairan diperkirakan bernilai lebih dari 200 miliar dolar AS.
Proyek-proyek yang ditujukan untuk pemenuhan kebutuhan ini akan menjadi investasi cerdas.
Tapi kembali lagi ke pemerintah, bolanya ada di tangan mereka untuk memulai langkah pertama.
Jika pemerintah tidak melestarikan cadangan air dan menyeragamkan pasokan, kelompok warga paling rentan akan terus menderita dan kondisi ini dengan cepatnya bisa mengarah pada keresahan sosial atau bahkan lebih buruk.
Jika negara terus berdiam diri dan tidak mengatasi krisis air yang melanda kawasan MENA, kesengsaraan mereka bisa memicu perang di masa mendatang.
Pada pertemuan Conference of the Parties to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, di Maroko bulan November nanti, isu mengenai air harus dijadikan prioritas.
Mengingat lebih dari 80% kontribusi nasional dalam perjuangan melawan perubahan iklim oleh negara-negara Selatan berfokus pada kelangkaan air, aksi terkoordinasi oleh pemerintah dan badan internasional tidak bisa ditunda-tunda lagi.
How to Win in the Middle East
RIYADH – Analysts the world over are assessing the situation in the Middle East in 2012 by listing the region’s “winners” and “losers.”
Hamas won.
Egypt’s President Mohamed Morsi won, then lost.
US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton won.
Syria lost.
Iraq lost.
Iran had a draw (tougher sanctions, but closer to nuclear-weapons capability), as did Saudi Arabia (growing clout, but unable to stop the killings in Syria or Gaza) and Israel (avoided massive bloodshed, but became even more isolated).
All of these lists, however, are merely the pastimes of policy wonks.
In the bloody, hostile miasma of the Middle East, being a “winner” in any sense of the word is fallacious.
The region continues to breed only losers.
The victims of the conflicts in Syria, Iran, and Palestine; the friends and families of the victims; those who hope for peace: all lost.
This is a grim reminder that when it comes to killing one another, repeatedly missing opportunities for peace, and botching all efforts at progress, no one can beat the Middle East.
In 2012, the region proved once again that it is truly the best at perpetrating the worst.
When will these vital, eclectic, and prosperous (or potentially prosperous) countries stop their ravenous infighting and start nurturing, protecting, and sustaining their people?
While there have been many prescriptions, I will provide my own 2012 Middle East roundup, with a look toward what must happen in 2013 if we want it to bring fewer losses.
The Israeli killing machine must be stopped by a determined United States using its leverage to bring about implementation of the land-for-peace principles of United Nations Security Council resolutions 242 and 338, the Madrid Conference, the Oslo Agreement, and the Abdullah Peace Initiative.
This is the only way out of the current unworkable predicament.
Borrowing a term from nuclear strategy, the situation between Israel and the Palestinians can be described only as “mutually assured destruction,” also known, fittingly, as MAD.
It benefits no one, so why let it continue?
Only the US has the ability to push the Israelis out of their MAD-ness, so I look forward to the Obama administration recognizing and acting on that moral obligation in the coming year.
The Assad killing machine must also be stopped.
In this case, it is through the West agreeing with Saudi Arabia to arm the Free Syrian Army with the defensive weapons that it needs to ground Bashar al-Assad’s aircraft and immobilize his tanks and artillery.
Unlike some conflicts in the region, this is a case with a clear and simple solution.
Those being attacked merely need weapons to defend themselves; if they get them, the entire dynamic of the conflict will shift, in turn ending the bloodshed.
By now, all of the actors in Syria are known.
There are no hidden jihadis, terrorists, or gangsters.
They are all well documented.
So the moderates are the ones who should get the anti-aircraft and anti-tank weapons.
Having them, their prestige among other fighters will soar, and so will support for their moderate stance.
Iranian intervention in Iraq must stop.
It is tearing Iraq apart and endangering the countries around it.
Western and Iranian support for Nouri al-Maliki’s government, which is controlled by Iran’s Basij militia, must be withdrawn, enabling the Iraqi people to determine freely their own destiny.
Did the Americans defeat Saddam Hussein, and did more than 100,000 Iraqis die in the process, so that their country could become a puppet of the hostile Iranian regime?
Iran’s meddling in Bahrain, Kuwait, Yemen, and other Gulf states must end as well.
In addition to these major tasks, Palestine’s main political rivals, Hamas and Fatah, must reconcile and turn their united efforts toward improving the lives of the Palestinian people.
Egypt must get over its post-revolutionary squabbling and reassume its leading role among the Arab states.
And all Arab states must coordinate their efforts to realize common ambitions, rather than continuing to pursue only narrow national interests.
Central to all of these tasks is a Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) that is united into a confederation that can meet the challenges of Iran’s regional ambitions and bring major military deployments to bear on regional conflicts.
If anything has become clear in the last year, it is that states like Israel, Iran, and Syria will act with impunity if no one is ready, willing, and able to stand up to them.
It is time for the GCC,&#160;anchored on&#160;Saudi Arabia's power,&#160;to take up that role.
The Middle East has been losing for too long, because its national leaders have been seeking to win in their own way, for their own purposes, and at everyone’s cost but their own.
Such unilateralism is impossible in today’s globalized world.
We must join together, or else we will rip each other to shreds.
The choice is simple: Do we want to be winners or losers?
Migration Is Development
LONDON – In September 2000, the United Nations Millennium Development Goals rallied the international community behind a shared vision.
The MDGs, which expire in 2015, signaled a new era of global cooperation, and triggered real progress in terms of lifting millions of people out of extreme poverty, improving health and access to education, and empowering women.
The eight original MDGs, which include reducing child mortality and achieving universal primary education, are lauded for their simplicity and measurability.
They took an abstract, outsize challenge and distilled it into achievable ends.
But, as Albert Einstein loved to say, “Not everything that counts can be counted, and not everything that can be counted counts.”
Today, it is important that we not become trapped by what worked in the past.
To succeed, the post-2015 agenda must break the original mold. It must be grounded in a fuller narrative about how development occurs – a narrative that accounts for complex issues such as migration.
Otherwise, the global development agenda could lose its relevance, and thus its grip on stakeholders.
It is perhaps understandable that the original MDGs did not mention either internal or international migration.
These are politically sensitive topics that could have polarized, rather than united, the international community.
Moreover, our empirical understanding of how migration interacts with development was limited at the time; there was little data with which to shape measurable goals.
Yet migration is the original strategyfor people seeking to escape poverty, mitigate risk, and build a better life.
It has been with us since the dawn of mankind, and its economic impact today is massive.
Migrant remittances exceed the value of all overseas development aid combined, to say nothing of the taxes that migrants pay, the investments they make, and the trade they stimulate.
As we consider the next-generation development agenda, it is also critical to understand that migration was a vital force in achieving the original MDGs.
There are an estimated 215 million international migrants today –&#160;a number expected to grow to 400 million by 2040 –&#160;and another 740 million internal migrants who have moved from rural to urban areas within countries.
Each typically supports many family members back home, which also helps to lift entire communities.
In Bangladesh, for example, just 13% of households that receive remittances from abroad are below the poverty line, compared to 34% of non-remittance-receiving households.
Evidence from Latin America, Africa, South Asia, and elsewhere shows that remittances reduce the depth and severity of poverty, and that the additional income is disproportionately spent on education and health.
In rural Pakistan, remittances are associated with higher school enrollment, especially for girls.
The list goes on.
Beyond the data, there is no greater symbol of the world’s growing interdependence than the movement of people.
If we can make meaningful economic progress in the coming generations, one of the pivotal reasons will be that people are allowed to move more freely.
Advanced countries, with their adverse demographic trends, need migrants, as do developing countries – not only for migrants’ economic contributions, but also for the social and cultural diversity that they bring.
This is not to deny that migration has downsides.
But migration is here to stay, and it is growing.
There can be no return to a monoethnic past, so successful societies will need to adapt to diversity.
Typically, development experts regard migration as a sign of failure: if development policies work, people should not want to move.
Accordingly, migration has been viewed as a problem to be solved –&#160;not as a solution to a problem.
But migration should not be considered good or bad; it is simply natural to the human condition.
People migrate from poor countries, from middle-income countries, and from rich countries.
They go from north to south, south to north, south to south, and north to north.
The likeliest outcome of the debate on the post-2015 global development agenda will be something between the MDG-style approach – concrete, measurable targets for reducing extreme poverty – and the emerging sustainable development narrative, which emphasizes the complex forces of interdependence, such as migration and climate change.
In the imperfect world of politics, this middle ground would be a positive outcome.
Fortunately, the type of measurable outcomes that the MDGs have thus far demanded are being developed for migration.
The overarching goal is to design a roadmap that can take us from today’s poorly managed, exploitative system of human mobility to one that is well managed, protects migrant rights, and plans for the consequences and opportunities of migration.
An ideal result would focus attention on the need to reduce the barriers to all kinds of human mobility – both internal and across national borders – by lowering its economic and social costs.
Such an agenda includes simple measures, like reducing fees for visas, and more complex reforms, like allowing migrants to switch employers without penalty and increasing the proportion of migrants who enjoy legal protections and labor rights.
The bottom line is that making migration part of the world’s development strategy will have a meaningful impact on the lives of migrants, affording them greater access to rights and to the fruits of their labor.
Perhaps even more important, it could change public perceptions of migrants, so that they are viewed as a blessing rather than a scourge.
Migration Fact vs. Migration Fiction
LONDON – Migration continues to dominate political debate in many countries.
Rightly so: the issue affects economies and societies worldwide.
But public opinion on this crucial topic tends to be shaped by emotions, rather than facts.
The result is a lack of open and effective dialogue about migration’s risks – or its many benefits.
Populist leaders, in particular, have been eager to manipulate the migration debate, using inflated figures and other gross exaggerations to stoke popular fears.
Such incendiary rhetoric directly hurts immigrants, even those who have long lived in their new country.
In the United Kingdom, reported hate crimes against immigrants surged 42% year on year in the run-up to and aftermath of June’s Brexit referendum.
But the impact of anti-immigrant sentiment extends far beyond national borders.
If populist fear-mongering drives their countries to embrace exclusionary, protectionist policies, the effect on the global economy – and the livelihoods of millions of people around the world – would be disastrous.
It is now up to rational political leaders and mass media to reintroduce facts into the debate.
They must publicize the actual figures for migration flows, both into and out of their countries.
They must make clear to citizens that many of the problems for which immigrants are blamed are not actually their fault.
And they must highlight immigrants’ large social and economic contributions.
The Brexit vote was driven by a distorted picture – eagerly painted by tabloid newspapers and populist politicians – of a country overflowing with migrants.
And, in fact, surveys show that in most countries, residents greatly overestimate the number of migrants in their midst.
In some Eastern European countries, Muslim migrants are perceived as being up to 70 times more numerous than they are.
The truth is that the share of people living outside their countries of origin has barely increased in recent decades, standing around 3% of the nearly 7.5 billion people alive today.
In the last five years, 36.5 million people – just 0.5% of the global population – have left their native lands.
It is a myth that all developing-country citizens seek to reach wealthy Western societies.
Those who do migrate are far more likely to stay in their own region.
Less than 1% of Africans have relocated to Europe.
Meanwhile, plenty of advanced-country citizens – including 4.9 million UK nationals – are represented in global migration figures.
Claims that migrants are a drain on national budgets are similarly inaccurate.
In the UK, immigrants generate more in taxes than they draw in benefits.
In fact, many advanced countries need migrants.
Of the ten countries with the highest share of people over the age of 65, nine are in Europe.
While industrialized countries often suffer a shortage of low-skill workers – Hungary recently acknowledged that it needs 250,000 foreign workers to fill the gaps in its labor market – immigrants are not necessarily uneducated.
In 2010, 29% of immigrants to the OECD had university degrees.
Beyond contributing to host economies as workers, entrepreneurs, investors, and taxpayers, migrants (and refugees) support development in their countries of origin through remittances.
Indeed, remittances account for a significant share of GDP in many developing countries, and are often the largest source of foreign-currency earnings.
Not only do remittances help pay for critical imports; by improving the balance of payments, they allow countries to borrow at lower interest rates in private capital markets.
Of course, there are challenges associated with migration.
But they can be overcome.
The refugee crisis in the Mediterranean, which has spurred panic across Europe, could have been addressed effectively with coordinated international action, as occurred in the past.
In the 1970s and 1980s, the international community rallied to resettle more than a million Vietnamese.
In the 1990s, when the Balkan conflicts displaced almost four million people, Europe stood up and helped.
But the political atmosphere today is less welcoming.
Donald Trump, the Republican US presidential nominee, portrays Syrian refugees fleeing for their lives as a security threat, despite the thorough screening procedures implemented by the current administration, which has committed to taking 10,000 Syrian refugees by the end of the fiscal year.
Hungary is set to hold a referendum in October on EU refugee quotas.
As advanced countries fight to keep out asylum-seekers – in Hungary’s case, just a few thousand – developing countries are housing millions of them.
Five countries that together constitute less than 2% of global GDP – Turkey, Jordan, Pakistan, Lebanon, and South Africa – provide shelter to almost half of the world’s refugees.
The world’s six wealthiest countries – the US, China, Japan, Germany, France, and the UK – account for 60% of global GDP, but they hosted fewer than 9% of all refugees last year.
This is no accident.
From 2010 to 2014, European states spent more than €1 billion ($1.1 billion) on walls and borders.
These attempts to “regain control” by erecting new barriers force migrants into the hands of exploitative smugglers and undermine trade and cooperation.
As it stands, only 7,200 of the 22,504 non-European refugees that the EU pledged last year to resettle have arrived.
Thousands of unaccompanied children, the most vulnerable of migrants, have yet to find a place.
Beyond the legal obligations of all signatories of the 1951 Refugee Convention, this is a test of humane values and decency – one that the so-called advanced countries are largely failing.
It is time for these countries to recognize that the best way to ensure orderly migration is to open legal channels for refugees and migrants.
As for integration, some of the practical hurdles can be overcome through more local investment and more coherent policies across government departments.
People have always moved, either by choice or when forced by circumstances.
This will not change.
It is time to stop resisting it and, armed with facts, start managing it.
The Future of Migration Governance
DHAKA – We live in a rapidly evolving, hyper-connected world, where goods, capital, and people are more mobile than ever before.
But, whereas countries have shown a willingness to cooperate on exchanging goods and capital, the international community has shown little appetite for improving how it governs human mobility.
After the wide-scale persecution and displacement of people in World War II, world leaders took the bold step of crafting the 1951 Refugee Convention.
In doing so, they relinquished a measure of national sovereignty – by accepting the principle of non-refoulement – in order to promote global solidarity toward refugees.
On the other hand, country leaders saw migration as something temporary that could be managed ad hoc, through unilateral or bilateral agreements primarily designed to fill specific labor-market needs in developed economies.
In hindsight, it is now clear that this approach was inadequate for dealing with the upsurge in human mobility that came with global and regional economic integration.
When writing about guest workers in Switzerland, Swiss playwright Max Frisch once observed that, “We asked for workers.
We got people instead.”