Lawyers call this the fact-finding process, which is characterized by a tradeoff: Finding out what really happened, as opposed to ending the dispute, can be costly.
A comparison of American and French law is illustrative in this regard.
American law has an elaborate fact-finding process called “discovery.”
In French civil disputes, by contrast, there is no oral testimony with cross-examination of witnesses. All evidence is written.
Lawyers gather whatever written evidence they have and submit it to the judge, who then decides.
In cases where something– a building, for example – must be seen, the French judge will appoint an “expert” to go look at it and then submit a written report.
The American legal system is better at getting at what really happened, but its high cost leaves much of the public without access to the courts.
The French system provides greater access to the public, but it is less likely to find out what really happened.
The cornerstone of law is social harmony, and its ultimate purpose can be defined as promoting social happiness, a higher standard than mere harmony.
Dawkins found happiness in science; we are all the richer for his contribution.
But, judging by his memoirs, we are equally fortunate that he did not pursue a career in law.
The Visual Politics of Terror
NEW YORK – The British artist Damien Hirst once referred to the 2001 attack on New York’s World Trade Center as “kind of an artwork in its own right.
It was wicked, but it was devised in this way for this kind of impact.
It was devised visually.”
Now, 13 years later, Western governments, while able to describe in strategic terms the threat of the Islamic State to the Middle East, are still struggling to come to terms with its visual assault in the global media.
Like Osama bin Laden and Al Qaeda, the Islamic State appears to understand the impact that lurid images of violence can have on the public imagination.
The irony, of course, is that the Islamic State’s exploitation of images of “pornographic” violence is at odds with the Islamists’ own condemnations of visual stimulation in other areas of life.
Indeed, their videos take sensory titillation to its limit.
Like an algorithm designed to access an adversary’s digital network, the Islamic State’s carefully staged videos, featuring the beheadings of American and British journalists and aid workers, have penetrated the Western psyche.
That psyche has long been primed to receive shocking imagery.
Now, the electronic media’s weakness for graphic violence has become the Islamic State’s strength.
The visual politics of terror may seem primitive, but its practice can be as sophisticated as its effects are profound.
Like ancient conquerors, who erected new temples on the sites where the vanquished had their own, the destroyers of New York’s Twin Towers used visual terror to strike at the heart of their enemy’s value system.
That is what terror aims to do: destabilize the foe’s normative reality.
Once the security of the familiar world is challenged, and its inner sanctums have been invaded and shaken, a space may be cleared for occupation.
Consider, for example, how Indonesia’s Suharto regime, from 1966 to 1998, depicted alleged Communist insurgent savagery, and compelled citizens to watch it on television and in theaters.
The horrifying images were intended to foment terror.
In the face of a grotesquely violent enemy, an even more terrifying state apparatus of organized violence emerged.
In effect, Suharto’s visual politics of atrocity and terror created a new reality from the violence and terror associated with the demise of the old.
The same perverse logic is at work in the Islamic State’s viral spectacles.
Though the need to confront evil remains as pressing as ever, Western societies’ motivation for doing so may lose clarity.
After all, it is one thing to deliberate on the pros and cons of confronting external forces of irrational violence; it is something else to lash out against the producers of brutal, politically charged, and upsetting imagery.
We must therefore ask ourselves what exactly is driving our response to the threats that the Islamic State presents.
Distinguishing between information about real national-security concerns and images strategically designed to shock and titillate us will not be easy.
But given the stakes, it is undoubtedly worthwhile.
The visual politics of atrocity and terror is only as strong as we imagine it.
That is why exorcising its demons will require more than military might. It also will require us to think deeply about the strategic use of violent images in the digital age.
Splendid Isolation?
LONDON – Membership of the European Union has shackled Britain’s economy to a corpse.
The United Kingdom has been bound by swaths of costly red tape to a bunch of moribund economies with no growth prospects.
As a result, UK exporters have been held back from the fast-growing markets of the Commonwealth and the developing world.
That, in a nutshell, is the view of British euroskeptics, and it has gained considerable force in the past few years of Europe’s slow-motion crisis.
The facts, however, tell a very different story.
A new study by the Center for European Reform (CER) asks the question: What is membership of the single market actually worth to the UK?
The standard answer is that close integration with the rest of Europe brings access to a market of more than 500 million people and injects healthy doses of competition and investment into the British economy, helping to raise productivity.
The CER has taken this analysis a lot further, by measuring UK trade with countries inside and outside the EU and adjusting the results for economic size and other factors that affect trade, such as distance to markets.
On this basis, one can work out whether British trade with other EU countries is higher or lower than one would expect, given the size and location of their economies.
The model shows that EU membership has boosted Britain’s trade in goods with other EU countries by more than half – accounting for roughly £130 billion ($219 billion) of total turnover of £364 billion in 2013.
For comparison, the value of Britain’s bilateral trade with China was £43 billion last year.
What explains this big “EU effect”?
The answer is that the single market is much more than a free-trade area.
Trade has been tariff-free for decades: the big impact has come from reducing non-tariff barriers arising from different national regulations.
A British-made car can now be sold anywhere in the EU without having to comply with 28 member states’ safety and emissions standards.
Moreover, EU membership has helped the UK to attract very large investments from elsewhere in Europe.
In 1997, other EU states accounted for 30% of inward foreign direct investment: by 2012, the EU’s share had risen to 50%.
Britain is also a preferred location for investors from the rest of the world who seek an attractive base within what is still a growing single market.
European economies as a whole have stagnated relative to the developing world. But trade among EU member states has still grown at a brisk pace over the past decade.
The CER study finds no evidence that EU membership has held back Britain’s trade with the rest of the world.
It points also to the explosive growth of Germany’s exports to China as evidence of the fact that it is possible to prosper both inside and outside the single market.
Euroskeptics claim that leaving the EU would enable the UK to dictate terms in trade negotiations with other members by virtue of the fact that Britain runs a trade deficit with them.
They export more to us than we do to them, so they need us more.
But that, too, is a weak argument.
The EU buys half of Britain’s exports, whereas the UK accounts for only a little more than a tenth of exports from the rest of the EU – hardly a strong negotiating position.
Moreover, just two member states – Germany and the Netherlands – account for half of the EU’s trade surplus with Britain.
Any new agreement would need the support of other EU countries, some of which buy more from Britain than they sell to it.
So much for dry analysis.
If you want to know what all of this means in practice, pay attention to recent statements from Diageo, the world’s largest producer of Scotch whisky.
The company says that its ability to move goods freely within the single market is a significant benefit, one that eliminates the need for expensive paperwork for intra-EU shipments and brings direct cost savings and economies of scale.
Membership allows Diageo to influence the rules that make it possible to compete on fair terms across Europe.
And, as Diageo’s trade reach extends beyond Europe and North America, the EU’s ability to push for free trade and common standards around the world will become “even more important, especially in the emerging markets where we and other consumer goods companies tend to face more significant market access issues.”
Of course, there are plenty of things that need fixing in the EU, and Britain’s membership cannot be weighed only in terms of pounds and pence.
But the CER’s report provides strong support for the view that in economic terms, the UK would have a lot more to lose than it would to gain from embarking on a different course.
The New Thirty Years’ War
NEW YORK – It is a region wracked by religious struggle between competing traditions of the faith.
But the conflict is also between militants and moderates, fueled by neighboring rulers seeking to defend their interests and increase their influence.
Conflicts take place within and between states; civil wars and proxy wars become impossible to distinguish.
Governments often forfeit control to smaller groups – militias and the like – operating within and across borders.
The loss of life is devastating, and millions are rendered homeless.
That could be a description of today’s Middle East.
In fact, it describes Europe in the first half of the seventeenth century.
In the Middle East in 2011, change came after a humiliated Tunisian fruit vendor set himself alight in protest; in a matter of weeks, the region was aflame.
In seventeenth-century Europe, a local religious uprising by Bohemian Protestants against the Catholic Habsburg Emperor Ferdinand II triggered that era’s conflagration.
Protestants and Catholics alike turned for support to their co-religionists within the territories that would one day become Germany.
Many of the era’s major powers, including Spain, France, Sweden, and Austria, were drawn in.
The result was the Thirty Years’ War, the most violent and destructive episode in European history until the two world wars of the twentieth century.
There are obvious differences between the events of 1618-1648 in Europe and those of 2011-2014 in the Middle East.
But the similarities are many – and sobering.
Three and a half years after the dawn of the “Arab Spring,” there is a real possibility that we are witnessing the early phase of a prolonged, costly, and deadly struggle; as bad as things are, they could well become worse.
The region is ripe for unrest.
Most of its people are politically impotent and poor in terms of both wealth and prospects.
Islam never experienced something akin to the Reformation in Europe; the lines between the sacred and the secular are unclear and contested.
Moreover, national identities often compete with – and are increasingly overwhelmed by – those stemming from religion, sect, and tribe.
Civil society is weak.
In some countries, the presence of oil and gas discourages the emergence of a diversified economy and, with it, a middle class.
Education emphasizes rote learning over critical thinking.
In many cases, authoritarian rulers lack legitimacy.
Outside actors, by what they did and failed to do, added fuel to the fire.
The 2003 Iraq war was highly consequential, for it exacerbated Sunni-Shia tensions in one of the region’s most important countries and, as a result, in many of the region’s other divided societies.
There is also the potential for disruption of energy production and shipping.
There are limits to what outsiders can do.
Sometimes, policymakers need to focus on preventing things from getting worse, rather than on ambitious agendas for improvement; this is one of those times.
What this calls for, above all, is prevention of nuclear proliferation (beginning with Iran), whether through diplomacy and sanctions, or, if need be, through sabotage and military attacks.
The alternative – a Middle East in which several governments and, through them, militias and terrorist groups have access to nuclear weapons and materials – is too horrific to contemplate.
Steps that reduce global dependence on the region’s energy supplies (including improvements in fuel efficiency and development of alternative sources) also make great sense.
Economic assistance should go simultaneously to Jordan and Lebanon to help them cope with the flood of refugees.
Democracy promotion in Turkey and Egypt should focus on strengthening civil society and creating robust constitutions that diffuse power.
Counter-terrorism against groups such as the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (which now calls itself simply the “Islamic State”) – whether by drones, small raids, or the training and arming of local partners – must become a staple of policy.
It is time to recognize the inevitability of Iraq’s break-up (the country is now more a vehicle for Iran’s influence than a bulwark against it) and bolster an independent Kurdistan within Iraq’s former borders.
There is no room for illusions.
Regime change is no panacea; it can be difficult to achieve and nearly impossible to consolidate.
Negotiations cannot resolve all or even most conflicts.
That is certainly true, for the time being, of the Israeli-Palestinian dispute.
Even if this changes, a comprehensive settlement would help the locals but not affect the dynamics of neighboring countries or conflicts.
That said, a narrow ceasefire between Israel and Hamas should be pursued.
Likewise, diplomacy can work in Syria only if it accepts the reality on the ground (including the survival of the Assad regime for the foreseeable future), rather than seeking to transform it.
The answer is not to be found in drawing new maps, though once populations have shifted and political stability has been restored, recognition of new borders might prove both desirable and viable.
Policymakers must recognize their limits.
For now and for the foreseeable future – until a new local order emerges or exhaustion sets in – the Middle East will be less a problem to be solved than a condition to be managed.
Free Trade Forever
NEWTON, MASSACHUSETTS – On December 7, representatives from the World Trade Organization’s 159 member countries reached agreement on the first multilateral trade deal in the WTO’s 19-year history.
Although the Trade Facilitation Agreement – dubbed the “Bali package,” after the Indonesian island where the meeting took place – did not address the most pressing North-South trade issues, it remains an important economic and political milestone.
The Bali package commits WTO members to moving toward lowering non-tariff trade barriers – for example, by establishing more transparent customs regulations and reducing trade-related paperwork.
These changes might seem like bureaucratic minutiae, but the agreement’s impact – adding $1 trillion to global output and creating 21 million jobs worldwide – will be substantial.
The agreement has been criticized for failing to meet the goals set out in the WTO’s 2001 Doha Development Agenda.
But these objectives – including improvement of market access in agriculture, manufacturing, and services; clarification of international trade rules; and progress on addressing relevant environmental issues – were overly ambitious.
Even the modest Bali package was touch and go, requiring an extra day of negotiations to reach agreement on contentious issues like Indian farm subsidies and the US embargo of Cuba.
Nonetheless, it is clear that trade liberalization is gaining momentum.
Consider the impressive scale and scope of other multilateral trade agreements – such as the Trans-Pacific Partnership, the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, and the Trade-in-Services Agreement – that are currently being negotiated.
Current progress toward trade liberalization underscores how trade policy – especially that of the United States – has improved over the last hundred years.
The early nineteenth century was characterized by high tariff rates in both the US and Europe.
But, during the last few decades of the century, European tariff rates fell substantially, largely in response to the United Kingdom’s unilateral repeal of the Corn Laws, which had imposed substantial tariffs on imported grain.
The US, however, continued to charge much higher tariffs.
Unlike in Europe, partisan politics shaped US trade policy before World War II, with the Republicans raising tariffs and the Democrats reducing them.
One of the most notable hikes occurred in 1922, when the Republican-controlled government passed the Fordney-McCumber Tariff, which raised the average import tariff rate by 64%.
This triggered vehement protests – and strong retaliation – from America’s trading partners.
From 1925 to 1929, 33 tariff revisions were made in 26 European countries, and 17 were made in Latin America.
International conferences in Brussels in 1920, Portorose in 1921, and Genoa in 1922 – as well as the League of Nations’ World Economic Conference in Geneva in 1927 – endorsed a tariff truce, but to no avail.
In 1930, US President Herbert Hoover and a Republican Congress, enacted the Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act, sending the tariff war into high gear.
Though the Smoot-Hawley tariff increases were modest compared to those under Fordney-McCumber, their timing turned the act into a virtual synonym for bad trade policy.
According to the League of Nations, Smoot-Hawley triggered “an outburst of tariff-making activities in other countries, at least partly by way of reprisals,” with substantial duty hikes made almost immediately by Canada, Cuba, France, Italy, Mexico, and Spain.
Thus, though Smoot-Hawley was not a direct cause of the Great Depression, as many have claimed, it did contribute to a breakdown of international trade precisely when the world could least afford it.
The two-thirds decline in aggregate imports from 1929 to 1933 was only partly a result of falling incomes, and hence import demand; retaliatory trade and exchange-rate policies also played a major role in bringing about the global trade collapse.
Even when world trade finally began to revive after the depression ended, it remained fragmented, developing primarily within trading blocs and regions.
It was only after World War II – when the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (succeeded in 1995 by the WTO) began the process of multilateral trade liberalization – that Smoot-Hawley’s destructive legacy was finally overcome.
Of course, protectionist pressures have occasionally arisen since then.
For example, during the 1992 US presidential campaign, Ross Perot argued that ratifying the North American Free Trade Agreement would lead to a “giant sucking sound,” as US jobs migrated to Mexico and American workers’ wages fell.
And many countries have introduced minor – and not so minor – impediments to trade since WWII.
Nonetheless, the overall trend has been toward increased openness.
In fact, the post-war era has been the longest sustained period of trade liberalization in history – a particularly impressive feat, given that the world has just suffered the worst economic downturn since the Great Depression.
Indeed, policymakers nowadays seem genuinely disinclined to resort to tariff increases.
There is no denying that Bali was not a complete success, and much of the WTO’s Doha agenda remains unfulfilled.
But the fact that countries have continued to pursue trade liberalization, however gradually, at a time of weak economic growth, suggests that free trade is here to stay.
The Monetary Cosmopolitans
NEWTON, MASSACHUSETTS – Can you imagine a French citizen being elected President of the United States?
Or a Japanese prime minister of the United Kingdom?
Or a Mexican chancellor of Germany?
Probably not.
Indeed, even if there were no legal obstacles, it would be difficult to imagine voters in a democracy installing a foreigner in their government’s top job.
But, during the last few years, countries have increasingly turned to foreigners and people with considerable foreign experience to assume what is generally viewed as a country’s second most important position: head of the central bank.
What has driven this shift, and should it be welcomed or discouraged?
For example, Stanley Fischer, nominated in January by US President Barack Obama to succeed Janet Yellen as Vice Chair of the Federal Reserve, is an American immigrant from southern Africa who served as Governor of the Bank of Israel from 2005 until last year.
And, in July 2013, Mark Carney, a Canadian who had served as central-bank governor in his home country, became the first foreigner to lead the Bank of England in its nearly 320-year history.
Similarly, the widely respected governor of Ireland’s central bank, Patrick Honohan, spent nearly a decade at the World Bank in Washington, DC.
One of Honohan’s deputies is a Swede with experience at the Hong Kong Monetary Authority; the other is a Frenchman.
This represents a major departure from the tradition of filling central banks’ top leadership positions with people who have spent most of their careers there – a tradition that, over time, allowed central banks to be taken over by “groupthink.”
With the entrenchment of a particular ideology or mode of thinking, monetary policymakers increasingly missed – by choice or inertia – opportunities to change, reinvigorate, and improve the running of these vital institutions.
As central banks’ key role in the recovery from the post-2008 global economic crisis demonstrated, monetary policy must be flexible and innovative.
That is where the different perspectives that foreigners bring can help.
The Fed’s experience – shaped by a historically decentralized power structure – highlights the benefits of a policymaking process characterized by diverse views.
When the Fed was established a century ago, monetary authority was distributed across 12 regional reserve banks, each of which had considerable autonomy.
The fact that the heads of each of the regional Fed banks were called “governor” – the same title given to heads of the long-established European central banks – was indicative of their authority.
But, in the aftermath of the Great Depression of the 1930’s, it became clear that such decentralization had prevented the Fed from formulating and implementing a coherent monetary policy.
The heads of the regional banks were “downgraded” from governors to “presidents” – the first and only time in US history when the transition from governor to president was a demotion – and power was centralized in the Board of Governors based in Washington, DC.
Nonetheless, an important legacy of the earlier system has remained: each of the regional banks maintains its own research department, and brings a different approach to the monetary-policy debate.
In other words, the Fed’s structure continues to foster a robust and diverse mix of views – something that is severely lacking in many other central banks.
Consider the Bank of Canada.
Years ago, an employee at one of the regional Fed banks – who was also my graduate-school classmate – contrasted the responses to his research presentations in the United States and Canada.
Whereas staff economists from the Federal Reserve System brought differing perspectives to the monetary-policy debate, their Canadian counterparts seemed to subscribe to a single “Bank of Canada view.”
Two independent reviews of the Bank of England published in the wake of the global financial crisis found a similar lack of intellectual diversity and robust debate.
One observed that Bank of England staff members tended to “filter” their advice to make it more palatable to their superiors.
The other concluded that the crisis highlighted just how wrong the consensus view had been, and recommended a new approach that considered divergent views.
This desire for change may have contributed to Carney’s appointment as the new governor, and his recent decision to bring more outside expertise into the Bank’s leadership.
Avoiding groupthink is essential to developing innovative, effective policies capable of responding to new monetary-policy challenges – and that demands a flexible, dynamic policymaking process.
The good news is that central banks have options for enriching their policy debates, even without the benefit of the Fed’s size, structure, and geographic spread.
For starters, they can establish committees of outside experts or commission regular external reviews of policy and the policymaking process.
Such reviews typically take place only after a crisis – when it is already too late.
Another solution is to appoint a governor from outside the central bank, preferably one who has enough external experience to avoid being captured by groupthink. 
Or, perhaps better yet, they can hire a foreigner.
Rich Europe, Poor Europe
From its earliest days, the European Union has aimed for balanced economic development across its many regions.
The Maastricht Treaty contains the striking phrase “overall harmonious development.”
But, however admirable this sentiment may be, there is no “scientific truth” about the “right” level of disparities and the correct speed of convergence. 
Nevertheless, it is useful to compare economic disparities in the EU with those in the United States to assess regional convergence in Europe – bearing in mind, of course, that the US has been a nation-state for more than two centuries, while the EU is best seen as a confederation of 27 states under a supra-national structure.
Let us first take a historical look at the western part of the EU.
In 1960, disparities in what later came to be known as the EU-15 were about twice as large as those between US states.
Today, they are comparable with American income disparities.
Income disparities have halved both in nominal terms when expressed in euros and in real terms when taking into account differences in purchasing power.
Western Europe first saw a period in which real incomes converged, followed by a period of converging prices.
In the 1960’s and early 1970’s, disparities in purchasing power declined by about 40%, then stalled, while nominal income disparities fell by a similar margin from the mid-1970’s to 1990.
With the introduction of the euro, and with falling inflation, nominal convergence and real convergence have grown similar, both making gradual progress since the mid-1990’s.
The average population of the EU-15 is about 25 million, many more than the six million in the average US state, which more closely resembles the average population of EU regions, such as Bavaria, Wallonia, Île-de-France and the Canary Islands.
So perhaps it is more useful to compare the 50 US states with the EU’s 72 regions. 
The convergence trend in the EU at the country level is reflected in the regions.
But income disparities in the regions are still substantial in western Europe when compared with American states.
It is true that poorer EU countries tend to outgrow richer ones, but poor regions do not necessarily outgrow rich regions or even the country average.
So regional disparities may persist or even grow, posing a challenge for policymakers concerned with stimulating economic growth and regional cohesion.
And what about wealth disparities in today’s EU of 27 members?
With the accession of 10 new states in 2004 and another two at the beginning of 2007, the Union’s membership now spans central and eastern Europe.
In the 1990’s, these ex-communist countries had to face temporary income slumps as most of their industrial production became virtually made obsolete overnight.
New production capacity has now been created and new markets conquered, but the catching-up process is still far from complete.
Unsurprisingly, then, regional disparities in income are much greater across the enlarged EU’s countries than across the US states.
In 2005, average income disparities were twice as high within the then-EU-25 as within the American states.
But they have come down by nearly one-third over the past 12 years.
As with the EU-15, income convergence for the regions again turns out to be slower than convergence between countries.
Recent empirical evidence suggests that the central and eastern European regions benefiting most from EU membership are those around the country’s capital city or sharing a border with one of the 15 countries.
But as long as poorer member states grow faster than their richer counterparts, one should not be overly concerned about temporary increases in intra-national disparities.
In fact, a temporary increase in intra-national disparities may be a good thing.
Globalization and technological change are reshaping production throughout Europe, leading to the decline of traditional industries and rapid growth of high-technology manufacturing, banking and finance, scientific research, and business services.
The fact that companies in these sectors benefit from operating close to one another may boost economic development at the expense of peripheral regions.
In the US, successful convergence in economic conditions across regions relies strongly on labor mobility.
Internal migration is the main driver of income convergence, helped by a common language and all the other factors that foster mobility in America, such as comparatively easy access to housing and education.
By contrast, labor in the EU is largely immobile.
Despite populist speeches about the threat posed by “Polish plumbers,” net migration flows between regions are generally insensitive to differences in unemployment rates among regions.
Of course, Europe’s labor immobility is partly caused by linguistic and cultural differences – barriers that cannot easily be removed.
But other barriers can be overcome by reforming housing policies, reducing the cost of moving, and revising social-welfare policies in order to end fears of losing long-term benefits.
Reducing the labor supply in economically depressed areas of Europe and increasing it in booming regions would do much to reduce differences in wages and unemployment rates.
It’s time to start thinking seriously about how to make Europeans move.
Kenya’s Resource Challenge
OXFORD – Kenya has been exporting energy for years – in the form of some of the world’s fastest long-distance runners.
But Kenya will soon be exporting another, far more profitable kind of energy, as it taps into a string of recently discovered oil fields in its 450-mile-long section of the Great Rift Valley, a fissure in the earth’s crust that runs from Lebanon to Mozambique.
African countries have plenty of experience with the downsides of major resource endowments. Kenya must learn from these cases, in order to prevent its new oil riches from tripping up East Africa in its headlong dash toward monetary union.
The riches are indeed vast.
In the last two years, more than 1.7 billion barrels of oil have been discovered in the Lokichar basin.
Estimates vary widely, but there could be up to 20 billion barrels – a volume that would make Kenya one of Africa’s most resource-rich countries, second only to Nigeria, which has 37 billion barrels of proven reserves.
Nearby, Uganda has discovered 3.5 billion barrels, and Tanzania has found vast reserves of natural gas.
These countries now must determine how to avoid the “resource curse” – an all-too-common affliction whereby rising resource revenues lead to volatility, rent seeking, and corruption, while spurring real exchange-rate appreciation and wage increases, thereby undermining other economic sectors’ competitiveness.
The key will be to capture the oil revenues and invest them wisely, thereby converting below-ground assets into above-ground assets that yield an adequate rate of return and stimulate economic development.
In Africa, oil is usually extracted by foreign companies, so well designed taxes are needed to ensure that countries retain a fair share of the profits.
While taxing profits looks good on paper, it encourages oil producers simply to shift their profits to a tax haven.
Royalties, which tax each barrel as it is produced, are a more effective approach.
Oil prices are also notoriously volatile, so the tax scheme must ensure that the government and the oil companies share the costs and benefits of price fluctuations.
Kenya’s next challenge will be to invest the taxes in much-needed infrastructure projects, including roads, sanitation, hospitals, and schools.
High-income countries like Norway can borrow to finance such projects, allowing them to save their oil wealth in a sovereign fund.
For Kenya, by contrast, borrowing is expensive.
Oil therefore provides an important opportunity to lay the groundwork for long-term economic growth and development.
Of course, like any marathon, it is best not to start too fast.
New teachers must be trained by experienced teachers, and new roads must connect to existing roads.
Investment should therefore be gradual, which may mean temporarily storing some oil wealth abroad.
Throughout this process, Kenya’s leaders should bear in mind that even the best plans can sometimes go awry, as Ghana’s recent experience has shown.
Four billion barrels of oil were discovered off Ghana’s coast in 2007, and production began in 2010.
The next year, the Petroleum Revenue Management Act divided the wealth among consumption, investment, and offshore savings, as recommended by economists around the world (including us).
But, with last year’s presidential election, the situation began to deteriorate.
In the race for votes, Ghana’s current-account deficit increased, owing to heavy fuel subsidies and a 47% increase in payouts to public-sector workers.
This is an all-too-common tale for developing countries that experience an oil bonanza.
But there is some good news from Ghana.
Despite the surge in government spending, the central bank’s efforts to stabilize inflation have kept prices of goods and services under control.
This focus on price stability – while common among developed countries like Australia, the United States, and the United Kingdom – is very unusual for Africa.
Indeed, it is something that Kenya lacks.
Ensuring price stability is about to become more important than ever.
This month, the leaders of East African Community member countries are set to endorse a move to establish a monetary union, covering 150 million people, as early as 2015.
But Kenya’s newfound oil stock will complicate these plans, given that massive capital inflows will cause Kenya’s overall price level to rise relative to that of its neighbors.
If East Africa’s central bank raises interest rates to stave off inflation in Kenya, the rest of the union will experience increased unemployment.
The ongoing euro crisis clearly demonstrates the problems that a union of unequal partners can face.
It is as if an untrained couch potato ran an 800-meter race with the world record-holder.
Kenya and the East African Community have been pursuing monetary union since 2000.
But the recent discovery of massive natural-resource deposits in Kenya and elsewhere should prompt officials to rethink this goal.
Central banks need the flexibility to adapt policy to rapid structural change in the economy – and to clean up the mess that elections often leave behind.
John Maynard Keynes is reported to have said: “When the facts change, I change my mind.”
In Kenya and East Africa, the facts have changed; it is time for policymakers’ minds to follow.
A Surfing Reflection
MELBOURNE – For me, as for most Australians, summer holidays have always meant going to the beach.
I grew up swimming and playing in the waves, eventually moving on to a body board, but somehow missing out on learning to stand on a surfboard.
I finally made up for that omission when I was in my fifties – too old ever to become good at it, but young enough for surfing to give me a decade of fun and a sense of accomplishment.
This southern summer, I’m back in Australia and in the waves again.
At the beach where I surfed today, I heard about a ceremony that had taken place there earlier in the season – a farewell to a local surfer who had died at a ripe old age.
His fellow-surfers paddled out into the ocean and formed a circle, sitting on their boards, while his ashes were scattered over the surface.
Other friends and family stood and watched from the beach and cliff top.
I was told that he was one of the best surfers around, but at a time when there was no money in it.
Was it his bad luck, I wondered, to be born too early to take part in today’s lucrative professional surfing circuit?
Or was it his good luck to be part of a surfing scene that was less about stardom and more about enjoying the waves?
This is not a general rant against the corrupting influence of money.
Having money opens up opportunities that, if used well, can be very positive.
Surfers have created environmental organizations like the Surfrider Foundation, which has a special concern for the oceans; and SurfAid, which tries to spread some of the benefits of surfing tourism in developing countries to the poorest of the local people.
Still, the spirit of surfing’s early days (think of the harmony of wave and human action portrayed in the 1971 movie Morning of the Earth) contrasts sharply with the razzamatazz of today’s professional circuit.
Some sports are inherently competitive.
Tennis fans may admire a well-executed backhand; but watching players warm up on court would soon become dull if no match followed.
The same is true of football (soccer): Who would go to watch a group of people kicking a ball around a field if it wasn’t all about winning or losing?
Players of these sports cannot exhibit the full range of their skills without being pushed by a competitive opponent.
Surfing is different.
There is nothing wrong with surfers competing to see who can do the most difficult maneuvers on a wave – just as there is nothing wrong with seeing who can pull off the most difficult dive from the ten-meter platform.
But when we make surfing competitive, a recreational activity in which millions of people can happily participate is transformed into a spectator sport to be watched, for most, on a screen.
It would be highly regrettable if the competitive sport’s narrow focus on point-scoring were to limit our appreciation of the beauty and harmony we can experience riding a wave without fitting as many turns as possible into our time on it.
Many of the highlights of my surfing have more to do with experiencing the splendor and power of the waves than with my ability to ride them.
In fact, at the time of my single most magical surfing moment, I wasn’t on a wave at all.
At Byron Bay, Australia’s easternmost point, I was paddling out to where the waves were breaking.
The sun was shining, the sea was blue, and I was aware of the Pacific Ocean stretching ahead thousands of miles, uninterrupted by land until it reached the coast of Chile.
A pulse of energy generated in that vast expanse of water neared a submerged line of rocks and reared up in front of me in a green wall.
As the wave began to break, a dolphin leapt out ahead of the foam, its entire body clear of the water.
It was a sublime moment, but not such an unusual one.
As many of my fellow wave riders know, we are the only animal that plays tennis or football, but not the only animal that enjoys surfing.
Righting the EU Constitution
The prospect of multiple referenda on the European Union Constitution has dramatically altered the betting on ratification.
But the elevation of the Social Chapter, previously a list of good intentions, to the status of fundamental constitutional rights, threatens to encumber workers and businesses in the member states with burdensome judicial proceedings and expensive social entitlements written by judges in Luxembourg whose last word is beyond appeal.
The inclusion in Part II of the draft on "social rights" - such as the right not to be unjustly dismissed, or the right to receive old-age pensions, unemployment compensation, and health benefits (regardless of cost) - is in no way necessary to the functioning of the whole.
These social protections are laudable, but all have a cost.
The very term "social right" is a misnomer.
If something is a "right," then cost is not an issue.
For instance, no economic cost is too great for the defense of freedom of speech.
The desirability of generous public pensions, on the other hand, cannot be dissociated from their cost to taxpayers. 
Social protections should be framed in laws enacted by democratically elected legislators, who are well placed to weigh the costs and benefits for their constituents.
The most ardent advocate of expanded health care rights should agree that the forum for that advocacy is the Parliament, not the European Court of Justice.
These protections have no place in a constitution, particularly one that cannot be easily amended.
The fact that certain "social rights" have made their way into some national constitutions on the Continent is no reason to impose them, as the present draft does, on the entire Union.
It is noteworthy that in the Scandinavian countries, which enjoy some of the most progressive social protections in Europe, these benefits are provided by statutory laws enacted by legislatures rather than by courts enacting constitutional "rights."
They are the social dividend, allocated by national parliaments, of real economic growth.
Supporters of the European Constitution in France, on both the left and the right, shrug and say that including the Social Chapter in the draft is a compromise.
The trouble is that the British safeguards do not work.
Article II-52 states that the Fundamental Rights in the Constitution (including its 12 "social rights") apply only to the actions of the Union, 
 and of member states when they are implementing Union decisions
 .
But as Europe integrates, these decisions will become pervasive.
If EU environmental directives, for instance, call for the closure of a heavily polluting plant in Britain, the Constitution would give labor unions the right to judicial appeals against the resulting redundancies.
Fortunately, this fault line in the British safeguards can be corrected without jeopardizing the document.
The simplest solution is to remove the Fundamental Rights of Part II from the body of the text, and give them the status the Social Chapter had in the Treaty of Amsterdam: a declaration of intentions appended to the Treaty.
All traditional individual rights are already covered in the Declaration of Human Rights, which will continue to be enforced by the court in Strasbourg.
"Social rights" should not become mandates for judges; they should remain a guide to legislators.
If a political compromise is needed, "competition" should be removed as a fundamental Union objective.
Free movement of goods, services, labor, and capital certainly suffices.
If this preferred solution proves unacceptable, an alternative would be to strengthen Article II-52, to state clearly that the twelve "social rights" of Part II apply to the Union, but 
 not
 to the member states, 
 even when these are implementing Union directives. 
 If the Union decides, as it could, that all member states must provide public health care for all unemployed persons, it would be up to national parliaments, not 25 judges in Luxembourg, to determine how to address that objective.
This would take some of the teeth out of the Union's social directives, and would give real substance to the principle of subsidiarity.
By excising from the draft Constitution the prospect of a welfare state run by judges, its framers will increase the chances that Britain and other doubters will, in the end, ratify the final product.
Righting the Wrongs of Leprosy
TOKYO – At its 15th session, which ended at the beginning of October, the United Nations Human Rights Council adopted a resolution encouraging governments to eliminate discrimination against people affected by leprosy – and their family members.
As the World Health Organization’s Goodwill Ambassador for Leprosy Elimination, I have long campaigned for this outcome.
Leprosy is one of the world’s oldest diseases.
It has a physical dimension, but also social and psychological components.
For much of its long history, there was no known cure.
It was only in the latter part of the twentieth century that a truly effective chemotherapy became available.
Since the introduction of multidrug therapy in the early 1980’s, roughly 16 million people around the world have been cured.
In virtually every country in the world, leprosy is no longer regarded as a public-health problem.
Caught early and addressed promptly, leprosy need leave no trace.
Only when the disease goes untreated does the damage caused to the peripheral nerves lead to loss of sensation and invite ulceration and wounds.
Unchecked, leprosy disfigures and can result in permanent disability.
Down the ages, the appearance of those with the disease, and the absence of a known cure, contributed to the fear that it caused – and thus to the stigmatization of its sufferers.
Even today, many mistaken notions about leprosy persist.
The stigma surrounding the disease remains hard to dispel, and results in discriminatory attitudes and practices that continue to blight the lives of millions of people.
But the facts about leprosy are hardly so odious.
The disease is caused by a bacillus called Myobacterium leprae, first identified in 1873 by G.H. Armauer Hansen.
Leprosy is thus an infectious disease; it is not hereditary, let alone a divine punishment.
Transmission is believed to be airborne, through close and frequent contact with an infected, untreated person.
But leprosy is very hard to develop; most people have a built-in immunity to it and have nothing to fear.
It is important to emphasize, too, that leprosy can be cured at any time.
The first dose of MDT kills 99.9% of the bacteria that cause leprosy, rendering the person no longer infectious.
But if treatment has been delayed, the patient may be left with recurring ulcers and permanent damage.
Last year, there were under 250,000 new cases of leprosy reported in the world, over half of them in India.
Brazil and Indonesia also contribute a significant number of new cases.
Compared to the numbers who fall ill with diseases such as HIV/AIDS, malaria, and tuberculosis, however, leprosy almost pales into insignificance.
But what is not acceptable is the way that people with leprosy, those cured of it, and even their family members continue to be discriminated against on the basis of fears, myths, and outdated notions about a disease that is today completely curable.
The Principles and Guidelines that were unanimously adopted by the Human Rights Council convey the nature and scale of the problem.
In affirming the rights to which people affected by leprosy and their family members are entitled, the Principles and Guidelines reveal the extent of discrimination and the forms that it has taken.
For example, the Principles and Guidelines note that people affected by leprosy, including sufferers’ family members, are entitled to the same rights as everyone else with respect to marriage, family, and parenthood.
So leprosy should not be grounds for denying anyone the right to marry, or for divorce; nor should it constitute grounds for separating a child from his or her parents.
People who have been infected with leprosy also are entitled to the same rights as everyone else with respect to full citizenship and obtaining identify documents.
They have the right to serve the public, on an equal basis with others, including the right to stand for elections and to hold office at all levels of government.
Likewise, they have the right to work and be treated on an equal basis with others vis-à-vis recruitment, hiring, promotion, and salary.
They are not to be denied admission to or expelled from schools or training programs on the grounds of leprosy.
In other words, people should not be discriminated against on the grounds of having or having had leprosy – or, indeed, any disease.
The landmark resolution adopted by the UN Human Rights Council encourages governments to give due consideration to the Principles and Guidelines in formulating policies.
I hope that governments will do more than that.
I hope that they will take them to heart and address once and for all the long-standing injustices that for too long have pushed too many people with leprosy to the margins of society.
Rights for Robots?
PRINCETON and WARSAW – Last month, Gecko Systems announced that it had been running trials of its “fully autonomous personal companion home care robot,” also known as a “carebot,” designed to help elderly or disabled people to live independently.
A woman with short-term memory loss broke into a big smile, the company reported, when the robot asked her, “Would you like a bowl of ice cream?” The woman answered “yes,” and presumably the robot did the rest.
Robots already perform many functions, from making cars to defusing bombs – or, more menacingly, firing missiles.
Children and adults play with toy robots, while vacuum-cleaning robots are sucking up dirt in a growing number of homes and – as evidenced by YouTube videos – entertaining cats.
There is even a Robot World Cup, though, judging by the standard of the event held in Graz, Austria, last summer, footballers have no need to feel threatened just yet. (Chess, of course, is a different matter.)
Most of the robots being developed for home use are functional in design – Gecko System’s home-care robot looks rather like the Star Wars robot R2-D2.
Honda and Sony are designing robots that look more like the same movie’s “android” C-3PO.
There are already some robots, though, with soft, flexible bodies, human-like faces and expressions, and a large repertoire of movement.
Hanson Robotics has a demonstration model called Albert, whose face bears a striking resemblance to that of Albert Einstein.
Will we soon get used to having humanoid robots around the home?
Noel Sharkey, professor of artificial intelligence and robotics at the University of Sheffield, has predicted that busy parents will start employing robots as babysitters.
What will it do to a child, he asks, to spend a lot of time with a machine that cannot express genuine empathy, understanding, or compassion?
One might also ask why we should develop energy-intensive robots to work in one of the few areas – care for children or elderly people – in which people with little education can find employment.
In his book Love and Sex with Robots , David Levy goes further, suggesting that we will fall in love with warm, cuddly robots, and even have sex with them. (If the robot has multiple sexual partners, just remove the relevant parts, drop them in disinfectant, and, voilà, no risk of sexually transmitted diseases!)
But what will the presence of a “sexbot” do to the marital home?
How will we feel if our spouse starts spending too much time with an inexhaustible robotic lover?
A more ominous question is familiar from novels and movies: Will we have to defend our civilization against intelligent machines of our own creation?
Some consider the development of superhuman artificial intelligence inevitable, and expect it to happen no later than 2070.
They refer to this moment as “the singularity,” and see it as a world-changing event.
Eliezer Yudkowsky, one of the founders of The Singularity Institute for Artificial Intelligence, believes that singularity will lead to an “intelligence explosion” as super-intelligent machines design even more intelligent machines, with each generation repeating this process.
The more cautious Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence has set up a special panel to study what it calls “the potential for loss of human control of computer-based intelligences.”
If that happens, the crucial question for the future of civilization is: Will the super-intelligent computers be friendly?
Is it time to start thinking about what steps to take to prevent our own creations from becoming hostile to us?
For the moment, a more realistic concern is not that robots will harm us, but that we will harm them.
At present, robots are mere items of property.
But what if they become sufficiently complex to have feelings?
After all, isn’t the human brain just a very complex machine?
If machines can and do become conscious, will we take their feelings into account?
The history of our relations with the only nonhuman sentient beings we have encountered so far – animals – gives no ground for confidence that we would recognize sentient robots not just as items of property, but as beings with moral standing and interests that deserve consideration.
The cognitive scientist Steve Torrance has pointed out that powerful new technologies, like cars, computers, and phones, tend to spread rapidly, in an uncontrolled way.
The development of a conscious robot that (who?) was not widely perceived as a member of our moral community could therefore lead to mistreatment on a large scale.&nbsp;
The hard question, of course, is how we could tell that a robot really was conscious, and not just designed to mimic consciousness.
Understanding how the robot had been programmed would provide a clue – did the designers write the code to provide only the appearance of consciousness?
If so, we would have no reason to believe that the robot was conscious.
But if the robot was designed to have human-like capacities that might incidentally give rise to consciousness, we would have a good reason to think that it really was conscious.
At that point, the movement for robot rights would begin.
The Right Fight Against Terrorism
LONDON – I traveled to Paris from London last Monday.
It takes two and a half hours by train.
We are neighbors, our histories and populations intertwined.
My ten-year-old grand-daughter will go there next week with her parents as a birthday treat.
She loves everything she has learned about Paris.
So, like other Londoners, and citizens of free societies everywhere, she was horrified by the recent atrocities there.
I suppose, she said, it could have happened here.
So it could – just as it did in 2005, and just as it could again in Madrid, or in Amsterdam, Berlin, Rome, or any other European city.
When President François Hollande announced that we are at war with the so-called Islamic State (ISIS), the “we” included you and me.
France’s fight is Britain’s fight and Europe’s fight.
It involves all of us.
Globalization does not mean only mangoes at the supermarket in mid-winter, easy air travel, and the Internet.
Terror and barbarity have been globalized, too.
Men and women can be taught, trained, and armed thousands of miles away and sent to our neighborhoods to kill and maim.
International terror requires an international response.
But that response must include dialogue and diplomacy.
We must not be driven by horror and fear into forgetting our civic values.
That is precisely what the terrorists want.
We must not demonize all Muslims.
We must not burn interfaith bridges.
We must not abandon the core tenets of European civilization, including the obligation to shelter refugees from evil.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s instinctive reaction to the influx should still be applauded, not condemned.
Populist rabble-rousing against men and women of different faiths and ethnicities will divide our societies at the moment when we should be united.
It will play into the hands of the terrorists.
From Beirut to Paris, the terrorists’ attacks are a deliberate effort to exacerbate tensions between communities.
Marine Le Pen of France’s far-right National Front and others like her might as well be ISIS recruiting sergeants.
Diplomacy was given a strong boost at the recently concluded G-20 meeting in Turkey.
That means, above all, obliging the Middle East’s main rivals, Sunni-ruled Saudi Arabia and Shia-ruled Iran, to face up to their responsibility to reduce hostilities between Sunni and Shia groups and countries in West Asia.
Western countries have been residual victims of the vicious struggles between Saudi and Iranian proxies.
We need to end the divisions among those in Syria who oppose ISIS.
That may involve giving a short-term role in a political transition to President Bashar al-Assad (partly to save Russia’s face).
But a president who has barrel bombed his own citizens cannot conceivably be part of a longer-term peaceful settlement.
The right political goals and diplomatic priorities are crucial.
But we must also face up to the fact that we will not defeat ISIS without a bigger, more effective, and better coordinated military effort.
We must drive ISIS out of its self-proclaimed caliphate in Syria and Iraq.
Otherwise, the territory it controls will continue to be a haven and training ground for murderers.
Perhaps more robust military intervention will provoke further atrocities.
But what is certain is that the attacks on civilization will continue until we have cut off ISIS’s head.
As terrorists often brag, we have to succeed in stopping their assaults every time; they only have to succeed every now and then.
Opponents of military intervention cite failure in Iraq and Afghanistan to justify inaction.
We should learn from those failures.
But appeasement is not one of the lessons.
We will not make our free societies safe by bombing ISIS with strong nouns and weak verbs rather than high explosives.
To his credit, British Prime Minister David Cameron clearly understands the importance of increasing the military pressure on ISIS; he had been held back by a head-under-the-blanket faction in his own Conservative Party and in Parliament as a whole.
But Europe – indeed, civilization – won’t be kept safe by wishful thinking.
It may be that most of the boots on the ground will have to be worn by Arabs, Iranians, and Kurds, including members of the Peshmerga International Brigade.
But they need stronger support – not just in the air or with weapons and training, but also from Western special forces.
There is a strong argument, too, for NATO to recognize that one of its members, France, has been attacked, thereby activating Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty, which ensures mutual defense.
The entire Alliance should commit itself to the defeat of terrorism.
Yet this is not only Europe’s fight, or that of the United States.
This is about global order in a stable and prosperous world.
Russia and China should make clear in the United Nations Security Council that the destruction of ISIS is their fight as well.
All those young men and women cut down in Paris must not have been slaughtered in vain.
Their deaths should challenge us to make sure that Paris, the city of light, will help to banish the darkness that threatens to overwhelm the century ahead.
Momentum Tepat bagi Tindakan Iklim
PARIS – Selama hampir 30 tahun sejak perubahan iklim menjadi kekhawatiran global, sebagian pemerintah secara optimis berasumsi bahwa peralihan ke praktik ramah lingkungan (green transition) akan terjadi secara alamiah seiring berjalannya waktu, ketika kenaikan harga bahan bakar fosil akan mendesak konsumen bergeser ke alternatif yang rendah karbon.
Diyakini bahwa hambatannya terletak di sisi produksi, ketika besarnya return dari investasi di ladang minyak semakin memacu eksplorasi besar-besaran.
Situasinya sekarang berbalik.
Saat harga minyak merosot hingga $40 per barel, perusahaan-perusahaan bahan bakar fosil tidak perlu menunggu instruksi pemerintah untuk menghentikan investasi.
Tantangan yang ada kini bergeser ke sisi konsumen.
Saat harga bahan bakar sedemikian rendah, apa saja tindakan yang bisa diambil untuk mengubah pola konsumsi?
Tentu ada tanda-tanda bahwa energi yang lebih murah dapat menghasilkan pertumbuhan cukup besar untuk memulihkan harga minyak.
Namun tidak seorang pun meramalkan adanya pembalikan (rebound) yang akan memicu transformasi radikal yang diperlukan negara untuk memenuhi target penurunan emisinya masing-masing.
Laporan OECD tahun 2015 menggambarkan betapa negara-negara ketinggalan dalam pemenuhan target emisi – meskipun telah berkomitmen membatasi kenaikan suhu global di bawah 2° Celsius.
Sementara itu, sejumlah produsen minyak terbesar di dunia masih bersemangat mengingatkan kita bahwa pembakaran bahan bakar fosil perlu diteruskan hingga bertahun-tahun ke depan seiring dunia melakukan peralihan menuju ekonomi energi yang baru.
Lalu apa yang harus dilakukan pemerintah?
Terdapat konsensus bahwa tidak ada seorang pun yang mendapat keuntungan dari bahaya pemanasan global.
Tapi setiap negara memiliki kepentingan yang berbeda-beda, tergantung pada status negara selaku pengekspor atau pengimpor minyak dan seberapa maju perekonomian mereka.
Negara-negara berkembang yang juga produsen minyak harus mempertimbangkan apakah sumber daya mereka memiliki prospek ekonomi di masa depan, mengingat berkurangnya ruang lingkup emisi.
Negara seperti Arab Saudi, Irak, dan Iran – yang kaya akan minyak dan murah untuk diekstraksi – akan bisa bertahan selama beberapa waktu.
Meskipun dunia dengan cepat menjalankan dekarbonisasi, konsumsi minyak akan tetap tinggi sehingga sumber daya mereka masih layak diekstraksi.
Namun negara-negara yang persediaan sumber daya minyaknya lebih sedikit harus menerapkan reformasi di bidang ekonomi dan menghapuskan subsidi.
Arab Saudi jelas menyatakan bahwa negaranya tidak mampu mengorbankan pangsa pasar demi memberi sokongan pada produsen-produsen yang berbiaya tinggi.
Keputusan Saudi untuk mempertahankan tingkat output sekarang – yang dengan seketika mengebiri kartel OPEC – sudah menciptakan dampak pada pasokan-pasokan yang bersaing; investasi pada bahan bakar fosil sebanyak $400 miliar sudah ditangguhkan.
Beberapa negara juga terpaksa bertindak.
Rusia mengumumkan pemotongan 10% dalam belanja negara dengan semakin merosotnya harga minyak tahun ini.
Indonesia juga bisa menghemat hampir $14 miliar melalui penghapusan subsidi BBM dan solar.
Di sisi lain, negara-negara maju pengimpor minyak bisa dianggap pengguna bahan bakar fosil yang cukup efisien.
Perekonomian mereka, terbukti dengan kemampuan mereka bertahan ketika harga minyak $100 per barel atau lebih, jelas tidak membutuhkan rangsangan energi murah untuk bisa tumbuh.
Dengan demikian, kini merupakan waktu tepat untuk memperkenalkan pajak karbon agar rezeki nomplok ini tidak lalu habis begitu saja di SPBU.
Negara-negara tersebut harus mengesampingkan segala khayalan akan menemukan “emas hitam”, menikmati keuntungan minyak murah dalam jangka pendek, dan bertindak sekarang untuk menyelaraskan investasi infrastruktur dengan perubahan teknologi.
Sementara itu, negara-negara maju yang juga produsen minyak harus menyisihkan sebagian kekayaannya untuk memungkinkan capital substitution dan menjamin kelangsungan hidup pasca minyak habis.
Tindakan ini telah dilakukan Norwegia selama 25 tahun terakhir demi kepentingan negara.
Terakhir, pemerintah yang berkuasa di negara-negara berkembang pengimpor minyak memiliki kebutuhan energi yang paling mendesak – serta tanggung jawab terbesar untuk memenuhi kebutuhan tersebut.
Mereka akan mengandalkan bantuan komunitas global dan perlu mempertimbangkan betul apakah solusi-solusi energi yang tersedia dapat berkelanjutan atau cukup modern.
Beban pembuktiannya terletak pada solusi-solusi yang berbasiskan bahan bakar fosil – terutama batubara – yang harus menunjukkan daya saingnya setelah memperhitungkan seluruh biaya-biaya sosial, lingkungan hidup, dan kesehatan.
Terkadang mungkin terkesan bahwa tidak pernah ada waktu yang tepat bagi aksi iklim.