Suppressing consumption thus suffocates future growth, and the share of household consumption in GDP has declined from 67% in the mid-1990’s to below 50% in recent years, with most of the decline reflecting the distortions created by government policies.
China’s government is production-oriented by nature.
The upside is that this has helped to maintain high GDP growth rates.
But the downside is equally pronounced. One negative consequence is the persistent deepening of income inequality.
The Gini coefficient of per capita income has surpassed 50 (with 100 representing maximal inequality), putting China in the upper quartile of inequality worldwide.
The problem may not be inequality per se, but its consequences, one of which is the bifurcation of human capital.
The return on education is increasing in China, but access to education is becoming increasingly divided socially and geographically.
While education is improving in urban areas, children in the countryside are facing a decline in educational quality, because better teachers find their way to the cities.
Moreover, given the income disparities between cities and rural areas, their education is more expensive than it is for urban families.
As a result, a majority of rural kids will enter the workforce without a university diploma.
Among China’s 140 million migrant workers, 80% have only nine years or less of formal education – far short of what high-income countries require.
Despite officials’ seeming desire to reduce income inequality, China’s government is aggravating it, by – among other things – subsidizing producers, favoring capital-intensive industries, and maintaining a highly inefficient financial sector.
But there are also promising signs of an economic uptick.
The government has just announced new rules for household registration, known as hukou.
Except in large cities, people can now freely choose their hukou after three years of residency.
This will greatly help migrants by ensuring equal access to education for their children.
To change completely the government’s distorting behavior, however, requires more drastic political changes.
The hukou reform is a good start, as it will strengthen migrants’ political rights in local communities.
Given their large numbers, their political participation may force local governments to become more responsive to ordinary people’s needs.
And government responsiveness at lower levels, one may hope, might eventually trickle up to the top.
China’s Happy Mask
BEIJING – China’s “face” may be its Achilles’ Heel.
As it basks in its new status as an economic superpower – the dragon that is outpacing Asia’s tigers as well as the donkeys of the West – China is mistakenly downplaying its own serious structural weaknesses.
The communist leadership finds it hard to mention, let alone emphasize, the country’s problems.
Officials’ preoccupation with commanding respect and not losing face leads them to focus almost exclusively on China’s achievements.
This is a strategy that risks backfiring, because it misunderstands the dynamics of international politics.
Emphasizing China’s meteoric rise means less understanding in the rest of the world of the need to sustain rapid economic development in order to satisfy the expectations of its 1.3 billion inhabitants.
The government knows that it has a political tiger by the tail, but refuses to acknowledge it, either inside China or outside.
Both are surely aware that China’s surging exports last year helped it surpass the US as Europe’s largest foreign supplier.
What they won’t see, of course, are the desperately low living standards of China’s teeming millions, especially the rural poor.
Yet China is in no mood to plead poverty when dealing with the West.
Its aim is to gain as much prestige as possible from the Olympic games in 2008 and the six-month World Expo in Shanghai during the spring and summer of 2010.
It remains to be seen whether the two events will be capable of swinging world opinion in China’s favor and keeping it there.
Indeed, the government’s suspicion of the international media is liable to spark friction when thousands of journalists arrive and inevitably widen their coverage beyond athletics to politics and human rights.
For the time being, sentiment about China’s future remains relentlessly upbeat.
McKinsey consultants have even forecast that the upper middle-class will number 520 million by 2025 – the sort of projection that the communist mandarins welcome as a tribute to their strange hybrid of a market economy and rigid state control.
Yet it is almost certainly the sort of forecast of which they should beware.
The reality of life in today’s China looks very different from the vantage point of a province far from the heady atmosphere of Beijing or Shanghai.
For example, like much of the country, Gansu Province, at China’s geographical center, is grappling with structural and social problems that range from the daunting to the apparently insuperable.
Average annual output per capita is about $900, and incomes among the peasants who make up most of its rural population of 26 million are less than $250.
Gansu’s challenges range from modernizing its heavy industries to resisting desertification and the encroachment of the Gobi desert.
While it has been making slow but steady progress, its future is clouded by worsening water shortages; though it straddles the Yellow River, the water table is dwindling fast.
Back in Beijing, the chief preoccupation is to safeguard 11% GDP growth while assuaging Western governments.
By the end of this year, China’s exports will be 24% higher than in 2006, at $1.2 trillion, and its trade surplus will have grown by 43%.
But trade will probably not be the main worry for China’s international relations.
Trouble seems more likely to come from growing concern in the West over climate change.
Political leaders in EU capitals and the US may be well aware of China’s global economic importance, but the widespread public perception is that its factories are dirty and environmentally harmful.
Rows over product safety and intellectual piracy could all too easily fuel calls for tough new trade limits.
The answer is not for China to step up its public-relations effort.
Instead, it should be revealing its weaknesses and vulnerabilities to gain Western understanding.
That really would be a cultural revolution.
China’s House Divided
DENVER – There has been much talk about America’s decline in recent years, with the corollary that China will take its place.
But, while the United States does indeed face problems that urgently need to be addressed, if China is to rise further, to say nothing of supplanting the US internationally, it must first put its own house in order.
Those who argue that America is in decline&#160;have a difficult case to make in economic terms.
For all its recent woes (which many countries would gladly exchange for their own), the US remains a dynamo of industry and innovation, and may be emerging as an energy powerhouse as well.
What threatens America’s global leadership is, rather, some of the most divided and disruptive domestic politics in its history.
A country whose people have traditionally prided themselves on practicality is experiencing a debilitating bout of excessive theorizing, ideology, and so-called “new ideas,” thereby forestalling the practical ideas that come from constructive interaction with one’s political opponents.
The demise of compromise and collegiality in domestic politics has raised new challenges in America’s interaction with others as well.
Foreign-policy debate in the US has become a proxy for who is “tougher,” which does not necessarily mean wiser.
Thus, the American art of diplomatic engagement, the ability to talk with different sides while holding one’s own views to oneself, has been largely replaced by a penchant for loud talk, finger-pointing, self-righteousness, and recrimination.
Countries used to welcome and look for American engagement. Now some are more likely to fear it, especially if it comes in the form of playing to domestic American constituencies’ appetite for supposed toughness.
But, before the US hands over international leadership to the Chinese, it would be instructive to look at China’s own internal political divisions and inability to synchronize its domestic politics with its growing global responsibilities.
China’s problems make those afflicting the US polity seem trivial in comparison.
In recent years, China has been increasingly embroiled in a nineteenth-century-style dispute with several of its Southeast Asian neighbors over conflicting claims to the South China Sea.
Before one laments Americans’ unwillingness to crack a history book on an international subject,&#160;it is enlightening to watch China in action, systematically complicating its vitally important relationships in the region over…what?
China’s so-called “nine dashes” claim, which essentially seeks to turn the entire South China Sea into a southern Chinese lake, represents a legacy of Chiang Kai-Shek’s Republic of China.
And where did the Generalissimo find the inspiration for this claim?
China argues that the waters have been Chinese for a thousand years, but the likelier inspiration is more recent, reflecting Imperial Japan’s occupation of Taiwan until 1945.
Thus, China, whose culture and achievements are the envy of the world, is today in a war of words – and a few naval vessels as well – with almost all of its southern neighbors over a recently inherited claim on an issue that calls for a respectful process of international negotiation.
Various considerations typically underlie policy choices in such situations.
But, in the case of China’s ham-handedness in the&#160;South China Sea, domestic constituencies decrying “weakness” and demanding toughness from political leaders are a key factor.
Among China’s 500 million Internet users, for example, one senses a palpable rise in nationalist sentiment, reflected in bitter criticism of official “weakness” in defending Chinese interests.
China’s government is extremely sensitive to such attacks.
If a Chinese blogger criticizes the government over its crackdown on Falun Gong, or supports Tibet’s opposition, the Internet police rush to the scene of the supposed crime.
But if the blogosphere emits jingoistic calls for more raw materials, the government salutes and works harder to obtain them.
Domestic pressures have tied China in knots on other issues as well.
Many international observers might forgive China its behavior in the South China Sea, given that many countries, large and small, have maritime disputes with neighbors.
But China’s own constituencies, whether netizens or competing official institutions, have contributed to an international record that is earning China derision from small neighbors and great powers alike.
China’s continued support for a nuclear aspirant like North Korea is a case in point.
No responsible country in the world today sees any merit to North Korea’s behavior.
Yet China’s preoccupation with its internal politics is such that it cannot see the price that it pays for reacting to every North Korean outrage with only vague opprobrium, combined with expressions of hope-over-experience that North Korea will reform.
For example, the equanimity of its response to North Korea’s military attacks against South Korea in 2010 left South Koreans, who are also China’s neighbors, in despair about bilateral relations.
The origin of China’s desultory policy lies in its leadership’s failure to shape or sharpen the drift of domestic politics: many Chinese still see plucky little North Korea as a friend and ally.
So China does nothing to signal a more serious way forward, much less earn respect in the broader international community, which is now thoroughly disgusted by North Korea’s behavior.
The list of untenable policies goes on.
Syria is the latest international problem that China, again constrained by domestic politics, cannot seem to get right.
No one expects China to line up in perfect formation with the US or the European Union on this and other issues.
But its consistent preference for lining up on the other side of the divide – even when doing so runs counter to its own national interests – calls into question whether it has the internal fortitude to be a leader.
None of this is meant to minimize the consequences of political polarization in the US.
But, whereas America’s problem in the world today is that domestic pressures sometimes lead to an excess of fortitude, China’s problem is that similarly constraining pressures produce foreign-policy weakness.
China the Responsible Stakeholder
TOKYO – Come to Asia and you will hear a growing chorus of concern that China is building a sphere of influence in the region.
To promote Chinese foreign investment, there is the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), in which the government is poised to take a 30% share.
And there is China’s “One Belt, One Road” initiative to construct a Silk Road Economic Belt extending through Central Asia, and a Maritime Silk Road linking China with Southeast Asia, the Indian Ocean, the Middle East, and ultimately Europe.
On the financial side, China is promoting wider international use of its currency, the renminbi. And it is increasingly asserting its interests militarily, fortifying the disputed Spratly Islands and constructing runways capable of accommodating fighter jets.
When contemplating these initiatives, it is important to take a nuanced view.
There is no question that China’s new island-based outposts in the South China Sea pose a threat not just to the security of Vietnam, the Philippines and other neighboring countries, but also to their mineral and fishing rights.
The international community has a shared interest in discouraging such activities.
But China’s economic initiatives, which promise benefits both at home and for the country’s partners, are a different matter.
For China, the AIIB and Silk Road projects offer alternatives to unproductive domestic investment.
Laying the foundations for increased trade among China, South Asia, and emerging Central Asia represents a better outlet for the Chinese construction sector than building more ghost towns at home.
Countries in these other regions, for their part, also will benefit from the additional trade.
A Chinese-led infrastructure bank that helps meet their extensive infrastructure needs could integrate these countries more deeply not just with China but also with the rest of the world.
The worry is that China, as the AIIB’s largest shareholder and contributor, will dominate the bank and distort its decision-making.
The result, skeptics say, is that AIIB-financed rail and road projects will lead only to China, while recipients grow more dependent – and not just financially – on their powerful funder.
But the fact that more than 50 countries, including advanced economies with democratic values, have joined the AIIB means that it will be possible to monitor its actions.
China promises that the new bank will be open and transparent.
It should be given the benefit of the doubt, at least until there is evidence to the contrary.
Similarly, renminbi internationalization should be encouraged rather than resisted.
To be sure, wider international use of the renminbi as a vehicle for cross-border trade and investment will heighten other countries’ dependence on renminbi-denominated credit in times of crisis.
Acknowledging this, the People’s Bank of China has negotiated currency swap lines with other central banks and has designated one of the country’s five large state-owned commercial banks as official clearing bank to settle transactions in renminbi in a variety of foreign financial centers.
Meanwhile, China has asked the International Monetary Fund to include the renminbi in the basket of currencies comprising Special Drawing Rights, the Fund’s unit of account.
That is an outcome that the rest of us should welcome, because it would give China a greater stake in a multilateral institution that oversees the operation of the global monetary system.
Renminbi internationalization is also desirable insofar as it gives the world another source of global liquidity besides the dollar.
When things go wrong financially in the United States, as they did in 2008, other countries will be able to tap a backup supply of emergency credit.
Indeed, China has designated clearing banks for, and negotiated swap lines with, countries in not just Asia but in Europe and the Western Hemisphere as well.
Rather than attempting to build a monetary bloc in Asia, China appears to be seeking to elevate the renminbi to the status of a true global currency that might one day rival the dollar.
Given the advantages of having more than one emergency lender and multiple sources of international liquidity, this can only be a good thing for the rest of the world.
No question, China is feeling its oats and asserting itself more forcefully.
Where China’s actions threaten its neighbors, as with its territorial claims in the South China Sea, they should be strongly sanctioned and resisted.
But where its policies promise economic benefits for other countries, as in the case of infrastructure finance through the AIIB and the Silk Road initiative, they should be encouraged.
This is equally true of initiatives like renminbi internationalization, which will integrate China more deeply into the global economy, giving it a bigger stake in the stability of the international system.
Rather than recoiling in fear, the international community should encourage China’s constructive engagement.
The first step toward that goal should be to take a more nuanced view of China’s recent initiatives.
A Silk Glove for China’s Iron Fist
NEW DELHI – For years, China has sought to encircle South Asia with a “string of pearls": a network of ports connecting its eastern coast to the Middle East that would boost its strategic clout and maritime access.
Not surprisingly, India and others have regarded this process with serious concern.
Now, however, China is attempting to disguise its strategy, claiming that it wants to create a twenty-first-century maritime Silk Road to improve trade and cultural exchange.
But friendly rhetoric can scarcely allay concern in Asia and beyond that China's strategic goal is to dominate the region.
That concern is well founded.
Simply put, the Silk Road initiative is designed to make China the hub of a new order in Asia and the Indian Ocean region.
Indeed, by working to establish its dominance along major trade arteries, while instigating territorial and maritime disputes with several neighbors, China is attempting to redraw Asia's geopolitical map.
The strategic dimension of the maritime Silk Road is underscored by the fact that the People's Liberation Army has led the debate on the subject.
The PLA National Defense University's Major General Ji Mingkui argues that the initiative can help China to craft a “new image" and “win influence," especially as the US “pivot" to Asia “loses momentum."
Yet PLA experts remain eager to disavow the Silk Road initiative's link with the “string of pearls."
Instead, they compare it to the fifteenth-century expeditions of Zheng He, a Chinese eunuch admiral who led a fleet of treasure ships to Africa.
According to Central Military Commission member Sun Sijing, Zheng used the ancient Silk Road without seizing “one inch of land" or seeking “maritime hegemony" (though history attests to his use of military force – for example, executing local rulers – to control maritime chokepoints).
In reality, little distinguishes the maritime Silk Road from the “string of pearls."
Though China is employing ostensibly peaceful tactics to advance the initiative, its primary goal is not mutually beneficial cooperation; it is strategic supremacy.
Indeed, the Silk Road is integral to President Xi Jinping's “China dream" ambitions, which entail restoring China's past glory and status.
China, especially under Xi, has often used aid, investment, and other economic leverage to compel its neighbors to deepen their economic dependence on – and expand their security cooperation with – the People's Republic.
Xi's use of a $40 billion Silk Road Fund and the new China-sponsored Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank to develop the maritime Silk Road reflects this approach.
Already, China is constructing ports, railroads, highways, and pipelines in the region's littoral states, not only to facilitate mineral-resource imports and exports of Chinese manufactured goods, but also to advance its strategic military goals.
For example, China concluded a multi-billion dollar deal with Pakistan to develop the port at Gwadar, owing to its strategic location at the mouth of the Strait of Hormuz, which more than offsets the port's limited commercial potential.
Twice last autumn, Chinese attack submarines docked at Sri Lanka's newly opened, $500 million container terminal at Colombo Harbor – built and majority-owned by Chinese state companies.
China has now embarked on a $1.4-billion project to build a sprawling complex roughly the size of Monaco on reclaimed land in Colombo – a “port city" that will become a major stop on China's nautical “road."
Zhou Bo, an honorary fellow with the PLA Academy of Military Science, admits that China's mega-projects “will fundamentally change the political and economic landscape of the Indian Ocean," while presenting China as a “strong yet benign" power.
This is important, because the new Asian order will be determined less by developments in East Asia, where Japan is determined to block China's rise, than by events in the Indian Ocean, where China is chipping away at India's longstanding dominance.
India is certainly suspicious of China's behavior.
But China is treading carefully enough that it can continue to advance its goals, without spooking its intended quarry.
The American academic John Garver depicted it best using a Chinese fable: “A frog in a pot of lukewarm water feels quite comfortable and safe.
He does not notice as the water temperature slowly rises until, at last, the frog dies and is thoroughly cooked."
Seen in this light, it is not surprising that China has invited India to join the maritime Silk Road initiative.
The aim is not only to help calm a suspicious neighbor, but also to slow the development of India's strategic ties with the US and Japan.
China's plans for the Silk Road combine economic, diplomatic, energy, and security objectives in an effort to create an expansive network of linked facilities to boost trade, aid strategic penetration, and permit an increasingly potent and active submarine force to play an expanded role.
In the process, China aims to fashion an Asian order based not on a balance of power with the US, but on its own hegemony.
Only a concert of democracies can block this strategy.
China’s Silk Road Revival
NEW DELHI – The phrase “Silk Road” evokes a romantic image – half history, half myth – of tented camel caravans winding their way across the trackless deserts and mountains of Central Asia.
But the Silk Road is not just part of a fabled past; it is an important feature of China’s current foreign policy.
The historical Silk Road comprised an overland and a maritime route, both of which facilitated the transfer to Europe of South and East Asian goods and ideas, from Chinese tea to inventions like paper, gunpowder, and the compass, as well as cultural products like Buddhist scripture and Indian music.
Likewise, the Silk Road – primarily the overland route, which also passed through the Arab world to Europe – gave China access to Indian astronomy, plants, and herbal medicines, while introducing it to the Buddhist and Islamic faiths.
Thanks to Chinese Admiral Zheng He, who steered his naval fleet across the Indian Ocean seven times in the early fifteenth century, the Chinese wok became the favorite cooking vessel of women in the southwestern Indian state of Kerala.
Chinese fishing nets still dot the waters off Kochi.
In 1411, Zheng erected a stone tablet – translated into Chinese, Persian, and Tamil – near the Sri Lankan coastal town of Galle, with an inscription appealing to the Hindu gods to bless his efforts to build a peaceful world based on trade and commerce.
Six hundred years later, Chinese President Xi Jinping is espousing a similar goal – only he is appealing to political leaders throughout Europe and Asia to advance his cause.
In September of last year, in a speech at Kazakhstan’s Nazarbayev University, Xi announced the so-called “Silk Road Economic Belt,” a new foreign-policy initiative aimed at boosting international cooperation and joint development throughout Eurasia.
To guide the effort, Xi identified five specific goals: strengthening economic collaboration, improving road connectivity, promoting trade and investment, facilitating currency conversion, and bolstering people-to-people exchanges.
The following month, the other shoe dropped.
Xi, addressing Indonesia’s Parliament, called for the re-establishment of the old sea networks to create a twenty-first century “maritime Silk Road” to foster international connectivity, scientific and environmental research, and fishery activities.
Chinese Premier Li Keqiang subsequently reiterated that goal at the Asia-Pacific Economic&nbsp;Cooperation summit, and again at the East Asia Summit last year.
Since then, the establishment of a modern overland and maritime Silk Road has become official Chinese policy, endorsed by the Communist Party and the National People’s Congress.
Xi has emphasized that the goal of the Silk Road economic initiative is to revive ancient ties of friendship in the contemporary globalized world.
But he undoubtedly has a domestic motive as well, rooted in the growing prosperity gap between eastern and western China.
The concentration of economic activity in the cities and special economic zones of the east has generated energy-supply and environmental constraints and bottlenecks that are hampering China’s ability to achieve the sustainable, inclusive growth that it needs to attain high-income status.
The government hopes that the Silk Road initiative will make China’s west and southwest regions the engines of the next phase of the country’s development.
Nonetheless, the initiative’s international dimension remains the most relevant – and complex.
Chinese diplomats have pointed to a constellation of mechanisms and platforms built or strengthened in recent years that could help maximize its impact. These include the Shanghai Cooperation Organization; the Bangladesh-China-India-Myanmar Corridor; the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor; the Chinese-built Yuxinou Railway from Chongqing to Germany (and onward to north European ports); and the new and incipient energy corridors between China and Central Asia, as well as Myanmar.
Moreover, China has established the New Development Bank with its fellow BRICS members (Brazil, Russia, India, and South Africa) and the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank – institutions that will undoubtedly benefit from China’s enormous investible surplus.
Given China’s prominent role in both, they could easily be used to provide financing for Silk Road-related programs.
But, though China may not struggle to finance its Silk Road ambitions, it is likely to face political resistance – especially with regard to the maritime route.
At a time when China’s assertive stance in the South and East China Seas is provoking anxiety among its neighbors – including Japan, Vietnam, the Philippines, and Singapore – the Silk Road initiative has aroused significant geopolitical apprehension.
In fact, these fears have a strong historical basis.
Zheng’s expeditions involved the use of military force in present-day Indonesia, Malaysia, Sri Lanka, and India to install friendly rulers and control strategic chokepoints across the Indian Ocean.
He intervened in the dynastic politics of Sri Lanka and Indonesia, abducting and executing local rulers.
He even seized the relic of the tooth of Buddha, a symbol of Sri Lankan political sovereignty.
The countries along Zheng’s route therefore recall his adventures not just as initiatives to promote trade and establish commercial links, but also as direct military intervention in their affairs, under the pretext of ushering in a harmonious world order under China’s emperor.
Reminding them of this painful past may not be entirely in China’s interest.
This is not to say that the modern Silk Road would benefit only China.
On the contrary, its overland and maritime routes could attract considerable investment to participating countries – especially from China, as it seeks new avenues for deploying its vast reserves.
But the modern Silk Road’s establishment will also mark a step toward reinvigorating the ancient Chinese concept of tianxia, in which the Chinese emperor was considered the divinely appointed ruler of the entire known world.
Many Asians still remember Japanese efforts before and during World War II to create a “Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere” – a self-sufficient bloc of countries, under Japan’s leadership – through conquest.
Might China be on a similar – albeit less openly aggressive – path?
Pembiayaan Pembangunan dengan Karakteristik Tiongkok?
JENEWA – Selepas kebingungan mengenai penambahan jumlah negara ke dalam keanggotaan pendiri Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), kini perhatiannya beralih kepada penetapan aturan dan regulasi yang dipimpin oleh Tiongkok.
Namun pertanyaan-pertanyaan utamanya tetap sama – khususnya, apakah AIIB berpotensi menjadi pesaing atau pelengkap yang disambut baik oleh lembaga keuangan multilateral seperti World Bank.
Sejak Tiongkok dan 20 negara di Asia menandatangi nota kesepahaman pendahuluan AIIB pada bulan Oktober lalu, 36 negara lainnya – termasuk Australia, Brasil, Mesir, Finlandia, Perancis, Jerman, Indonesia, Iran, Israel, Italia, Norwegia, Rusia, Arab Saudi, Afrika Selatan, Korea Selatan, Swedia, Swiss, Turki, dan UK – telah bergabung sebagai anggota pendiri.
Berdasarkan kementerian keuangan Tiongkok, anggota pendiri AIIB harus menyelesaikan perundingan Ketentuan-ketentuan Perjanjian sebelum bulan Juli dan pelaksanaannya akan dimulai akhir tahun ini.
Tiongkok akan menjadi standing chairman pada sejumlah pertemuan negosiator, dimana negara anggota yang menjadi tuan rumah pertemuan akan menjadi co-chair.
Pertemuan kepala negosiator yang keempat sudah diselenggarakan di Beijing pada akhir bulan April dan pertemuan kelima akan dilaksanakan di Singapura pada akhir Mei nanti.
Pakar ekonomi asal Tiongkok, Jin Liqun, terpilih untuk memimpin Sekretariat Interim Multilateral AIIB yang bertanggungjawab mengawasi pendirian AIIB.
Meskipun PDB menjadi kriteria dasar pembagian saham bagi anggota pendiri, kementerian keuangan telah menyarankan pada bulan Oktober bahwa Tiongkok tidak serta-merta memerlukan kepemilikan saham sebesar 50% yang layaknya diperoleh berdasarkan tingkat PDB.
Selain itu, meskipun AIIB berkedudukan di Beijing, kementerian menyatakan bahwa penetapan kantor-kantor regional dan pihak manajemen senior akan dilakukan berdasarkan konsultasi dan perundingan lanjutan.
Serupa dengan New Development Bank yang bernilai $50 miliar yang diumumkan oleh negara-negara BRICS (Brasil, Rusia, India, Tiongkok, dan Afrika Selatan) di musim panas lalu, AIIB menghadapi tingginya pengawasan, dengan sejumlah pemimpin dari negara Barat mempertanyakan tata kelola, transparansi, dan motif AIIB.
Sesungguhnya banyak negara Barat memandang pendirian AIIB sebagai upaya untuk menggantikan badan pemberi pinjaman multilateral yang beroperasi sekarang.
Namun bank-bank pembangunan yang baru nampaknya kurang tertarik untuk menggantikan lembaga-lembaga yang ada dibandingkan dengan memajukannya – suatu tujuan yang mereka miliki.
Sebagaimana dijelaskan Wakil Menteri Keuangan Shi Yaobin baru-baru ini, dengan mengakui adanya kebutuhan untuk mengubah tata kelola, badan pemberi pinjaman multilateral menunjukkan bahwa pada faktanya tidak ada yang disebut sebagai “praktik-praktik terbaik” – yang ada hanya “praktik-praktik yang lebih baik”.
Tidak ada alasan mengapa perbaikan tersebut tidak bisa dihasilkan melalui sumber lain.
Faktanya, berdasarkan pendekatan eksperimental terhadap pembangunan, Tiongkok cocok – dan sebagaimana diisyaratkan oleh sejumlah pejabat tinggi, sangat bersedia – berkontribusi pada proses ini.
Jika Tiongkok dapat menetapkan cara untuk menyeimbangkan kebutuhan akan standar dan jaminan yang tinggi untuk pinjaman proyek dengan kewajiban sebaran pinjaman yang cepat, maka tata kelola ekonomi global akan memperoleh manfaat yang signifikan.
Dalam merintis pendekatan yang lebih pragmatis menuju pembiayaan pembangunan, model kelembagaan yang diterapkan Tiongkok bisa jadi merupakan Dana Jalur Sutera (Silk Road Fund/SRF) sebesar $40 miliar yang diumumkan Presiden Xi Jinping pada bulan November lalu.
SRF dan AIIB menjadi perangkat keuangan utama dalam strategi “One Belt, One Road” yang dijalankan Tiongkok, berpusat pada pembentukan dua jenis Jalur Sutera modern – “Sabuk Ekonomi Jalur Ekonomi” (melalui darat) dan “Jalur Sutera Maritim Abad ke-21” – yang melintasi Asia menuju Eropa.
Prakarsa ini bertujuan mengembangkan kerjasama ekonomi dan integrasi di kawasan Asia Pasifik, khususnya dengan pembiayaan bagi infrastruktur seperti jalan raya, jalur kereta api, bandar udara, pelabuhan, dan pembangkit tenaga listrik.
Akan tetapi SRF mendapatkan sedikit perhatian dari media-media Barat.
Hal ini sungguh disayangkan sebab yang kini belum diketahui bisa jadi akan memainkan peran penting dalam mengubah pembiayaan pembangunan.
Menurut media massa di Tiongkok, SRF akan dikapitalisasi oleh empat lembaga negara.
State Administration of Foreign Exchange yang akan memegang 65% saham; China Investment Corporation (CIC, unit investasi pemerintah di Tiongkok) dan China Export-Import Bank (China Exim) masing-masing memiliki 15% saham; dan China Development Bank (CDB) memiliki sisa saham sebanyak 5%.
Dana SRF ini terdaftar secara resmi pada bulan Desember 2014 dan lalu menyelenggarakan pertemuan Dewan Direksi yang pertama satu bulan setelahnya.
Dengan demikian. SRF bisa dianggap sebagai bentuk unit investasi pemerintah Tiongkok yang terbaru dan sejumlah media bahkan merujuknya sebagai “CIC yang kedua”.
Akan tetapi, sementara CIC berada di bawah kendali manajerial kementerian keuangan, penerapan SRF justru nampaknya mencerminkan pengaruh dari People’s Bank of China (PBOC).
Dalam wawancaranya baru-baru ini, gubernur PBOC, Zhou Xiaochuan, menjelaskan bahwa SRF akan lebih memfokuskan pada “proyek-proyek kerjasama”, khususnya investasi ekuitas langsung, sebelum mengisyaratkan fitur-fitur pembiayaan pada SRF yang dipandang “paling tepat”.
Sebagai contoh, Zhou menerangkan bahwa SRF akan mengadopsi jangka waktu investasi setidaknya selama 15 tahun, berbeda dengan durasi 7-10 tahun yang ditetapkan oleh sebagian besar firma ekuitas swasta, agar bisa menghasilkan return yang lebih lama dari investasi infrastruktur di negara-negara berkembang.
Lebih lanjutnya, SRF dapat menjadi katalis bagi lembaga keuangan negara lainnya untuk berkontribusi pada ekuitas dan pembiayaan utang di beragam proyek.
Dana SRF beserta investor publik dan swasta lainnya – akan membentuk investasi ekuitas bersama yang pertama bagi proyek ini.
China Exim dan CDB nantinya dapat mengeluarkan pinjaman bagi pembiayaan utang, dimana CIC akan menyediakan pembiayaan ekuitas lanjutan.
Ketika AIIB beroperasi, AIIB juga dapat menunjang proses ini melalui pengaturan pembiayaan utang yang akan berdampingan dengan investasi ekuitas awal oleh SRF.
Tentu masih banyak persoalan yang perlu diselesaikan sehubungan dengan prakarsa pembiayaan baru ini.
Namun kita sudah bisa melihat garis besar lansekap pembiayaan pembangunan Selatan-Selatan (South-South development-finance) – potensi meningkatkan pinjaman multilateral menjadi lebih luas. 
China’s Industrial Nightmare
The Western media have a habit of going on feeding frenzies.
Ironically, when it comes to China, the latest frenzy concerns food itself.
The execution this week of the former head of China’s State Food and Drug Administration (SFDA), Zhen Xiaoyu, who accepted almost $1 million in bribes, shows that the frenzy has now seeped into China as well.
First came a spate of stories about pet food laced with melamine (a coal derivative), cough medicine and toothpaste adulterated with diethylene glycol (a sweet-tasting industrial chemical used in anti-freeze and brake fluid), toy trains decorated with lead-based paints, bacteria-infected antibiotics, exploding cell phone batteries, and defective car tires.
Now, attention has now turned to food.
The world press is filled with stories about honey laced with industrial sweeteners, canned goods contaminated by bacteria and excessive amounts of additives, rice wine braced with industrial alcohol, and farm-raised fish, eel, and shrimp fed large doses of antibiotics and then washed down with formaldehyde to lower bacterial counts.
In response, China’s government acted almost instantly.
The General Administration of Quality and Supervision, Inspection, and Quarantine conducted a survey and reported that nearly one-fifth of all products made in China for domestic use did not measure up to safety and quality standards.
At the same time, regulators increased inspections, closed down some 180 food manufacturers and now post the names of violators on their Web site.
Moreover, not only was Zhen Xiaouyu executed, but Cao Wenzhuang, who was in charge of drug registration at the SFDA, was sentenced to death for accepting roughly $300,000 in bribes from drug manufacturers.
Both verdicts were doubtless calculated, as a famous Chinese proverb puts it, to “kill some chickens in order to scare the monkeys.”
But why does this surprise us?
After all, “capitalism with Chinese characteristics” has been a chaotic free-for-all for some time.
Roughly 75% of China’s food is now produced by small, private, and un-licensed operations that are difficult to regulate.
With little knowledge of China’s tectonic changes, foreigners have been investing, buying, trading, and extravagantly praising its amazing, but hell-bent, “economic boom.”
Fear of “China bashing” has made it difficult for so-called “friends of China” to discuss its darker side openly.
The Chinese people themselves, however, have been far from unaware that the purity of their food, medicine, water, and air is in doubt.
The xiadao xiaoxi (back alley news) has long been replete with rumors of things going awry.
One small-time operation ground up sheet-rock and put it in gel-caps to sell as medicine.
A peasant village raided a hospital dumpster to reclaim discarded surgical equipment, wash it in a nearby canal, re-package it in sealed plastic saying “sterilized,” and sell it back to the hospital at cut-rate prices.
It has not helped, of course, that the Communist Party loathes a free press and a robust civil society, both of which are essential information feedback loops in ensuring any country’s well-being.
Nor has it helped that China’s regulatory agencies lag far behind the growth of its economy.
For example, the Beijing office of China’s State Environmental Protection Administration has less than 300 employees, whereas the United States Environmental Protection Administration has over 17,000.
China’s mad rush toward fuqiang (wealth and power) has given it little chance to develop all the compensatory institutions that any truly developed, not to say enlightened, society needs to achieve equilibrium and social health.
But in today’s globalized world, where national boundaries have morphed into synapses for myriad kinds of uncontrollable interactions, each country’s problems have become everyone’s problem.
So, before we in the West becomes too censorious of China’s quality control problems, we should remember our complicity in making China the world’s industrial park and global dumping ground for many toxic industries.
While we may lament the loss of manufacturing jobs through “outsourcing,” we certainly do not lament exporting massive amounts of pollution to China.
China may come to rue the wanton eagerness with which it has embraced industrialization.
Already, the Chinese are beginning to awaken from the infatuation with development that besieged them as they began to emerge from the commodity-starved Cultural Revolution.
In a world of scarcity, more always seemed better.
But now, just as the West began to understand decades ago that the natural environment has limits, China is showing the first signs of entering a post-industrial phase.
So, rather than simply shutting our doors to Chinese products, we might contemplate helping China by opening the doors of our regulatory agencies to Chinese regulators.
To do so would actually help ourselves.
For, even with “strategic competitors” like China, we now live in a global commons in which we share air, water, manufactured goods, and even food.
China’s Landing – Soft not Hard
NEW HAVEN – China’s economy is slowing.
This is no surprise for an export-led economy dependent on faltering global demand.
But China’s looming slowdown is likely to be both manageable and welcome. Fears of a hard landing are overblown.
To be sure, the economic data have softened.
Purchasing managers’ indices are now threatening the “50” threshold, which has long been associated with the break-even point between expansion and contraction.
Similar downtrends are evident in a broad array of leading indicators, ranging from consumer expectations, money supply, and the stock market, to steel production, industrial product sales, and newly started construction.
But this is not 2008.
Back then, global commerce was collapsing, presaging a 10.7% drop in the volume of world trade in 2009 – the sharpest annual contraction since the 1930s.
In response, China’s export performance swung from 26% annual growth in July 2008 to a 27% contraction by February 2009.
Sequential GDP growth slowed to a low single-digit pace – a virtual standstill by Chinese standards.
And more than 20 million migrant workers reportedly lost their jobs in export-led Guangdong province.
By late 2008, China was in the throes of the functional equivalent of a full-blown recession.
Thanks to a massive fiscal stimulus, China veered away from the abyss in early 2009.
But it paid a price for this bank-funded investment boom.
Local governments’ indebtedness soared, and fixed investment surged toward an unprecedented 50% of GDP.
Fears surfaced of another banking crisis, the imminent collapse of a monstrous property bubble, and runaway inflation.
Add a wrenching European crisis to the equation, and a replay of 2008 no longer seemed far-fetched.
While there is a kernel of truth to each of these China-specific concerns, they do not by themselves imply a hard landing.
Nonperforming loans will undoubtedly increase in response to the banking sector’s exposure to some $1.7 trillion of local-government debt, much of which was incurred during the stimulus of 2008-2009.
But the feared deterioration in loan quality is exaggerated.
The reason: With rural-urban migration projected to exceed 310 million people over the next 20 years, there is reason to believe that much of the apparent overhang of housing supply will be steadily absorbed.
Like Shanghai Pudong in the late 1990’s, today’s Chinese “ghost cities” are likely to be teaming urban centers in the not-so-distant future.
Meanwhile, deposit-rich Chinese banks have ample liquidity to absorb potential losses; the system-wide loan-to-deposit ratio is only about 65% – well below earlier pre-crisis levels that were typically closer to 120%, according to a recent analysis by the Xerion team of Perella Weinberg Partners.
Nor is the Chinese property market about to implode.
Yes, a building boom and speculative excesses have occurred.
But a year and a half ago, the government moved aggressively to dampen multiple property purchases – raising down payments to 50% for second homes and to 100% for third homes.
While that halted much speculative activity, house prices have remained at elevated levels – underscoring lingering affordability issues for China’s emerging middle class.
Notwithstanding that problem, major imbalances in Chinese property markets should prove to be the exception over the next two decades.&#160; While there could be supply-demand mismatches in any given year, with an average of roughly 15 million citizens a year slated to move from the countryside to newly urbanized areas, demand should rise to meet supply.&#160; Meanwhile, there are encouraging signs that property inflation is now cooling: For 46 of 70 major Chinese cities, property prices either declined or stayed flat in August 2011 compared with 31 cities that reported similar conditions in July.
Inflation is always a serious risk in China – especially with headline increases in the country’s Consumer Price Index surging through the 6% threshold this summer.
The government has responded forcefully on four fronts.
First, food inflation, which accounts for about half the recent run-up in overall prices, has been addressed by administrative measures aimed at cutting fertilizer costs and removing bottlenecks to increased supplies of pork, cooking oil, and vegetables.
Second, in an effort to curtail excess bank lending, reserve ratios were increased nine times in the past 11 months.
Third, the rate of currency appreciation has edged up.
Finally – and perhaps most importantly – the People’s Bank of China has raised its benchmark policy rate five times since October 2010.
At 6.5%, the one-year lending rate is now 0.3% above August’s headline inflation rate.
If food inflation recedes further, and the headline inflation rate starts to converge on the 3% core (non-food) rate, the result will be the equivalent of "passive monetary tightening" in real (inflation-adjusted) terms – precisely what the inflation-prone Chinese economy needs.
All of this underscores a potential silver lining.
An increasingly unbalanced Chinese economy cannot afford persistent 10% GDP growth.
Accordingly, China has no choice but to move quickly to implement the pro-consumption initiatives of its recently enacted 12th Five-Year Plan. Strategic transition is what modern China is all about.
That’s what happened 30 years ago, when economic reform began. &#160;And it needs to happen again today.&#160; For China, a soft landing will provide a window of opportunity to press ahead with the formidable task of increasingly urgent economic rebalancing.
China’s Lessons for the World Bank
The China Daily recently ran a front-page story recounting how Paul Wolfowitz used threats and vulgarities to pressure senior World Bank staff.
The newspaper noted that Wolfowitz sounded like a character out of the mafia television show The Sopranos .
At the same time, while the Wolfowitz scandal unfolded, China was playing host to the Africa Development Bank (ADB), which held its Board meeting in Shanghai.
This is a vivid metaphor for today’s world: while the World Bank is caught up in corruption and controversy, China skillfully raises its geopolitical profile in the developing world.
China’s rising power is, of course, based heavily on its remarkable economic success.
The ADB meeting took place in the Pudong District, Shanghai’s most remarkable development site.
From largely unused land a generation ago, Pudong has become a booming center of skyscrapers, luxury hotels, parks, industry, and vast stretches of apartment buildings.
Shanghai’s overall economy is currently growing at around 13% per year, thus doubling in size every five or six years.
Everywhere there are startups, innovations, and young entrepreneurs hungry for profits.
I had the chance to participate in high-level meetings between Chinese and African officials at the ADB meetings.
The advice that the African leaders received from their Chinese counterparts was sound, and much more practical than they typically get from the World Bank.
Chinese officials stressed the crucial role of public investments, especially in agriculture and infrastructure, to lay the basis for private-sector-led growth.
In a hungry and poor rural economy, as China was in the 1970’s and as most of Africa is today, a key starting point is to raise farm productivity.
Peasant farmers need the benefits of fertilizer, irrigation, and high-yield seeds, all of which were a core part of China’s economic takeoff.
Two other critical investments are also needed: roads and electricity, without which there cannot be a modern economy.
Farmers might be able to increase their output, but it won’t be able to reach the cities, and the cities won’t be able to provide the countryside with inputs.
The officials stressed how the government has taken pains to ensure that the power grid and transportation network reaches every village in China.
Of course, the African leaders were most appreciative of the next message: China is prepared to help Africa in substantial ways in agriculture, roads, power, health, and education. And the African leaders already know that this is not an empty boast.
All over Africa, China is financing and constructing basic infrastructure.
During the meeting, the Chinese leaders emphasized their readiness to support agricultural research as well.
They described new high-yield rice varieties, which they are prepared to share with their African counterparts.
All of this illustrates what is wrong with the World Bank, even aside from Wolfowitz’s failed leadership.
Unlike the Chinese, the Bank has too often forgotten the most basic lessons of development, preferring to lecture the poor and force them to privatize basic infrastructure, rather than to help the poor to invest in infrastructure and other crucial sectors.
The Bank’s failures began in the early 1980’s, when, under the ideological sway of President Ronald Reagan and Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, it tried to get Africa and other poor regions to cut back or close down government investments and services.
For 25 years, the Bank tried to get governments out of agriculture, leaving impoverished peasants to fend for themselves.
The result has been a disaster in Africa, with farm productivity stagnant for decades.
The Bank also pushed for privatization of national health systems, water utilities, and road and power networks, and grossly underfinanced these critical sectors.
This extreme free-market ideology, also called “structural adjustment,” went against the practical lessons of development successes in China and the rest of Asia.
Practical development strategy recognizes that public investments – in agriculture, health, education, and infrastructure – are necessary complements to private investments.
The World Bank has instead wrongly seen such vital public investments as an enemy of private-sector development.
Whenever the Bank’s extreme free-market ideology failed, it has blamed the poor for corruption, mismanagement, or lack of initiative.
This was Wolfowitz’s approach, too.
Instead of focusing the Bank’s attention on helping the poorest countries to improve their infrastructure, he launched a crusade against corruption.
Ironically, of course, his stance became untenable when his own misdeeds came to light.
The Bank can regain its relevance only if it becomes practical once again, by returning its focus to financing public investments in priority sectors, just as the Chinese leadership is prepared to do.
The good news is that African governments are getting the message on how to spur economic growth, and are also getting crucial help from China and other partners that are less wedded to extreme free-market ideology than the World Bank.
Many African governments at the Shanghai meeting declared their intention to act boldly, by investing in infrastructure, agricultural modernization, public health, and education.
The Wolfowitz debacle should be a wake-up call to the World Bank: it must no longer be controlled by ideology.
If that happens, the Bank can still do justice to the bold vision of a world of shared prosperity that prompted its creation after World War II.
China’s Losing Battle Against Corruption
China’s rulers rarely wash their dirty linen in public.
So the arrest of Politburo member and Shanghai Communist Party boss Chen Liangyu on corruption charges has sent shock waves across the country.
Some speculate that the arrest is really part of a power struggle, with President Hu Jingtao demonstrating his authority against a local power broker who had thwarted national policy.
Whatever the truth behind Chen’s fall, and despite the widening corruption probe of other senior government officials, data and evidence recently released by the government and multilateral institutions suggest that the authorities are fighting a rearguard battle against a rising tide of graft.
Consider the grim statistics recently released by the Supreme People’s Procuratorate (SPP).
More than 42,000 government officials on average were investigated for corruption every year from 2002 to 2005, with more than 30,000 per year facing criminal charges.
These startling figures do not include economic crimes outside the public sector.
For example, in 2005 alone, the China Banking Regulatory Commission (CBRC) unearthed irregularities involving misused funds of RMB767.1 billion ($93.7 billion).
The CBRC uncovered 1,272 criminal cases and disciplined 6,826 bank employees (including 325 senior managers).
According to Ye Feng, a SPP Director-General, “[a]lmost every type of financial institution has seen the emergence of criminal cases involving the solicitation of bribes in return for loans.”
Despite the government’s intermittent anti-corruption campaigns, progress has been slow.
On the contrary, as Ye has candidly acknowledged, the number of corruption cases “has continued to rise.”
Indeed, international measures of graft show that the authorities may be reaching a stalemate or even retreating in the fight.
Multinational executives frequently cite China as their favorite investment destination, but many of them also complain about rampant graft.
According to the World Bank’s “Investment Climate Surveys”, 27% of nearly 4,000 firms doing business in China in 2002-03 described corruption as a “major constraint” on their commercial operations, while 55% reported that they had paid bribes to government bureaucrats and/or local business partners to get things done.
Likewise, Hu Angang, an economics professor at Beijing’s Tsinghua University, has estimated that corruption in 1999-2001 alone caused economic losses worth RMB1,293 billion ($156 billion), or 13.2% of GDP.
Since most government corruption occurs at the county, township and village levels, it usually involves abuses of power by local officials.
However, since these petty bureaucrats’ power is almost absolute, they also control the channels for addressing grievances.
Indeed, among the World Bank’s six “Governance Indicators,” China’s score on the “Rule of Law” index has also slid in recent years, from -0.28 in 1998 to -0.47 in 2005, when China ranked 124th out of 208 countries in this category.
With little recourse to legal means, an increasing number of frustrated victims of graft resort to extra-legal measures such as strikes, demonstrations, and sit-ins in order to gain media and public attention.
Some even carry their fights to the provincial and central authorities, stoking a sharp rise in the incidents of “public order disturbances” nation-wide.
Whereas the Ministry of Public Security reported only 8,700 such disturbances in 1993, by 2005 the number had jumped ten-fold, to 87,000.
Needless to say, government mishandling of such disturbances, or a decision to repress them with force, would only fuel further social discontent.
In fact, the government’s success in clamping down on corruption, especially at sub-national levels, will be a litmus test of its legitimacy.
To fail would risk igniting a severe political backlash, including a spontaneous escalation of anti-regime activities.
China’s Macro Disconnect
NEW HAVEN – Structural change and rebalancing are formidable undertakings for any economy.
China has been focused on these objectives for five years – seeking to transform a powerful yet unbalanced growth model based largely on exports and investment into one driven increasingly by its consumers.
Success is essential if China is to avoid the dreaded “middle-income trap” – the economic slowdown that most fast-growing developing economies experience when they reach income thresholds comparable to that of China today.
The results have been mixed.
China has been highly successful in its initial efforts to shift the industrial structure of its economy from manufacturing to services, which have long been viewed as the foundation of modern consumer societies.
But it has made far less progress in boosting private consumption.
China now has no choice but to address this disconnect head on.
The performance of China’s services sector has been especially impressive in recent years, with its share of GDP increasing from 44% in 2010 to 51.6% in the first three quarters of 2015, according to official statistics.
That is nearly double the four-percentage-point increase that was initially envisioned in the 12th Five-Year Plan, which is about to come to an end.
The gains have been particularly strong in the distribution sectors – wholesale and retail trade – as well as in finance and real estate.
And China’s shift to services has only just begun.
It should broaden into IT services, healthcare, domestic transportation, and hospitality and leisure, as the sector as a whole climbs toward a 60-65% share of GDP over the next decade.
By contrast, consumer-led growth has been much slower to materialize.
After bottoming out at 36% of GDP in 2010, private consumption’s share of GDP inched up to 38% in 2014 – a two-percentage-point increase that is only about one-fourth the magnitude of the services-led shift in the economy’s structure.
With its prowess in central planning, China has always been adept at engineering shifts in its industrial structure – as the move toward services-led growth attests.
But China apparently is far less proficient in replicating the DNA of a modern consumer culture – specifically, in altering the behavioral norms of its people.
The disconnect between surging services and lagging growth in private consumption has been accompanied by a steady rise in China’s urban saving rate to 30% in 2014 (versus 24% a decade earlier).
This has occurred despite a significant increase in the personal income share of the Chinese economy, driven by services-led employment growth and the income leverage of urbanization.
Chinese families have been reluctant to convert much of this newfound income into discretionary spending.
China’s high and rising urban saving rate in a climate of vigorous per capita income growth reflects a persistent preference for precautionary saving over discretionary consumption.
Unfortunately, this is a rational response to the uncertain future faced by the majority of Chinese families, underscored by the lack of a reliable social safety net.
Moreover, anxiety over inadequate provisions for retirement and health care is set to intensify as a rapidly aging population now enters the most vulnerable phase of its life cycle.
The good news is that the 13th Five-Year Plan (covering the 2016-2020 period), which is to be enacted in March 2016, appears likely to address these concerns explicitly.
Early indications from the Fifth Plenum of the 18th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, held in late October, suggest that the next plan will focus on the missing piece of consumer-led rebalancing: a strong social safety net.
A proposed consolidation of rural and urban plans for pensions and critical health care is particularly important in this regard, as is the authorities’ commitment to allowing workers to transfer their hukou (residency permits) – and the associated social welfare benefits – wherever they move.
For China’s 270 million migrant workers, benefit portability could be decisive in shifting the balance from fear and precautionary saving to security and discretionary spending.
Equally significant was the Fifth Plenum’s emphasis on using state capital to fund a more robust safety net through an increase in taxes on state-owned enterprises that was proposed a couple of years ago.
But the biggest breakthrough in reshaping societal norms was in family-planning policy – replacing the one-child limit that had been in force since 1980 with a two-child limit beginning in 2017.
Aimed at addressing China’s serious aging problem, the eventual consequences of this long-overdue shift cannot be minimized.
As the family unit, central to China’s Confucian heritage, changes, so will the country’s social and economic character.
Over the past 35 years, China’s powerful growth model has yielded extraordinary progress in terms of economic growth and development.
But speedy implementation of the shift from production to consumption will be vital if the country is to remain on course and avoid the middle-income trap.
That will require resolving the disconnect between the structural shift to services and the behavioral norms that will ultimately shape the spending habits of its people.
And that means overcoming the understandable caution of Chinese households in the face of an uncertain future.
Converting fear into confidence is a daunting task for any society.
China is no exception.
The focus on resolving China’s macroeconomic disconnect, reflected at the Fifth Plenum and a likely precursor of what to expect in the upcoming 13th Five-Year Plan, is thus very encouraging.
China’s Made-in-America Success Story
NEW DELHI – America’s strategy in Asia for more than a century has sought a stable balance of power to prevent the rise of any hegemon.
Yet the United States, according to its official National Security Strategy, is also committed to accommodating “the emergence of a China that is peaceful and prosperous and that cooperates with us to address common challenges and mutual interests.”
So America’s Asia policy has in some ways been at war with itself.
In fact, the US has played a key role in China’s rise.
For example, rather than sustain trade sanctions against China after the Tiananmen Square massacre in 1989, the US decided instead to integrate the country into global institutions.
But US foreign policy had been notable for a China-friendly approach long before that.
In 1905, President Theodore Roosevelt, who hosted the peace conference in Portsmouth, New Hampshire, after the Russo-Japanese War, argued for the return of Manchuria to Manchu-ruled China and for a balance of power in East Asia.
The war ended up making the US an active participant in China’s affairs.
After the Communists seized power in China in 1949, the US openly viewed Chinese Communism as benign, and thus distinct from Soviet Communism.
And it was after the Communists crushed the pro-democracy movement in 1989 that the US helped to turn China into an export juggernaut that has accumulated massive trade surpluses and become the principal source of capital flows to the US.
America’s policy toward Communist China has traversed three stages.
In the first phase, America courted Mao Zedong’s regime, despite the Korean War, China's annexation of Tibet, and domestic witch hunts, such as the Hundred Flowers Campaign.
Courtship gave way to estrangement during the second phase, as US policy for much of the 1960’s sought to isolate China.
The third phase began immediately after the 1969 Sino-Soviet military clashes, with the US actively seeking to exploit the rift in the Communist world by aligning China with its anti-Soviet strategy.
Although China clearly instigated the bloody border clashes, America sided with Mao’s regime.
That helped to lay the groundwork for the China “opening” of 1970-1971, engineered by US National Security Adviser Henry Kissinger, who until then had no knowledge of the country.
Since then, the US has pursued a conscious policy of aiding China’s rise.
Indeed, President Jimmy Carter sent a memo to various US government departments instructing them to help in China’s rise – an approach that remains in effect today, even as America seeks to hedge against the risk that Chinese power gives rise to arrogance.
Indeed, even China’s firing of missiles into the Taiwan Strait in 1996 did not change US policy.
If anything, the US has been gradually loosening its close links with Taiwan, with no US cabinet member visiting the island since those missile maneuvers.
Seen in this light, China’s spectacular economic success – including the world’s largest trade surplus and foreign-currency reserves – owes much to US policy from the 1970’s on.
Without the significant expansion in US-Chinese trade and financial relations, China’s growth would have been much slower and more difficult to sustain.
Allies of convenience during the second half of the Cold War, the US and China emerged from it as partners tied by interdependence.
America depends on China’s trade surplus and savings to finance its outsize budget deficits, while China relies on its huge exports to the US to sustain its economic growth and finance its military modernization.
By plowing more than two-thirds of its mammoth foreign-currency reserves into US dollar-denominated assets, China has gained significant political leverage.
China is thus very different from previous US adversaries.
America’s interests are now so closely intertwined with China that a policy to isolate or confront it is not feasible.
Even on the issue of democracy, the US prefers to lecture other dictatorships rather than the world’s largest autocracy.
Yet it is also true that the US is uneasy about China’s not-too-hidden aim to dominate Asia – an objective that runs counter to US security and commercial interests and to the larger goal of securing a balance in power in Asia.
To avert Chinese dominance, the US has already started to build countervailing influences and partnerships, without making any attempt to contain China.
For the US, China’s growing power actually helps to validate its forward military deployments in Asia, maintain existing allies in the region, and win new strategic partners.
Indeed, an increasingly assertive China has proven a diplomatic boon for the US in strengthening and expanding its Asian security relationships.
The lesson is clear: The muscle-flexing rise of a world power can strengthen the strategic relevance and role of a power in relative decline.
Barely a decade ago, the US was beginning to feel marginalized in Asia, owing to several developments, including China’s “charm offensive.”
But now America has returned firmly to center stage.
South Korea has beefed up its military alliance with the US; Japan has backed away from an effort to persuade the US to move its Marine base out of Okinawa; Singapore has allowed the US Navy to station ships; Australia is hosting US Marine and other deployments; and India, Vietnam, Indonesia, and the Philippines, among others, have drawn closer to the US as well.
But no one should have any illusions about US policy.
Despite America’s “pivot” to Asia, it intends to stick to its two-pronged approach: seek to maintain a balance of power with the help of strategic allies and partners, while continuing to accommodate a rising China.
China’s Misrule of Law
PHILADELPHIA – A last-minute deal between the United States and China may afford human-rights lawyer and activist Chen Guangcheng the opportunity to enroll in law school in New York.&nbsp;But, even if a way out of the diplomatic debacle is at hand, much about the case remains troubling.
In particular, despite more than three decades of legal reform in China, Chen had precious little recourse to fight harassment and house arrest at the hands of the Chinese authorities.
Indeed, 23 years after dissident Fang Lizhi took refuge in the US embassy following the crackdown in Tiananmen Square, Chen’s only option was to take the same last-gasp leap into the arms of American diplomats.
Chen’s case reveals weaknesses in China’s legal system, and it should spark a push to build stronger ties between China’s human-rights activists and the broader legal profession.
Chen rose to prominence as a self-educated legal activist after he challenged harsh enforcement of the government’s family-planning policies.
His approach reflected a larger trend of rights-based resistance in China that began in that late 1990’s; Chen was part of a coterie of lawyers and activists, some well-known and many others not, who wanted to see the government behave according to its own rules.
This activism was interpreted as a sign of an emerging rule-of-law culture in China.
But Chen’s career as a legal activist met an abrupt end with a conviction for disturbing public order, and most experts inside and outside of China considered his ensuing confinement to be unlawful.
Chen’s case, like so many others in China, reminds us how incomplete Chinese legal reform has been.
Despite the many laws enacted, lawyers trained, courtrooms built, and millions of technical-assistance dollars spent, China’s legal institutions remain weak, especially when the cases brought before them have – or acquire – political implications.
Legal activism in China is not unprecedented.
In 1923, more than 100 Chinese judges, prosecutors, and clerks resigned en masse to protest trumped-up corruption charges against the then-finance minister.
Their primary concern was the government’s interference in the legal process in its pursuit of the case.
“We have labored diligently and carefully.…[to see] that a strong foundation of our judicial system should be laid,” they wrote in their resignation letter.
As a result of the government’s threat to the independence of the judiciary, they concluded, “the bone and sinew of the results of our long and hard labors thus become as running water.”
Lawyers argue unpopular positions.
They challenge the establishment.
Chen has paid a terrible price for living up to the ideals of the profession.
At a time when the legal academy and the profession are under attack in the US, Chen’s case is a reminder of what strong lawyers and legal institutions provide to a society.
Last June, we led a delegation of nine US law school deans to a two-day summit with ten peers from China’s top law schools, which culminated in a joint statement declaring that both sides recognize and support the rule of law, and agree on the importance of promoting the integrity of the legal profession.
The Chen case provides another reminder that the integrity of the profession is under pressure.
Activist lawyers in China pursue their cases with little explicit support from the legal academy or the profession.
They are not able to speak at law schools, much less teach or recruit students to work for them.
Many Chinese lawyers and legal academics wish that the rule of law in China were more robust, and a few of them, such as Jiang Ping, have warned about backsliding.
But, in cases like that of Chen, even sympathetic legal colleagues are often afraid to speak out, much less take action.
China’s top law deans and professors now have a chance to turn rhetoric into reality.
Law schools should be a place where students and professors can engage with the full range of Chinese law and legal activity.
That means studying how Chinese law is developing and being deployed in the protection of rights, and creating opportunities to interact with those who are at the forefront of these movements in all areas of law.
Not long after Chen left the US embassy for Beijing’s Chaoyang hospital, China’s government issued its usual denunciation of US interference in its internal affairs.
But China’s leaders should expect nothing else so long as they maintain a system where lawyers face persecution when they advocate for the weakest groups in its society.
Chen had to turn to American diplomats to be his advocates, but it would augur better for China’s future if the country’s legal profession came together to urge the authorities to uphold the rule of law in even the most sensitive cases.
That would help to ensure that three decades of legal reform is more bone and sinew than running water.
China’s Monetary Sterilization
BEIJING – Not long after the United States Federal Reserve Board announced its second round of “quantitative easing” (known as QE2), the People’s Bank of China (PBC), China’s central bank, announced two increases of 0.5 percentage points in the required reserve ratio (RRR) of bank deposits.
The RRR now stands at 18.5%, a historic high, even in global terms.
While the Fed is planning to pump more money into the US economy, the PBC is trying to reduce the amount of money in circulation in China.
Money used by commercial banks to satisfy the RRR, which is held in accounts at the PBC, can no longer be extended as loans.
As a result, more money than ever is now frozen or inactive in China.
It is understandable that the Fed wants to boost demand as long as the US economy remains depressed.
But why has the PBC tightened monetary policy so much?
The Chinese economy is not over-heating.
Growth is still high, at about 10% per year, but has started to moderate.
And, while inflation is a concern – having risen to 4.4% year on year in October, from 3.6% in September – this cannot explain why the PBC raised the RRR three times earlier this year, when inflation was lower.
Instead, the PBC’s policy is preemptive: sterilize over-liquidity and get the money supply under control in order to prevent inflation or over-heating.
At the beginning of the year, the RRR increases could be regarded as part of efforts to correct the over-supply of money that arose from the anti-crisis stimulus package.
But the most recent RRR increases serve mainly to sterilize the “passive money supply” caused by the increase in foreign-exchange reserves.
Indeed, in September alone, China’s foreign-currency reserves increased by almost $100 billion compared to August.
With the global economy recovering, China’s trade surplus began to grow.
Moreover, capital inflows increased significantly, owing to real investment opportunities in the high-growth economy and the expectation of renminbi revaluation.
But rapid growth in foreign-exchange reserves means an increase in the domestic money supply, because the PBC issues RMB6.64 (down 3% since June) for every dollar it receives.
That means that money supply increase by nearly RMB700 billion in September.