Unfortunately, it is also dangerously misleading.
After all, even if government were the problem, then changing what it does must be part of the solution.
The truth is that markets cannot exist without governments, and vice versa.
Governments are essential to the establishment of security, justice, property rights, and contract enforcement, all of which are essential to a market economy.
Governments must also organize the provision of infrastructure for transportation, communication, energy, water, and waste disposal.
They run and regulate health-care systems and primary, secondary, tertiary, and vocational education.
They create the rules and provide the certifications that allow firms to assure their customers, workers, and neighbors that what they do is safe.
They protect creditors and minority shareholders from miscreant managers (and managers from impulsive creditors).
Saying that governments should get out of the way and let the private sector do its thing is like saying that air traffic controllers should get out of the way and let pilots do their thing.
In fact, governments and the private sector need each other, and they need to find better ways to collaborate.
The problem is that in many countries, both developed and developing, the current relationship between the private sector and the government is often dysfunctional.
Not only is it characterized by deep distrust, but the broader society does not find a closer relationship to be either legitimate or in the public interest, and for good reason.
The private sector often engages with the government in order to make itself more profitable.
After all, maximizing profits is what CEOs are supposed to do.
And the government has ways to help: It can force suppliers to sell their inputs more cheaply, repress workers’ wage demands, protect the final market from competition by imports or new entrants, or lower their taxes.
But these schemes make firms more profitable by making their suppliers, workers, and customers poorer.
Accepting such demands makes the government rightly illegitimate in the eyes of the rest of society, which cherishes higher priorities than redistribution in favor of the already rich.
Outcomes would be very different if the focus of the relationship were productivity rather than profitability.
Productivity improvements, by lowering costs, allow firms to pay their workers and suppliers better, reduce prices for consumers, pay more in taxes, and still make more money for their shareholders.
A focus on productivity is win-win-win.
Governments can do many things, in a variety of areas, to raise productivity.
Fresh produce requires a cold-storage logistic system, a green lane at customs, certification of good agricultural practices, and sanitary permits.
Tourism depends on sensible visa requirements, convenient airports, road signs, hotel construction permits, and the preservation of cultural sites and coastlines.
Manufacturing requires dedicated urban space that is adequately connected to power, water, transport, logistics, security, and a diverse labor force.
All of these productivity-boosting inputs require institutions that teach and extend industry-relevant knowledge and skills.
None of them appears in the World Bank’s Doing Business indicators or the World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Index.
And yet, without these public inputs, the industries that depend on them cannot succeed.
That is precisely what happens in the absence of a sound and legitimate basis for cooperation between the government and the private sector.
The result is inadequate provision of public goods that raise productivity and make everyone better off.
To create such a basis for cooperation, many countries need a new compact between the government and the private sector.
This will not be possible if business groups insist on putting taxes at the center of the discussion.
Instead, they should focus on measures that raise productivity.
More broadly, business groups should seek only those government policies that are unambiguously in the public interest.
Demands that are perceived as greedy erode legitimacy and, ultimately, effectiveness.
In this context, watchdog NGOs dedicated to scoring the public-interest value of what business groups ask for from the government could facilitate trust.
Perhaps most important, business associations do their members a disservice by seeking to impose on them a single voice.
Doing so usually leads to a focus on policies that are preferred by all members – such as lower taxes – instead of measures that are important to the productivity of each member.
Just as monopolies are bad for markets and politics, business representation in the private sector would benefit from more competition.
The Procurement Goldmine
WASHINGTON, DC – Gold is rare.
More than 99.9% of the Earth’s crust is composed of oxides of silicon, aluminum, calcium, magnesium, sodium, iron, potassium, titanium, and phosphorus.
So, for most of human history, people have become quite excited when they have discovered gold.
Despite the serious environmental consequences of gold mining, including mercury and cyanide pollution and the devastation of landscapes, humanity has not given up the search – and seems unlikely to do so any time soon.
But there is a figurative goldmine – safer and potentially at least as lucrative as the real thing – that most countries possess, but few choose to exploit fully: government procurement.
The potential adverse consequences of government procurement are well known.
It can enable companies to charge excessive prices for low-quality goods and unreliable services, while facilitating corruption, abuses of power, and waste.
To mitigate these risks, most countries have implemented requirements for open bidding processes and strict transparency rules for government purchases.
Indeed, most recent free-trade agreements require signatories to open up government procurement to one another’s firms, and the World Bank publishes the names of firms barred for fraud or corruption from bidding on Bank-financed projects.
Countries that forego open bidding processes end up with the kind of large-scale theft that has been documented in Venezuela and almost certainly occurred in Ukraine under deposed President Viktor Yanukovych.
But beneath all of this arsenic is gold.
Most modern production involves not just the cost of doing things, but also the cost of figuring out how to do them.
Before aircraft manufacturers can produce and sell a new airplane model, they must spend billions of dollars over a decade or more of development – costs that must later be recouped.
If they were not sure whether there would be a market for the new model, few would assume these costs.
That is where government procurement comes in.
For example, in 1946, the United States government issued a contract for Boeing to develop the B-52.
The government obviously did not want the company to deliver more of the same; it wanted the first fast jet-powered strategic bomber.
After all, the second-best army in a war is the loser.
The contract thus had to reflect the risks inherent in finding out how to design and produce the most advanced aircraft of its time.
But the benefits of the government purchase extended beyond its specific goal, when Boeing used the knowhow it acquired developing the B-52 to create its commercial B-707 aircraft.
Though the government never purposely promoted the development of commercial airplanes, its procurement of high-quality, technologically advanced military aircraft was essential to the emergence of America’s globally dominant commercial aircraft industry.
Simply put, figuring out how to do one thing often makes it easier to do other things.
In this way, a government that is exacting about the quality of its purchases can have a powerful impact on the evolution of its country’s comparative advantage.
Israel’s government has had a similar impact through its effort to manage its limited water resources.
Let’s say that the country incurs a cost of 100 of some unit because of its water shortages.
The innovations that the government encourages, such as drip irrigation or desalination, not only reduce the domestic cost of such shortages to, say, 70, but also underpin an industry that, by selling its wares in the most demanding markets, accrues a global value of more than 1,000.
In this sense, Israel’s water scarcity has made the country wealthier than it otherwise would have been.
Likewise, Israel’s military investments have generated a set of solutions that, with some extra effort, have had useful – and lucrative – civilian applications.
This helps to explain why private investment in research and development constitutes a larger share of GDP in Israel than anywhere else in the world.
The lessons from army purchases can be applied elsewhere.
Governments are in the business of procuring solutions to their particular society’s most pressing challenges.
Given that a country’s problems are rarely unique, innovative solutions can spawn globally competitive – even dominant – industries.
And solutions for one problem may have applications in other areas.
This should serve as a model for Latin America as it works to improve the quality of its educational systems.
As it stands, the eight Latin American countries that take the OECD’s standardized PISA exam are among the 15 worst-performing countries of the 65 that participate in the program.
Instead of sinking massive amounts of money into poorly performing school systems, Latin American governments would undoubtedly be interested in innovative solutions, such as tablet-based textbooks, that can help teachers provide effective lessons, monitor their students’ progress, and identify remediation strategies.
Beyond improving their own children’s performance, such efforts could spawn a globally competitive industry in state-of-the-art teaching tools.
These are just a few examples of the value that can be extracted from the government-procurement goldmine.
By committing to purchase large amounts of high-quality products that address major national challenges, governments can encourage private, public, or mixed organizations to incur the fixed costs of finding solutions.
In many cases, the benefits of those solutions will extend far beyond their original purpose.
But, in pursuing such a path, governments must remember that mining is a potentially dangerous industry that must be approached with care.
To this end, they could begin by applying, say, 5% of their procurement budgets to nurture urgently needed solutions in areas with potentially large global markets.
After all, anything that is worth doing is worth doing better.
Let’s Get Fiscal
LONDON – Everyone knows there is no gain without pain.
But there can be pain without gain – a lesson that Western populations have been learning the hard way since at least 2012.
With years of fiscal austerity in the United States, Europe, and Japan having achieved nothing, it is time for governments to start spending again.
The proposal will be met with outrage from many governments, especially, but not exclusively, Germany’s, and will be dismissed by the many political candidates who treat sovereign debt, built up by the incumbents they are seeking to depose, as the devil’s work.
But beyond ideology and self-interest lies a simple and unavoidable truth: austerity is not working.
Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe reluctantly acknowledged austerity’s failure when he announced on June 1 that his government would postpone a planned increase in the country’s consumption tax.
Far from helping to control Japan’s budget deficit and huge public debt, the tax hike probably would have reduced revenues.
After all, the previous hike, implemented in April 2014, quickly drove the economy back into recession.
The eurozone – the developed world’s leading champion of austerity – has yet to come to the same realization, despite glaring evidence.
In 2012, eurozone leaders signed a fiscal compact aimed at controlling public debt – which, in total, amounted to 91.3% of GDP, according to the International Monetary Fund – by forcing countries to cut spending and raise taxes.
By 2015, the eurozone’s budget deficit, as a share of GDP, had fallen by two-thirds from its peak in 2010.
Yet gross public debt had actually increased, to 93.2% of GDP.
The problem, of course, lies in sluggish economic growth, which undermines wage growth, weakens tax revenues, and makes it impossible for governments to pay down their debts.
Among the biggest drags on growth today is fiscal austerity.
The more governments cut their deficits, the faster growth slows – and the further out of reach debt-reduction targets become.
Thus runs the self-defeating cycle of fiscal austerity.
To be sure, this is not always how austerity works.
In the inflation-plagued 1970s and 1980s, when investors’ demand for inflation-risk premia pushed up long-term borrowing costs, larger deficits tended to boost long-term interest rates further, while smaller deficits reduced them.
It was this experience that caused policymakers after 2010 to assume that reducing government demand would help to boost private investment.
(In the eurozone, it should be noted, arguments for fiscal austerity were also fueled by mistrust among governments, with creditor countries demanding that debtors endure some pain in exchange for “gains” like bailouts.)
But times have changed.
For starters, we are no longer living in an inflationary era.
On the contrary, Japan and some eurozone countries face deflation, while inflation in the UK is essentially zero.
Only in America is inflation picking up – and only gently.
Moreover, long-term borrowing costs are at historic lows, just as they have been throughout the last five years.
Pursuing austerity in this context has resulted in a drag on growth so severe that not even the halving of energy prices over the last 18 months has overcome it.
Expansionary monetary policy – that is, massive injections of liquidity through so-called quantitative easing – is clearly not enough, either.
While QE does serve a purpose – and remains necessary in Europe and Japan – it has failed to stimulate private investment and accelerate job creation and wage growth.
Some direct intervention in wages may help.
The UK has implemented an increase in the mandatory minimum wage, and some US states, led by California, will soon follow.
Japan, which faces stagnant wages, despite apparent labor shortages, may stand to benefit the most from this approach.
But, in today’s world, nothing can substitute for fiscal expansion.
Many countries, particularly in Europe, need to boost public investment in infrastructure.
More broadly, Europe needs a new Marshall Plan, this time self-financed, rather than funded by the Americans, to kick-start economic growth and boost productivity.
There is plenty of scope for a similar program in the US, too.
Such spending could even help get tax revenues growing, by pushing employment and wages higher.
At a time of low borrowing costs and little to no inflation (or even deflation), austerity is not the answer.
It is time for policymakers to recognize that there is no need for pain that is not bringing any gain.
It is time to get fiscal.
Grading Obamanomics
PALO ALTO – It is still too soon to gauge the full economic impact of President Barack Obama’s implemented and proposed policies, but a preliminary read indicates limited short-term benefit at large long-term cost.
The administration is exploiting a crisis atmosphere to enact a vast agenda that would reengineer the American economy, from autos and financial services to health care, energy, and the distribution of income.
Obama outsourced the details of the $787 billion fiscal stimulus to Congress and, no surprise, the old barons of the House stuffed it with pork and social engineering.
Several months later, only 4%-6% of the funds have been spent, and the federal government is brow-beating state governments – for example, demanding that California rescind a small pay cut for some unionized workers or lose $7 billion in stimulus funds.
(Intervening in contractual relations ex post to enforce union demands is an emerging characteristic of the administration).
The foreclosure relief plan is off to an even slower start, and is likely to run into numerous problems concerning how to rework delinquent mortgages without inducing a lot more delinquencies.
So score the stimulus a very expensive, largely wasted opportunity.
Instead, Obama could, for example, have suspended the payroll tax for a year, getting money directly into people’s pockets quickly and decreasing the need for firms to lay off workers.
Obama’s long-run budget calls for much higher spending, higher taxes, and an explosion of debt that will crowd out borrowing in capital markets by private companies, state and local governments, and developing countries.
Obama would add $6.5 trillion to the United States’ national debt, more than all previous presidents, from George Washington to George W. Bush, combined.
That is in addition to explicit tax hikes on income, capital gains, and dividends, the implicit ones on energy via cap-and-trade, etc.
It appears that the Obama strategy is to “stuff the beast” (the mirror image of the tax-cutting “starve the beast” philosophy attributed to some of President Ronald Reagan’s advisers), i.e., to initiate massive spending and hide the true cost from citizens.
The large deficits will eventually force much higher taxes, such as a national value-added tax similar to those in Europe, or gigantic increases in everyone’s income taxes.
The Federal Reserve lowered its target federal funds rate to zero before Obama was inaugurated, and initiated many programs to try to revive credit markets, with mixed results (the commercial paper facility has helped, whereas others seem to have gotten off to less sanguine starts).
The Fed’s independence is a key component of its anti-inflation credibility, and a key test for Obama will be to support the Fed’s efforts to withdraw the liquidity before substantial inflation pressures assert themselves several years from now. 
The Obama administration also seems to be heading toward regulating derivatives and financial institutions deemed too big to fail.
America does need a clearinghouse for derivatives, and a much higher percentage of derivative trading should take place on exchanges, rather than bilaterally over the counter.
Any institution that is or could quickly become too big to fail needs to have adequate capital (rising with size), and real-time continuous monitoring of risk, but these measures should be implemented without overbearing micromanagement.
Unfortunately, the Obama administration’s decision to put the unions ahead of secured debt-holders in the orchestrated Chrysler bankruptcy risks rupturing the basic fabric of credit markets.
But Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner’s much-ridiculed bank “stress tests” made sense (although one can argue that sufficiently dire scenarios were not included or that too much was negotiated with the banks, etc.).
Determining the size of likely losses is necessary to decide whether banks’ retained earnings from profitable ongoing operations and their ability to raise private capital will allow them to work down their toxic assets over time.
If not, more draconian solutions will be necessary. 
I support Geithner’s plan to cooperate with private investors in dealing with the banks’ toxic assets, because they make better business decisions than government bureaucrats.
But the Fed’s low-interest, non-recourse loans to buy up toxic assets have not yet caused a stampede of participants.
Will banks be willing to part with the assets at a low enough price to attract private investment?
And would doing so force larger write-downs, requiring banks, in turn, to ration credit – and thus harming the economy?
Obama has been better than feared on international trade.
He was famously protectionist during the primaries, declaring he would unilaterally rewrite NAFTA.
But, while he has continued his softer tone since the election, he has not even bothered to ask for fast-track trade-promotion authority, let alone try to pump new life into the Doha Round of global trade talks.
Obama is getting a large part of his agenda.
Unfortunately, the numbers don’t add up and he is laying twin time bombs with the explosion of federal government debt and inefficient government micromanagement of the economy.
His call for immense deficits  even once the economy is back to normal, funds are returned from the financial bailouts, and the US is out of Iraq – is simply irresponsible.
The American economy will likely return to growth late this year and next, especially with all the monetary and fiscal stimulus (growth would have initially been slower and then much stronger without it), but it will still be an economy on a government lifeline.
The big questions left unanswered are how far Obama wants to push the US toward a European-style social-welfare state, how he intends to pay for it, and how much long-term economic damage will result?
Grandmasters and Global Growth
CAMBRIDGE – As the global economy limps out of the last decade and enters a new one in 2010, what will be the next big driver of global growth? Here’s betting that the “teens” is a decade in which artificial intelligence hits escape velocity, and starts to have an economic impact on par with the emergence of India and China.
Unfortunately, the supremely confident Kasparov did not take Deep Blue seriously enough in the 1997 rematch.
Deep Blue shocked the champion, winning the match 3.5 to 2.5.
At the same time, computer programs began to exploit huge databases of games between grandmaster (the highest title in chess), using results from the human games to extrapolate what moves have the highest chances of success. Soon, it became clear that even the best human chess players would have little chance to do better than an occasional draw.
Today, chess programs have become so good that even grandmasters sometimes struggle to understand the logic behind some of their moves.
In chess magazines, one often sees comments from top players such as “My silicon friend says I should have moved my King instead of my Queen, but I still think I played the best ‘human’ move.”
It gets worse. Many commercially available computer programs can be set to mimic the styles of top grandmasters to an extent that is almost uncanny.
Indeed, chess programs now come very close to passing the late British mathematician Alan Turing’s ultimate test of artificial intelligence: can a human conversing with the machine tell it is not human?
I sure can’t.
Of course, this is a microcosm of the larger changes that we can expect.
The horrible computerized telephone-answering systems that we all now suffer with might actually improve.
Imagine, someday you might actually prefer digital to human operators.
In 50 years, computers might be doing everything from driving taxis to performing routine surgery.
Sooner than that, artificial intelligence will transform higher learning, potentially making a world-class university education broadly affordable even in poor developing countries.
And, of course, there are more mundane but crucial uses of artificial intelligence everywhere, from managing the electronics and lighting in our homes to populating “smart grids” for water and electricity, helping monitor these and other systems to reduce waste.
In short, I do not share the view of many that, after the Internet and the personal computer, it will be a long wait until the next paradigm-shifting innovation.
Artificial intelligence will provide the boost that keeps the teens rolling.
Both the agreement itself and the atmosphere of cooperation that permeated the proceedings represent a sea change from the failed Copenhagen summit in 2009.
But while we should congratulate world leaders on their success, Paris marks the beginning, not the end, of the road.
It is now our collective duty to hold our leaders to account and ensure that they turn promises into action – especially in the world’s most vulnerable regions, such as Africa.
We should applaud China, India, the United States, and the European Union for their pre-Paris pledges on climate action.
These countries’ commitments created the sense of responsibility, trust, and solidarity that enabled 195 nations not merely to agree on a one-off deal, but to set in motion a series of increasingly ambitious five-year cycles to phase out greenhouse-gas emissions this century.
This is a clear signal that the carbon era has reached a turning point; as a result, there will be more investment in renewable energy.
Countries also promised to work harder to protect the world’s most vulnerable, by aiming to limit average global warming to as little as 1.5º Celsius above pre-industrial levels.
And developed countries pledged at least $100 billion of annual climate finance to help the least developed countries cut their carbon emissions and prepare for climate change.
For the first time, an international agreement offers the least developed countries funds to cover some of the loss and damage caused by climate shocks.
But in order to fulfill the Paris agreement, we must ensure that governments keep their promises.
National emissions targets are voluntary, rather than inscribed in the agreement, so they are not legally binding.
In hard, practical terms, there is not yet anything specific to slow the extraction of fossil fuels or stop high-polluting countries from using coal for electricity.
Developed countries made no individual commitments, and the starting year for funding adaptation assistance remains unclear.
We must keep the pressure on to make sure that the promised climate finance is sufficient to enable the least-developed countries to adapt to present and future climate change.
All of this must happen urgently.
The cumulative effect of previous decades of emissions means that there will be no chance for a last-minute solution.
In Africa, climate change may already be responsible for falling water levels in West African rivers; declining coral reefs in tropical waters; lower fruit production in the Sahel; fewer fish in the Great Lakes region; and the spread of malaria in the Kenyan uplands.
Without significant cuts in greenhouse-gas emissions, we will see far worse.
By threatening basic human needs, such as food and water, climate change will be a catalyst for instability, migration, and conflict.
Africa will pay a heavy price.
Fortunately, we now know that we can prevent catastrophic climate change while still providing the energy needed to sustain economic growth, create jobs, and lift millions of people out of poverty.
The many benefits of pursuing a low-carbon development path include not only cleaner air and better energy security, but also the opportunities that arise from decentralized and renewable power.
These opportunities are particularly crucial for Africa, where more than 620 million people live without electricity.
The falling cost of solar power, batteries, and LED lighting means that renewable sources can now provide affordable, modern energy.
In Kenya, for example, Maasai women in Magadi who have been trained to install solar power have brought electricity to 2,000 households in just two years.
But to realize this economic and social potential, African leaders must combat corruption.
They must make the management of their utilities more transparent, strengthen regulations, and increase public spending on energy infrastructure.
Investment and external financing must follow.
This is not a question of aid, but of fairness, given that Africa contributes so little to global emissions but stands to suffer the most from climate change.
Investing in low-carbon energy also makes sound business sense: It boosts technology companies and promotes social entrepreneurship globally.
I am pleased that two initiatives launched in Paris will take us farther down the renewable-energy path.
Europe and Canada pledged $10 billion toward an ambitious project called the Africa Renewable Energy Initiative, which aims to install ten gigawatts of solar, wind, and geothermal capacity by the end of the decade.
And France and India launched the International Solar Alliance to raise more than $1 trillion by 2030 to deploy solar power in more than 100 developing countries.
The Paris agreement has drawn the first broad strokes of a solution to climate change.
But until its targets are translated into action, the world’s least-developed countries may not be convinced that the developed countries are serious about equity – or “climate justice.”
For Africa, 2015 must be a turning point.
If the world’s citizens hold their leaders to account for the targets they have set, it will be.
Quite simply, the historic responsibility for the planet’s future rests on the shoulders of us all.
Revanchist China
SYDNEY – In a speech at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington, DC, on February 22, Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe informed the audience of officials, experts, and journalists that Japan is “back” and will not stand down in its ongoing sovereignty dispute with China over the Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands.
With Chinese provocations on the rise, US President Barack Obama, Abe’s host, appealed for calm and restraint on both sides.
Japan is likely to accede – grudgingly – to America’s request, as it remains dependent on its alliance with the US for its security.
But it will be much more difficult to persuade China that it should stand down.
China’s assertiveness over its sovereignty claim reflects more than a desire to exploit seabed resources, or to gain a widened strategic gateway into the western Pacific.
It is also about national renewal and rejuvenation – the core of the Chinese Communist Party’s raison d’être.
Turning away from a fight with its former occupier and historical rival would be a step backward in this six-decade-long quest.
The idea of Chinese renewal or rejuvenation was popularized by then-Premier Zhao Ziyang in the late 1980’s, and frequently promoted by Presidents Jiang Zemin and Hu Jintao.
Most recently, incoming President Xi Jinping, visiting the National Museum of China’s “Road Toward Renewal” exhibition, pledged to continue the “great renewal of the Chinese nation.”
What does “renewal” or “rejuvenation” mean to the Chinese?
All nations – great and small – embody a combination of historical fact and myth.
In this case, the CCP’s view of rejuvenation is built on the belief that the zenith of Chinese power under the Ming and Qing dynasties represents the natural, just, and permanent state of affairs for a 5,000-year-old civilization.
When Mao Zedong took power in 1949, his immediate goal was to re-establish the “greater China” of the Qing Dynasty (1644-1912), insisting that the Manchu-led empire was the permanent and enduring China.
But, while the assault on the Qing Dynasty by foreign powers is a historical fact, the notion that there has been one enduring China struggling against avaricious outsiders across several millennia is false and self-serving.
Mao achieved his goal following the so-called peaceful liberation of the East Turkestan Republic (now Xinjiang) in 1949 and the invasion of Tibet in 1950, which promptly increased China’s size by more than one-third.
And every CCP leader since has carried forward his vision of a greater China, adjusting and expanding it as the country’s power grows.
For example, China showed little interest in the Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands prior to 1968 – the year a geographical study pointed to vast oil reserves beneath the seabed.
The same can be said for China’s growing stridency with respect to its claims in the South China Sea.
In 2009, relying heavily on a dubious historical claim, China formally tabled its “nine-dotted line” map to the United Nations Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf, and has since referred to almost all of the South China Sea as being under its “indisputable sovereignty.”
Having dominated East and Southeast Asia for all but the last two centuries of the past two millennia, China is chafing at the current US-led regional order of sovereign states, in which even the smallest enjoys the same rights, privileges, and protection as the largest.
Modern China has benefited enormously from this arrangement; nonetheless, there is keen resentment that the Chinese civilization-state’s vast achievements over several thousand years offer China no special status.
To a people imbued with a deep sense of superior moral worth, historical achievement, and victimization by foreign powers, this state of affairs is unjust and unnatural.
It follows that pulling back from any territorial dispute with smaller and inferior states would be seen as a humiliating defeat, rather than a step toward ensuring long-term regional stability.
Moreover, an expanding view of greater China implies that a resolution of the dispute over the Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands in China’s favor would be likely to embolden rather than satisfy its ambitions.
Making good on its claim to the South China Sea could be next.
As Obama and Abe forge a common strategy aimed at helping to manage China’s rise peacefully, they must understand that China’s conception of renewal seeks to resurrect a glorious past, and that this implies revision, not affirmation, of the existing regional order.
This means that they will have to limit China’s strategic and military options, even if they cannot constrain its ambitions.
Greece and the Limits of Anti-Austerity
CAMBRIDGE – Is austerity dead?
At last month’s G-8 meeting at Camp David, the German-led austerity program for the eurozone’s troubled southern members ran up against substantial resistance.
Likewise, France’s recent presidential election bolstered those who argue that Europe must grow its way out of its debt-heavy public sector, rather than aim for immediate fiscal orthodoxy.
And there is no guarantee that Greece’s newly elected center-right New Democracy party, which favors honoring the country’s bailout terms, will be able to form a majority government.
The United States, by contrast, has pursued expansionary and growth-oriented macroeconomic policies since the 2007-2009 financial crisis, despite massive budget deficits.
Thus far, judging from the modest recovery in the US versus non-recovery in Europe, American policy accommodation is performing better than European austerity.
But simply choosing between expansion and austerity is not the whole story.
Macroeconomic policies interact with on-the-ground microeconomic realities in subtle but powerful, rarely remarked-upon ways.
Simply put, Europe’s microeconomic structure makes the same growth-based macroeconomic policies less effective in the European Union than in the US.
Here’s why: macroeconomic easing, by lowering interest rates or otherwise pumping money into the economy, aims to increase economic activity.
With more money moving around, businesses rehire employees and ask existing employees to work more hours.
Entrepreneurs considering whether or not to start a business decide to proceed, and their bank lends them the money to make the new business viable.
The newly hired workers and newly formed businesses spend money, which induces more hiring, more start-ups, and yet more spending.
The economy grows, yielding higher tax revenues, thereby helping governments to put their fiscal house in order.
The country grows its way out of its economic problems.
But the EU cannot realize this scenario as easily as the US can, because micro-level rules in the EU generate friction that slows that kind of an expansion.
The EU’s stricter labor rules are a well-known and often-cited example.
European labor-market rigidities mean that it is difficult in many EU countries to downsize a company.
Anticipating that difficulty, companies are less willing to hire in the first place, until they are sure that long-term demand for their products is sufficient to justify long-term hires.
Hence, even if businesses get easier access to money and loans, many firms will still decline to hire on a large scale, fearing that they would be saddled with a large payroll in a future downturn.
For example, The Economist’s recent portrait of Italian Prime Minister Mario Monti shows that Italy continues to be stymied by labor rules that make businesses reluctant to expand beyond 15 employees (after which it becomes hard for a firm to downsize).
To work smoothly, expansive macroeconomic policies require compatible microeconomic rules.
There is some irony in the fact that the strongest proponent of austerity has been German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s government, because Germany, particularly under her predecessor Gerhard Schroeder’s Social Democrat-led government, did much more to liberalize the country’s rules for labor and business than other EU governments.
Expansive, growth-based policy could work better in Germany than in many eurozone countries for which it is being prescribed.
Rules that impede business start-ups may be an even more important obstacle to making monetary expansion effective.
It is simply too difficult to launch many types of businesses in many places, and to expand those that are started.
Necessary licenses are often not routinely obtained. The simple start-up paperwork is still more burdensome than it is in the US.
Indeed, while this process has become easier in Europe in recent years, the World Bank estimates that it still takes twice as long to start up a small business in Greece and much of the rest of the EU as it does in the US – and four times as long in Spain.
While the relative absence of Facebook-style mega-entrepreneurial successes in Europe is regularly bemoaned, the difficulties of opening hairdressers, basic retailers, and simple mail-order businesses may have an equally profound overall effect.
Consider taxi licensing.
Many people can drive a cab, including many who are unemployed, but not so many can get permission to do so in many major cities in Europe and the US.
Imagine much of the economy organized like the taxi industry.
Most kinds of economic stimulus won’t generate more taxis, until entry restrictions are reduced.
Magda Bianco, Silvia Giacomelli, and Giacomo Rodano, researchers at the Bank of Italy, report that these institutional roadblocks to expansion remain substantial in Italy.
A factory might get easier access to funds, and it might see more demand for its products, but, rather than hiring new workers, it might decide to raise its prices.
A potential competitor might consider entering that market; but, given substantial regulatory entry barriers, it might ultimately decide to remain in its current business.
Expansionary monetary policy in such an environment might fail.
Perhaps for this reason, France’s new president, François Hollande, favors using the government to direct specific outcomes – for example, by hiring 60,000 new teachers.
One can imagine a grand bargain in Europe, with expansionary macroeconomic policies coupled with the easing of microeconomic impediments.
But existing businesses and already-employed workers prefer the status quo, and can powerfully inhibit policymakers.
There may be more than a little of this in Greek politics, and that of other EU countries.
Greece, Argentina, and the Middle-Income Trap
SANTIAGO – Aside from an established tradition of bad macroeconomics, what do Greece and Argentina have in common?
One answer is that they were the world’s longest-held captives of the so-called middle-income trap – and remain within its reach to this day.
With countries in Asia, Eastern Europe, and Latin American fearing that, having reached the international middle class, they could be stuck there, Greece and Argentina shed light on how that might happen.
A recent paper by economists from Bard College and the Asian Development Bank categorizes the world economy according to four groups – with the top two categories occupied by upper-middle-income and high-income countries – and tracks countries’ movements in and out of these groups.
Which countries were stuck for the longest period in the upper-middle-income category before moving to high income?
You guessed it: Greece and Argentina.
Correcting for variations in the cost of living across countries, the paper concludes that $10,750 of purchasing power in the year 1990 is the threshold for per capita income beyond which a country is high income, while $7,250 makes it upper-middle income.
(These thresholds may sound low, but the World Bank uses similar cutoffs.)
By these criteria, Argentina became an upper-middle-income country all the way back in 1970, and then spent 40 years stuck in that category before reaching high-income status in 2010.
Greece joined the international upper middle class in 1972, and then took 28 years to reach the top income group, in 2000.
No other country that became upper middle income after 1950, and then made the transition, took nearly as long.
In fact, the average length of that transition was 14 years, with economies such as South Korea, Taiwan, and Hong Kong taking as little as seven years.
Data in the paper stop at 2010, but the story may well be worse today.
According to IMF figures, Greece’s never-ending crisis has cut per capita GDP (in terms of purchasing power parity) by 10% since 2010, and by 18% since 2007.
Indeed, Greece may have dropped out of the high-income category in recent years.
Argentina’s per capita income has risen, albeit slowly, during this period, but the country was never far from a full-blown macroeconomic crisis that could reduce household incomes sharply.
So it seems fair to conclude that both countries are still caught in the middle-income trap.
What kind of trap is it?
In Greece and Argentina, it is both political and economic.
Start with the politics.
In their book Why Nations Fail, Daron Acemoglu and James A. Robinson argue that societies with political arrangements that concentrate power in the hands of a few seldom excel at innovation and growth, because innovators have no guarantee they will keep the fruits of their labors.
And, to the extent that outsiders cannot generate wealth, they have few resources with which to challenge the power of insiders; as a result, exclusionary political arrangements are mostly self-sustaining.
That is a useful account of why there is a poverty trap – which is the question the book seeks to answer – but it does not clarify why there is a middle-income trap.
Greece and Argentina are, after all, democracies, however imperfect, and so are most of the countries in Latin America or East Asia that worry about being stuck at middle-income level.
The Acemoglu-Robinson account of a single small elite pulling all the strings needs to be replaced by a different narrative, in which an array of politically powerful groups exercise veto power over decisions that affect their economic interests.
Think of powerful business groups vetoing moves to improve tax collection or strengthen competition policy.
This helps explain why the Greek and Argentine governments are perennially in deficit (until borrowing options dry up and adjustment is inevitable), or why prices – and profits – are high in sectors (for example, transportation and telecoms) that provide would-be entrepreneurs with crucial (but often unaffordable) inputs.
Or think of public-sector unions vetoing changes in benefits for their members.
That goes a long way toward explaining (add a bit of ideology to the mix) why the current Greek government has gone to the brink of default before agreeing to restrain public-sector pensions, as its European Union partners demand.
It also helps explain why both Greece and Argentina have sizeable governments (public spending accounts for 46% and 39% of GDP, respectively) but puny public investment and outdated infrastructure.
This is not a case of too much democracy, as conservative commentators sometimes claim, but of too little.
Underdeveloped democratic institutions allow for decisions that are individually rational but collectively shortsighted and harmful.
And bad politics makes for bad economics.
To go from middle-income to high-income status, countries have to redeploy resources to high-productivity, knowledge- and skill-intensive sectors.
That is a transition that Greece and Argentina, with their financial instability, poor infrastructure, and weak education systems, have never made.
Greece exports refined petroleum products, olive oil, raw cotton, and dried fruit.
Argentina exports corn, soybeans, fruits, and wine – as well as cars and auto parts to the rest of the regional Mercosur trade bloc, where it enjoys ample tariff protection against third-country competition.
According to the Atlas of Economic Complexity, developed by Ricardo Hausmann and colleagues at Harvard University, the 2008 gap between Greece’s income and the knowledge content of its exports was the largest in a sample of 128 countries.
By 2013, Greece ranked 48th in the Atlas’s index of complexity of exports – by far the lowest of any developed country in Europe – while Argentina ranked 67th.
Sluggish exports mean slow growth, which in turn places limits on social mobility and the expansion of an entrepreneurial middle class.
That helps preserve the political power of entrenched veto-wielding players, closing the trap.
Perhaps a weighty tome entitled Why Middle-Income Nations Fail will tell the story in full.
Societies will then understand why high-income status eludes them – and what they might do differently.
Europe’s Last Act?
NEW YORK – European Union leaders continue to play a game of brinkmanship with the Greek government.
Greece has met its creditors’ demands far more than halfway.
Yet Germany and Greece’s other creditors continue to demand that the country sign on to a program that has proven to be a failure, and that few economists ever thought could, would, or should be implemented.
The swing in Greece’s fiscal position from a large primary deficit to a surplus was almost unprecedented, but the demand that the country achieve a primary surplus of 4.5% of GDP was unconscionable.
Unfortunately, at the time that the “troika” – the European Commission, the European Central Bank, and the International Monetary Fund – first included this irresponsible demand in the international financial program for Greece, the country’s authorities had no choice but to accede to it.
The folly of continuing to pursue this program is particularly acute now, given the 25% decline in GDP that Greece has endured since the beginning of the crisis.
The troika badly misjudged the macroeconomic effects of the program that they imposed.
According to their published forecasts, they believed that, by cutting wages and accepting other austerity measures, Greek exports would increase and the economy would quickly return to growth.
They also believed that the first debt restructuring would lead to debt sustainability.
The troika’s forecasts have been wrong, and repeatedly so.
And not by a little, but by an enormous amount.
Greece’s voters were right to demand a change in course, and their government is right to refuse to sign on to a deeply flawed program.
Having said that, there is room for a deal: Greece has made clear its willingness to engage in continued reforms, and has welcomed Europe’s help in implementing some of them.
A dose of reality on the part of Greece’s creditors – about what is achievable, and about the macroeconomic consequences of different fiscal and structural reforms – could provide the basis of an agreement that would be good not only for Greece, but for all of Europe.
Some in Europe, especially in Germany, seem nonchalant about a Greek exit from the eurozone.
The market has, they claim, already “priced in” such a rupture.
Some even suggest that it would be good for the monetary union.
I believe that such views significantly underestimate both the current and future risks involved.
A similar degree of complacency was evident in the United States before the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008.
The fragility of America’s banks had been known for a long time – at least since the bankruptcy of Bear Stearns the previous March.
Yet, given the lack of transparency (owing in part to weak regulation), both markets and policymakers did not fully appreciate the linkages among financial institutions.
Indeed, the world’s financial system is still feeling the aftershocks of the Lehman collapse.
And banks remain non-transparent, and thus at risk.
We still don’t know the full extent of linkages among financial institutions, including those arising from non-transparent derivatives and credit default swaps.
In Europe, we can already see some of the consequences of inadequate regulation and the flawed design of the eurozone itself.
We know that the structure of the eurozone encourages divergence, not convergence: as capital and talented people leave crisis-hit economies, these countries become less able to repay their debts.
As markets grasp that a vicious downward spiral is structurally embedded in the euro, the consequences for the next crisis become profound.
And another crisis in inevitable: it is in the very nature of capitalism.
ECB President Mario Draghi’s confidence trick, in the form of his declaration in 2012 that the monetary authorities would do “whatever it takes” to preserve the euro, has worked so far.
But the knowledge that the euro is not a binding commitment among its members will make it far less likely to work the next time.
Bond yields could spike, and no amount of reassurance by the ECB and Europe’s leaders would suffice to bring them down from stratospheric levels, because the world now knows that they will not do “whatever it takes.”
As the example of Greece has shown, they will do only what short-sighted electoral politics demands.
The most important consequence, I fear, is the weakening of European solidarity.
The euro was supposed to strengthen it.
Instead, it has had the opposite effect.
It is not in the interest of Europe – or the world – to have a country on Europe’s periphery alienated from its neighbors, especially now, when geopolitical instability is already so evident.
The neighboring Middle East is in turmoil; the West is attempting to contain a newly aggressive Russia; and China, already the world’s largest source of savings, the largest trading country, and the largest overall economy (in terms of purchasing power parity), is confronting the West with new economic and strategic realities.
This is no time for European disunion.
Europe’s leaders viewed themselves as visionaries when they created the euro.
They thought they were looking beyond the short-term demands that usually preoccupy political leaders.
Unfortunately, their understanding of economics fell short of their ambition; and the politics of the moment did not permit the creation of the institutional framework that might have enabled the euro to work as intended.
Although the single currency was supposed to bring unprecedented prosperity, it is difficult to detect a significant positive effect for the eurozone as a whole in the period before the crisis.
In the period since, the adverse effects have been enormous.
The future of Europe and the euro now depends on whether the eurozone’s political leaders can combine a modicum of economic understanding with a visionary sense of, and concern for, European solidarity.
We are likely to begin finding out the answer to that existential question in the next few weeks.
Europe’s Greek Failure
BRUSSELS – Narratives matter, especially when they are intertwined with hard interests.
As Greece and its creditors court catastrophe, we are getting a clear picture of how conflicting narratives can lead to a lose-lose result.
The facts are indisputable.
In early 2010, when the Greek government could no longer finance itself, it turned to its European partners and the International Monetary Fund for financial support.
And they delivered: not only did other eurozone countries issue loans to Greece, but the IMF provided its largest-ever loan to the country.
Later, Greece received even more support through the eurozone’s bailout funds.
The result was hundreds of billions of euros worth of assistance.
But, as time progressed, Greece and its creditors came to view these facts very differently.
As Greece’s economic situation deteriorated, its citizens got the sense that the loans were not really intended to help them, but rather to bail out German and French banks.
With this narrative, Greeks could avoid admitting the role of their own government’s policy mistakes in thrusting them into recession.
Greece’s creditors, by contrast, felt that they had generously saved a profligate country from bankruptcy.
This narrative allowed policymakers in Germany to disregard the fact that their country’s banks had financed Greek borrowing for too long.
Both narratives contain a large amount of truth, but conveniently overlook some important facts.
For instance, a substantial share of the loans given to Greece until early 2012 was indeed used to pay off maturing debt.
But it is likely that the holders of the debt were no longer French or German banks – who for the most part would have been unable to bear the uncertainty that preceded the 2012 bailout and haircut on Greek debt.
By the time the eurozone governments intervened decisively, most French and German banks had largely unloaded their holdings at a loss to hedge funds and other investors with a greater appetite for risk.
Whatever debt they had held onto lost more than half its value in the haircut.
Given this, it cannot be said that French and German banks did not suffer losses.
Similarly, the creditor countries were right that they had helped Greece, a country that had undeniably overspent for years.
Their financial assistance allowed Greece to reduce its fiscal deficits more slowly than if it had simply gone bankrupt in 2010, as it enabled the country to remain connected to financial markets.
In the first quarter of last year, Greece actually experienced a slight uptick in growth and a small decline in unemployment.
What the creditors overlooked was that, over time, the pain of austerity began – in the minds of many Greeks – to outweigh the benefits of their assistance.
Until a few months ago, it still looked as if Greece could achieve a primary surplus, albeit a small one, this year.
When the country turned to its creditors for help, it was only because it could not cover some large payments on maturing loans.
Greece had ceased to be a “bottomless pit.”
With a bit of financial engineering, Greece’s creditors could have postponed some of the payments the country owed this year – payments that, it should be noted, everyone knew it would not be able to repay at this stage – and enabled it to continue its gradual recovery.
Instead, these clashing narratives created a deleterious spiral, fanning the flames of animosity and leading to the election of a left-wing government in Greece with a mandate to oppose austerity – with disastrous results for both sides.
Rather than help Greece make its payments, the creditors reacted by imposing tough conditions for a new loan that would be used only to repay debts that they themselves held – a point that Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras emphasized in his last proposal.
And yet, blaming the creditors for their “punitive” conditions, as Greek negotiators have done, would also be a mistake, for this simplistic narrative too obscures a complicated truth.
Right before the talks were abruptly cut off for Greece to hold its referendum, the two sides had agreed on fiscal targets for Greece; all that was left was to determine how the targets should be reached.
The Greek government wanted to raise some taxes.
Its creditors believed that this approach would stifle growth even more, so they advocated increasing the tax base, such as by eliminating the lower value-added tax rates enjoyed by Greek islands, instead.
Though the creditors’ logic was sound and their intentions laudable, the Greek side believed that such a condition would amount to an affront to their country’s sovereignty.
With that, their narrative morphed into one of national pride.
It was a classic “prisoner’s dilemma.”
Both sides have known throughout the tortuous negotiations of recent months that failure to reach an agreement would benefit no one.
Greece’s economy would contract even further, and its creditors would have to accept even larger write-offs.
But the two sides have remained locked in their respective narratives – narratives that the recent cutoff of negotiations and hastily arranged referendum have reinforced.
Now, the Greek electorate is rejecting the creditors’ demands in the name of national pride, democracy, and sovereignty; the creditors are angry not only at their attitude, but also at their government’s unreliability.
Saving Greece was always going to be difficult, given its previous fiscal excesses and weak economy.
But last year, it seemed that success was within reach – until the clash of narratives derailed the progress the two sides had made.
This highlights a larger problem: the European Union lacks a unifying narrative strong enough to prevent the emergence of conflicting – and highly destructive – narratives within its borders.
In this sense, the failure to save Greece amounts to a failure of Europe.
Getting Personal With the Greek Crisis
BERLIN – Today’s decision-makers are supposed to embrace the virtues of big data, relentlessly pursue quantitative metrics, and then adhere to the optimal course of action that these powerful tools supposedly indicate.
Yet if there is one thing that the Greek crisis has made clear, it is the importance of the human factor in negotiations.
People and their personalities, and the way they perceive one another, can make small debts seem unserviceable or large debts disappear with a handshake.
In a world that feels increasingly unstable, many seek reassurance in the illusion of certainty that data provide.
We want it in our journalism.
We want it in our investment decisions.
We even want gadgets that count our every step and heartbeat.
We want to bring our wellbeing and our future fully under our control.
But the Greek financial crisis serves as a reminder that life is not governed by data alone.
In the end, outcomes may – and often do – depend on the amorphous yet essential qualities of integrity, trustworthiness, and interpersonal “chemistry.”
The importance of such factors was no less clear in the negotiations over Iran’s nuclear program.
Whereas partisan grandstanding and nationalist posturing in the Greek negotiations have eroded confidence in the entire European project, the negotiators on the Iran deal overcame an even deeper trust gap.
With arguably more at stake, and despite the involvement of more players with overlapping and, at times, antagonistic agendas, entrusting the process to professional diplomats, rather than elected politicians, clearly paid off.
There is an important lesson here for Europe.
People selected to lead countries or companies must have the technical competence – and the number-crunching support teams – needed to make good decisions.
But that is never enough.
Effective leaders must be able not only to represent a point of view, but also to work well with others to realize their vision.
If deals – whether on bailout arrangements, nuclear programs, or corporate mergers – could be concluded on the basis of quantitative data alone, they would be.
But they never are.
For Greece and its creditors now, the latest agreement is only the first step.
The six months of finger pointing and brinkmanship that preceded the deal have created a mountain of mistrust among leaders and citizens alike.
When multiple ceasefire agreements fail in South Sudan and eastern Ukraine, or a humanitarian truce in Yemen collapses within hours, one or more of the parties is said to lack “credible commitment.”
Similarly, when the Greek side proposes essentially the same deal that it just called a snap referendum to reject, or when the Eurogroup of eurozone finance ministers, following Germany’s lead, simply ignores the unsustainability of Greece’s debt, the ability to execute any deal must be in doubt.
What will make this deal work is quick ratification and credible follow-through in terms of day-to-day implementation.
Both sides need incentives to stick with it and deterrents to defecting from it.
Above all, conditioning further, essential debt relief for Greece on its execution of the deal should be used as a way to commit both sides.
A track record of failed implementation – of accepting bailouts without implementing the reforms needed to regain solvency – creates a climate in which deal making becomes ever more difficult.
The risks are too high, especially when every development in the talks is spun for partisan advantage, to make leaders look smart, to label winners and losers, or to undermine progress by nit-picking the data.
It is to the credit of European leaders involved in the negotiations that they have been able to reach a deal in the face of enormous uncertainty.
They have committed not just financial resources but also significant political capital at a make-or-break moment for Europe.
Given the lack of trust between the parties to the deal, the situation will remain extremely volatile for some time.
Quantitative data will be necessary to monitor Greece’s progress on carrying out the agreed reforms, as well as to determine the extent of further debt relief.
But neither Greece nor Europe will regain a sense of stability merely because the data add up.
Their leaders’ personal qualities – their unshakable will and determination to make the deal stick – must add up, too.
Greece’s Imperfect Imperative
LONDON – Greece and its creditors are now enacting a deal that provides financial support in exchange for wide-ranging reforms.
Although reservations about the agreement abound, political conditions did not permit a better one.
But the deal can – and must – serve as the basis for saving Greece and the eurozone.
For the plan to work, Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras must show real commitment to a reform program in which neither he nor many Greek citizens believe.
And he must forge an alliance with Greece’s pro-European parties, because only a united government will be able to deliver.
The creditors must find the money to fund the bailout.
And the International Monetary Fund must agree with the Eurogroup on how to restore debt sustainability in Greece, a precondition for the country to regain access to capital markets.
In this effort, a critical distinction must be made: though Greece has committed to deep and rapid reform, it must not be forced into hurried fiscal consolidation.
Indeed, such an approach could undermine urgently needed structural reforms, not least by destroying the political capital required to enact them.
Unfortunately, the recent agreement includes unrealistic proposals for fiscal adjustment.
Before Greek banks closed and capital controls were imposed in late June, the European Commission put the primary budget deficit for this year at €4-6 billion ($4.3-6.5 billion), or 2-3% of GDP.
Now, it looks like the primary deficit (which excludes interest payments) could reach 6% of GDP, with GDP falling by 4%.
Yet the new deal anticipates that Greece will make up for the year’s fiscal shortfall in just five months.
As Greece and other eurozone countries have already learned, attempting to rush fiscal adjustment increases the debt burden, as the liquidity squeeze and concomitant uncertainty undermine output and reform efforts.
For example, one of the key initiatives to address the fiscal shortfall is an increase in the value-added tax to 23% for almost all goods and services.
But with VAT evasion in Greece as high as 50%, the hike will place firms that pay, which tend to be larger and more efficient, at an even greater disadvantage relative to firms that do not.
Greece should therefore focus first on building the legal and technical infrastructure to combat tax evasion.
Greece’s government will find it hard to adhere to the new program unless its fiscal targets make sense.
Though it is politically unrealistic to renegotiate the deal at this point, a serious analysis of the necessary fiscal adjustment, possibly arbitrated by independent experts, is needed.
The IMF’s latest analysis of Greece’s debt sustainability reinforces this assessment.
Despite pressure from Germany and other countries to participate in the new bailout program, the Fund will not get involved unless it judges Greece’s debt to be sustainable.
That means making the economy’s debt stocks and fiscal flows consistent, with the right combination of tough but feasible fiscal targets and debt relief.
Fiscal discipline should not take priority over the important structural reforms included in the new deal, particularly measures to overhaul pensions, the legal system, product markets, public administration, and the judiciary.
Implementation will be very difficult even without excessively tight fiscal targets; with them, it may be impossible.
Previous attempts at pension reform, for example, have been partial and indecisive, with exceptions and grace periods undermining their effectiveness.
Similarly, though attempts to reform the code of civil procedure, aimed at improving the judicial system’s efficiency, began in 2011, little progress has been made, owing largely to the government’s failure to face down opposition from lawyers’ associations, which stand to lose their excessive fees from useless procedures.
And, although the groundwork has been laid for product-market reforms, no preparations for serious public-administration reform have been made.
The key to overcoming these challenges is for the Greek people to take ownership of the reforms, so that the public interest can prevail over vested interests.
But that, too, will be difficult, given the widespread view that the reforms are being imposed on Greece by its creditors.
Tsipras must lead the way by building a broad consensus.
The details of the reform legislation are important.
Rather than attempting to meet unfeasible deadlines, legislators should proceed with deliberate speed.
Meanwhile, Greek banks – which, given their huge volume of non-performing loans, are now more likely to be insolvent than illiquid – will require massive recapitalization, funded by the European Stability Mechanism, not the Greek state, in order to break the bank-sovereign link.
The operation might involve restructuring as well.
In this effort, there must be no bail-in of depositors, which would have damaging social consequences, or Greek state ownership of the banks, which would entrench clientelism in the financial system.
The ESM would later sell the banks in open auctions to recoup its investment.
Many in Greece, as well as some outsiders, have called the new agreement “neocolonialist oppression.”
And, indeed, Greece’s humiliation in the negotiations evoked memories of the Indonesian president’s treatment by the IMF during the Asian financial crisis of 1997.
(Some creditors feel that they are the true victims, exploited by Greek counterparts who never intended to fulfill their promises.)
But the Greeks must put aside these emotional responses and recognize the need for many of the proposed reforms.
Greece’s failure to implement them has allowed the clientelism, oligarchy, corruption, and tax evasion underpinning its economic and political dysfunction to continue practically unfettered.
The alternative is a Greek exit from the eurozone.
(German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble’s suggestion that Greece can just take a “time out” is a fiction.)
Economists who pretend that this would be anything less than an economic and political catastrophe for Greece should look closely at the structure of Greek trade, the anemic response of exports to the already huge internal devaluation, and company and household balance sheets.
Some would welcome the damage this would do to European unity; we would not.
The recent agreement is far from ideal.
But Greece and its creditors must make it work.