Global growth remains slow; and, with monetary and fiscal policies having a limited impact on economic recovery, governments have neither the resources nor the courage to push for major projects.
Not surprisingly, our survey group ranked chronic fiscal imbalances second among 50 global risks that are most likely to manifest themselves over the next ten years.
Strong economies provide the leeway to invest in climate adaptation, while environmental stability ensures the breathing space needed to attend to economic problems.
Facing stresses on both systems simultaneously is like losing both engines on an airplane in mid-flight.
The second case study takes another perspective on systems thinking.
What happens if an apparently “minor” system – such as social media – sparks a “major” geopolitical crisis?
With the growing reach of social networks, information can spread worldwide almost instantaneously.
The benefits of this are well documented, but the risks of misinformation are not.
Consider the real-world case of someone shouting “Fire!” in a crowded theater.
Could something similar happen digitally, with a spark of misinformation igniting a conflagration and wreaking havoc before the truth is revealed?
The report’s third case study looks at what happens when we become complacent about a vital system.
For example, constant innovation in medical science over the last 100 years has left us with the impression that our health-care systems can never regress.
But experts are increasingly concerned about the potential for pandemics caused by bacteria resistant to all current antibiotics, while our intellectual-property system is failing to create adequate incentives for the development of new varieties.
The director-general of the World Health Organization has warned that if the world falls back into a pre-antibiotic age, a scratch or throat infection could become lethal once again.
Each case highlights the need to consider how to make systems more resilient, which means that systems cannot be considered in isolation.
They are both plugged into larger systems and comprised of smaller subsystems.
While, ideally, global risks would be met with global responses, the reality is that these risks manifest themselves mainly at the national level, and countries must address them largely on their own.
So we need to assess national resilience by regularly evaluating critical subsystems within countries.
The WEF currently is developing metrics that could evaluate national subsystems across five factors of resilience – redundancy, robustness, resourcefulness, response, and recovery – by combining perception-based data with publicly available statistical data.
Initial perception-based data gathered by the Forum is pointing toward the importance of leadership ability, transparency, efficiency, and good relationships between public and private-sector stakeholders.
While the development of these metrics is in its early stages, the ultimate aim is to develop a practical diagnostic tool that would function as an “MRI” for national decision-makers to assess their countries’ resilience to global risks.
By revealing underlying weaknesses that more traditional risk-assessment methods may miss, we could pinpoint the structural reforms, behavioral changes, and strategic investments that increased resilience requires.
The result would not only directly benefit each country willing to engage in this process. It would also imply accelerated innovation in global governance, which we need more than ever for the sake of preserving the integrity of our most crucial systems.
The World’s Biggest Shock Absorber
MUNICH – Since last autumn, Germany has been accused by a number of Anglo-American economists, above all by the 2008 Nobel laureate Paul Krugman, of not doing enough to combat the world economic crisis and of free-riding on other countries’ stimulus programs.
Recently, The Financial Times asked where the German economists are who defend Germany’s policies, voicing the presumption that they disagree with their government’s policies but are too cowardly to say so publicly, thus conforming to the rituals of the German “consensus society.”
From a German point of view, this discussion is a ludicrous inversion of the truth.
Germany has implemented two economic stimulus programs, amounting to €80 billion, or 3.2% of GDP, of which 1% of GDP will take effect in 2009.
At first glance, this is indeed less than the American program, which totals 6.2% of GDP, of which 2% will be spent in 2009.
But this impression is deceptive, since the German state, through the built-in flexibility of its extensive social-welfare system, already contributes to stabilizing the world economy.
Indeed, Germany’s generous unemployment insurance policies ensure that people are able to maintain their consumption standards even if they lose their jobs.
Germany even has short-time allowances that enable companies to reduce their employees’ working hours, with the loss in earnings partly reimbursed by the state.
Without this short-time allowance, the average number of unemployed in 2009 would be 300,000 higher than it is now.
At the same time, more than 40% of Germany’s adult population (pensioners, social-welfare recipients, unemployed, accident victims, students) receives some form of state transfer income, especially those in eastern Germany, while the burden of taxes and social security contributions on those in employment is high.
In the United States, the budget deficit in 2008 stood at 5.8% of GDP, and, according to the same OECD forecast, will amount to 10.2% of GDP in 2009, which translates into exactly the same economic stimulus as in Germany, 4.4% of GDP.
In addition, Germany has much more inner stability than the US, because it does not have the problem of heavily indebted households that are now restricted in their borrowing.
German banks grant mortgages only to a maximum of 60% of the value of a house, instead of the 100% mortgages that were frequently seen in the US and United Kingdom.
Likewise, there is also virtually no credit card debt in Germany, or other reasons for US-style household indebtedness.
A normal German household is not on its last financial legs, and is therefore able to compensate for income losses by adjusting its savings.
This is an additional reason why private consumption in Germany, according to last week’s joint forecast by Germany’s leading economic institutes, will increase by 0.3% in 2009 in the midst of the worst post-war economic crisis, whereas private consumption is in freefall almost everywhere else in the world.
Germany is the world’s second largest importer, closely behind the US.
Thus, the stability of German consumption is currently the world economy’s strongest economic pillar.
Whereas German exports are falling at an annual rate of 20%, the portion of imports that does not consist of intermediate products for export goods is stable, helping the world as a whole.
The data clearly supports this view.
According to the OECD, the annualized flow of German goods exports from January 2008 to January 2009 declined by $173 billion more than the corresponding flow of imports fell, which means that Germany’s annualized trade surplus fell by the same amount.
This is the strongest decline in net foreign demand facing a single country, or, equivalently, the strongest increase in a country’s net demand for foreign goods.
Japan, for example, has confronted only a $157 billion decline in its annualized trade balance.
During the same period, annualized US imports declined by $284 billion more than US exports, and China’s annualized trade surplus increased by $249 billion.
In other words, from January 2008 to January 2009, the US withdrew $284 billion and China $249 billion in annualized demand from the world economy, whereas Germany provided $173 billion and Japan $157 billion in annualized demand stimulus to the world economy.
For Europe’s bigger countries, the picture of annualized demand in the same period is mixed.
While Italy, like Germany and Japan, has added demand, totaling $6 billion, Spain has withdrawn $101 billion, the UK $50 billion and France $19 billion.
The $7 trillion decline in US house prices over the past two years was equivalent to the explosion of an atomic bomb.
Germany, Japan, and other countries absorbed and mitigated the shock waves.
So, instead of belittling German efforts, the world should show Germany a little more gratitude.
The World\u0027s Runaway Train
CAMBRIDGE – The global economy is a runaway train that is slowing, but not quickly enough.
That is what the extraordinary run-up in prices for oil, metals, and food is screaming at us.
The spectacular and historic global economic boom of the past six years is about to hit a wall.
Unfortunately, no one, certainly not in Asia or the United States, seems willing to bite the bullet and help engineer the necessary coordinated retreat to sustained sub-trend growth, which is necessary so that new commodity supplies and alternatives can catch up.
Instead, governments are clawing to stretch out unsustainable booms, further pushing up commodity prices, and raising the risk of a once-in-a-lifetime economic and financial mess.
All this need not end horribly, but policymakers in most regions have to start pressing hard on the brakes, not the accelerator.
Don’t look to the US for leadership in a presidential election year.
On the contrary, the US government has been handing out tax-rebate checks so that Americans will shop until they drop, and now Congress is talking about doing more. 
Don’t look to emerging markets, either.
Desperate to sustain their political and economic momentum, most have taken a wide variety of steps to prevent their economies from feeling the full brunt of the commodity price hikes.
As a result, higher commodity prices are eating into fiscal cushions rather than curtailing demand.
I am puzzled that so many economic pundits seem to think that the solution is for all governments, rich and poor, to pass out even more checks and subsidies so as to keep the boom going.
Keynesian stimulus policies might help ease the pain a bit for individual countries acting in isolation. But if every country tries to stimulate consumption at the same time, it won’t work.
A general rise in global demand will simply spill over into higher commodity prices, with little helpful effect on consumption.
Isn’t this obvious?
Yes, there is still a financial crisis in the US, but stoking inflation is an incredibly unfair and inefficient way to deal with it.
Some central bankers tell us not to worry, because they will be much more disciplined than central banks were in the 1970’s, when the world faced a similar commodity price spike.
This time is different, though. The commodity price problem has snuck up on us, despite notable institutional reforms in macroeconomic policymaking all over the world.
The historic influx of new entrants into the global work force, each aspiring to Western consumption standards, is simply pushing global growth past the safety marker on the speed dial.
As a result, commodity resource constraints that we once expected to face in the middle of the twenty-first century are hitting us today.
Wait a second, you say.
Why can’t our wonderfully flexible market economies roll with the punches?
Won’t high prices cause people to conserve on consumption and seek out new sources of supply?
Yes, and that eventually happened with energy supplies in the 1980’s.
But the process takes time, and, because of the rising weight of relatively inflexible emerging market economies in global consumption, adjustment will probably take longer than it did a few decades ago.
Oil exporters and China have been accounting for two-thirds of global oil demand growth in recent years.
Rich country consumers are responding to higher energy prices, and it helps.
New York City, for example, has seen a reduction of perhaps 5% in private vehicles entering the city over the past six months.
Gridlock has abated, and you can almost get around the city by car these days.
But the response is slower elsewhere. It certainly is not getting any easier to drive around in places like São Paulo, Dubai, and Shanghai.
For a variety of reasons, mostly related to government intervention, few emerging market economies can be categorized as having flexible resource demand, so commodity price spikes are not having a particularly big effect on demand.
The central bankers who tell us not to worry about inflation point to relative wage stability.
Expansions usually start collapsing when labor gets too scarce and too expensive.
But the current expansion is unusual in that, due to unique (in the modern era) circumstances, labor constraints are not the problem.
On the contrary, the effective global labor force keeps swelling.
No, this time, commodity resources are the primary constraint, rather than a secondary problem, as in the past.
That is why commodity prices will just keep soaring until world growth slows down long enough for new supply and new conservation options to catch up with demand.
This runaway-train global economy has all the hallmarks of a giant crisis in the making – financial, political, and economic.
Will policymakers find a way to achieve the necessary international coordination?
Getting the diagnosis right is the place to start.
The world as a whole needs tighter monetary and fiscal policy.
It is time to put the brakes on this runaway train before it is too late.
The Global Growth Quest
NEWPORT BEACH – What is the most urgent economic priority shared by countries as diverse as Brazil, China, Cyprus, France, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Korea, Portugal, the United Kingdom, and the United States?
It is not debt and deficits; and it is not dealing with the aftermath of irresponsible lending and borrowing.
Yes, these are relevant and, in a handful of cases, urgent.
But the number one challenge facing these countries is to develop growth models that can provide more ample, well-paid, and secure jobs amid a secular re-alignment of the global economy.
For both theoretical and practical reasons, this is a challenge that will not be met easily or quickly.
And, when it is met, the process will most likely be partial and uneven, accentuating differences and posing tricky coordination issues at the national, regional, and global levels.
The last few years have highlighted the declining potency of long-standing growth models.
Some countries (for example, Greece and Portugal) relied on debt-financed government spending to fuel economy activity.
Others (think Cyprus, Iceland, Ireland, the UK, and the US) resorted to unsustainable surges in leverage among financial institutions to fund private-sector activities, sometimes almost irrespective of underlying fundamentals.
Still others (China and Korea) exploited seemingly limitless globalization and buoyant international trade to capture growing market shares.
And a final group rode China’s coattails.
Recent data from the International Monetary Fund highlight these models’ simultaneous loss of effectiveness.
Global growth averaged only 2.9% in the most recent five-year period, well below the level for virtually any such multi-year period going back to 1971.
As a result, highly indebted governments were the next to hit the wall.
Some were pushed there by the high cost of containing the damage from banks’ irresponsible behavior.
Facing immediate credit rationing and large output contractions, they could be stabilized only by exceptional official financing from abroad, and, in some extreme cases, by defaulting on past commitments (including to bondholders and, most recently, bank depositors).
For other countries, including the US, medium-term issues came to the fore.
But, rather than catalyzing sensible policy discussions, these issues played into polarized and polarizing politics, creating new and more immediate headwinds to economic growth.
Meanwhile, a highly interdependent and (now) less dynamic world economy has been limiting the scope for external growth drivers.
Accordingly, even countries with sound balance sheets and manageable leverage have experienced a growth slowdown.
The consequences have become painfully clear, especially in Western countries.
With insufficient growth to deleverage safely, social costs have been considerable.
Alarmingly high youth unemployment, shrinking social safety nets, and under-investment in infrastructure and human capital are burdening current generations and, in a growing number of cases, will adversely affect future generations as well.
In the process, inequality has risen further.
And yet, despite the urgent need for major policy adaptations at the national level, and much better regional and global coordination, progress has been disappointing.
With the political context undermining the right mix of short- and longer-term measures, national policymaking has stumbled into partial approaches and unusual experimentation.
The focus has been on buying time, rather than on implementing a sensible transition to a sustainable policy stance.
And potential national outcomes would be less uncertain if excessive inequality were not treated as an afterthought.
The regional and multilateral dimensions are similarly inadequate.
The absence of well-articulated common analyses and policy coordination has accentuated legitimacy deficits, encouraging leaders and publics to opt for partial narratives and eroding confidence in existing institutional structures.
Given these trends, the search for more robust growth models will take much longer and be more complicated than many recognize – especially as the world economy pivots away from unfettered globalization and high levels of leverage.
We should expect countries like the US to benefit from dynamic bottom-up entrepreneurship and traditional cyclical economic healing.
Notwithstanding a dysfunctional Congress, the private sector will increasingly convert a paralyzing uncertainty premium, which impedes much investment, into a less disruptive risk premium.
But, without a short-term economic turbo-charger, the recovery in growth and jobs will remain gradual, vulnerable to political and policy risks, and disproportionately beneficial to those with favorable initial endowments of wealth and globalized talents.
Governments’ role will be different in countries like China, where officials will guide a shift from dependence on external sources of growth to more balanced demand.
As this requires some fundamental domestic re-alignments, the rebalancing will be both gradual and non-linear at times.
The outlook for other economies is more uncertain.
Undermined by a lack of policy flexibility, it will take a long time for countries like Cyprus to overcome the immediate shock of crisis and revamp their growth models.
Left to their own devices, these multi-speed dynamics would translate into higher global growth overall, coupled with larger internal and cross-country disparities – often exacerbated by demographics.
The question is whether existing governance systems can coordinate effective intervention to counter the resulting tensions.
Simultaneous progress on both substance and process is needed.
Parliaments and multilateral institutions must do a better job at facilitating cooperative policy implementation, which will require a willingness to reform outmoded institutions, including political lobbying.
No one should underestimate the growth challenge facing today’s global economy.
The stronger sectors (within countries and across them) will continue to recover, but not enough to pull up the global economy whole As a result, weaker sectors risk being surpassed at an ever-faster pace.
These trends will become more difficult to reconcile and keep orderly if governance systems fail to adjust.
The Wrong Growth Strategy for Japan
CAMBRIDGE – Japan’s new government, led by Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, could be about to shoot itself in the foot.
Seeking to boost economic growth, the authorities may soon destroy their one great advantage: the low rate of interest on government debt and private borrowing.
If that happens, Japanese conditions will most likely be worse at the end of Abe’s term than they are today.
The interest rate on Japan’s ten-year government bonds is now less than 1% – the lowest in the world, despite a very high level of government debt and annual budget deficits.
Indeed, Japan’s debt is now roughly 230% of GDP, higher than that of Greece (175% of GDP) and nearly twice that of Italy (125% of GDP).
The annual budget deficit is nearly 10% of GDP, higher than any of the eurozone countries.
With nominal GDP stagnating, that deficit is causing the debt/GDP ratio to rise by 10% annually.
Japan’s government is able to pay such a low rate of interest because domestic prices have been falling for more than a decade, while the yen has been strengthening against other major currencies.
Domestic deflation means that the real interest rate on Japanese bonds is higher than the nominal rate.
The yen’s rising value raises the yield on Japanese bonds relative to the yield on bonds denominated in other currencies.
That may be about to come to an end.
Abe has demanded that the Bank of Japan pursue a quantitative-easing strategy that will deliver an inflation rate of 2-3% and weaken the yen.
He will soon appoint a new BOJ governor and two deputy governors, who will, one presumes, be committed to this goal.
The financial markets are taking Abe’s strategy seriously.
The yen’s value against the US dollar has declined by more than 7% in the last month.
With the euro rising relative to the dollar, the yen’s fall relative to the euro has been even greater.
The yen’s weakening will mean higher import costs, and therefore a higher rate of inflation.
An aggressive BOJ policy of money creation could cause further weakening of the yen’s exchange rate – and a rise in domestic prices that is more rapid than what Abe wants.
With Japanese prices rising and the yen falling relative to other currencies, investors will be willing to hold Japanese government bonds (JGBs) only if their nominal yield is significantly higher than it has been in the past.
A direct effect of the higher interest rate would be to increase the budget deficit and the rate of growth of government debt.
With a debt/GDP ratio of 230%, a four-percentage-point rise in borrowing costs would cause the annual deficit to double, to 20% of GDP.
The government might be tempted to rely on rapid inflation to try to reduce the real value of its debt.
Fear of that strategy could cause investors to demand even higher real interest rates.
The combination of exploding debt and rising interest rates is a recipe for economic disaster.
The BOJ’s widely respected governor, Masaaki Shirakawa, whose term expires in April, summarized the situation in his usual restrained way, saying that “long-term interest rates may spike and have a negative effect on the economy.”
A spike in long-term rates would lower the price of JGBs, destroying household wealth and, in turn, reducing consumer spending.
The higher interest rates would also apply to corporate bonds and bank loans, weakening business investment.
Even without the prospect of faster inflation and a declining yen, fundamental conditions in Japan point to higher interest rates.
The Japanese government has been able to sell its bonds to domestic buyers because of the high rate of domestic saving.
The excess of saving over investment has given Japan a current-account surplus, allowing the country to finance all of the government borrowing domestically, with enough left over to invest in dollar-denominated bonds and other foreign securities.
But that is coming to an end.
The household saving rate has collapsed in recent years, falling to less than 2%.
The combination of high corporate saving and low business investment has sustained the current-account surplus, allowing Japan to fund its budget deficit domestically.
But the surplus has fallen sharply in the past five years, from roughly 6% of GDP in 2007 to only 1% now.
With a falling rate of household saving and the prospect of new fiscal deficits, the current account will soon be negative, forcing Japan to sell its debt to foreign buyers.
Abe plans to supplement the easy-money strategy with an increase in government spending of some $120 billion, or 2% of GDP.
It is not clear why Abe and his advisers believe that this will deliver sustained real GDP growth of 2% a year.
Although the $120 billion is presumably just for the current year (if the spending can be made to happen that quickly), he also spoke during his campaign about a ten-year rise in government spending of ¥200 trillion yen, substantially more than the $120 billion annual rate.
The impact of all of this on the national debt and on Japan’s interest rates could be staggering.
Abe is right about one thing: Japan needs to get out of its no-growth and deflationary trap.
But the policies that he favors are not the way to do it.
Europe’s Next Great Mistake
PRINCETON – In constructing Europe’s monetary union, political leaders did not think through all of the implications, which led to major design flaws.
Worse, they do not appear to have learned from that experience, for they are about to take the same approach to the monetary union’s political analogue.
The logic of the financial crisis is driving Europeans toward greater integration, which implies new mechanisms for political expression.
Well before the crisis, the European Union was widely perceived to be suffering from a “democratic deficit.”
Now, with many Europeans blaming the EU for painful austerity measures, that complaint has grown more powerful – and Europe’s political leaders believe that they must act now to address it.
Unfortunately, Europe confronts another deficit: a lack of political leadership.
The charismatic figures of the mid-twentieth century – Churchill, Adenauer, and de Gaulle – have no contemporary counterparts.
Citizens associate the EU with, above all, bureaucratic grayness and technocratic rationality.
European officialdom is now responding to these deficits with an initiative to reform and democratize the European Commission.
Current Commission President José Manuel Barroso suggests that ideologically like-minded political parties running in the next European Parliament elections should intensify their cooperation in political “families” that would then jointly nominate candidates for the Commission presidency.
Voters would thus play a more direct role in choosing a new European chief executive.
They would feel as if they were appointing a government.
And politicians would need to beef up their charisma in order to be elected.
This approach has been supported by luminaries such as former British Prime Minister Tony Blair.
Because it apparently does not imply any real loss of power for national governments, it has achieved a certain acceptance and seems close to being implemented.
But that does not make it a good idea.
In particular, the perceived need to channel Europe’s existing political families into a two-party system, with social democrats on one side and “people’s parties” on the other, is deeply problematic.
The two-party parliamentary model emerged in nineteenth-century Great Britain.
Electors chose only a representative for the House of Commons, and the majority party then appointed the prime minister.
The contemporary British comic opera Iolanthe celebrated the fact that “every boy and every gal that’s born into the world alive is either a little Liberal or else a little Conservative.”
But what if not every little boy and girl is born that way?
In the stable British model, if a political party is too radical, it will lose the political center in the next election.
The parties’ rivalry is healthy, though there is a built-in tendency to seek solutions that command a broad social consensus.
But such an institutional outcome is not inevitable (and it probably no longer endures even in contemporary Britain).
British lawyers liked to recommend this model to other countries.
They were especially persuasive in Britain’s former colonies, notably in newly independent African states.
The results were disastrous.
Citizens could not understand why they should be expected to align their political preferences along a simple left-right spectrum.
Instead, politics was usually recast in terms of old inter-group or inter-ethnic tensions.
The contemporary United States also is not a compelling demonstration that competition between two parties leads to increasing moderation and political centrism.
On the contrary, the partisan struggle can play to the parties’ extremes.
The two-party moderation thesis makes sense only if the main differences concern redistributive preferences in a simple model driven by an almost Marxist kind of economic determinism.
The left-wing party wants to redistribute wealth and incomes more, and the right-wing party less; but both need to restrain themselves, and in appealing to the median voter, they become near-identical alternatives.
In a globally inter-connected world, however, a new politics has developed, in which both the left and right fringes fear that outside competition or influences will limit their ability to shape political choices.
Their main political preference then becomes resistance to those external threats.
The old left-right polarity no longer works.
Artificially creating a new European polity split between left and right would create new struggles – and intensify old ones – about redistribution.
The only thing that would hold the left together would be the claim that there should be more redistribution: but to whom, and according to what mechanism?
Nor is it clear that Spanish socialists have more in common with German social democrats than with their fellow nationals.
Each ideological grouping would most likely become factionalized along complex national lines – divisions likely to be reflected in the ensuing competition to be charismatic.
Instead of encouraging new Churchills and Adenauers, the result might be new imitators of Hitler or Stalin.
There is a better model, one developed in a linguistically, culturally, and religiously diverse test-tube in the geographic heart of Europe: the Swiss model of Konkordanzdemokratie.
In the Swiss system, several parties compete, but they do not aim to control the government exclusively.
Instead, all the major parties are represented in the government, and are consequently obliged to hammer out compromises.
Members of the federal government are driven by regional loyalties at some times, and by ideological commitments at other times; they all need to be negotiated when making decisions.
The Swiss solution of electing an all-embracing and balanced government tends to produce boring and uninspiring politics.
Famously, few people know who even holds Switzerland’s annually rotating presidency.
Charismatic politicians act by polarizing, galvanizing, and mobilizing supporters; routine politics, by contrast, requires maintaining a low profile and being willing to strike compromises.
Europe today does not need inspirational leaders who can whip up a populist frenzy. Instead, it needs locally respected leaders who are capable of working in a complex and multi-dimensional political world.
The Wrong Tax for Europe
CAMBRIDGE – Europe is already in pickle, so why not add more vinegar?
That seems to be the thinking behind the European Commission’s proposed financial transactions tax (FTT) – the Commission’s latest response to Europe’s festering growth and financing problems.
The emotional appeal of a tax on all financial transactions is undeniable.
Ordinary Europeans have to pay value-added tax on most of the goods and services that they buy, so why not tax purchases of stocks, bonds, and all kinds of derivatives?
Surely, such a tax will hit wealthy individuals and financial firms far more than anyone else, and, besides, it will raise a ton of revenue.
Indeed, the European Commission estimates that its proposed tax of only 0.1% on stock and bond trades, and 0.01% tax on derivatives, will raise more than €50 billion per year.
As a bonus, an FTT will curb destabilizing speculation in financial markets.
If only it were so simple.
Of course, taxation of financial firms’ profits and bonuses should be made more similar to that of other economic activities.
Excessive leverage needs to be reined in.
A return to pre-2007 levels of macroeconomic and financial stability would support growth.
Unfortunately, much as FTTs are the darling of leading liberal economic commentators and Robin Hood NGOs, they are an extremely misguided approach to achieving such worthy ends.
True, great thinkers like John Maynard Keynes and the late Nobel laureate James Tobin floated various ideas for taxing financial transactions as a way to reduce economic volatility.
(Tobin’s tax applied specifically to foreign-exchange trading.)
But, since then, the idea has received close attention from many economic researchers, and, frankly, it is hard to find their research results supportive.
Such taxes surely reduce liquidity in financial markets.
With fewer trades, the information content of prices is arguably reduced.
But both theoretical and simulation results suggest no obvious decline in volatility.
And, while raising so much revenue with so low a tax rate sounds grand, the declining volume of trades would shrink the tax base precipitously.
As a result, the ultimate revenue gains are likely to prove disappointing, as Sweden discovered when it attempted to tax financial transactions two decades ago.
Worse still, over the long run, the tax burden would shift.
Higher transactions taxes increase the cost of capital, ultimately lowering investment.
With a lower capital stock, output would trend downward, reducing government revenues and substantially offsetting the direct gain from the tax.
In the long run, wages would fall, and ordinary workers would end up bearing a significant share of the cost.
More broadly, FTTs violate the general public-finance principle that it is inefficient to tax intermediate factors of production, particularly ones that are highly mobile and fluid in their response.
All of this is well known, even if prominent opinion leaders, politicians, and philanthropists prefer to ignore it.
The European Commission has surely been strongly cautioned by the Fiscal Affairs Department at the International Monetary Fund, whose economists have thoroughly catalogued the pros and cons of FTTs.
So why did the Commission go forward with the idea?
The most generous interpretation is that the Commission simply does not believe economists’ estimates and analysis, and views an FTT as more workable than is commonly realized (a scenario that calls to mind the debate surrounding the creation of the euro).
It is true that Latin American governments, particularly the Brazilian authorities, succeeded in raising more revenue from taxes on bank withdrawals (a crude version of an FTT) than most policy analysts thought possible.
On the other hand, Latin America’s long-term growth record is hardly an advertisement for the approach, and accounting for lost tax revenues due to lower GDP would surely yield a less impressive fiscal outcome.
Another possibility is that the Europeans concluded that an FTT’s political advantages outweigh its economic flaws.
After all, there certainly is a case to be made that an FTT has so much gut-level popular appeal that politically powerful financial interests could not block it.
One can almost buy this idea, except that the tax is so counterproductive in the long run that it is hardly obvious that it would be better than nothing.
There are more cynical interpretations of the European Commission’s motives.
Perhaps officials noticed that virtually everything in Europe is already heavily taxed. So, rather than finance the European Union’s institutions through greater contributions from existing tax bases, they are seeking a consensus for new revenue sources.
Or perhaps the Commission realizes that the FTT will be dead on arrival, owing to disputes within Europe, and simply wants to gain political capital from an enormously popular proposal.
After the financial crisis erupted with full force in 2008, former US Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker claimed that the only worthwhile financial innovation in recent decades was the ATM.
And, as the Oscar-winning documentary Inside Job rightly points out, no one whose other, less useful innovations helped cause the financial crisis – politicians, financiers, and many others – has really paid a price.
There is, in short, ample reason to be angry at financiers, and real change is needed in how they operate.
But the FTT, despite its noble intellectual lineage, is no solution to Europe’s problems – or to the world’s.
The Wrong Way to Think About Oil
In his recent State of the Union address, President George W. Bush declared, “America is addicted to oil.”
He announced a program of energy research that would reduce American oil imports from the Middle East by 75% over the next two decades.
But even if his program succeeds, it will not do much to increase America’s energy security.
The United States gets only a fifth of its oil from the Persian Gulf.
Americans are not alone in worrying about oil as a security problem.
China and India, the two largest countries in the world, realize that their high rates of economic growth also depend upon foreign oil.
While the two countries together consume slightly less than half as much oil as the US, their consumption is increasing faster.
When poor countries consume as much per capita as rich countries, will there be enough oil to go around?
China and India have been crisscrossing the globe making financially and politically costly deals to try to lock up the output of new oil-producing countries.
For example, when Western countries discouraged their oil companies from dealing with Sudan’s government because of its inadequate response to the genocide in Darfur, China was quick to buy up the country’s oil.
Some petroleum experts argue that world oil production will peak in a decade or so.
Others reply that new discoveries and improved technologies for extracting oil from existing fields make such projections too alarmist.
Because accurate statistics about reserves in countries like Saudi Arabia are not available, it is impossible to settle the dispute definitively.
But the majority of experts agree that the world will not run out of oil anytime soon – even with growing Chinese and Indian demand.
Over a trillion barrels of reserves have been proven, and more are likely to be found.
In any case, arguments about the size of world oil reserves and when global production will peak misses the key security issue.
The heart of the problem is not the overall quantity of oil, but its location.
Two-thirds of proven reserves are in the Persian Gulf, one of the world’s most volatile regions.
Oil supply is likely to be vulnerable to political disruptions long before issues arise from overall scarcity of supply.
For China and India, that just reinforces their desire to lock up oil supplies from countries outside the Persian Gulf.
Similarly, it led Bush to his declared objective of cutting imports from the region by 75% over the next two decades.
At first glance, Bush’s task looks easy.
The US uses about 21 million barrels of oil a day, and imports about 2.5 million of it from the Persian Gulf.
Even before new technologies produce that amount of fuel, the US could switch to imports from Nigeria, Venezuela, and other countries.
But even if those countries remain stable, America will not be safe.
What matters is the total amount of oil a country imports, not where it comes from.
Suppose there is a crisis in the Persian Gulf over Iran’s efforts to get nuclear weapons.
Iran has threatened to cut oil exports if the United Nations Security Council imposes sanctions against it for violating its nuclear pledges.
Most experts predict that such a move would drive the price of oil – including the Venezuelan, Nigerian, and other oil that the US, China, and India consume – above $100 per barrel.
The rapid spike in prices would harm all economies that import oil, regardless of where it comes from.
The world learned that lesson following the 1973 Arab-Israel war.
Arab oil-exporting countries embargoed oil sales to the US and the Netherlands to punish them for their support of Israel.
But the oil destined for the US and the Netherlands was shifted to other countries like Japan, while oil destined for other countries found its way to the US and the Netherlands.
Oil is a fungible commodity, and markets clear at a common price.
When the dust settled, it turned out that American, Dutch, and other importers all suffered roughly the same degree of shortfall and paid the same damaging high price.
This means that China and India are deluding themselves if they think that preferential deals for Sudanese or Iranian oil will provide them with security.
When a disruption occurs, China, India, and the US will all find that they face equal prices ­­– and thus equal pain.
In the meantime, China’s mercantilist misunderstanding of markets means that it often overpays for what it mistakenly thinks is energy security.
Bush is similarly mistaken.
Even if he cuts imports from the Middle East, America will not enjoy energy security unless it curbs its overall thirst for oil.
In the past, rising prices helped slow oil consumption in the US. The US uses only half as much oil per dollar of production as it did before the price spikes of the 1970’s.
But over half the oil Americans use goes for driving cars and trucks.
The US will not solve its energy security problem until it gets better at fuel economy, possibly by a combination of technology, gasoline taxes, and regulations.
Oil was not the cause of the Iraq War in the simplistic sense that American control of Iraqi oil would make it more secure.
The world’s dependence on Persian Gulf oil means that all countries have an interest in maintaining stability in that region, while improving energy efficiency and increasing the diversity of their overall energy supplies.
The Year of Rational Pessimism
NEW YORK – Someone recently quipped that the best thing about 2011 was that it was likely better than 2012.
By the same token, while there has been much concern about America’s political gridlock, something worse for America, and for the world, could have happened: the Republicans could have prevailed in their program of austerity-cum-redistribution to the wealthy.
Automatic cuts won’t happen until 2013, which means that the economy in 2012 will be spared, ever so slightly.
Two more positive notes for 2011: America seems finally to have awakened to the yawning gap between the rich and the rest – between the top 1% and everyone else.
And youth-led protest movements, from the Arab Spring to the Spanish indignados and the Occupy Wall Streeters, have made clear that something is very wrong with the capitalist system.
The likelihood, though, is that the economic and political problems that were so manifest in the US and Europe in 2011 – and which have so far been tremendously mismanaged – will only grow worse in 2012.
Any forecast for the coming year depends, more than usual, on politics – on the outcome of the US gridlock, and on European leaders’ ability to respond to the euro crisis.
Economic forecasts are difficult enough; but when it comes to political forecasts, our crystal balls are even cloudier. That said, here is my best guess.
European leaders repeatedly proclaim their commitment to saving the euro, but those who could have repeatedly said that they are committed to not doing what is needed.
They have recognized that austerity will mean slower growth – indeed, a recession is increasingly likely – and that, without growth, the eurozone’s distressed countries will not be able to manage their debts.
But they have done nothing to promote growth.
They are on a death spiral.
The only thing saving the euro in the short term is the European Central Bank’s purchases of sovereign bonds, which have kept interest rates from soaring.
Like it or not, the ECB is effectively financing the sovereigns.
German leaders have frowned on this, and the ECB has felt uncomfortable, limiting its purchases and saying that political leaders, not central bankers, should save the euro.
But the political response has been too little, too late, to say the least.
The most likely scenario is more of the same: austerity, weaker economies, more unemployment, and continuing deficits, with European leaders doing the minimum to fend off crisis for the moment.
In short: more turmoil.&nbsp;
The day of reckoning – when the euro breaks up or Europe takes the kind of definitive action that would make a single currency work – may come in 2012, but, more likely than not, Europe’s leaders will do whatever they can to postpone that day of reckoning.
Europe will suffer, and so will the rest of the world.
The United States had hoped for an export-led recovery, but, with economic growth slowing in Europe, its largest customer (and impeding growth in much of the rest of the world), that is unlikely.
And, with the worst effects of spending cuts potentially still to come, gridlock – and Republican spite – may mean that the Obama administration’s payroll-tax cut will not be extended, weakening household consumption.
That, combined with cutbacks at the state and local level, means that the first real manifestations of austerity’s impact will appear in 2012.
(Already, though, public employment is around 700,000 below its pre-crisis level; government, rather than acting counter-cyclically, offsetting weak private demand, has been acting pro-cyclically, exacerbating the economy’s problems.)
Meanwhile, the consequences of failure to deal with the housing crisis – which triggered financial markets’ near-meltdown in 2008 – are continuing to be felt: further decline in real-estate prices, more foreclosures, and thus even greater stress on US households.
No one in either US political party seems willing to face the fact that fixing the banking system, though necessary, was not sufficient to restore the economy to health (or that the financial system was never really fixed).
The American economy before the crisis was being maintained on artificial life support by a housing bubble that led to unsustainable consumption.
There is no way back to 2007.
But neither party has been willing to admit what is really wrong, or advance an agenda that would address the underlying ills.
Platitudes and placebos – vapid calls for more job creation, fiscal restraint, reining in entitlement programs, and so forth – will characterize America’s election year.
Neither side will step forward with a program for restructuring the economy and reducing the inequality that is sapping the country’s strength.
I have been a big critic of markets, but even America’s market participants now sense that political leaders are not up to the task.
If investors suffered from irrational exuberance in the 1990’s, they are likely to suffer from rational pessimism in the coming year.
After all, Americans will have to choose between a leader who has proven that he can’t lead the US out of its economic morass, and one who has not yet proven his inability to do so – but who could make matters even worse through policies that increase inequality and slow growth.
I hope that events prove me wrong, and that my pessimism turns out to have been excessive.
But I am afraid that the risks are more on the downside.
Indeed, 2012 could prove to be the year in which the experiment with the euro, the culmination of a 50-year process of economic and political integration in Europe, comes to an end.
In that case, rather than bringing the hoped-for end of the Great Recession of 2008, a downturn that has lasted too long and caused too much suffering, 2012 may mark the beginning of a new and more frightening phase of the world’s worst economic calamity in three-quarters of a century.
The Year of the “China Model”
It will be China’s year in 2008.
The Olympic Games – no doubt perfectly organized, without a protester, homeless person, religious dissenter, or any other kind of spoilsport in sight – will probably bolster China’s global prestige.
While the American economy gets dragged down further in a swamp of bad property debts, China will continue to boom.
Exciting new buildings, designed by the world’s most famous architects, will make Beijing and Shanghai look like models of twenty-first century modernity.
More Chinese will be featured in annual lists of the world’s richest people.
And Chinese artists will command prices at international art auctions that others can only dream of.
To come back from near destitution and bloody tyranny in one generation is a great feat, and China should be saluted for it.
But China’s success story is also the most serious challenge that liberal democracy has faced since fascism in the 1930’s.
This is not because China poses a great military threat – war with the United States, or even Japan, is only a fantasy in the minds of a few ultra-nationalist cranks and paranoiacs.
It is in the realm of ideas that China’s political-economic model, regardless of its environmental consequences, is scoring victories and looking like an attractive alternative to liberal democratic capitalism.
And it is a real alternative.
Contrary to what some pundits say, Chinese capitalism is not like nineteenth-century European capitalism.
True, the European working class, not to mention women, did not have voting rights 200 years ago.
But even during the most ruthless phases of Western capitalism, civil society in Europe and the US was made up of a huge network of organizations independent of the state – churches, clubs, parties, societies, and associations that were available to all social classes.
In China, by contrast, while individuals have regained many personal freedoms since the death of Maoism, they are not free to organize anything that is not controlled by the Communist Party.
Despite communism’s ideological bankruptcy, China has not changed in this regard.
The China Model is sometimes described in traditional terms, as though modern Chinese politics were an updated version of Confucianism.
But a society where the elite’s pursuit of money is elevated above all other human endeavors is a far cry from any kind of Confucianism that may have existed in the past.
Still, it’s hard to argue with success.
If anything has been laid to rest by China’s rising wealth, it is the comforting idea that capitalism, and the growth of a prosperous bourgeoisie, will inevitably lead to liberal democracy.
On the contrary, it is precisely the middle class, bought off by promises of ever-greater material gains, that hopes to conserve the current political order.
It may be a Faustian bargain – prosperity in exchange for political obedience – but so far it has worked.
The China Model is attractive not only to the country’s new coastal elites, but has global appeal.
African dictators – indeed, dictators everywhere – who walk the plush red carpets laid out for them in Beijing love it.
For the model is non-Western, and the Chinese do not preach to others about democracy.
It is also a source of vast amounts of money, much of which will end up in the tyrants’ pockets.
By proving that authoritarianism can be successful, China is an example to autocrats everywhere, from Moscow to Dubai, from Islamabad to Khartoum.
China’s appeal is growing in the Western world as well.
Businessmen, media moguls, and architects all flock there.
Could there be a better place to do business, build stadiums and skyscrapers, or sell information technology and media networks than a country without independent trade unions or any form of organized protest that could lower profits?
Meanwhile, concern for human or civic rights is denigrated as outmoded, or an arrogant expression of Western imperialism.
There is, however, a fly in the ointment.
No economy keeps growing at the same pace forever.
Crises occur.
What if the bargain struck between the Chinese middle classes and the one-party state were to fall apart, owing to a pause, or even a setback, in the race for material wealth?
This has happened before.
The closest thing, in some ways, to the China Model is nineteenth-century Germany, with its industrial strength, its cultivated but politically neutered middle class, and its tendency toward aggressive nationalism.
Nationalism became lethal when the economy crashed, and social unrest threatened to upset the political order.
The same thing could happen in China, where national pride constantly teeters on the edge of belligerence towards Japan, Taiwan, and ultimately the West.
Aggressive Chinese nationalism could turn lethal, too, if its economy were to falter.
This would not be in anyone’s interest, so we should wish China well in 2008, while sparing a thought for all the dissidents, democrats, and free spirits languishing in labor camps and prisons.
We should hope that they will live to see the day when the Chinese, too, will be a free people.
It might be a distant dream, but dreaming is what New Year’s is all about.
The Young General’s Old Tricks
TOKYO – Brinkmanship seems to be congenital in North Korea.
Under the late Kim Jong-il’s pudgy young successor – his third son, Kim Jong-un, dubbed “the Young General” – threats and mendacity still mark the Hermit Kingdom’s diplomacy.
With North Korea’s announcement of plans to use an Unha-3 rocket to launch its Bright Star-3 satellite into earth orbit in mid-April, the newest threat is a continuation of an old one.
Indeed, it signals a quick demise for the agreement reached with the United States just weeks ago.
The decision to launch the satellite, which had been planned by Kim Jong-il, is clearly intended to provide a “heroic” martial achievement for a new leader who lacks any military experience.
The regime aims to boost North Korea’s international prestige and domestic morale simultaneously, with the population supposedly keen to support this show of the country’s technological and military might.
And, no surprise, North Korea’s leaders also claim that what they propose to launch is a “peaceful” satellite.
But no one, particularly in the region, where North Korean missiles pose the gravest threat, accepts this claim at face value.
It is clear that the rocket to be launched is effectively a long-range ballistic missile, which might be able to reach Guam, the site of an important US military base.
So doubtful is the world of North Korea’s claim of peaceful intent that not only did the United Nations, South Korea, the US, Japan, and the European Union immediately express concern; so did China and Russia – perhaps the only two countries in the world that are on good terms with the Kim regime.
Despite the international community’s almost unanimous demand for restraint, North Korea is highly unlikely to roll back its launch plans.
Halting such missile tests is simply not an option for a regime whose only claim to legitimacy is the military threat that it poses to others.
The announcement of the forthcoming launch is timed, as always seems to be the case with North Korea’s provocations, to the regime’s need for food and funds from around the world to prevent the reemergence of mass starvation at home.
Moreover, 2012 is a special year for North Korea, starting with the 70th anniversary of Kim Jong-il’s birth on February 16.
That occasion will be followed by the 100th anniversary of Kim Il-sung’s birth on April 15 and the 80th anniversary of the creation of the People’s Army on April 25.
The country’s undernourished masses are not being invited to the capital, Pyongyang, for the extravagant parades that will be held at enormous cost.
The missile launch, it seems, will have to suffice for them.
The regime uses food as the currency of its domestic power and foreign policy.
For the commemoration of Kim Jong-il’s birthday in February, a kilogram of fish was provided to residents in one district, but nowhere else.
At the same time, the regime sought 240,000 tons of nutritional support in its recent negotiations with the US and South Korea, though the North was forced to return 30,000 tons of rice from a previous food-aid package as part of its recent agreement with the US.
Indeed, the North lets few diplomatic occasions pass without strong-arming its interlocutors for more.
For Kim Jong-un, even a meeting with Japanese officials in Ulan Bator, Mongolia’s capital, to discuss the return of Japanese women who went to North Korea with their Korean husbands thinking that they were journeying to a socialist paradise, served as a platform to secure food aid from Japan.
The negotiations were to be held between Song Il-ho, North Korea’s ambassador responsible for normalizing relations with Japan, and Hiroshi Nakai, a former minister who negotiates officially for the release of Japanese citizens abducted by the North.
But Nakai was unable to leave Tokyo, and a university professor replaced him as Japan’s negotiator.
Rank-conscious North Korea would normally send a lower official than Song if his counterpart were substituted, but no change was made, so desperate is the North for food.
North Korea then asked Japan for economic aid and food supplies in exchange for returning not only the Japanese wives in question, but also seven Japanese known to have been abducted by the North.
The Japanese aid, like the ransom paid to a kidnapper, must be provided by April 15, just in time for the commemoration of Kim Il-song’s birth – a clear indication of North Korea’s true intentions, and desperation.
And now, given the potential cost of scuttling the recent agreement with the US, the decision to launch a long-range missile takes that desperation a step further.
In fact, it has been suggested that the launch is intended to be a demonstration to Iran of the North’s missile prowess, as the Islamic Republic could become a customer for the illicit missile and nuclear-technology sales that are one of the regime’s few sources of hard currency.
Thus, the North Korean drama, now starring Kim Jong-un, plays on, relying on extorted proceeds from manufactured crises abroad to finance spectacular kitsch and brutal repression at home.
It is up to China, the real director of the North Korean production, to drop the curtain on this abominable show and its rogue star.
Thick as BRICS
MEXICO CITY – When the United Nations voted for what was known as partition and created the State of Israel 64 years ago, subsequently granting it full membership, several Latin American countries – Brazil, El Salvador, Argentina, Colombia, Chile, Honduras – abstained, or, in the case of Cuba, voted against the relevant resolutions.
Mexico abstained on partition, though it voted in favor of admitting Israel to the UN a few months later, and subsequently recognized the Jewish state, acknowledging that its national interest was best served by not taking sides in the Middle East imbroglio.
In the coming weeks, most Latin American countries will vote in favor of some form of UN membership or recognition of statehood that the Palestinian Authority is seeking.
But some will not. The issue is not a simple one for the Security Council’s two Latin American non-permanent members, Brazil and Colombia, or for Cuba, Nicaragua, Venezuela, Costa Rica, Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Ecuador, Peru, Uruguay, and Honduras, which have already recognized Palestine, but have not yet voted to grant it “observer” status at the UN.
To become a full-fledged UN member, the Security Council must recommend the move to the General Assembly; but upgrading the Palestinian Authority’s status to that of the Vatican – which in theory would allow it to participate in many UN agencies, including the International Criminal Court – requires only a two-thirds vote in the General Assembly.
In any case, the political consequences overshadow legal or bureaucratic issues.
Forcing the US to use its veto in the Security Council, or obtaining the support of more than 150 of the UN’s 193 member states in the General Assembly, would be a huge defeat for Israel and the US, which is why the Latin American votes are important.
Brazil has stated that it intends to vote in the Security Council in favor of recommending Palestine’s admission to the General Assembly; Colombia has said that it plans to abstain.
Most other Latin American countries would probably vote in favor of some sort of enhanced status for the Palestinian Authority.
The Jewish community in the United States, and to a lesser extent President Barack Obama’s administration, has attempted to convince Chile and Mexico, which have not yet made their stances explicit, that nothing would be gained by isolating Israel (or the US, for that matter) on this issue.
Indeed, little would change on the ground even with full Palestinian statehood if Israel and the US do not accept it – and Mexico and Chile could lose much in distancing themselves from an ally on a question of great importance to it.
In short, as was the case more than a half-century ago, the region has not spoken with a single voice on these crucial issues.
Now, as then, most Latin American countries have not taken a principled stand – either for or against Israel, or for or against the Palestinians.
Instead, they have followed the path of expedience, their positions depending on the relative clout and stridency of their societies’ Jewish or Arab communities, and on urging from Washington or from the so-called ALBA bloc of Cuba, Venezuela, Nicaragua, Bolivia, and Paraguay.
Latin Americans’ lack of conviction on such grave matters – with the exception of the ALBA countries, which have the wrong convictions, but nonetheless believe in them almost religiously – has marginalized the region on other important international issues, such as the recent crisis in Libya, and the ongoing one in Syria.
On the UN resolution establishing a no-fly zone and civilian protection in Libya, Brazil, along with three of the other “BRICS” (and world power wannabes) – Russia, India, and China – abstained.
The fourth, South Africa, went along only grudgingly.
And now, on the European and American attempt to impose UN-mandated sanctions on Syria’s President Bashar al-Assad, the BRICS have gone from bad to worse.
First, they dispatched a three-country mission (Brazil, India, and South Africa) to Damascus to “persuade” Assad not to murder his people.
Needless to say, he did not respond that, yes, he had killed a few thousand here and there, but that now that they brought it up, he would try to be more careful.
Then they made statement after statement claiming that Syria was not Libya, and they would not allow another Western intervention to achieve regime change in another Arab country just because its people seemed upset with the local dictator.
In the words of a senior NGO human rights leader: “They’re punishing the Syrian people because they were unhappy that NATO took the mandate of protecting civilians in Libya and transformed it into a mandate for regime change.”
Given their growing role in the global economy, it is understandable that larger Latin American countries, along with the other BRICS, are seeking a more influential world role.
This is not the way to achieve it.
Which Thinkers Will Define Our Future?
BERKELEY – Several years ago, it occurred to me that social scientists today are all standing on the shoulders of giants like Niccolo Machiavelli, John Locke, Adam Smith, Alexis de Tocqueville, Max Weber, and Émile Durkheim.
One thing they all have in common is that their primary focus was on the social, political, and economic makeup of the Western European world between 1450 and 1900.
Which is to say, they provide an intellectual toolkit for looking at, say, the Western world of 1840, but not necessarily the Western world of 2016.
What will be taught in the social theory courses of, say, 2070?
What canon – written today or still forthcoming – will those who end their careers in the 2070s wish that they had used when they started them in the late 2010s?
After mulling this question for the past few years, I’ve narrowed down my choice to the writings of three people: Tocqueville, who wrote in the 1830s and 1840s; John Maynard Keynes, who wrote in the 1920s and 1930s; and Karl Polanyi, who wrote in the 1930s and 1940s.
Keynes’s central concerns for his own time ring true today.
He was worried about the fragility of our collective prosperity, and the grave tensions between nationalism and the rootless cosmopolitan attitudes underpinning a peaceful and flourishing global society.
He focused on how to organize our activities and use our prosperity to create a world fit for the good life.
He sought to expose the bankruptcy of ascendant ideological nostrums: laissez-faire, spontaneous order, collective cooperation, central planning.
And he thought deeply about the technocratic problems of economic management – and about the social, moral, and political disasters that would follow from failing to address them.
After World War II, the problems that concerned Keynes faded into the background, as renewed prosperity in the West led many to believe that they had been permanently solved.
Even during the stagflation (slow growth and rising prices) in the 1970s, the problem was said to be social-democratic overreach, not any fundamental flaw in the political economy of the West.
That argument cleared the way for British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and US President Ronald Reagan to scale back the state’s economic role and untether market forces.
The Thatcher-Reagan correction was an unquestioned success among the moneyed classes that prospered thereafter.
It created an ideological consensus that would dominate the public sphere from 1980 to 2010.
Post-war prosperity also overshadowed the central problems with which Polanyi grappled in the 1930s and 1940s.
Polanyi accepted that a market society could indeed produce a great deal of material prosperity, but he was concerned that it could only do so by turning people into puppets and playthings of mindless market forces, and that people did not take well to this new role.
The goal, for Polanyi, was to achieve the prosperity that a market economy generates, without suffering the risks of poverty, creative destruction, and community erosion implied by the operation of market forces.
Crucially, Polanyi warned that if the modern bourgeois order failed at this task, authoritarian and totalitarian political movements would benefit.
During the post-war period, the fair-weather argument that market-driven prosperity justifies any collateral social pain was taken as a given; it also came to define the consensus view among the moneyed class and its ideological backers.
This brings us to Tocqueville, who wrote almost two centuries ago, but whose central concerns never went away.
Tocqueville focused on the consequences of the destruction of caste as a principle of social and political order.
The big castes – from the supposedly Frankish Nobles of the Sword and Nobles of the Robe to proto-bourgeois merchants and Gallo-Roman villeins – all conferred upon their members small liberties and a measure of personal autonomy in exchange for obligations to the state.
(And, of course, the lower one’s social status, the greater one’s obligations.)
Tocqueville saw this strictly ordered world being replaced by democracy and formal social equality, in which everyone would be equally free, but would also be equally at the mercy of society.
In this new setting, no privileges or liberties would protect you if you failed to find a counterparty in the market, or ran afoul of the tyranny of the majority, or simply sought some form of direction as you tried to decide who you were supposed to be.
In Tocqueville’s world, the destruction of caste was only partial.
He wrote for white men who knew their nationality, knew what caste membership meant, and knew the privileges such membership brought.
In our own time, the destruction of caste and caste privilege is taking another step forward.
The period of white males’ political dominion in Western democracies is coming to an end.
And it is coming to an end at a time when economic populism is replacing technocratic management, often with white males turning to nativism in response to the destruction of their jobs and livelihoods by the impersonal forces of globalization.
As we can see in one country after another, the old order won’t give up without a fight.
No old order does.
But the caste-like privilege of white males is doomed.
The challenge now before us is how best to realize newly available opportunities for human betterment, for the benefit of all.