VIENNA – Last month, firecrackers were thrown at the only synagogue in the Swedish city of Malmö, breaking three windows.
The day before, a bomb threat had been left at the building, warning of what was about to happen.
Two weeks previously, another attack was launched against the same synagogue.
Let us recall that it was Sweden’s top-selling newspaper, Aftonbladet, that last year published an anti-Semitic blood libel by alleging that Israeli soldiers routinely murdered Palestinian children and harvested their bodily organs for sale on the international black market.
The Swedish government responded with indifference, and worse: when the country’s ambassador to Israel put up a note on the embassy’s Web site distancing Sweden from such appalling calumnies, her enraged superiors in Stockholm ordered her to take it down.
It is not just the media and the government that is fanning the flames of this hatred.
In January 2009, church officials in the town of Luleå cancelled a planned torch-light procession for Holocaust Memorial Day, with a spokesman saying that they were “preoccupied” and “grief-stricken” by Israel’s Operation Cast Lead in Gaza.
Canceling Holocaust Memorial Day?
Spreading blood libels, and acquiescing in them?
Allowing a state of affairs in which Jews are frightened to leave their homes?
This does not sound like the tolerant, fair, and just society for which Sweden would like to be known.
How has such a state of affairs arisen, and what can be done to address it?
The first problem is that Swedish mainstream hostility to the State of Israel has clearly begun to cross the line into outright anti-Semitism.
Of course, attempts to draw a distinction between hatred of Jews and hatred of Israel were never particularly convincing.
Israel is a specifically Jewish project, and to join the campaign of de-legitimization against the Jewish state is to join a campaign of de-legitimization against much of world Jewry, the vast majority of which either lives in Israel or regards it as a central component of Jewish identity.
But one particular section of Sweden’s population has never engaged in the pretense that there is a distinction between hatred of Israel and hatred of Jews.
Which brings us to the second major issue at play here: Sweden’s Muslim population.
While all manifestations of intolerance against Muslims must be firmly resisted, it is also vital to recognize the danger that some Muslim immigrants have brought with them from their home cultures: extreme forms of bigotry against Jews and Israel.
When mainstream politicians, newspapers, and churches rail against Israel, many Swedish Muslims inevitably see this is a green light for them to unleash their own hostility toward ordinary Jews.
They feel that their anti-Semitism is acceptable.
A third layer of this problem is the increasingly symbiotic alliance between radical Islamist groups in Sweden and a left that has departed from the honorable social-democratic traditions for which the country is famous around the world.
When the Israeli Davis Cup tennis team came to Malmö in 2009, it was forced to play against its hosts behind closed doors while a crowd of 6,000 far-leftists and Muslims rioted outside.
With anti-Israeli hate serving as the primary unifying factor, this alliance has grown into a new and dangerous force for intolerance within Swedish society.
Ultimately, change will not come unless and until Sweden’s leaders address these problems.
Officials and opinion shapers must understand that this perilous state of affairs will worsen if they fail to take their responsibilities more seriously, tone down their rhetoric, and adopt a balanced approach to Israel.
Above all, Swedish politicians must speak out when minorities become the target of hate crimes.
Even a tolerant country such as Sweden must not tolerate those who preach intolerance.
Sweden in Crisis
STOCKHOLM – After decades of adherence to more or less stable rules and predictable patterns, Swedish politics has entered uncharted territory in recent weeks.
Many are shocked that the government collapsed and had to call a new election only two months after taking office.
After all, Sweden had been a rare beacon of success in Europe in the years since the 2008 global financial crisis.
So what happened?
The immediate cause of the government’s demise was Parliament’s rejection of the center-left coalition’s proposed budget, in favor of the budget presented by the center-right Alliance parties, which formed the previous government.
Having failed to pass its first budget – owing to the abrupt decision by the far-right Swedish Democrats (SD) to support the Alliance alternative – the government could not simply continue as if nothing had happened.
The background to this episode was the September election, which the four-party Alliance lost after eight years in power (during which I served as Foreign Minister).
The Alliance government was widely considered to have been successful; but eight years is a long time in politics.
Fair enough.
But, though the Alliance certainly lost, the main opposition Swedish Social Democratic Party and its allies on the left did not win.
In fact, the three leftist parties in Parliament gained a slightly smaller share of the popular vote than they did in the 2010 election.
The big winner was the populist SD, which doubled its share of the vote, to more than 13%.
And, because no other party was prepared to cooperate with the SD, the only viable alternative was a minority government.
To be sure, the Social Democrat-Green coalition, with the support of only 38% of MPs, was bound to be an uncertain exercise.
But it could have worked, had the government not quickly veered sharply to the left, forging budget and other agreements with the ex-Communist Left party.
That strategy sealed the government’s fate, though the end came sooner and more dramatically than expected.
But Sweden’s current political muddle is also rooted in longer-term changes, which to some extent reflect broader European trends.
One is the structural decline of the once-dominant Social Democrats.
For decades, any election in which the party won less than 45% of the vote was viewed as a disaster.
Now the Social Democrats’ popular support hovers at around 30%, and the last two elections yielded the worst results in a century.
The other trend is the rise of the populist SD.
Until 2010, Sweden seemed immune to the rise of far-right parties like those in Denmark, Norway, and Finland.
Since then, however, the SD has fundamentally changed the country’s political landscape.
Anti-immigrant sentiment is part of the story, though Swedish public opinion has become much more favorable toward immigration since the early 1990s.
For some, immigration has become a symbol of a society gone astray.
For others, the number of immigrants over the last few years has simply been too high.
In fact, the numbers are high – not in comparison with a country like Turkey, but certainly relative to other European Union countries.
Sweden and Germany receive the largest inflows of immigrants by far – and Germany is nearly ten times the size of Sweden.
Our tradition of being open to refugees is not new.
People came from the Baltic countries in the 1940s, Hungary in 1956, Chile after the 1973 coup, and Iran after the 1979 revolution. For decades, Swedish industry was dependent on immigrant workers.
During the Bosnian War of the 1990s, Sweden opened its doors to some 100,000 people – a challenge at any time, much less during a period of profound economic crisis.
But it still turned out well: The Bosnian immigrants have fared roughly as well as the Swedes who received them, and they have enriched our society.
In the new century, refugees have come increasingly from the Middle East and the Horn of Africa.
One percent of Sweden’s population today is from Iran, and almost 2% are from Iraq.
Indeed, after the Iraq war, the small town of Södertälje took in more Iraqi refugees than the United States did.
Given the numbers, immigration in Sweden has worked much better than expected.
But there are problems.
The Swedish labor market’s sometimes rather strict systems and stable structures have impeded integration relative to many other countries.
And now the number of immigrants is increasing again, reflecting chronic turmoil in the Middle East and elsewhere, as well as Europe’s increasingly turbulent and dangerous neighborhood, largely owing to Russian revisionism and military expansion.
Sweden, already a humanitarian superpower in terms of the aid it provides to conflict regions, certainly will not close its doors.
But other European countries will have to bear more of the burden, and the authorities will have to do more to facilitate integration.
In particular, the pace of job creation achieved in the last few years must be maintained.
For all of its economic success during the past two decades, not least since the 2008 crisis, industry is hollowing out, and structural issues are beginning to be felt.
Our celebrated welfare state will come under strain from an aging population.
Indeed, in this respect, immigration is more a part of the solution than a part of the problem.
There is no guarantee that the election in March will resolve Sweden’s political crisis, particularly if the SD performs well again.
A German-style grand coalition has never been tested in Sweden; and Austria’s experience suggests that it could play into the extremists’ hands.
But a more cooperative atmosphere might well be needed.
In that case, the key question will be whether the Social Democrats can ditch their allies further to the left.
Swine Flu for Grownups
PRINCETON – No one knows how the swine flu (H1N1) pandemic will evolve.
Will it keep spreading, or will it fizzle?
Will it retreat during the northern hemisphere’s summer and return in the fall?
Will it stay mild or turn more severe?
Flu experts just don’t know.
What is certain is that health officials risk mishandling how they explain this new and potentially alarming threat to the public.
When health officials tell us confidently that X is going to happen, and then Y happens instead, we lose trust in their leadership.
And experts worry that the novel H1N1 virus could mutate into a more severe strain.
Yet officials endlessly insist that there is, as a Scottish health official put it, “absolutely no need for the public to be concerned.”
This is false and it could backfire.
Even before a situation deteriorates (if it does), people sense when they are being “calmed” rather than informed.
But “panic panic” – leaders’ fear that they will be unable to stop their people from panicking – is both common and harmful.
Experts agree that pandemics can be slowed, but not “contained.” Officials who promise – or imply – that they can keep this pandemic from their borders, or stop it once it has arrived, are setting themselves up for public outrage later.
7. Don’t oversell what the public can do. It is good risk communication to offer people things to do.
Action gives us a sense of control, and helps us bear our fear.
And if H1N1 becomes more severe, people (and communities) who have prepared for that possibility will probably fare better than those who have not.
But hygiene recommendations like hand-washing and cough-covering help only a little.
They shouldn’t urge urban residents with underlying health conditions to “avoid crowds” without acknowledging empathically that it’s impossible to avoid crowds entirely for the duration of the pandemic.
9. Don’t neglect the teachable moment. In the developing world, swine flu (so far) is much less serious than many endemic health threats, and the main risk-communication goal should be to help people get through their adjustment reaction, take precautions that are feasible, and refocus on other priorities.
But in the developed world, swine flu has two long-lasting lessons to teach: (1) Flu is a bigger deal than many people imagine.
(2) Eventually, a severe pandemic will strike, whether it’s H1N1 or not, and we should do what we can, now, to prepare.
Health officials in North America mostly missed the teachable moment.
Instead of these lessons, many people “learned” (or mislearned) that pandemics are paper tigers, and that health officials are fear-mongers.
Let us hope that officials elsewhere will do better. 
Sympathy for Greenspan
BERKELEY – In the circles in which I travel, there is near-universal consensus that America’s monetary authorities made three serious mistakes that contributed to and exacerbated the financial crisis.
This consensus is almost always qualified by declarations that the United States has been well served by its Federal Reserve chairmen since at least Paul Volcker’s tenure, and that those of us who have not sat in that seat know that we would have made worse mistakes.
Nevertheless, the consensus is that US policymakers erred when:
·    the decision was made to eschew principles-based regulation and allow the shadow banking sector to grow with respect to its leverage and its compensation schemes, in the belief that the government’s guarantee of the commercial banking system was enough to keep us out of trouble;
·    the Fed and the Treasury decided, once we were in trouble, to nationalize AIG and pay its bills rather than to support its counterparties, which allowed financiers to pretend that their strategies were fundamentally sound;
·    the Fed and the Treasury decided to let Lehman Brothers go into uncontrolled bankruptcy in order to try to teach financiers that having an ill-capitalized counterparty was not without risk, and that people should not expect the government to come to their rescue automatically.
There is, however, a lively debate about whether there was a fourth big mistake: Alan Greenspan’s decision in 2001-2004 to push and keep nominal interest rates on US Treasury securities very low in order to try to keep the economy near full employment.
In other words, should Greenspan have kept interest rates higher and triggered a recession in order to avert the growth of a housing bubble?
If we push interest rates up, Greenspan thought, millions of Americans would become unemployed, to no one’s benefit.
If interest rates were allowed to fall, these extra workers would be employed building houses and making things to sell to all the people whose incomes come from the construction sector.
Full employment is better than high unemployment if it can be accomplished without inflation, Greenspan thought.
If a bubble develops, and if the bubble does not deflate but collapses, threatening to cause a depression, the Fed would have the policy tools to short-circuit that chain.
In hindsight, Greenspan was wrong.
But the question is: was the bet that Greenspan made a favorable one?
Whenever in the future the US finds itself in a situation like 2003, should it try to keep the economy near full employment even at some risk of a developing bubble?
I am genuinely unsure as to which side I come down on in this debate.
Central bankers have long recognized that it is imprudent to lower interest rates in pursuit of full employment if the consequence is an inflationary spiral.
Some days I think that, in the future, central bankers must also recognize that it is imprudent to lower interest rates in pursuit of full employment when doing so risks causing an asset price bubble.
Other days, however, I think that, even with the extra information we have learned about the structure of the economy, Greenspan’s decisions in 2001-2004 were prudent and committed us to a favorable and acceptable bet.
What I do know is that the way the issue is usually posed is wrong.
People claim that Greenspan’s Fed “aggressively pushed interest rates below a natural level.”
But what is the natural level?
In the 1920’s, Swedish economist Knut Wicksell defined it as the interest rate at which, economy-wide, desired investment equals desired savings, implying no upward pressure on consumer prices, resource prices, or wages as aggregate demand outruns supply, and no downward pressure on these prices as supply exceeds demand.
On Wicksell’s definition – the best, and, in fact, the only definition I know of – the market interest rate was, if anything, above the natural interest rate in the early 2000’s: the threat was deflation, not accelerating inflation.
The natural interest rate was low because, as the Fed’s current chairman Ben Bernanke explained at the time, the world had a global savings glut (or, rather, a global investment deficiency).
You can argue that Greenspan’s policies in the early 2000’s were wrong. But you cannot argue that he aggressively pushed the interest rate below its natural level.
Rather, Greenspan's mistake – if it was a mistake – was his failure to overrule the market and aggressively push the interest rate up above its natural rate, which would have deepened and prolonged the recession that started in 2001.
But today is one of those days when I don’t think that Greenspan’s failure to raise interest rates above the natural rate to generate high unemployment and avert the growth of a mortgage-finance bubble was a mistake. There were plenty of other mistakes that generated the catastrophe that faces us today.
Defusing the Syrian Time Bomb
TEL AVIV – It is remarkable that a stern warning about the scale of the threat posed to the United States by Syria’s civil war has gone practically unnoticed.
Is President Barack Obama’s administration stumbling toward the abyss?
Earlier this month, the Wall Street Journal reported that, according to the CIA’s deputy director, Michael Morell, “Syria’s volatile mix of Al Qaeda extremism and civil war now poses the greatest threat to US national security” – indeed, “probably the most important issue in the world today.”
By contrast, Morell described the Iranian regime’s “merging of...nuclear ambitions with its desire to be a hegemonic power in the Middle East” as a mere “cause for concern.”
Morell, who is preparing to step down from the CIA soon, has little reason to dissemble.
Just two months ago, in mid-June, when the Syrian crisis was the focus of international attention and the subject of heated policy debate, such a statement by a senior administration official would have drawn strong reactions from several quarters.
But Syria has since moved from the center of attention, displaced by the coup and ongoing crisis in Egypt, the threat of an Al Qaeda terror offensive in Yemen and elsewhere, and the renewal of Israeli-Palestinian negotiations.
The apparent (and deceptive) lull in the fighting in Syria has contributed to this shift.
After the government’s military achievements in Quseir and Homs, there has been some tactical regrouping by the opposition.
Both sides are trading minor blows as they prepare for a major round of fighting in Aleppo, Syria’s largest city, now held by the opposition.
Overall, and despite the regime’s recent victories, the fighting remains at a stalemate.
So this is a convenient time for the international community to look away from a crisis that seems to have no good solutions.
But this does not diminish the gravity of what is happening in Syria, or lessen the seriousness of Morell’s warning.
As Morell put it, the most acute danger is that a regime with a large stockpile of weapons of mass destruction will be supplanted by a regime affiliated with, or dominated by, Al Qaeda.
Pointing to the inflow of jihadis, Morell said that Syria’s “current track is toward the collapse of its central government,” after which it would replace Pakistan as Al Qaeda’s preferred haven.
Morell thus placed himself squarely within one of the two principal schools of thought in the policy debate on Syria (a debate that is articulated almost exclusively in geopolitical terms and ignores humanitarian issues).
One school regards Syria primarily as a theater of battle against Al Qaeda and other extremists.
Its adherents, preoccupied with the prospect of a jihadi takeover in Syria, argue (sometimes implicitly and sometimes explicitly) that the US and its allies must not support or intervene on the side of the rebels and, in fact, should view Bashar al-Assad’s regime as the lesser evil.
Those who fear a jihadi takeover cite recent events in Sinai.
Just a few days ago, Israel closed its airport in Eilat after receiving a warning that jihadis in Sinai planned to attack it with rockets.
This, it is argued, is only a dress rehearsal for what can be expected in a post-Assad Syria.
The other school of thought does not take this scenario lightly.
Nonetheless, it argues that a victory in Syria by a coalition of Russia, Iran, Hezbollah, and Assad’s regime would pose an even greater danger.
Moreover, in the event of the Assad regime’s fall, there would be plenty of ways to deal with the jihadi groups in Syria.
But the most appropriate response to Morell’s statement is that the US does not necessarily have to choose between two sharply defined options.
Yes, Syria’s secular opposition is weak and divided, while the jihadis are more dynamic; but jihadi supremacy in the event of an opposition victory is not inevitable.
The US and its allies should conduct a robust policy, make a more significant investment in the secular opposition, and articulate clear goals.
In June, Obama announced that Assad’s regime had used chemical weapons against its own population and had thus crossed his administration’s “red line.”
But no coherent action or policy followed this powerful statement.
For Obama, Syria’s fate simply does not seem urgent; but when the decisive battle for Aleppo begins, it may be too late.
Morell’s warnings may yet be vindicated – by default, if not by design.
No More Aleppos
MADRID – It has been nearly four years since the first uprisings in Damascus and the beginning of the Syrian civil war.
Across the country, more than 240,000 people have died.
Another 7.5 million have lost their homes or fled the country, becoming refugees.
Syria is drowning in a bloody, cruel, and pointless conflict.
It is time to say “enough” – starting in the devastated city of Aleppo.
Bringing the fighting to a halt will not be easy.
It will require the coordination and cooperation of regional and global rivals.
But the chance to forge a ceasefire is not only an opportunity to end a humanitarian disaster; it could also mark the beginning of a new approach to resolving and preventing crises elsewhere.
Aleppo is one of the oldest inhabited cities in the world – and one of the bloodiest battlegrounds in the war.
The ancient walled city is one of Syria’s six UNESCO World Heritage sites.
Much of it has already been irreversibly damaged.
Today, Aleppo is under rebel control – surrounded by the Syrian army.
Militants loyal to the Islamic State lie in wait a few dozen kilometers away.
The series of international failures in this conflict so far is inexcusable.
Each subsequent breakdown in negotiations, including the Geneva talks, has not only led away from peace, but has also contributed to calamitous developments, including the resurgence of extremist terrorism and the emergence of the Islamic State.
A ceasefire in Aleppo cannot be postponed any further.
Enormous humanitarian efforts will be needed to address the catastrophic situation the war has left, and UN Special Envoy Staffan de Mistura’s immense dedication will be critical.
Fortunately, Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s two main allies, Iran and Russia, have reasons for seeking a ceasefire.
Falling oil prices and economic sanctions have affected both countries.
Iran increasingly feels drained by the economic support it gives to the Syrian army and to Hezbollah in Lebanon, while Russia’s authorities, now also confronting a currency crisis, are battling the perfect storm.
Both countries also have reasons to demonstrate that they can contribute to regional and global stability – Iran, especially, as international negotiations over its nuclear program are at a critical stage.
If Russia and Iran threaten to withdraw support, Assad will have no option other than to come to the table.
However, the biggest obstacle to a ceasefire is the same one that presented itself during negotiations over Syria’s chemical weapons: any deal will require accepting Assad as a partner in the negotiations.
If a ceasefire is achieved at this stage, it will reflect the rapidly shifting nature of today’s geopolitical environment.
Bringing a halt to the fighting will require the United States, the European Union, Russia, Iran, and possibly Saudi Arabia and Qatar to work together toward a common goal.
In order to achieve results in the future, international coalitions will have to be broader, more inclusive, and more representative of the interests of all.
Today, a variety of strategic “poles” is available, each with the capacity to attract and influence.
In this multipolar context, unilateral action will increasingly fail to achieve its objectives.
If the negotiations so far had recognized this and been conducted with more tenacity, the conflict in Syria could have been resolved long ago, averting much death and destruction.
For Europe, Syria’s meltdown should serve as a wakeup call.
The difficulties presented there are not confined to the chronically unstable Middle East, and Europe must confront the situation immediately.
But the European pole’s power of attraction is waning.
Even as the EU continues to struggle with economic malaise, it finds itself in the midst of a growing geopolitical maelstrom, with crises in Ukraine, Russia, North Africa, and the Middle East each presenting important challenges.
The EU needs to acknowledge that it is no longer the center around which its neighbors revolve.
As Stefan Lehne, a visiting scholar at Carnegie Europe, recently put it, Europe is undergoing a Copernican revolution.
The reality of a multipolar world is that other players can attract and influence.
For example, China is working to restore the last stretch of the old Silk Road to reach the ports of the Mediterranean.
That stretch passes through the Balkans.
European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker has asked the new commissioner for regional policy, Johannes Hahn, to make recommendations aimed at redefining the European Neighborhood Policy, the framework through which the EU relates to its immediate geopolitical environment.
The policy needs a complete overhaul.
It no longer makes sense to apply a single standard.
The EU’s offer is no longer unique, and faces competition from other frameworks for integration, other actors, and myriad strategic opportunities.
In this context, it may be equally important to consider the neighbors of Europe’s neighbors.
The European Neighborhood Policy must be made more flexible.
Conditionality has plainly failed to deliver the intended results, because, ultimately, its success depends on countries’ willingness to accept the European agenda.
Countries that are considered strategically important will require more attention and more commitment.
International politics is witnessing exceptional and far-reaching change.
Unless multipolarity is met with an efficient multilateral approach, problems like Syria’s civil war will become much more frequent – and more difficult to resolve.
Syria, and its largest city, is the perfect place to start seeking a better way.
Syria’s Continuing Chemical Fallout
THE HAGUE – The international community’s failure to bring the Syrian civil war to an end is a tragedy – especially for the country’s long-suffering people.
In one respect, multilateral action has had a clearly positive impact: the elimination of the Syrian government’s chemical-weapons program.
And yet there are persistent reports that chemical weapons, including sulfur mustard (commonly known as mustard gas) and chlorine bombs deployed against civilians, continue to be used in Syria.
The stakes could not be higher.
The perpetrators of these attacks must be identified and brought to justice.
Allowing the use of chemical weapons to go unpunished not only could reverse one of the few promising developments in the Syrian conflict; it also threatens to undermine international norms on the use of toxic gas and nerve agents, increasing the possibility that they will be used in terrorist attacks.
In August 2013, rockets containing deadly sarin gas struck Ghouta, a rebel-controlled suburb near Damascus.
Horrific images of women and children dying in agony mobilized international consensus against the use of these types of weapons.
In October 2013, following Syria’s accession to the Chemical Weapons Convention, a joint mission of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) and the United Nations was tasked with eliminating the country’s chemical arsenal and production facilities.
Less than a year later, the mission accomplished what no military intervention could have achieved; the strategic threat from Syria’s chemical weapons was effectively eliminated.
Work to clarify certain aspects of the government’s initial declaration about its weapons program is ongoing; but 1,300 metric tons of chemical weapons, including sulfur mustard and precursors for deadly nerve agents, have been accounted for and destroyed under the watchful eyes of OPCW inspectors.
This achievement must not be allowed to be rolled back.
The Chemical Weapons Convention is one of mankind’s most successful disarmament efforts.
Since 1997, 192 countries have agreed to be bound by its provisions, and 91% of the world’s declared chemical weapons have been destroyed.
The continued use of chemical weapons in the Syrian conflict is not only causing terrible suffering among the country’s civilian population; it also risks eroding the convention’s credibility.
A fact-finding mission established by the OPCW in April 2014 found “compelling confirmation” that a toxic chemical – most likely chlorine gas – was used “systematically and repeatedly” as a weapon in villages in northern Syria.
It was on the basis of these findings that the UN Security Council agreed in August 2015 to create a joint investigative mechanism of the OPCW and the UN and task it with identifying those responsible for the use of chemical weapons in the conflict.
The fog of war cannot be allowed to create a fog of responsibility.
The perpetrators of chemical attacks must be held to account, whoever they are.
International investigators deployed in Syria bring vital expertise to this important mission.
It is crucial that political leaders express confidence in their impartiality, allow them to carry out their work unobstructed, and not second-guess their conclusions.
Once those responsible for the use of chemical weapons have been identified, the international community must ensure that they are prosecuted, in order to send a clear signal about the inviolability of the global ban.
Persistent allegations that non-state actors are using chemical weapons in Syria and northern Iraq are of particular concern, as they raise the possibility of toxic chemicals being used in terrorist attacks.
Manufacturing nerve agents is a complex process, but extremists can easily deploy toxic industrial chemicals – such as chlorine gas – if they have them in their possession.
A conventional attack against a chemical facility is another potentially devastating risk – one that is not beyond the capabilities of a well-funded terrorist group.
Nearly two decades after the Chemical Weapons Convention entered into force, the treaty is facing a major test.
The threat that toxic gas or nerve agents will be deployed in a conflict between countries has been all but eliminated.
Failure to punish their use in the Syrian civil war risks undermining the regime that has brought us to the threshold of a chemical weapons-free world.
Syria’s Final Countdown
TEL AVIV – A series of crucial defeats of the Syrian army has laid to rest any illusions that the government in Damascus is in control of its country.
By spreading his forces thinly across Syria, President Bashar al-Assad has drastically reduced his capacity to win decisive battles, and he is now being forced to evacuate wide areas of the country to concentrate his army around Damascus and the Alawite enclave in the northwest.
As it becomes clear that Assad is likely to lose the war, his closest allies – as well as world powers and regional players – are beginning to plan for the end game.
In late May, the leader of Hezbollah, Hassan Nasrallah, gave a speech that spoke volumes about the impact of the Syrian war on his organization.
“The threat we face is existential,” Nasrallah said.
“We now have three options: to expand the war and fight far more than we have fought in the last four years, to capitulate and be slaughtered, or to disperse throughout the world, walking humiliated and purposeless from catastrophe to catastrophe.”
More than 3,000 Hezbollah fighters have died in Syria, and another 4,000 have been injured.
Syrian militants, including Islamic State fighters, have penetrated Lebanon, threatening to rekindle the country’s ethnic war and undermining Hezbollah’s legitimacy as the guarantor of its security.
Assad’s fall would deny the organization its vital logistic hinterland in Syria, making it vulnerable to challenges by insurgent Sunni militias.
Iran, too, is likely to face a reckoning, as its ally in Damascus approaches defeat.
The country’s strategic calculations are bound to have been affected by the ascension of Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud to the Saudi throne, a real game changer that has resulted in a shift of alliances among the region’s Sunni powers.
Stronger ties among Saudi Arabia, Turkey, and Qatar – and the spectacular successes of the latter’s Sunni proxies in Syria – will put pressure on Iran to cut Assad loose or risk being drawn even deeper into the Syrian quagmire.
The regional proxy war between the Iran-backed Assad government and Sunni-backed rebels has largely undermined America’s influence on the course of events in Syria.
Sunni fighters have ignored calls by the United States to focus on fighting the Islamic State instead of the Assad regime.
In fact, the most effective fighting force in the country is Jaish al-Fatah – The Army of Conquest – a collection of Sunni rebel groups, some of which the US considers to be terrorist organizations.
The US is rightly worried that a victory by Jaish al-Fatah and others might empower anti-Western elements in Syria.
Drawing from its sad experience in Iraq, the US government fears that Assad’s fall would be quickly followed by the collapse of the Syrian army, leaving the country without a stabilizing force.
Rather than turning their attention to the Islamic State, the fractious victors would most likely turn on one another.
As in Libya, the fighting would make the country ungovernable.
Meanwhile, Russia, which considers the naval base of Tartus to be strategically vital, can be counted on to do all it can to prevent a total defeat of the regime.
When Secretary of State John Kerry proposed, at a meeting last May, a joint international approach to contain the conflict, Russian President Vladimir Putin was not interested.
But the Russian regime is not blind to the realities of the battlefield.
Following the loss of the city of Palmyra to the Islamic State, families of Russian advisers began to be repatriated.
In preparation for a possible future without Assad, the Kremlin is now trying to gain influence in opposition groups.
For now, Assad is doing his best to cling to power.
A power-sharing agreement is all but unthinkable, and Syria’s geography is not well suited to an orderly division along sectarian lines.
Assad’s war aims have been reduced to avoiding decisive defeat and gaining international legitimacy, in the hope of a favorable political solution.
The rise of the Islamic State did lend support to the government’s claims that Syria risks being taken over by terrorist groups; nonetheless, the regime is finding itself increasingly isolated.
Assad’s final days are unlikely to be pretty.
The tight-knit members of his clan, his political allies, and many members of the Alawite minority will be fighting for their survival.
Unless a political solution is somehow found, Syria’s fate will come down to the prophetic words a Sunni frontline fighter from Homs told a German reporter in 2012.
“It’s a question of numbers,” he said.
“There are 18 million Sunnis against him.
Assad must kill them all.
Otherwise, we’ll win and kill him and his henchmen.”
Solving Syria in the Security Council
NEW YORK – The ongoing bloodletting in Syria is not only the world’s greatest humanitarian disaster by far, but also one of its gravest geopolitical risks.
And the United States’ current approach – a two-front war against the Islamic State and President Bashar al-Assad’s regime – has failed miserably.
The solution to the Syrian crisis, including the growing refugee crisis in Europe, must run through the United Nations Security Council.
The roots of US strategy in Syria lie in a strange– and unsuccessful – union of two sources of American foreign policy.
One comprises the US security establishment, including the military, the intelligence agencies, and their staunch supporters in Congress.
The other source emerges from the human-rights community.
Their peculiar merger has been evident in many recent US wars in the Middle East and Africa.
Unfortunately, the results have been consistently devastating.
The security establishment is driven by US policymakers’ long-standing reliance on military force and covert operations to topple regimes deemed to be harmful to American interests.
From the 1953 toppling of Mohammad Mossadegh’s democratically elected government in Iran and the “other 9/11” (the US-backed military coup in 1973 against Chile’s democratically elected Salvador Allende) to Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya, and now Syria, regime change has long been the coin of the US security realm.
At the same time, parts of the human-rights community have backed recent US military interventions on the grounds of the “Responsibility to Protect,” or R2P.
This doctrine, adopted unanimously by the UN General Assembly in 2005, holds that the international community is obliged to intervene to protect a civilian population under massive attack by its own government.
In the face of the brutality of Saddam Hussein, Muammar el-Qaddafi, and Assad, some human-rights advocates made common cause with the US security establishment, while China, Russia, and others have argued that R2P has become a pretext for US-led regime change.
The problem, as human-rights advocates should have learned long ago, is that the US security establishment’s regime-change model does not work.
What appears to be a “quick fix” to protect local populations and US interests often devolves into chaos, anarchy, civil war, and burgeoning humanitarian crises, as has happened in Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya, and now Syria.
The risks of failure multiply whenever the UN Security Council as a whole does not back the military part of the intervention.
The US intervention in Syria can also be traced to decisions taken by the security establishment a quarter-century ago to overthrow Soviet-backed regimes in the Middle East.
As then-Under Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz explained to General Wesley Clark in 1991: “We learned that we can intervene militarily in the region with impunity, and the Soviets won’t do a thing to stop us… [We’ve] got about five to ten years to take out these old Soviet ‘surrogate’ regimes – Iraq, Syria, and the rest – before the next superpower [China] comes along to challenge us in the region.”
When al-Qaeda struck the US on September 11, 2001, the attack was used as a pretext by the security establishment to launch its long-desired war to topple Saddam.
When the Arab Spring protests erupted a decade later, the US security establishment viewed the sudden vulnerability of the Qaddafi and Assad regimes as a similar opportunity to install new regimes in Libya and Syria.
Such was the theory, at any rate.
In the case of Syria, America’s regional allies also told President Barack Obama’s administration to move on Assad.
Saudi Arabia wanted Assad gone to weaken a client state of Iran, the kingdom’s main rival for regional primacy.
Israel wanted Assad gone to weaken Iran’s supply lines to Hezbollah in southern Lebanon.
And Turkey wanted Assad gone to extend its strategic reach and stabilize its southern border.
The humanitarian community joined the regime-change chorus when Assad responded to Arab Spring protesters’ demand for political liberalization by unleashing the army and paramilitaries.
From March to August 2011, Assad’s forces killed around 2,000 people.
At that point, Obama declared that Assad must “step aside.”
We don’t know the full extent of US actions in Syria after that.
On the diplomatic level, the US organized the “Friends of Syria,” mainly Western countries and Middle East allies committed to Assad’s overthrow.
The CIA began to work covertly with Turkey to channel arms, financing, and non-lethal support to the so-called “Free Syrian Army” and other insurgent groups operating to topple Assad.
The results have been an unmitigated disaster.
While roughly 500 people per month were killed from March to August 2011, some 100,000 civilians – around 3,200 per month – died between September 2011 and April 2015, with the total number of dead, including combatants, reaching perhaps 310,000, or 10,000 per month.
And, with the Islamic State and other brutal extremist groups capitalizing on the anarchy created by the civil war, the prospect of peace is more distant than ever.
Military intervention led or backed by the US in Afghanistan, Iraq, and Libya has produced similar debacles.
Toppling a regime is one thing; replacing it with a stable and legitimate government is quite another.
If the US wants better results, it should stop going it alone.
The US cannot impose its will unilaterally, and trying to do so has merely arrayed other powerful countries, including China and Russia, against it.
Like the US, Russia has a strong interest in stability in Syria and in defeating the Islamic State; but it has no interest in allowing the US to install its choice of regimes in Syria or elsewhere in the region.
That is why all efforts by the UN Security Council to forge a common position on Syria have so far foundered.
But the UN route can and must be tried again.
The nuclear pact between Iran and the Security Council’s five permanent members (the US, China, France, Russia, and the UK) plus Germany, has just provided a powerful demonstration of the Council’s capacity to lead.
It can lead in Syria as well, if the US will set aside its unilateral demand for regime change and work with the rest of the Council, including China and Russia, on a common approach.
In Syria, only multilateralism can succeed.
The UN remains the world’s best – indeed its only – hope to stop the Syrian bloodbath and halt the flood of refugees to Europe.
No Time to Lose in Syria
MADRID – The arrival of hundreds of thousands of men, women, and children seeking refuge from conflict has confronted the European Union with two stark realities.
First, its member states are not all meeting their obligations, both to one another and according to international law.
Second, its position regarding Syria’s civil war is unsustainable.
To be clear: failing to work towards peace in Syria is just as grave an error as turning away those fleeing from persecution.
The defects in Europe’s asylum legislation and the difference among its member states’ practices have been evident for some time.
But the 350,000 refugees who crossed European borders, and the more than 2,600 who drowned trying to reach them, in the first eight months of this year have opened our eyes.
The inhumane conditions these refugees face are unacceptable.
Now, on top of the so-called “north-south” split that emerged from the economic crisis, the United Kingdom’s potential exit from the EU, and the critical situation in Greece, a new breach, between east and west, has appeared in Europe.
The EU cannot afford any more cracks.
Therefore, it must use all possible means to compel its members to abide by their international and European legal obligations.
That same urgency must be applied to peacemaking in Syria; after all, the refugees are a product of the country’s long, brutal, multi-sided civil war.
The seriousness of the situation in Syria cannot be overstated.
Since the conflict began in 2011, it has produced more than four million refugees, and approximately eight million internally displaced people.
More than 200,000 people have died.
To put that in perspective: more than half of the 22 million people living in Syria in 2011 are either dead or displaced.
Control of Syria’s territory is now divided between President Bashar al-Assad’s regime, various armed opposition groups, the Kurds, and the Islamic State.
The civil war has enabled the extremist Islamic State to build up its capacity to the point that, if the Syrian regime were to collapse entirely, the group would likely be able to take advantage of the power vacuum to seize control of the entire country.
Nonetheless, Russia’s claim that Syria faces a choice between Assad or the Islamic State is false.
Suspicions about Russia’s intentions have lately ballooned, as the country allegedly steps up its aid to the Assad regime, a longtime ally, and calls increasingly loudly for cooperation with the regime to combat the Islamic State.
While Russia’s emphasis on keeping Assad in power is likely driven by its own interests in retaining influence in the Middle East, it is right about one thing: the Islamic State must be stopped.
And it is a grave mistake to think that this can be achieved without a political solution to the conflict in Syria – the conflict that enabled the organization’s explosive growth.
Only if external powers think beyond military operations and devise a political solution to the crisis can the fight against the Islamic State succeed.
Such a political solution must, first and foremost, reflect an understanding of past errors and a commitment not to repeat them.
Recall that in Iraq, the attempt to rebuild the state began with the complete dismantling of Saddam Hussein’s regime and all existing governance structures.
The power vacuum that this approach produced was filled by Sunni militias and, ultimately, the Islamic State.
For Syria, this means that part of the existing state, including Assad’s Alawite sect, should be included in a broad coalition, along with the opposition and the Kurds.
Without such broad representation, no Syrian government can hope to defeat terrorist forces and lead the country toward a more stable future.
Of course, implementing such a solution will not be easy – not least because of sharp divisions among relevant external powers.
Like Russia, Iran – which will be crucial to the success of any solution – backs the regime.
Meanwhile, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, and Qatar are unwilling to support any solution that includes Assad.
This deadlock cannot persist.
And, fortunately, it doesn’t have to.
All crises end in the same way: with all parties sitting at the negotiating table.
That must be the goal in Syria now.
This is where EU leadership can prove vital.
Exercising it will require EU member states to maintain a common position, supporting the efforts of the United Nations special envoy for Syria, Staffan de Mistura, to work with all relevant players – including the EU, the United States, Russia, Iran, and Saudi Arabia – to achieve peace in Syria.
A good place to start would be by urging the so-called E3/EU+3 group – that is, the five permanent members of the UN Security Council (China, France, Russia, the US, and the UK), Germany, and the EU – to convene.
Given that these countries recently managed to overcome their strong differences to reach a nuclear agreement with Iran, this might be the right forum to begin building consensus on a political solution in Syria.
Negotiations could subsequently progress to include other major actors, especially Saudi Arabia, Iran, and Turkey.
Syria is out of time.
Its people have been besieged by brutality and mayhem for far too long; they can find respite in far too few countries; and they are being forced to undertake journeys that are far too dangerous.
The UN General Assembly cannot end its 70th session without taking decisive steps toward effective negotiations – and an effective solution.
The world, urged by the EU, must work to bring peace to Syria now, and to establish a strong state capable of guaranteeing peace in the future.
Engaging the World in Syria
ABU DHABI – A global security crisis of historic proportions is raging in the Middle East, and spreading by the day, as millions of refugees flee Syria and Iraq.
The crisis is now affecting not just all of Syria’s immediate neighbors, straining their resources and exacerbating social and ethnic tensions; it now directly involves all of the current permanent members of the Security Council except China.
It is time for all would-be permanent members of the United Nations Security Council – namely, Germany, India, Japan, Brazil, and Egypt – to step up.
The desire for a political settlement that could end the Syrian civil war is palpable; but just what that settlement would look like remains open to debate – or to further conflict.
Indeed, Russia and the United States are circling each other like boxers before the contest actually begins, supporting different factions and trying to ensure that their allies in the multi-sided conflict are advancing, or at least holding ground.
The need for broad cooperation – and the support of the entire UN Security Council – is apparent.
That is why US Secretary of State John Kerry is talking to the Russians, the Saudis, and the Turks to build support for a new round of international talks.
And the UN and Arab League’s special envoy to Syria, Staffan de Mistura, has created a set of working groups, chaired by Europeans, to “create a framework for concrete talks between Syria’s government and opposition.”
In enabling a peace deal, a coalition of countries that are not yet directly involved in the crisis could be very helpful.
Such a coalition – involving, say, Germany, India, Japan, Brazil, and Egypt – could increase the pressure on President Bashar al-Assad to negotiate by convincing Russian President Vladimir Putin that the world is watching his deal-making efforts closely and that his prestige is on the line.
Moreover, coalition members could convince other relevant regional players to push for a lasting peace.
Germany, for example, already recognizes that the only long-term solution to Europe’s refugee influx lies in eliminating the need to flee, and has begun to make some moves.
Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier traveled to Turkey in September to help broker a deal on keeping refugees in Turkey, in exchange for restarting talks on Turkish accession to the European Union.
A leading German foreign policy expert, Volker Perthes, is chairing one of de Mistura’s working groups.
The other countries have yet to take action.
But they, too, have plenty of motivation – and plenty to offer.
India – as well as Pakistan – has a great deal to gain from strengthening Southwest Asian trade, energy, and investment ties.
Since the signing of the Iran nuclear deal, India has been contemplating renewing the plan for an Iran-Pakistan-India gas pipeline, with the participation of China and Russia.
But that will be impossible without a settlement in Syria and a decision by Iran to stop supporting Hezbollah.
India has a strong relationship with Iran, underpinned by long-standing cultural, social, political, and economic ties, with India now funding an overhaul of the Iranian port of Chabahar, which will give it direct access to Afghanistan.
This places India in a strong position to push Iran to put pressure on Assad.
Likewise, India can leverage its relationship with Russia – it remains a major importer of Russian arms – to help drive progress.
Japan’s potential contribution also involves Iran, with which Japan has lately been pursuing a closer relationship – not least because Japan needs Iranian oil and gas.
Earlier this month in Tehran, the Japanese and Iranian foreign ministers agreed to begin negotiations on a bilateral investment treaty.
Japan also wants to speed up implementation of the Iran nuclear deal, so that it can take advantage of the business opportunities that will result when economic sanctions on the Islamic Republic are lifted.
But if Iran is truly to rejoin the international community, it must play a constructive role in its region.
Japan, which now aspires to enhance its own role on the world stage, must not shy away from making that clear.
A bonus here is that Japanese and Indian interest in the Syrian peace process could spur China to play an active role in reaching, rather than blocking, a solution.
Brazil, despite confronting plenty of domestic problems right now, is also in a position to help.
Not only does it have substantial ties with Russia; it is also linked to Turkey, exemplified by the two countries’ 2010 effort to broker a deal with Iran over its nuclear program.
Moreover, in 2011, Brazil put forward a concept paper at the UN outlining how countries seeking to implement the “responsibility to protect” doctrine should behave.
With the Syrian government – through its murder of tens of thousands of civilians with barrel bombs and poison gas – having more than fulfilled the criteria for triggering the international community’s obligation to intervene, Brazil could suggest what an intervention that reflected the principle of “responsibility while protecting” might look like.
Finally, Egypt – a perennial candidate for a permanent or rotating African seat in a reformed Security Council – has important relationships throughout the region, particularly with Saudi Arabia and other Gulf countries that are directly supporting some Syrian opposition groups.
The government of Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, who has emphasized the need for a comprehensive political settlement, is tacitly supporting Assad, but is also deeply concerned about the Islamic State.
Egyptian diplomats are thus excellent candidates to exert pressure for compromise.
Many of these countries’ governments might say that the Syrian conflict is too far away to affect them directly.
But global leadership does not simply mean enjoying the prestige that accompanies presumed power.
The UN Charter requires countries to use their power to identify “any threat to the peace, breach of the peace, or act of aggression,” and to decide which measures must be taken “to maintain or restore international peace and security.”
The Syrian crisis is a major “threat to the peace,” and the world must address it together.
The Key to a Syrian Accord
DAVOS – The Syrian peace talks that are scheduled to resume in Geneva on January 25 will take place under a framework set out in Vienna in October.
These principles, agreed upon by the most important foreign players in Syria’s war, include a commitment to secular governance, the eventual defeat of the Islamic State (ISIS) and other terrorist groups, the maintenance of Syria’s prewar borders, the preservation of its state institutions, and the protection of minority groups.
What they do not include is an effort to address the largest obstacle to lasting peace: the ongoing attacks against civilians and other atrocities that are intensifying divisions among the Syrian factions who will eventually have to govern together.
If the deliberate carnage does not stop soon, diplomacy alone will be unlikely to suffice to end the conflict.
The war has continued for so long, in part, because both the Syrian government and the armed groups it is fighting believed that they would ultimately prevail.
Russia’s entry into the conflict has helped change that calculus.
But, while Russian airpower has bolstered the government enough to keep it from collapsing, it has not been enough to make significant progress against the opposition.
Meanwhile, the attacks in Europe by ISIS, combined with the mass exodus of Syrian refugees, has spurred a new push for a political compromise.
The European Union, the United States, and other interested countries hope that Syria’s warring parties will stop fighting each other, and turn their weapons instead on ISIS and other extremist groups, such as Jabhat al-Nusra.
One of the toughest nuts to crack in the peace negotiations is the fate of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad and his henchmen.
The Assad regime is responsible for the highest number of civilian casualties by far, having carried out indiscriminate attacks in populated opposition-held areas, besieged entire populations, blocked the delivery of humanitarian aid, and tortured and executed prisoners.
And yet, while Assad’s opponents insist that he relinquish power, that clearly will not be a precondition for the talks.
As a practical matter, Assad leads one of the conflict’s most powerful factions, one that must be represented at the negotiating table if peace is to be achieved.
Furthermore, the abrupt removal of Assad could deal a fatal blow to the Syrian state – an outcome that is in no one’s interest (with the exception of ISIS and other extremists).
The dissolution of Syria’s security forces and judicial system could be especially dangerous for Syria’s minorities.
That is why a managed transition must be the goal of all participants in the talks.
One logical compromise would be for Assad to retain power for a short period.
Even Russia and Iran, his most vociferous supporters, have hinted that they could accept his departure if he steps down through negotiations, rather than being ousted by a popular revolt (and as long as the successor regime is friendly to them).
If Assad and his murderous cronies agree to relinquish power, they will undoubtedly seek amnesty for their crimes.
That must be firmly rejected.
Since the early 1990s, the international community has rightly withheld its imprimatur from amnesties for mass atrocities.
Indeed, international law requires that such proposals be rejected.
In any case, an amnesty in Syria would not protect Assad from prosecution.
If a future Syrian government were to join the International Criminal Court and consent to retroactive jurisdiction, the court would be free to prosecute any mass atrocities it saw fit to investigate.
Similarly, foreign courts exercising universal jurisdiction over alleged Syrian war criminals found on their territory would be free to ignore an amnesty.
And precedents from Argentina, Chile, and Peru have shown how even in countries where the atrocities occurred, amnesties granted under pressure of violence can be ruled invalid.
Of course, it would not be realistic to expect Assad and his henchmen to deliver themselves directly to prosecutors in The Hague.
They are more likely to use their power in Syria to shield themselves and, if weakened, flee to Moscow or Tehran, delaying efforts to apprehend them.
In the meantime, negotiators face the difficult question of who should replace Assad.
According to the Vienna declaration, that question would ultimately be decided by UN-supervised elections.
But credible elections in war-torn Syria, where millions have been displaced, will take much time and preparation to organize.
In the meantime, it will be necessary to establish a coalition government by agreement.
The Vienna declaration calls for “credible, inclusive, non-sectarian governance.”
In practice, this will mean choosing political figures who have credibility among both Syria’s Sunni majority and the Alawite and other minorities whose members have largely turned to Assad for protection.
The international community could facilitate agreement by insisting on the exclusion of people from any side who, through a fair, open, and contested process, are found responsible for serious abuses.
Achieving an accord along such lines depends on developing a level of trust among Syria’s warring factions that is currently lacking.
It is difficult to shake hands with opponents who are killing one’s families and neighbors.
That is why US Secretary of State John Kerry is wrong to prioritize striking a deal over ending atrocities.
Stopping the deliberate slaughter of civilians is not a byproduct of a peace deal, but a prerequisite for successful negotiations.
Syria’s Dangerous Liaisons
All eyes turned to Syria following the assassination of former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri.
Opposition groups in Lebanon, as well as Hariri supporters, openly accused Syrian President Bashar Assad’s regime of being responsible for the killing.
The Bush administration, while not formally blaming Syria, virtually did so and recalled its ambassador to Damascus.
The US is said to be extremely angry at Syria’s refusal to withdraw its forces from Lebanon in line with a United Nations resolution.
Growing opposition to Syrian hegemony in Lebanon is but one of four related problems Syria faces, all of which it has addressed inadequately.
The other three are Syria’s behavior in Iraq, its relations with the US, and the need for domestic reform.
While corrosive immobility is a trademark of the Syrian regime, these challenges threaten to reinforce each other and marginalize Syria internationally even more so than today.
In Lebanon, the Syrians have repeatedly misread the Bush administration’s intentions.
Last September, the US, together with France, sponsored UN Security Council Resolution 1559 demanding a Syrian pullout and the disarming of militias – mainly Hezbollah.
This came after Assad last September imposed an unconstitutional extension of Lebanese President Emile Lahoud’s mandate, despite French and American warnings.
Yet to this day, Syrian officials privately say that they don’t think the US is serious about a withdrawal.
Syria’s leaders also continue to dismiss demands from within Lebanon for an end to Syria’s 28-year military presence.
Such demands escalated dramatically after Hariri’s death, as tens of thousands of the former prime minister’s partisans, who previously sat on the fence when it came to Syria, shouted “Syria out.”
Indeed, a broad multi-communal opposition front has formed in Beirut to demand Syria’s departure.
Yet rather than address the front’s demands and shape a healthy bilateral relationship between equal countries, Syria has sought to divide the opposition and reassert control.
Hariri’s assassination makes that far more difficult, and Syria must prepare for a strong backlash from the US and France.
In Iraq, since the fall of Baghdad on April 9, 2003, Damascus has shown undue nostalgia for the old system.
Though the Syrian and Iraqi Baath parties were bitter foes, there was consolation in that both were members of a confederacy of despotisms.
For the Syrians, a democratic Iraq friendly to the US was always far worse than Saddam Hussein, the enemy they knew – and later profitably traded with – during the years of international sanctions against Iraq.
Syria’s suspected support for Iraqi Baathist exiles threatens to damage relations with the new Iraq.
Baghdad has repeatedly accused the Assad regime of allowing Iraqi funds to be channeled to insurgents, and recently notified the Syrians that the photograph of a senior Syrian intelligence official taken with an Islamist combatant was found on the latter’s body in Falluja.
As a legitimate Iraqi authority emerges following the elections, the Syrians will have to show foresight in jettisoning their pro-Saddam acquaintances.
The Bush administration’s growing impatience with Syrian involvement in the Iraqi insurgency is a major reason for Syria’s deteriorating relationship with the US.
Indeed, there is palpable disdain for Syria in Washington.
That is why Syria’s denials that it is playing a spoiler role in Iraq are rarely taken seriously, and why Assad has not gained American support for renewed negotiations with Israel over the Golan Heights.
There are signs that the Syrians are unable to gauge American intentions on other issues as well.
For example, Assad apparently still does not realize how much the Bush administration associates his regime with terrorism.
Syrian officials believe that because the Baath Party is secular, the US will invariably support it against an Islamist resurgence.
They fail to see that American officials regard Syria as complicit in the activities of Islamist terrorist groups in the Palestinian territories, Iraq, and Lebanon.
At home, Assad’s regime also finds itself in a bind.
Political and economic reform, when it advances, does so at a glacial pace.
A major item of discussion in Syria is the revival of Islam as an alternative to a political and economic system offering few incentives except to regime grandees.
France’s opposition to Syria’s presence in Lebanon was at least partly a reflection of disenchantment with Assad’s reformist ambitions, and the European Union has expressed similar reservations.
Assad is now in a consolidation phase, leaving little room for reform.
Indeed, his new interior minister, Ghazi Kanaan, an old-school hardliner, spearheaded a crackdown on reformers and Kurds in the past year or so.
The reshuffle last November that brought Kanaan and others into the cabinet was seen to reflect Assad’s preferences.
In the coming month, several rounds of retirements should allow the president to place more of his people in positions of power.
Consolidation, however, is not reform.
Assad must show that his enhanced authority can lead to genuine transformation.
Until now, the president has toed a hard line on Iraq, on Lebanon, and in domestic affairs.
If he’s a reformer, few are convinced.
Syria may pay a heavy price for that ambiguity.
Syria’s Sectarian Stalemate
PRINCETON – What began in Syria as a revolt against an oppressive regime has evolved into a sectarian civil war and, more recently, into a proxy conflict.
In the process, the struggle has become increasingly convoluted, with conflicting agendas among allies, together with deep-seated communal tensions, rendering the situation nearly intractable.
On one side, the United States, the European Union, Turkey, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and Qatar are backing the opposition – a welter of armed factions with diverse agendas and ideologies that range from Syrian nationalist to global jihadi.
This disunity reflects the fissures in Syrian society, a result of more than four decades of brutal authoritarian rule.
On the other side, Russia and Iran (and its proxy, Lebanon’s Hezbollah), each for its own reasons, are supporting President Bashar al-Assad’s regime.
Russia’s motivations are tied to the legacy of the Cold War.
The Assad regime has consistently adopted an anti-Western stance, aligning itself with the Soviet Union and later with Russia.
Today, Syria represents Russia’s only remaining toehold in the Arab world, while all of Assad’s regional opponents are US allies.