1929 or 1989?
PARIS – As the economic crisis deepens and widens, the world has been searching for historical analogies to help us understand what has been happening.
At the start of the crisis, many people likened it to 1982 or 1973, which was reassuring, because both dates refer to classical cyclical downturns.
Today, the mood is much grimmer, with references to 1929 and 1931 beginning to abound, even if some governments continue to behave as if the crisis was more classical than exceptional.
The tendency is either excessive restraint (Europe) or a diffusion of the effort (the United States).
Europe is being cautious in the name of avoiding debt and defending the euro, whereas the US has moved on many fronts in order not to waste an ideal opportunity to implement badly needed structural reforms.
For geo-strategists, however, the year that naturally comes to mind, in both politics and economics, is 1989.
Of course, the fall of the house of Lehman Brothers has nothing to do with the fall of the Berlin Wall.
Indeed, on the surface it seems to be its perfect antithesis: the collapse of a wall symbolizing oppression and artificial divisions versus the collapse of a seemingly indestructible and reassuring institution of financial capitalism.
Yet 2008-2009, like 1989, may very well correspond to an epochal change, whose unfolding consequences will be felt for decades.
The end of the East-West ideological divide and the end of absolute faith in markets are historical turning points.
And what happens in 2009 may jeopardize some of the positive results of 1989, including the peaceful reunification of Europe and the triumph of democratic principles over nationalist, if not xenophobic, tendencies.
In 1989, liberal democracy triumphed over the socialist ideology incarnated and promoted by the Soviet Bloc.
For many of his supporters, it was President Ronald Reagan who, with his deliberate escalation of the arms race, pushed the Soviet economy to the brink, thereby fully demonstrating the superiority of liberal societies and free markets.
Of course, there are obvious differences between 1989 and now.
First, and perhaps above all, the revolutions of 1989 and the subsequent collapse of the Soviet Union put an end to global bipolarity.
By contrast, 2009 is likely to pave the way to a new form of bipolarity, but with China substituting for the Soviet Union.
Second, whereas democracy and market capitalism appeared as clear – if more fragile than expected – winners in 1989, it is difficult in 2009, with the spread of the global crisis, to distinguish winners from losers.
Everyone seems to be a loser, even if some are more affected than others.
Yet, history is unfair, and the US, despite its greater responsibility for today’s global crisis, may emerge in better shape than most countries from the morass.
In better shape, but not alone.
As a visiting professor at Harvard and MIT, I am getting a good preview of what the world could look like when the crisis finally passes.
One senses something like the making of an American-Asian dominated universe.
From the incredible media lab at MIT to the mathematics and economics departments at Harvard, Asians – Chinese and Indians, in particular – are everywhere, like the Romans in Athens in the first century BC: full of admiration for those from whom they were learning so much, and whom they would overcome in the coming decades.
But before this new order appears, the world may be faced with spreading disorder, if not outright chaos.
What, for example, will happen to a country as central and vulnerable as Egypt when hundred of thousands of Egyptians working in the Gulf are forced to return to their homeland as a result of the crisis in the oil-producing countries?
When the rich get less rich, the poor get poorer.
And what about the foreign workers who have reached for the “European dream” and are now faced with potential explosions of xenophobia in Europe’s supposedly open countries?
The consequences of 1989 ended up being less enduring than many observers, including me, would have assumed.
We can only hope that, in the end, the consequences of 2009 similarly prove to be far less dramatic than we now – intuitively and in our historical reflexes – feel them to be.
What Failed in 2008?
BERKELEY – To solve a problem, it is not enough to know what to do.
You actually have to implement the solution – and be willing to change course if it turns out that you did not know quite as much as you thought.
As a result, markets were deregulated, making it easier to trade assets that were perceived to be safe, but were in fact not.
As a result, systemic risk proliferated beyond central bankers’ wildest imagination.
Untested – and ultimately incorrect – assumptions created a policymaking environment defined by what can only be called hubris.
Officials underestimated tail risks.
They set inflation targets at around 2% – leaving little room for maneuver when the water got choppy.
And, most audaciously of all, the European Union introduced the euro as a common currency.
Indeed, wrongheaded policymaking continued long after the crisis began.
Politicians responded to worsening economic conditions by hewing as closely as possible to failed prescriptions, making sure to do no more than absolutely necessary to address the biggest economic disaster since the Great Depression.
Wolf’s prescription for countering the crisis is simple, smart, and unassailable.
In the short term, he suggests that countries with reserve currencies spend more (especially to finance public-sector investments) and issue more debt.
Their central banks, he argues, should raise inflation targets to 3% or even 4% per year.
Over the medium term, according to Wolf, countries need to put in place regulatory measures that lower debt levels and discourage overleveraging.
The eurozone, too, must resolve its internal contradictions, either by disbanding or by introducing “a minimum set of institutions and policies” that allow the monetary union to function properly.
Wolf’s long-term solutions include tackling inequality, “more global regulation,” a greater degree of “freedom for individual countries to craft their own responses,” and economic analysis that is less in thrall to the free-market ideologues that led us into the crisis in the first place.
And yet, as recommendable as Wolf’s proposals may be, little has been done to implement them.
The reasons why are found in the second book: Hall of Mirrors, by&nbsp;my friend, teacher, and patron, Barry Eichengreen.
Eichengreen traces our tepid response to the crisis to the triumph of monetarist economists, the disciples of Milton Friedman, over their Keynesian and Minskyite peers – at least when it comes to interpretations of the causes and consequences of the Great Depression.
When the 2008 financial crisis erupted, policymakers tried to apply Friedman’s proposed solutions to the Great Depression.
Unfortunately, this turned out to be the wrong thing to do, as the monetarist interpretation of the Great Depression was, to put it bluntly, wrong in significant respects and radically incomplete.
The resulting policies were enough to prevent the post-2008 recession from developing into a full-blown depression; but that partial success turned out to be a Pyrrhic victory, for it allowed politicians to declare that the crisis had been overcome, and that it was time to embrace austerity and focus on structural reform.
The result is today’s stagnant economy, marked by anemic growth that threatens to become the new normal.
The United States and Europe are on track to have thrown away 10% of their potential wealth, while the failure to strengthen financial-sector regulation has left the world economy exposed to the risk of another major crisis.
Wolf and Eichengreen would agree that the main shortcomings that led to the 2008 financial crisis – and that continue to underpin our inadequate response to it – are intellectual.
Indeed, the only true lesson of the crisis so far seems to be that its lessons will never truly be learned.
A Comeback Strategy for Europe
STOCKHOLM/MADRID – When Pope Francis addressed the European Parliament last November, he compared the European Union to a grandmother – pleasant and rich with experience, but lacking the vitality and energy of the past.
It is high time, Francis argued, that EU leaders shed their dozy image, recognize the strategic challenges that Europe faces, and forge a clear policy for tackling them.
Admittedly, the pope’s characterization was alarmingly accurate in some respects.
But, despite its seeming lassitude, Europe retains significant strengths.
It is a hub of high-level thought and innovation; it is home to some of the world’s most competitive regions and industries; and, perhaps most impressive, it has built a community and market encompassing a half-billion people.
But the world is changing: the Asia-Pacific region is increasingly influencing global developments, economic and otherwise.
The Trans-Pacific Partnership – by which the United States and 11 other countries would create a mega-regional free-trade zone – would most likely accelerate this shift (all the more so if China eventually joins).
Though the TPP faces no shortage of hurdles to clear before an agreement is finalized, its potential to augment Asia’s economic power cannot be underestimated.
Europe must work to secure its position in the new world order – beginning by enhancing its own trade and investment ties with the US.
The problem is that, as the TPP negotiations progress, talks on the EU-US Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) have become so deeply mired in domestic controversies that the entire project may well be scuttled.
Business leaders on both sides of the Atlantic are convinced that a successful TTIP agreement would bring substantial economic benefits – a perception that many studies reinforce.
Yet trivial issues – for example, the use of chlorinated chicken and settlements of investor disputes – continue to dominate the debate.
The TTIP’s goal is to unleash the power of the transatlantic economy, which remains by far the world’s largest and wealthiest market, accounting for three-quarters of global financial activity and more than half of world trade.
(If the TTIP was opened to other economies – such as Turkey, Mexico, and Canada – the benefits would be even greater.)
Even more compelling than the benefits of achieving an agreement, though, are the potentially catastrophic consequences of failure.
For starters, a breakdown of TTIP talks would give considerable ammunition to those in the United Kingdom who advocate withdrawal from the EU; conversely, if the TTIP were implemented, the UK would be unwise – and thus unlikely – to leave.
Moreover, the perception that the EU’s internal squabbles had led it to squander a strategic opportunity would probably drive the US to accelerate its disengagement from the continent.
And Russian President Vladimir Putin would invariably regard the EU’s failure as a major opportunity to exert more influence over parts of Europe.
All of this contributes to a starkly fundamental strategic risk: If the TTIP stalls or collapses, while the TPP moves forward and succeeds, the global balance will tip strongly in Asia’s favor – and Europe will have few options, if any, for regaining its economic and geopolitical influence.
When the TTIP was first proposed, Europe seemed to recognize its value.
Indeed, it was the EU that pushed the US, which initially doubted Europe’s commitment, to launch the negotiation process in June 2013.
The ambition was to complete the negotiations on “one tank of gas.”
No one wanted to endure protracted talks – or the associated political pain.
But EU leaders essentially abandoned the project, seemingly confirming American fears.
Trade negotiators struggled to make headway, while anti-globalization groups seized control of the public discourse, presenting the TTIP as a threat to everything from Europe’s democracy to its health.
This is dangerously inaccurate talk, and EU leaders must prevent it from gaining any more traction by making the strategic case for the agreement.
And they must revive their commitment to conclude the talks successfully in 2015.
This is not to say that resolving the remaining issues in the TTIP negotiations will be simple.
But establishing a trade agreement, especially one that entails so many regulatory issues, is always difficult, as it must account for the complexity and changeability of modern economies.
The fact is that the challenges inherent in completing the TTIP are no more intractable than those that EU leaders have faced in the last few years of crisis.
When the TTIP negotiations resume next month, EU leaders must push for genuine progress, with the goal of completing a deal by the end of the year.
The good news is that the recent midterm elections in the US might have improved their chances.
President Barack Obama now might get so-called fast-track negotiating authority from Congress.
If he does, Congress would simply approve or reject any negotiated agreement, rather than picking it apart.
The US presidential election season is starting, and other issues in the new year could easily take over the EU agenda.
That is why Europe’s leaders have no time to waste.
They must seize economic opportunity – and avert strategic disaster.
The Year That Ended an Epoch?
MADRID – As 2016 comes to an end, the outlook for 2017 is shrouded in uncertainty.
Tensions in the Middle East are rising, and populist movements have appeared in Europe and the United States.
In the Middle East, the tragic conflict in Syria continues, despite several fruitless attempts at rapprochement, which were marred by the fundamental disagreement about Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s future role in any peace process or political transition.
Meanwhile, over the past week, Syrian government troops, backed by Russia and Iran, have retaken almost all of Aleppo – once Syria’s largest city, now utterly devastated by the war.
The world’s priority for the coming year must be to achieve peace in Syria, which will require close regional and international cooperation.
On December 27, Iran, Russia, and Turkey will hold a tripartite meeting in Moscow to discuss a political solution for the Syria conflict.
That meeting, if it takes place, is likely to be overshadowed by the fallout from the assassination of Russia’s ambassador to Turkey.
But it is nothing if not surprising that these parties, and not the US and the European Union, would be negotiating such an agreement.
One positive development this year came in March, when the EU and Turkey signed an agreement to address the refugee crisis.
Turkey has now taken in some three million Syrian refugees since the beginning of the conflict.
Although EU-Turkey relations are currently not at their best, the dialogue between the two sides must continue in 2017, not least because of their common interests, which are based not only on economic interdependence, but also on the refugee crisis and the collective fight against terrorism.
European politics next year, meanwhile, will be consumed by the Brexit negotiations.
In March, the United Kingdom will likely invoke Article 50 of the Treaty of Lisbon, triggering the formal procedure for withdrawal from the EU.
The challenge will be to reach an agreement that guarantees the wellbeing of future EU-UK relations.
This will not be easy, and EU negotiators have already set a timeline of only 18 months.
While much remains uncertain, what is clear is that if the UK wants to retain access to the European single market, it will have to accept the EU’s four freedoms, including the free movement of workers.
In 2017, several European countries will hold general elections, and there is a risk that isolationist, anti-European populist movements will make a strong showing.
For the EU to lose a country as militarily and economically important as the UK is bad enough; but to lose a founding EU member state, such as France, would be tragic.
Fortunately, many Europeans’ views toward the EU actually improved in the aftermath of the Brexit referendum.
But this will not lessen the challenge for EU governments in the year ahead.
They must unite societies divided by powerful global forces, such as globalization and rapid technological innovation.
The Brexit referendum, followed by Donald Trump’s victory in the US presidential election, signaled the rise of populism in the West.
But now that Trump is filling his cabinet with oligarchs and former military men, we have reason to doubt that he will keep his promise to govern without the Washington “establishment.”
Trump’s incoming administration is full of unknowns, but there can be no doubt that his rejection of multilateral institutions will endanger international efforts to cooperate on solutions to the world’s biggest problems.
This holds peril for US-EU relations.
In previous years, the Paris climate agreement and the nuclear agreement with Iran were rays of light in a world closing itself off to multilateralism.
In the coming years, such rays may become scarcer still.
Now more than ever, we need the kind of dialogue that builds strategic trust between great powers.
And yet, Trump’s statements casting doubt on continued US adherence to a “One China” policy vis-à-vis Taiwan could severely damage relations between the world’s two largest economies.
Similarly, notwithstanding the pro-Russian leanings of some among Trump’s team, the US-Russian relationship also lacks strategic trust, owing to Russia’s military intervention in Syria, its invasion of eastern Ukraine, and its alleged interference in the US election.
The coming year will be particularly important for Europe.
Relations between the EU and the US must remain strong, rooted in mutual respect for democracy, freedom, and human rights.
After a turbulent 2016, and with little positive news in international politics, 2017 is shaping up to be a year of challenges and uncertainty.
But the biggest uncertainty of all is whether this is simply the end of another year, or the end of a geopolitical epoch.
Another Slow Year for the Global Economy
WASHINGTON, DC – Last April, the International Monetary Fund projected that the world economy would grow by 3.5% in 2015.
In the ensuing months, that forecast was steadily whittled down, reaching 3.1% in October.
But the IMF continues to insist – as it has, with almost banal predictability, for the last seven years – that next year will be better.
But it is almost certainly wrong yet again.
For starters, world trade is growing at an anemic annual rate of 2%, compared to 8% from 2003 to 2007.
Whereas trade growth during those heady years far exceeded that of world GDP, which averaged 4.5%, lately, trade and GDP growth rates have been about the same.
Even if GDP growth outstrips growth in trade this year, it will likely amount to no more than 2.7%.
The question is why.
According to Christina and David Romer of the University of California, Berkeley, the aftershocks of modern financial crises – that is, since World War II – fade after 2-3 years.
The Harvard economists Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff say that it takes five years for a country to dig itself out of a financial crisis.
And, indeed, the financial dislocations of 2007-2008 have largely receded.
So what accounts for the sluggish economic recovery?
One popular explanation lies in the fuzzy notion of “secular stagnation”: long-term depressed demand for goods and services is undermining incentives to invest and hire.
But demand would remain weak only if people lacked confidence in the future.
The only logical explanation for this enduring lack of confidence, as Northwestern University’s Robert Gordon has painstakingly documented and argued, is slow productivity growth.
Before the crisis – and especially from 2003 to 2007 – slow productivity growth was being obscured by an illusory sense of prosperity in much of the world.
In some countries – notably, the United States, Spain, and Ireland – rising real-estate prices, speculative construction, and financial risk-taking were mutually reinforcing.
At the same time, countries were amplifying one another’s growth through trade.
Central to the global boom was China, the rising giant that flooded the world with cheap exports, putting a lid on global inflation.
Equally important, China imported a huge volume of commodities, thereby bolstering many African and Latin American economies, and purchased German cars and machines, enabling Europe’s largest economy to keep its regional supply chains humming.
This dynamic reversed around March 2008, when the US rescued its fifth-largest investment bank, Bear Sterns, from collapse.
With the eurozone banks also deeply implicated in the subprime mortgage mess and desperately short of US dollars, America and much of Europe began a remorseless slide into recession.
Whereas in the boom years, world trade had spread the bounty, it was now spreading the malaise.
As each country’s GDP growth slowed, so did its imports, causing its trading partners’ growth to slow as well.
The US economy began to emerge from its recession in the second half of 2009, thanks largely to aggressive monetary policy and steps to stabilize the financial system.
Eurozone policymakers, by contrast, rejected monetary stimulus and implemented fiscal austerity measures, while ignoring the deepening distress of their banks.
The eurozone thus pushed the world into a second global recession.
Just when that recession seemed to have run its course, emerging economies began to unravel.
For years, observers had been touting the governance and growth-enhancing reforms that these countries’ leaders had supposedly introduced.
In October 2012, the IMF celebrated emerging economies’ “resilience.”
As if on cue, that facade began to crumble, revealing an inconvenient truth: factors like high commodity prices and massive capital inflows had been concealing serious economic weaknesses, while legitimizing a culture of garish inequality and rampant corruption.
These problems are now being compounded by the growth slowdown in China, the fulcrum of global trade.
And the worst is yet to come.
China’s huge industrial overcapacity and property glut needs to be wound down; the hubris driving its global acquisitions must be reined in; and its corruption networks have to be dismantled.
In short, the factors that dragged down the global economy in 2015 will persist – and in some cases even intensify – in the new year.
Emerging economies will remain weak.
The eurozone, having enjoyed a temporary reprieve from austerity, will be constrained by listless global trade.
Rising interest rates on corporate bonds portend slower growth in the US.
China’s collapsing asset values could trigger financial turbulence.
And policymakers are adrift, with little political leverage to stem these trends.
The IMF should stop forecasting renewed growth and issue a warning that the global economy will remain weak and vulnerable unless world leaders act energetically to spur innovation and growth.
Such an effort is long overdue.
Трамптық белгісіздік
НЬЮ-ЙОРК – Әрбір қаңтар айында, мен алдағы жылға арналған болжамды дайындай бастаймын.
Экономикалық болжау дайындау оңай іс емес; алайда, Гарри Трумэннің бір қолды экономисттердің болуына («екінші жағынан» деп айта алмайтын) өтінішінде шындықтың барына қарамастан, менің болжамдарым дұрыс болды деп айта аламын.
Соңғы жылдары, мен күшті фискалдық ынталандыру болмаған жағдайда, (Еуропада немесе Америка Құрама Штаттарында жақын арада болжанбаған) 2008 жылдың Ұлы құлдырауынан сауығу баяу болады деп дұрыс таптым.
Осы болжамдарды жасаған кезде мен кешенді эконометрикалық модельдерге қарағанда базалық экономикалық күштерді талдауға толығырақ сүйенген болатынмын.
Мысалы, 2016 жылдың басында, соңғы бірнеше жыл бойы орын алған жаһандық жиынтық сұраныстың тапшылығының күрт өзгеруі екіталай екені анық көрінді. Сондықтан, мен әсерлі қалыпқа келуді болжағандар туралы олар әлемді тым жақсы жағынан көріп, кемшіліктерді ескермей жатыр деп ойладым.
Мен күткендей, көптеген экономикалық даму жағдайлары орын алды.
Бірақ, 2016 жылдың саяси оқиғалары олай жайлы болмады.
Мен, өсіп келе жатқан теңсіздік мәселесі, әсіресе АҚШ-та, сондай-ақ бүкіл әлем бойынша көптеген елдерде, шешілмесе, онда оның саяси салдары болатыны туралы көптеген жылдар бойы жазып келдім.
Бірақ теңсіздікке байланысты жағдай нашарлай бастады, тіпті АҚШ-та орташа өмір сүру ұзақтығы қысқаруда деген шошынышты деректер де белгілі болды.
Энн Кейс  және Ангус Дитонның өткен жылғы зерттеуінде айтылғандай, тұрғын халықтың үлкен сегменттерінде өмір сүру ұзақтығы қысқаруда, онын ішінде Американың Тот белдеуінің ашулы ерлері де бар.
Бірақ, табысы төмендердің 90%-ы ғасырдың үштен бірі бойы тоқырауда болған (және елеулі бөлігі төмендеп жатқан) жағдайда, денсаулық сақтау деректеріне жүгінсек, еліміздің өте үлкен бөлігінің жағдайы нашар.
Америка бұл үрдістің басында болғанымен, басқа жерлерде жағдай бұдан аса жақсы емес.
Саяси салдардың болуы анық көрінгенімен, олардың нысаны мен мерзімдері әлдеқайда айқын болмады.
Бұрын емес, ал дәл экономика түзетіліп келе жатқанда, АҚШ-та неге саяси қарсылық пайда болды?
Және неге ол оңға қарай бет алды?
Негізі, өздері қатты жақтаған  жаһандану нәтижесінде жұмыс орындарын жоғалтқан адамдарға ұсынылатын көмекті бұғаттаған республикашылдар болды. 26 штатта, медициналық көмекті кеңейтуге республиканшылдар қарсы болып, осылайша жағдайлары төмен адамдарға медициналық сақтандыру берілмеді.
Және басқаларды пайдалана отырып өмір сүрген, ашық түрде салықты төлемегенін мойындап және салықтан жалтаруды мақтаныш қылған біреу қалайша жеңіске жетті?
Дональд Трамп заман үрдісін дәл тапты: жағдай жақсы болмады, және көптеген сайлаушылар өзгерісті қалады.
Енді олардың тілегі орындалады- ешқандай іс әдеттегідей болмайды. Бірақ мұндай белгісіздік әлі болмаған.
Трамп қандай саясат жүргізетіні, олардың қайсысы табысқа жетеді немесе  олардың салдары қандай болады - мұның бәрі белгісіз болып тұр.
Трамп қалай болса да сауда соғысын жасайтындай.
Бірақ Қытай мен Мексика қандай жауап қайтарады?
Трамп өзінің ұсыныстары Дүниежүзілік сауда ұйымы ережесін бұзатынын түсінуі-ақ мүмкін, бірақ ол сондай-ақ, ДСҰ оған қарсы шығуы үшін ұзақ уақыт қажет екенін білетін шығар.
Ал ол уақытқа дейін, Американың сауда шоты қайта балансқа келуі мүмкін.
Бірақ бұл ойынды екі жақ та ойнай алады: Қытай, ұқсас әрекеттерді жасай алады, бірақ оның жауабы шеберлеу болуы мүмкін.
Бірақ сауда соғысы орын алса, қандай болар еді?
Трамптың жеңе аламын деп ойлауында негіз болуы мүмкін; өйткені, Қытай АҚШ-қа экспорт бойынша тәуелдірек болып табылады, бұл әрине АҚШ-қа артықшылық береді.
Бірақ сауда соғысы бір жақ қана жеңіп алатын ойын емес.
АҚШ та сондай-ақ жеңіледі. Қытай өткір саяси ауырсынуды тудыра отырып, кегін ала алады.
Қытайдың АҚШ-қа қарағанда, АҚШ-тың өздеріне зиян келтіруіне қарсы тұруында да артықшылығы бар.
Ауырсынуды кімнің оңайырақ шыдай алатынын бәріміз білеміз ғой.
Ол, қарапайым халқы қазірдің өзінде ұзақ зардап шеккен АҚШ па, немесе қиын-қыстау заманға қарамастан, 6% -дан асатын өсуді қалыптастыра білген Қытай ма?
Кеңінен алғанда, республикашылдар / Трамп күн тәртібі, стандартты GOP рецептінде көрсетілгендегіге қарағанда, салық қысқартуларымен бірге байларға қарай көбірек бағытталып, байлықтың төмен сарқылу идеясына негізделген, ол, шын мәнінде тиімді болмаған Рейган дәуірінің ұсыным экономикасының жалғасындай көрінеді.  Алау атқан риторика, немесе Twitter-де таңғы үште жазылған сандырақ ойлар, кем дегенде біраз уақытқа, Рейган революциясының салдарынан артты қалып кеткендердің ашуын басуы мүмкін.
Бірақ  бұл қаншалықты ұзақ уақытқа жетеді?
Ал содан соң не болады?
Трамп вуду экономикасының өз нұсқасын жүргізіп, экономиканың негізгі заңдарының күшін жоюды қалауы мүмкін.
Бірақ олай жасау мүмкін емес. Әлемнің ең ірі экономикасы 2017 жылы және одан әрі белгісіз саяси теңізге жол тартқанда, жәй бір пенде үшін болжам жасау ойсыз, аңғал қылықтай болар, тек айқын жәйттарды атау болмаса: су ағыны құбылмалы болады, және көптеген саясаттанушы кемелер батып та кетер.
9/11 and the New Authoritarianism
Five years after the attacks on the Twin Towers in New York and the Pentagon in Washington, “9/11” is no longer a mere date.
It has entered the history books as the beginning of something new, a new era perhaps, but in any case a time of change.
The terrorist bombings in Madrid and London and elsewhere will also be remembered; but it is “9/11” that has become the catchphrase, almost like “August 1914.”
But was it really a war that started on September 11, 2001?
Not all are happy about this American notion.
During the heyday of Irish terrorism in the UK, successive British governments went out of their way not to concede to the IRA the notion that a war was being waged.
“War” would have meant acceptance of the terrorists as legitimate enemies, in a sense as equals in a bloody contest for which there are accepted rules of engagement.
This is neither a correct description nor a useful terminology for terrorist acts, which are more correctly described as criminal.
By calling them war – and naming an opponent, usually al-Qaeda and its leader, Osama bin Laden – the United States government has justified domestic changes that, before the 9/11 attacks, would have been unacceptable in any free country.
Most of these changes were embodied in the so-called “USA Patriot Act.”
Though some of the changes simply involved administrative regulations, the Patriot Act’s overall effect was to erode the great pillars of liberty, such as habeas corpus , the right to recourse to an independent court whenever the state deprives an individual of his freedom.
From an early date, the prison camp at Guantánamo Bay in Cuba became the symbol of something unheard of: the arrest without trial of “illegal combatants” who are deprived of all human rights.
The world now wonders how many more of these non-human humans are there in how many places.
For everyone else, a kind of state of emergency was proclaimed that has allowed state interference in essential civil rights.
Controls at borders have become an ordeal for many, and police persecution now burdens quite a few.
A climate of fear has made life hard for anyone who looks suspicious or acts suspiciously, notably for Muslims.
Such restrictions on freedom did not meet with much public opposition when they were adopted.
On the contrary, by and large it was the critics, not the supporters, of these measures who found themselves in trouble.
In Britain, where Prime Minister Tony Blair supported the US attitude entirely, the government introduced similar measures and even offered a new theory.
Blair was the first to argue that security is the first freedom.
In other words, liberty is not the right of individuals to define their own lives, but the right of the state to restrict individual freedom in the name of a security that only the state can define.
This is the beginning of a new authoritarianism.
The problem exists in all countries affected by the threat of terrorism, though in many it has not become quite as specific.
In most countries of continental Europe, “9/11” has remained an American date.
There is even a debate – and indeed some evidence – concerning the question of whether involvement in the “war against terrorism” has actually increased the threat of terrorist acts.
Germans certainly use this argument to stay out of the action wherever possible.
This stance, however, has not prevented the spread of something for which a German word is used in other languages, too: Angst .
A diffuse anxiety is gaining ground.
People feel uneasy and worried, especially when traveling.
Any train accident or airplane crash is now at first suspected of being an act of terrorism.
Thus, 9/11 has meant, directly or indirectly, a great shock, both psychologically and to our political systems.
While terrorism is fought in the name of democracy, the fight has in fact led to a distinct weakening of democracy, owing to official legislation and popular angst.
One of the worrying features of the 9/11 attacks is that it is hard to see their purpose beyond the perpetrators’ resentment of the West and its ways.
But the West’s key features, democracy and the rule of law, have taken a far more severe battering at the hands of their defenders than by their attackers.
Two steps, above all, are needed to restore confidence in liberty within the democracies affected by the legacy of 9/11.
First, we must make certain that the relevant legislation to meet the challenge of terrorism is strictly temporary.
Some of today’s restrictions on habeas corpus and civil liberties have sunset clauses restricting their validity; all such rules should be re-examined by parliaments regularly.
Second, and more importantly, our leaders must seek to calm, rather than exploit, public anxiety.
The terrorists with whom we are currently at “war” cannot win, because their dark vision will never gain broad popular legitimacy.
That is all the more reason for democrats to stand tall in defending our values – first and foremost by acting in accordance with them.
9/11 in Perspective
NEW YORK – It was a decade ago that 19 terrorists took control of four planes, flew two into the twin towers of the World Trade Center, hit the Pentagon with a third, and crashed the fourth in a field in Pennsylvania after passengers resisted and made it impossible for the terrorists to complete their malevolent mission.
In a matter of hours, more than 3,000 innocent people, mostly Americans, but also people from 115 other countries, had their lives suddenly and violently taken from them.
September 11, 2001, was a terrible tragedy by any measure, but it was not a historical turning point.
It did not herald a new era of international relations in which terrorists with a global agenda prevailed, or in which such spectacular terrorist attacks became commonplace. On the contrary, 9/11 has not been replicated.
Despite the attention devoted to the “Global War on Terrorism,” the most important developments of the last ten years have been the introduction and spread of innovative information technologies, globalization, the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, and the political upheavals in the Middle East. 
As for the future, it is much more likely to be defined by the United States’ need to put its economic house in order; China’s trajectory within and beyond its borders; and the ability of the world’s governments to cooperate on restoring economic growth, stemming the spread of nuclear weapons, and meeting energy and environmental challenges.
It is and would be wrong to make opposition to terrorism the centerpiece of what responsible governments do in the world.
Terrorists continue to be outliers with limited appeal at best.
They can destroy but not create.
It is worth noting that the people who went into the streets of Cairo and Damascus calling for change were not shouting the slogans of Al Qaeda or supporting its agenda.
Moreover, measures have been implemented to push back, successfully, against terrorists.
Intelligence assets have been redirected. Borders have been made more secure and societies more resilient.
International cooperation has increased markedly, in part because governments that cannot agree on many things can agree on the need to cooperate in this area.
Military force has played a role as well.
Al Qaeda lost its base in Afghanistan when the Taliban government that had provided it sanctuary was ousted from power.
Osama bin-Laden was finally found and killed by US Special Forces in the suburbs of Islamabad.
Drones – unmanned aircraft that are remotely steered – have proven to be effective in killing a significant number of terrorists, including many of the most important leaders.
Weak governments can be made stronger; governments that tolerate or support terrorism must be held accountable.
But progress is not to be confused with victory.
Terrorists and terrorism cannot be eliminated any more than we can rid the world of disease.
There will always be those who will resort to force against innocent men, women, and children in pursuit of political goals.
Indeed, terrorists are advancing in some areas.
Pakistan remains a sanctuary for Al Qaeda and some of the world’s other most dangerous terrorists.
A mixture of instability, government weakness, and ideology in countries such as Yemen, Libya, Somalia, and Nigeria are providing fertile territory for terrorists to organize, train, and mount operations – much as they did in Afghanistan did a decade ago.
New groups constantly emerge from the ruins of old ones.
There is also a growing danger of homegrown terrorism.
We have seen it in Great Britain and the US.
The Internet, one of the great inventions of the modern Western world, has shown itself to be a weapon that can be used to incite and train those who wish to cause harm to that world.
The question raised in October 2003 by then US Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld is no less relevant today: “Are we capturing, killing, or deterring and dissuading more terrorists every day than the madrassas and the radical clerics are recruiting, training, and deploying against us?”
All things being equal, we probably are.
But even small terrorist successes are costly in terms of lives, money, and making open societies less so.
What is to be done?
Alas, there is no single or silver bullet.
The establishment of a Palestinian state will not be enough for those terrorists who want to see the elimination of the Jewish state, any more than reaching a compromise over Kashmir will satisfy those Pakistan-based terrorists with bigger agendas vis-à-vis India.
Reducing unemployment is desirable, of course, but many terrorists do not come from poverty.
Helping to make societies in the Middle East and elsewhere more democratic might reduce the alienation that can lead to radicalism and worse, but this is easier said than done.
Of course, we want to continue to find ways to make ourselves less vulnerable and terrorists more so.
But what may be most important, particularly in the Arab and Islamic communities, is to end any acceptance of terrorism.
The Nigerian father who warned the US embassy in Lagos that he feared what his own son might do – before that same young man attempted to detonate a bomb aboard a flight to Detroit on Christmas Day 2009 – is an example of just this.
Only when more parents, teachers, and community leaders behave likewise will recruitment of terrorists dry up and law-enforcement authorities receive full cooperation from the populations they police.
Terrorism must lose its legitimacy among those who have historically supported or tolerated it before it will lose its potency.
Transatlantic Trade for All
WASHINGTON, DC – The negotiations to create a Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership between the European Union and the United States are being widely welcomed.
British Prime Minister David Cameron has called the TTIP a “once-in-a-generation prize,” citing potential gains of £80 billion ($125.5 billion) each for the EU and the US and £85 billion for the rest of the world.
For a world weary of waiting for the World Trade Organization’s interminable Doha trade round to conclude, even a bilateral trade initiative may seem like a boon, especially when, as a recent Financial Times editorial pointed out, “bilateral” covers half of the world’s economy.
But there is a serious downside: The deal could hurt developing-country exporters, unless the EU and the US make a concerted effort to protect these actors’ interests.
The feature of the proposed pact that elicits the most excitement – its focus on regulatory barriers like mandatory product standards – should actually incite the greatest concern.
Given low tariffs in the EU and the US – less than 5%, on average – further preferential reductions will not seriously handicap outsiders.
But, when it comes to standards – such as those governing safety, health, and the environment – the market-access requirements are brutal and binary: either you meet the established standard or you do not sell.
As a result, third-country firms’ options will depend on how TTIP standards are established: through harmonization (adoption of a common standard) or mutual recognition (acceptance of goods that meet one another’s established standards).
The first option would enable producers everywhere to take advantage of economies of scale.
But, in some cases, the harmonized standard could be more stringent than some countries’ original standards.
Even though new standards would apply to suppliers from all exporting countries, compliance costs usually vary, meaning that those less equipped to meet higher standards could suffer.
In the late 1990’s, when the EU decided to harmonize standards for aflatoxins (a group of toxic compounds produced by certain molds), eight member states – including Italy, the Netherlands, and Spain – raised their national standards substantially, which is likely to have caused African exports of cereals, dried fruits, and nuts to Europe to decline by as much as $670 million.
With mutual recognition, the EU and the US would accept each other’s standards or conformity-assessment procedures, allowing firms to adhere to the less stringent requirements in each area.
If the policy were extended to third-country firms, it would have a powerful liberalizing impact.
For example, Malaysian television producers could choose to comply with, say, America’s easier-to-meet safety standards, then sell the same product in both markets, reaping the benefits of economies of scale while lowering compliance costs.
If, however, the TTIP excluded third-country firms from the mutual recognition policy, their competitiveness vis-à-vis European and American companies would diminish substantially.
Indeed, our research shows that when mutual-recognition agreements include restrictive rules of origin, intra-regional trade increases – at the expense of trade with other countries – and that developing countries tend to suffer most.
In fact, excessively constraining rules of origin have proved problematic for some of the EU’s previous recognition agreements, such as those governing professional-services standards.
While a Brazilian orange admitted for sale in Portugal can be sold throughout the EU, a Brazilian engineer or accountant licensed in Portugal must fulfill separate licensing requirements to work elsewhere in the EU, hampering much-needed labor mobility by forcing non-European workers to endure costly and inefficient bureaucratic procedures.
Furthermore, when it comes to tariffs and standards, WTO rules are not created equal.
While they protect countries excluded from bilateral or regional tariff agreements, thereby ensuring that integrated markets do not receive additional advantages, few safeguards exist to shield third countries from the fallout of agreements on mandatory standards.
Even in the absence of international rules, the EU and the US could take two actions to ensure that the TTIP does not have adverse consequences for developing economies.
First, they could allow all countries to reap the benefits of a bilateral mutual-recognition deal by agreeing not to impose restrictive rules of origin.
Second, where they do consider harmonization, they could favor the less stringent of the original standards, unless there is credible evidence that it would not support the relevant regulatory objective.
This is akin to a WTO test for departures from established international standards.
If the EU and the US made these two commitments, the rest of the world could follow the TTIP negotiations with hope, rather than trepidation.
A Balanced Look at Sino-American Imbalances
BEIJING – Before July 2007, most economists agreed that global imbalances were the most important threat to global growth.
It was argued that the United States’ rising net foreign debt-to-GDP ratio – the result of chronic current-account deficits – would put a sharp brake on capital inflows, in turn weakening the dollar, driving up interest rates, and plunging the US economy into crisis.
But this scenario failed to materialize. Instead, the crisis stemmed from the US sub-prime debacle, which quickly dragged the global economy into its deepest recession since the 1930’s.
Most economists failed to foresee the economic dynamics that actually led to the crisis, because they failed to pay enough attention to the rapid increase in US total debt.
Instead, they focused exclusively on US foreign debt, ignoring household debt (mortgage and consumer debt), public debt, business debt, and financial debt.
In particular, they should have paid greater attention to the sustainability of US mortgage and consumer debt.
In 2007, the mortgage and consumer debt-to-GDP ratio was more than 90%, compared to 24% for net foreign debt.
Of course, the various components of debt differ considerably in their character and sources of financing – and thus in their sustainability.
But all parts of a country’s total debt and how it is financed are interconnected.
This means two things. First, funds from different sources of finance are interchangeable to a certain degree: deficiency of funds for one component of total debt can be supplemented by surplus funds originally aimed at financing other components.
Second, troubles in any single component of total debt will have an impact on all the other components.
After the subprime crisis erupted, mortgage and consumer debt was paid down by households either with their savings or by default.
The fall in US total debt, and the narrowing of the financing gap between total debt and domestic funds, led to a significant improvement in the US current-account deficit in 2008-2009, disproving US Federal Reserve Board Chairman Ben Bernanke’s claim that the deficit was caused by a global “saving glut.”
Indeed, America’s current-account position strengthened despite the dollar’s appreciation in the face of safe-haven demand.
Unfortunately, as a result of the private-sector deleveraging and an increase in household savings, the US economy, driven by debt and consumption, slid into recession.
To offset the negative impact of private-sector deleveraging on growth, the US government has maintained expansionary fiscal and monetary policies.
Now, with household debt sustained on a knife-edge after feverish government intervention, the fiscal position has deteriorated dramatically and the current-account balance has worsened again.
Sustainability of public debt has replaced sustainability of private debt as the biggest threat to financial stability, and the focus of debate about the US current account has shifted from the sustainability of foreign debt to the impact of reducing the external deficit on growth and employment.
The dilemma facing US policymakers is how to stimulate growth while lowering the level of total debt.
The most important way to achieve both objectives is to increase exports by strengthening US competitiveness.
But where will increased competitiveness come from?
Devaluation of the dollar could improve US competitiveness in the short run, but it is not a solution.
Because rapid fiscal deterioration now has investors worrying about capital losses on US government securities, devaluation would make foreigners more hesitant to finance America’s budget deficit.
If foreign financing is not forthcoming, yields on US government debt will rise and the US economy will fall back into recession.
In the long run, America’s growth pattern must undergo a structural shift from reliance on debt and consumption one based on Americans vaunted capacity for creativity and innovation.
Only then will America improve its competitiveness enough to allow the government to reduce both private and public debt to sustainable levels while maintaining a respectable growth rate.
But neither improved competitiveness, nor reduction of total debt, can be achieved overnight.
In the short run, the US current-account deficit will remain, regardless of which country runs bilateral surpluses.
Thus, China’s continued reinvestment of its current-account surplus in US government securities is of utmost important for US growth and financial stability.
Given that America benefits mightily from China’s purchases of US government securities, it is difficult to understand why the US government and Congress have been complaining so much about the bilateral current-account deficit.
It is also difficult to grasp why China is so reluctant to reduce its bilateral surplus, given meager returns on its massive holdings of US government securities and a sustained risk of large capital losses in the future.
The good news is that, following President Hu Jintao’s recent visit to Washington, both America and China have been taking positive steps to resolve their differences over the bilateral current-account balance.
That augurs well for a more rational and constructive Sino-American dialogue on global imbalances, which would certainly benefit the global economy.
A Banking Union Baby Step
BRUSSELS – At the beginning of the financial crisis, it was said that banks were, in Charles Goodhart’s crisp phrase, “international in life, but national in death.”
At the time (2008-2009), large international banks had to be rescued by their home countries’ governments when they ran into trouble.
But the problem now in Europe is the opposite: banks are “national in life, but European in death.”
In Spain, for example, local savings banks (cajas) financed an outsize real-estate boom.
As the boom turned to bust, the losses threatened to overwhelm the capacity of the Spanish state, and the problem became European, because it threatened the very survival of the euro.
The Spanish case is symptomatic of a larger problem.
National supervisors always tend to minimize problems at home.
Their instinct (and their bureaucratic interest) is to defend their countries’ “national champion” bank(s) abroad.
But their resistance to recognizing problems at home runs even deeper.
Until recently, the Spanish authorities maintained that the problems in their country’s real-estate sector were temporary.
To acknowledge the truth would have meant admitting that for years they had overlooked the build-up of an unsustainable construction boom that now threatens to bankrupt the entire country.
In the case of Ireland, the situation was initially not much different.
When problems started to surface, the finance minister at the time initially claimed that the country would carry out “the cheapest bank rescue ever.”
Given national supervisors’ predictable tendency not to recognize problems at home, it seemed natural that the cost of cleaning up insolvent banks should also be borne at the national level.
It thus seemed to make sense that even in the eurozone, banking supervision remained largely national.
The recently created European Banking Authority has only limited powers over national supervisors, whose daily work is guided mainly by national considerations.
But reality has shown that this approach is not tenable.
Problems might originate at the national level, but, owing to monetary union, they quickly threaten the stability of the entire eurozone banking system.
At their June summit, Europe’s leaders finally recognized the need to rectify this situation, transferring responsibility for banking supervision in the eurozone to the European Central Bank.
Given that financial integration is particularly strong within the monetary union, putting the ECB in charge was an obvious choice.
Moreover, the ECB already bears de facto responsibility for the stability of the eurozone’s banking system.
But, until now, it had to lend massive amounts to banks without being able to judge their soundness, because all of that information was in the hands of national authorities who guarded it jealously and typically denied problems until it was too late.
Putting the ECB in charge should also help to stop the creeping disintegration process, which is not publicly visible, but is very real nonetheless.
Just ask any of the large international banking groups headquartered in financially stressed eurozone countries.
Consider the case of a bank headquartered in Italy, but with an important subsidiary in Germany.
The German operations naturally generate a surplus of funds (given that savings in Germany far exceed investment on average).
The parent bank would like to use these funds to reinforce the group’s liquidity.
But the German supervisory authorities consider Italy at risk and thus oppose any transfer of funds there.
The supervisor of the home country (Italy) has the opposite interest.
It would like to see the “internal capital market” operate as much as possible.
Here, too, it makes sense to have the ECB in charge as a neutral arbiter with respect to these opposing interests.
But, while putting the ECB in charge of banking supervision solves one problem, it creates another: can national authorities still be held responsible for saving banks that they no longer supervise?
Economic (and political) logic requires that the eurozone will soon also need a common bank rescue fund.
Officially, this has not yet been acknowledged.
But that is often the way that European integration proceeds: an incomplete step in one area later requires further steps in related areas.
This incremental approach has worked well in the past; indeed, today’s European Union resulted from it.
But a financial crisis does not give policymakers the time that they once had to explain to voters why one step required another.
They will have to walk much more quickly to save the euro.
The Renewed Promise of Abenomics
TOKYO – Japan’s Liberal Democratic Party scored a decisive victory in the December 14 parliamentary election, with Japanese voters demonstrating their overwhelming approval of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s macroeconomic policy agenda.
Though voter turnout was relatively low, owing largely to the somewhat technical nature of the issues, the election’s message was clear: most Japanese abhor the prospect of a return to the grim economic trajectory that prevailed in Japan before “Abenomics.”
When the first “arrow” of Abenomics – a fiscal stimulus program – was launched nearly two years ago, asset markets' immediate response was positive.
The second arrow of Abenomics – monetary easing – intensified these effects.
In the last two years, Japan’s stock market has almost doubled in value, increasing the wealth of Japanese consumers.
Moreover, the yen has fallen by nearly one-third against the US dollar, from around ¥80 to nearly ¥120 per dollar, invigorating Japan’s export industries.
Even more encouraging are developments in the labor market, which, unlike those in asset markets, reflect outcomes, not expectations.
Here, too, the news is good.
The labor market has tightened, with unemployment standing at 3.5% and the job-to-applicant ratio above parity.
To be sure, there have been some setbacks: Japan’s GDP shrank in the second and third quarters of 2014.
But the downturn, which resulted from April’s consumption-tax hike – from 5% to 8% – cannot be blamed on Abenomics.
Indeed, Abe was honoring a law enacted by the previous government, led by the Democratic Party of Japan.
The first two arrows of Abenomics were aimed at stimulating demand – and they were extremely effective.
The consumption-tax hike was needed to sustain them in flight. Unfortunately, the hike was too large to keep them aloft.
The good news is that the tax hike’s impact is temporary. Soon, it will begin to taper off, and industrial output will approach full capacity.
When demand begins to exceed supply, demand-side stimulus policies will become increasingly ineffective, and it will be time to launch the third arrow of Abenomics: growth-enhancing structural reforms.
Such reforms are essential to raise productivity growth and improve the Japanese economy’s competitiveness.
Four imperatives stand out.
The first task should be to eliminate – or, at least, reduce – the thicket of government regulations that is stifling economic dynamism.
The current system is so convoluted and complex that it took more than three decades to open a new medical school in Tokyo.
Likewise, flights to Haneda airport, a convenient connection to the Tokyo city area, have been rationed.
This is no formula for long-term economic success.
Furthermore, Japan’s government should push to complete negotiations for the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which is currently being negotiated among 12 countries, from Mexico to the United States to Vietnam.
The TPP would improve Japan’s trade prospects considerably, including in sensitive sectors like agriculture, where exports of fast-moving consumer goods like flowers and vegetables would benefit.
Japan’s leaders must also work to expand the workforce, which faces severe constraints, owing largely to the country’s rapidly aging population.
In the absence of large-scale immigration, to which Japanese remain unamenable, one relatively simple solution would be to integrate more women into the labor force.
A 10% increase in Japan’s female labor-force participation rate – an entirely attainable goal – would translate into an almost 5% gain in total labor-force participation.
Finally, Abe’s government must reduce the corporate-tax rate to align it more closely with international standards.
Amid increasingly intense international competition to attract foreign investment, reducing the corporate tax would actually increase Japan’s tax revenues, by spurring companies to invest their vast cash stockpiles in more productive activities.
Now that Abe’s government has a renewed mandate from Japanese voters, it must deliver on its promises – and that means decisive and comprehensive implementation of structural reforms.
Of course, this will require some sacrifices.
Indeed, households have already endured some hardship, brought about by the consumption-tax hike.
The next step is for Abe’s government to use its political capital to overcome vested interests, both in the bureaucracy and the business community.
This means compelling businesses to give up some of the special tax benefits they now enjoy.
For their part, politicians must participate in the taxpayer identification system.
And bureaucrats must forego some of the power that excessive regulation affords them.
If all of these groups join the Japanese public in accepting reasonable sacrifices, Abe’s government can fulfill its promise and build a thriving economy.
For the sake of all Japanese – not to mention a world economy in need of a new source of dynamism – that promise deserves to be met.
The Missing Arrow of Abenomics
TOKYO – In his drive to kick-start the Japanese economy, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, shortly after taking office in 2012, introduced a large fiscal stimulus and put in place a bold program of monetary easing.
Since then, Japanese policymakers have been working to launch what Abe calls the third “arrow” of his agenda: arduous reforms of key industries and the demolition of structural barriers to growth.
But the focus on public policy has left a “fourth arrow” – the private sector – untouched and seemingly ignored.
This is unfortunate, because the government cannot fix Japan’s ills on its own.
Annual productivity growth has been stubbornly sluggish, rarely rising above 2% for much of the past two decades, reflecting both missed opportunities and declining cost competitiveness.
Japan’s productivity slump permeates the entire economy; labor and capital productivity gains have nearly stalled in almost every sector – even in Japan’s signature advanced manufacturing industries.
Labor productivity in the transport-equipment sector, for example, is barely half that of Germany.
This trend puts annual GDP growth on course to average only 1.3% through 2025, implying a third consecutive decade of stagnation.
Such an outcome would coincide with – and exacerbate the effects of – an adverse demographic shift that will constrain fiscal revenues and drive up costs for universal health care and pension benefits.
Japan’s ability to alter its trajectory depends on individual companies making decisions to invest, change workplace policies, deploy new technologies, and test untried business models.
Abe’s structural reforms will take time and political will to enact, but Japanese companies cannot afford to sit still.
They can and must act, without waiting for the government to change its policies.
In many cases, the economy’s bottlenecks are not regulatory in nature, but stem from entrenched ways of doing business.
New research by the McKinsey Global Institute examines Japan’s advanced manufacturing, retail, financial services, and health-care industries in detail – and finds substantial untapped productivity potential in every area.
For starters, Japanese firms must become more globally integrated.
Exporting to the fastest-growing overseas markets is one obvious route to overcoming sluggish demand growth at home.
But, rather than just selling products abroad, Japanese enterprises need to expand operations beyond their borders and cast a wider net for international talent.
Japanese companies have formidable R&amp;D operations, but most will need to reconfigure them to obtain better returns and impact.
The process must start with an understanding of what the customer wants and a determination to deliver solutions accordingly.
Closed and tightly managed R&amp;D operations must be transformed into more fluid, open processes involving collaboration with customers and suppliers.
Japanese companies will also need to improve their capabilities in areas such as marketing, pricing, and talent development.
While there are some pockets of excellence, most Japanese firms are severely lacking in these areas.
To compete in global markets, they will need to achieve the same consistency in these areas that they have in their traditional areas of strength.
Many Japanese companies have yet to digitize paper-based processes and replace outdated information-technology systems.
Others would benefit from moving beyond basic digitization to next-generation technologies, such as big-data analytics.
Companies can also head off looming labor shortages with intelligent software systems and robotics.
Manufacturers can augment or replace their assembly lines with technologies such as the Internet of Things and 3D printing.
More broadly, Japanese companies have to organize for performance and discipline.
As policy changes unleash market forces, businesses will face greater competition.
Some may need to reorganize or exit unprofitable markets; others may have to undertake mergers and acquisitions to achieve economies of scale.
Finally, shareholders and senior executives should tie performance goals to incentives.
Some of Japan’s corporate giants have already begun shifting from traditional seniority-based advancement toward merit-based pay structures.
Others should follow their lead.
Promoting younger and more diverse talent can create agile organizations with fresh ideas.
If Japan’s private sector rises to the challenge, it can move the economy onto a path of faster growth.
Innovations in one company would cascade across its entire industry by forcing competitors to raise their game.
In the 1950s and 1960s, for example, Toyota introduced more efficient production processes that were eventually adopted by the entire automobile industry.
Instead of settling for a future of 1.3% annual GDP growth, Japan could attain roughly 3% annual growth through 2025.
Doing so would require the growth rate of labor productivity to more than double, but this is an attainable goal.
More than half of this growth increment can be met by adopting best practices that companies around the world already use, while technology can close much of the remaining gap.
Japanese business leaders need to combine big thinking with a focused attention to detail.
They will need to create innovative products, penetrate new markets, and make bold investments in equipment, technology, and talent, while simultaneously scrutinizing every aspect of their operations for inefficiency and waste.
Traditional ways of doing business may have to be abandoned.
But there is ample scope to make progress and spur faster economic growth.
Immense trade flows, the rise of billions of new consumers in the emerging world, and technology breakthroughs are rapidly transforming the global economy.
Japan can shift its current trajectory by turning this wave of disruption into opportunity.
From Russia With Unrequited Love
NEW DELHI – Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has assiduously courted Russian President Vladimir Putin, meeting with him more than a dozen times in four years.
This month he hosted Putin in Tokyo and in his hometown of Nagato (famed for its onsen, or natural hot springs).
But Abe’s courtship has so far yielded little for Japan, and much for Russia.
Abe’s diplomatic overtures to Putin are integral to his broader strategy to position Japan as a counterweight to China, and to rebalance power in Asia, where Japan, Russia, China, and India form a strategic quadrangle.
Abe has already built a close relationship with India, and he sees improved relations with Russia – with which Japan never formally made peace after World War II – as the missing ingredient for a regional power equilibrium.
But Abe’s trust-building efforts with Russia are not aimed only at checking Chinese aggression.
He also wants Russia to return its southernmost Kuril Islands – a resource-rich area known as the Northern Territories in Japan – which the Soviet Union seized just after the United States dropped nuclear bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945.
In exchange, Abe has offered economic aid, investments in Russia’s neglected Far East, and major energy deals.
Abe has, however, encountered several obstacles.
For starters, Japan is a participant in the US-led sanctions that were imposed on Russia after it annexed Crimea in March 2014.
These sanctions have pushed Russia closer to its traditional rival, China; and Putin has publicly identified the sanctions as a hindrance to concluding a peace treaty with Japan.
In response to Abe’s overtures, Putin has doggedly tried to drive a hard bargain.
Against this backdrop, it is not surprising that Abe left the recent “onsen summit” with dashed hopes of resolving the territorial dispute, while Putin returned home with 68 new commercial accords.
Many of the new agreements are symbolic, but some are substantive, including deals worth $2.5 billion and an agreement to set up a $1 billion bilateral-investment fund.
Under the latter agreement, Japan and Russia are supposed create a “special framework” for joint economic activities on the disputed islands.
But the plan has already run into trouble.
Peter Shelakhaev, a senior Russian official who leads the government’s Far East Investment and Export Agency, has indicated that there are legal hurdles to establishing such a framework, and that Japanese firms doing business on the Kurils would have to pay taxes to Russia.
If Japan did that, however, it would effectively be recognizing Russia’s jurisdiction over the islands.
Abe has thus been denied the legacy that he sought, while Putin has succeeded in easing Russia’s international isolation.