Such a statement is essential to support democratic forces in Ukraine at a time when they stand a realistic chance of shaping Ukraine's future.
Ukraine's ruling elite is brutally suppressing opposition, limiting freedom of speech, and curtailing economic liberty.
The coming presidential election is thus a test that will answer several fundamental questions.
Will Ukrainian society maintain its right to choose its representatives, or will a so-called "managed democracy" win out, with power transferred back and forth within small circles of oligarchic clans?
Will a free market flourish, or will oligarchic capitalism serve the interests of the few?
Will civil society thrive, or will Ukraine be a society of obedient subjects?
Will the law serve all, or only the elites?
The victory of the opposition in the parliamentary election of 2002 attests to the potential that may be unleashed with a victory by democratic forces in the presidential election.
As a result of the policies initiated in 2000, and particularly the struggle against oligarchic omnipotence, Ukraine's economy has been growing for five years in a row.
The parliamentary victory of the opposition also forced the reluctant authorities to declare Ukraine's readiness to enter NATO and the EU.
To complete the process of democratic transformation, Ukraine needs a declaration by Europe affirming Ukraine's European and Euro-Atlantic prospects.
Such a declaration would mean that Europe is not closing its doors on Ukraine, a country with a European cultural identity and a long tradition of struggle for democracy and human rights.
It would be hard to overestimate the importance of such a declaration.
The example of Poland and that of the other countries of Central Europe shows that the clear prospect of EU membership may be one of the engines of effective reforms and may significantly enhance the ability of local leaders to persuade their people to accept the need for reforms that are sometimes painful.
More generally, discussions about the future of Europe should be permeated by a spirit of solidarity with respect to the states and nations that are not yet members and whose membership is not envisioned in the near future.
Otherwise, the continent will again be divided into rich and poor, into peoples living under democracy and those subjected to authoritarian regimes.
We do not want a new Iron Curtain on the Polish-Ukrainian border.
In the years since it regained its independence, Ukraine has proved that it can play an important and constructive role in the region.
In the early 1990's, Ukraine gave up its nuclear weapons. Since then, it has participated in UN and NATO peace missions, and it has settled its borders with all its neighbors.
Independent Ukraine has been free of ethnic conflicts, even though there has been no shortage of attempts to incite them.
In terms of its historical heritage, economic interest, and ethnic composition, Ukraine belongs to both Central and Eastern Europe.
Its location on the Black Sea ties it to Southeast Europe, the Balkans, and the Caucasus, as well as Turkey.
Ukraine has formed a regional association with Georgia, Uzbekistan, Azerbaijan, and Moldova, and its ambition is to play the role of a center of democracy and economic freedom in this huge area.
Both Ukraine and Poland pay special attention to good neighborly relations with Russia.
Strengthening Russian democracy is in the interest of Ukraine, Poland, and all of Europe.
A democratic Ukraine, closely cooperating with Poland within the framework of the European community, will open new possibilities for developing and strengthening partnership with Russia.
We are aware of the problems inherent in the creation of a European prospect for Ukraine.
Integrating the ten new member countries that joined the EU on May 1 will demand tremendous effort on the part of the Union, as well as a fair division of the burdens. But this should not make us lose sight of other challenges.
One of the most important is the fate of Ukraine, and the need to strengthen liberty and democracy there.
Europe’s Squandered Minority
BUDAPEST – Today, millions of Europeans are afraid and frustrated as they face unemployment, loss of savings and pensions, radically reduced social benefits, and other economic hardships.
Their fears are warranted, because the current financial crisis is undermining the very union that was established to heal Europe’s wounds at the end of World War II.
But, in the midst of the general suffering, one group – the Roma – has been ignored.
Europe’s largest and most disadvantaged ethnic minority, with a population equal to that of Greece, millions of Roma are trapped in extreme poverty and ignorance, compounded by widespread discrimination.
Indeed, the 2009 European Union Minorities and Discrimination Survey found that Roma experience more severe discrimination than any other ethnic-minority group in Europe.
Hard times provoke aggressive, vindictive, and intolerant attitudes, and Roma have become scapegoats in this economic crisis.
In fact, Roma-bashing is helping far-right political parties to mobilize and nationalist leaders to win votes.
Even some mainstream political parties have resorted to using anti-Roma rhetoric that would have been inconceivable a decade ago.
But the Roma have refrained from reciprocating the sometimes lethal violence inflicted on them.
Six years ago, the Open Society Foundation, the World Bank, and nine national governments addressed the issue by elaborating a step-by-step plan to integrate the Roma into European society.
Known as the “Decade of Roma Inclusion 2005-15,” the program prioritized four areas: health, housing, education, and employment.
This year, the European Commission has requested that all EU member states develop and implement strategies to promote Roma social inclusion in these areas.
The Decade of Roma Inclusion provides a blueprint for how to achieve integration and equality, and to eliminate unlawful discrimination.
But these goals can be achieved only if the EU resolves its financial crisis, embarks on a sustainable recovery, and, above all, becomes an inclusive economy.Otherwise, Roma will inevitably serve as the EU’s convenient scapegoats.
Social exclusion is not only morally and legally repugnant; it also defies economic sense.
Roma are Europe’s youngest and fastest-growing population with an average age of 25, in contrast to the European average of 40.
According to recent World Bank research, Roma comprise approximately 23% of new entrants into Bulgaria’s labor market.
In Romania, the figure is 21%.
The vast majority of working-age Roma, however, lack the requisite education to compete successfully in the labor market.
By continuing to shunt Roma children into “special” schools, where expectations are low and results still lower, EU member states are squandering hundreds of millions of euros annually in productivity and tax revenues.
The message is simple: improving opportunities for Roma is morally right and economically smart.
Integration is possible.
I grew up in a small, impoverished town in central Serbia, where my parents lifted themselves out of extreme poverty and deprivation.
My father obtained a high school diploma and became a taxi driver, while my mother attended university and worked in a state office.
We were proud of the two-room house my parents managed to build before we moved into a larger home in an ethnically mixed area.
Having grown up in a family that struggled to rise from poverty to the middle class, I went on to study law and completed an NGO-management training program at Harvard University.
Thousands of Roma have made similar journeys.
And hundreds of thousands more are capable of doing the same.
Europe cannot continue to marginalize one of its own minorities; anti-Roma prejudice and unlawful discrimination must not go unchallenged.
The status quo is damaging the lives of millions of Roma, but it is also hurting Europe economically and morally.
The historical truism applies here – Europe’s greatness will be judged by how it treats its most vulnerable members.
Europe’s Stifled Celebration
LONDON – This could have been a year of joy for Europe.
The 20th anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall will be commemorated in November, and it has been five years since the European Union’s “Big Bang” enlargement.
The Cold War division of Europe is well and truly over.
But, instead of setting off fireworks, the EU finds itself under fire, as the global economic crisis confronts it with the greatest challenge it has seen since 1989.
After years of strong growth and remarkable resilience, the Union’s new member states in the east are being hit hard by the economic turmoil that started in the west.
Integration into the global economy, a crucial source of capital, stability, and innovation, has become a threat to many of these countries.
This is true both of the region’s financial sectors and its real economies.
But the tough question that has to be asked is whether the crisis could lead to the unraveling of European integration.
There are four key issues that need to be tackled if we are to ensure that Europe emerges from this crisis strengthened.
The first issue concerns the continuation of enlargement.
The EU is an indisputable success, constituting the largest integrated economic area in the world and accounting for more than 30% of world GDP and around 17% of world trade.
Even with this year’s marked contraction of some central and eastern European countries’ economies, their accession to the EU boosted its overall economic growth, with the European Commission estimating that GDP in the new member states increased by extra 1.75 percentage points in the period 2004-2009.
For the pre-Big Bang EU-15, enlargement significantly contributed to their growth through investment opportunities and increased foreign demand: 7.5% of the older member states’ exports went to the newcomers in 2007, up from 4.7% in 1999.
Indeed, by 2007, central and eastern Europe had become the second most important export destination for euro-zone countries.
But EU membership has always been about more than economic integration and trade flows.
The prospect of a “return to Europe,” as Václav Havel once put it, provided the backing for essential, if sometimes painful, economic, social, and political reforms.
Today, EU membership is a more powerful incentive than ever for what the EU calls three “candidate countries” (Croatia, FYR Macedonia, and Turkey) and five “potential candidate countries” (Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo under UN Security Council Resolution 1244, Montenegro, and Serbia).
These countries are increasing their efforts to prepare for EU admission, and the EU must not shut its doors on them.
On the contrary, it should finalize further enlargement: the economic crisis has clearly demonstrated that the EU cannot afford black holes on the map of Europe.
The second key issue concerns the EU’s internal structure.
The Lisbon Treaty offers a fundamental redesign of how the Union works, but, despite the pressing need to enhance EU institutions’ mobility and flexibility, it is still awaiting ratification.
The economic crisis makes it more important than ever to introduce these reforms.
Third, there is the euro.
The 12 new member states that joined the EU in 2004 and 2007 committed themselves to its adoption, but with no set date.
Expansion of the euro zone has therefore been slow, especially in central and eastern Europe, where to date only Slovenia (2007) and Slovakia (2009) have become members of the single currency.
But the financial and economic crisis has demonstrated the benefits of euro membership.
Ten years after the common currency’s introduction, the 16-member euro zone has the world’s second most important currency, accounting for more than a quarter of all central banks’ foreign-exchange reserves and having overtaken the dollar as the currency of choice for international bond issues.
The euro’s increasingly important role brings stability, something that is never more important than in times of upheaval.
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development therefore encourages all new EU member states that have not yet started doing so to draft credible and convincing plans for euro-zone admission.
But there must be no softening of the criteria for joining the euro.
The final issue concerns European solidarity.
EU enlargement brought greater prosperity, with living standards improving throughout the Union, particularly in the new member states.
But many of the older member states also benefitted, and not only in economically measureable ways.
The growing together of people, regions, and countries underpins the foundations on which Europe rests.
The EU’s newcomers have adopted growth models that rely to varying degrees on foreign capital to finance domestic investment, and on banking systems that are largely owned by west European banks.
It is a model that has served new and old member states well.
Investors from the EU-15 committed €37.2 billion in central and eastern Europe in 2006, roughly double the €19.1 billion spent there in 2004.
Over the past five years, foreign direct investment in the new member states topped the €100 billion mark.
This process enabled western European companies and banks to expand into new markets with higher growth rates and, thereby satisfying pent-up demand and tapping unrealized potential.
This has created jobs in central and eastern Europe, while boosting prosperity in the older member states.
To turn our backs on these countries would have serious economic ramifications.
The EU drew the right conclusions when it stressed that national bank rescue packages must not be designed in ways that starve subsidiaries, and also by doubling – to €50 billion – the crisis funds available to EU countries outside the euro zone.
The EU must not stand aside when solidarity is needed.
Today’s crisis offers an opportunity to show that the EU can provide stability, support, and solidarity.
By taking the right steps now, the Union is laying the foundations that will enable it to emerge from today’s difficulties strengthened and more united.
The 60-Year Itch?
JERUSALEM – “Europe is boring: thank God, for you and for us,” my interlocutor told me.
“Today, drama is in the Middle East, growth is in Asia, hope is in Africa, and proximity to the United States is in Latin America.
Europe is nowhere – it has become the lost continent.”
There is, of course, a little provocation and a lot of irony in these remarks.
A few years ago, their speaker occupied important positions within US diplomacy; he is now a key figure of the New York establishment.
And his provocation highlights a sad reality that Europeans must accept and confront: Europe no longer interests America.
Yes, the European Union’s enlargement since 2004 was preceded by NATO’s eastward expansion.
But that has not made a real difference; at the end of the day, America is also losing interest in NATO, which turned in a not-fully-convincing performance in Libya and a downright poor one in Afghanistan.
Earlier this month, I gave a talk in Washington, DC, entitled “Hollande’s France: A Year After.”
The audience members’ average age was significantly higher than mine (and I am 66).
The complexities of French politics do not interest young Americans – and why should they?
Would I have had a younger and larger audience if my talk had been called “Merkel’s Germany on the Eve of the Upcoming Election”?
Whereas young Europeans look for jobs and entrepreneurial opportunities in America, young Americans go to Europe as tourists.
For them, Europe is a continent undergoing museumification – a place to "do," not a place to be.
This disinterest in Europe is not recent, but it has deepened over recent years.
Since the end of the Cold War, Europe has no longer been the first line of defense of the United States.
And, since the end of the Balkan wars, the continent’s security problems have disappeared (except at the margins, as in Georgia, or potential threats stemming from its near-abroad, particularly the Arab world).
Many American scholars who were once interested in Europe’s social model have moved on to other research interests or retired, with no new generation to replace them.
Learning European languages is no longer popular in American schools, with the possible exception of Spanish.
To some extent, Mandarin has become the new French, but with a major difference: The language of Molière was a cultural tool, not (or not entirely) an instrument of economic success.
Of course, it would be wrong to overemphasize disenchantment and push self-flagellation too far.
Europe still exists in the US, though probably more among the Washington administrative and political elite than within the world of New York finance and business, despite the fundamental importance of transatlantic trade for both economies.
But is the US interested in Europe or only in parts of it?
In Washington – as in Beijing, for that matter – the temptation to approach Europe in a bilateral manner is strong and growing.
President Barack Obama’s America, rendered prudent by the costs of the country’s military adventures in Iraq and Afghanistan, is only too happy to count on the interventionist traditions of Great Britain and France.
From Libya to Mali, France and Britain are largely seen as the extended arm of an America that is increasingly reticent to commit its own troops – or even weapons.
Similarly, for the US government, as for China’s leaders, Germany has become Europe’s key economic actor.
Of course, faced with the Chinese economic challenge, America would be happy to forge a united front – especially in matters of trade – with the continent that is still the world’s leading commercial power.
But Europe’s interest in successfully concluding a proposed EU-US free-trade agreement may be even stronger.
Without America by its side, Europe would be more vulnerable in the face of a rising China than America would be without the EU.
So America needs Europe, but now at the margins.
Europe, given its current divisions and the growing gap between its northern and southern economies, still needs America.
In security terms, Europe would be quite lonely without the US, whatever the nature of the threat.
Of course, the former NSA contractor Edward Snowden’s revelations of the global reach and the extent of America’s Internet and telephone surveillance are, to say the least, unpleasant.
But America’s questionable means of satisfying its legitimate security concerns are certainly less damaging for Europe in the long run than is Chinese industrial espionage.
America is taking risks with the rule of law, but China has a long way to go before it becomes a country ruled by law.
In the immediate aftermath of Snowden’s revelations, the French satirical newspaper Le Canard Enchaîné ran a headline that said: “For once, Obama is interested in what we are saying.”
Europeans should be pleased – and relieved – that they are no longer America’s first line of defense.
But if they want the US to listen to them, they need to have something to say, and they need to say it together.
Europe’s Summer Reading List
BERKELEY – In August, Europeans head for the beach.
The continent shuts down on the assumption that nothing of consequence will happen until everyone returns, suitably tanned, in September.
Never mind the subprime crisis of August 2007 or, closer to home, the European monetary crisis of August 1992: the August holiday is a venerable tradition.
So, what should Europeans be reading beneath their sun umbrellas this year?
Milton Friedman’s and Anna Schwartz’s A Monetary History of the United States belongs at the top of the list.
At the center of their gripping narrative is a chapter on the Great Depression, anchored by an indictment of the US Federal Reserve Board for responding inadequately to the mounting crisis.
Friedman and Schwartz are generally seen as reproving the Fed for failing to react swiftly to successive waves of bank failures, first in late 1930 and then again in 1931 and 1933.
But a close reading reveals that the authors reserve their most scathing criticism for the Fed’s failure to initiate a concerted program of security purchases in the first half of 1930 in order to prevent those bank failures.
That is a message that the European Central Bank’s board members could usefully take to heart, given their announcement on August 2 that they were ready to respond to events as they unfolded but were taking no action for now.
Reading Friedman and Schwartz will remind them that it is better to head off a crisis than it is to rely on one’s ability to end it.
A second recommendation is another account of the crisis of the 1930’s, Charles Kindleberger’s The World in Depression, 1929-1939. (If vacationing officials detect a pattern in their summer reading, all the better.)
Kindleberger’s point is that avoiding a crisis – and when failing to avoid one, successfully exiting from it – requires leadership.
Specifically, it requires leadership by a country with the power of the purse and the willingness to use it.
The problem in the interwar period, as Kindleberger recounts it, was the reluctance of the leading power, the US, to provide the leadership and financial wherewithal to resolve the crisis.
In Europe today, reunified and reinvigorated Germany is the only country capable of assuming this role.
It could agree to swift bank recapitalization, a banking license for the European Stability Mechanism, and a more expansionary ECB policy.
If Germany provided this kind of leadership, other countries would be quick to follow.
Europe’s crisis would then be well along the path to resolution.
Germans sunning themselves on Greek islands, one hopes, would be inspired by such reading.
But it is hard to be confident.
Of course, books by economics professors about the Great Depression hardly a summer holiday make.
For variety, European leaders could take along Ron Chernow’s biography of Alexander Hamilton.
Hamilton was a colorful character, born out of wedlock, raised in the West Indies, and captain of an artillery company in America’s revolutionary war.
More to the point, as George Washington’s Treasury secretary, he crafted the bargain that successfully rationalized the US states’ debts.
US states entered their new union with different debt loads and different capacities to service them.
Hamilton made the case that the federal government should assume responsibility for their liabilities stemming from the costs of financing the war.
He identified a source of revenue – the tariff – that could be devoted to this end, and he rendered the bargain politically palatable by making clear that if state governments accumulated additional debts, and again got into trouble, they would not be bailed out a second time.
European officials will argue that their problem is more difficult.
Not only does Europe lack a federal government, but there is no desire to create one.
A close reading of Hamilton’s accomplishments, however, will remind European readers that there was an equally deep aversion to federalism in the early US.
It took politicians with vision and diplomatic skills to craft the political entity that emerged after independence.
Finally, European leaders should consider adding to their book bag Barbara Tuchman’s The Guns of August (again, notice the month).
Tuchman describes how a series of individual decisions, all of which seemed sound when considered in isolation, had the unintended consequence of leading Europe into World War I.
No one is predicting war in Europe today.
But what is true of international diplomacy – that a series of seemingly reasonable decisions can have cataclysmic consequences if no one bothers to figure out the endgame – is equally true of international finance.
Europe is dangerously close to its financial Sarajevo.
The continent’s leaders, while relaxing on southern Europe’s crisis-ridden shores, should take Tuchman’s message to heart.
Europe’s Test in North Africa
LONDON – Europe’s reaction to the historic revolutions in North Africa has vacillated between exhilaration and fear.
The natural instinct to celebrate and support democratization across the Mediterranean has been tempered by concerns that the crisis will spill onto European shores.
A few leaders have invoked the post-World War II Marshall Plan as a model for large-scale European development assistance for the region, the aim being to ensure the sustainability of a democratic transformation and generate long-term political and economic benefits for Europe.
But the mainstream reaction has been much more fearful: media and politicians throughout the European Union are obsessing about the threat of waves of migrants reaching their borders.
Such a threat should not be taken lightly.
Already, the controversy over Tunisian migrants in Italy has started to fray the political underpinnings that allow free movement in the Schengen area.
The war in Libya, meanwhile, could lead to many more thousands of civilians fleeing the violence and needing international protection.
So far, nearly 400,000 people have filled refugee camps in Tunisia and Egypt, and an estimated 20,000 have reached Italy’s shores.
Dealing with any surge of asylum seekers will require the EU to strengthen its capacity to offer temporary protection – and possibly to reconsider how its overall asylum system works.
That the Union has been moving towards a common approach to border security, most visibly with the expansion of the Frontex border agency, will be of help here.
But if Europe allows itself to be consumed by the short-term crisis, it risks squandering an extraordinary long-term opportunity.
By using this moment strategically and wisely, the EU would have a chance to reframe its relationship with the southern Mediterranean (as it is being redubbed) to promote generational development and growth in ways that can address Europe’s interests, too.
The best way to allay European fears and prevent uncontrolled migration is to establish positive incentives, and the practical means,for potential migrants to stay home – most significantly by creating jobs in the southern Mediterranean. After all, the vast majority of migrants leave home reluctantly.
Yet, at the same time, as its baby boomers retire en masse in the coming decade, Europe will need workers at all skill levels.
The southern Mediterranean can be the source of this labor, given its huge youth bulge.
The trick will be to ensure that migrants are given the chance to acquire the skills that European employers need, and that they have the chance to move in a safe, legal, and orderly fashion.
Policies that help train the next generation of North Africans, and allow them to circulate more freely between Europe and their home countries, are a much smarter solution than the current approach, which sustains illegal migration without meeting Europe's labor needs. This is an argument not for more migration, but for better migration – well thought out and planned.
Of course, if Europe helps North Africa build sustainable, prosperous democracies, this would be the greatest long-term deterrent to illegal migration of all.
It is worth recalling that 50 years ago, the largest immigrant populations in northern Europe hailed from Italy, Greece, Portugal, and Spain.
As those countries prospered, the émigrés returned home: their countries eventually became engines of European growth, and major export markets for Germany, France, and other EU member states.
The same arc of development can and should be limned for the southern Mediterranean.
Fortunately, research on migration and development in recent years has helped foster a range of policy tools that Europe should be considering. Experts and policymakers have been devising many innovative programs, including low-cost remittances from migrants to their home countries, efforts to strengthen ties between diasporas and their homelands, and initiatives that help skilled migrants find proper employment, so that qualified surgeons are not driving taxis.
In thinking about how to reframe the EU’s relationship with the southern Mediterranean, we should draw on these ideas as expansively as possible.
In order to connect our societies in positive ways, we should seriously consider liberalizing trade regimes, opening new avenues for legal migration, and vastly expanding the number of students from the region who come to Europe for education and professional training.
After all, it was the youth of North Africa, both at home and abroad, whose notions of freedom helped bring down dictators in Egypt and Tunisia. Their talents and energy should now be cultivated and harnessed to help rebuild their societies.
Responding to the challenges and opportunities of this moment demands the creation of strong partnerships among states, international institutions, and non-governmental actors.
Since its inception in 2006, the Global Forum on Migration and Development (GFMD) has provided a much-needed platform for dialogue among states and other stakeholders on issues related to migration and development.
Its annual plenary sessions facilitate the exchange of experiences and good practices in a way that transcends traditional “North-South” conflicts.
Among other changes that it has spurred, the GFMD has compelled governments to understand migration more holistically, and to develop a “whole of government” approach to addressing the opportunities and challenges that it poses.
It also has highlighted the importance to development of protecting migrant rights and of fighting illegal migration.
The Global Forum has done its job by generating and fostering ideas that can make migration benefit the development of countries of origin and destination.
It is high time that these ideas are implemented.
There could be no greater opportunity for doing so than this strategically crucial window in the history of Europe and the southern Mediterranean.
If we do not seize this moment for action, history could well pass us by.
Europe’s Three Eastern Questions
WASHINGTON, DC – Today, the European project is shaking.
Of course, I am confident that the eurozone’s ongoing sovereign-debt crisis will be overcome, and that a more integrated and effective Europe will emerge.
But, to get to that improved Europe, not only must the sovereign debt crisis be resolved; relations with three major countries to Europe’s east – Turkey, Russia, and Ukraine – will need to be put on more secure footing.
I was of the generation in my country that lived through the transition from dictatorship to democracy four decades ago.
For us, the European Union was a dream.
Indeed, we used to quote Ortega y Gasset: “If Spain is the problem, Europe is the solution.”
I continue to believe, very deeply, that Europe is the solution, particularly for societies that need to deepen – if not establish – a democratic tradition.
Closer relations between Europe and Turkey, Russia, and Ukraine can deliver for them many of the same benefits that we in Spain always associated with Europe.
Turkey is, of course, already a candidate for EU membership, but accession negotiations are moving very slowly, which is strategically unwise, because Turkey’s great authority in the wider Middle East is vitally important to Europe (and probably greater than its own).
From Syria to all of the Arab Spring countries, Turkey’s influence is highly significant, and further cooperation with the EU can only prove beneficial.
The EU has created a channel of communication with Turkey on political matters.
But it has not resolved the relationship’s endgame.
My passionate hope is that Turkey becomes an EU member, because a country that is Muslim, democratic, and overwhelmingly young could strengthen the Union in vital ways.
The debate around Turkish membership is set to become hotter in the second half of this year, when Cyprus assumes the EU’s rotating presidency.
Turkey, to be blunt, will not recognize today’s divided Cyprus as the sole representative of that island.
Further complicating matters is the discovery of oil close to the Cypriot coast.
Anyone planning to drill there will become embroiled in a major maritime dispute, with Cyprus claiming that the reserves lie within its territorial waters, and Turkey countering that Cyprus has no territorial waters, because Cyprus, at least for the Turks, does not exist.
Russia has become a different type of complicating factor for Europe.
Vladimir Putin, who has now returned to the presidency, may be the same person as before, but Russia has changed.
The recent wave of protests in Moscow and throughout the country has exposed the limits of his power.
I believe that Putin understands this, which is an important fact for future diplomacy.
In the next few days, the formation of Russia’s new government will reveal much about power relations between conservatives and liberals.
Notably, billions of dollars of public property are at stake, owing to a privatization plan designed by former President Dimitri Medvedev.
Here, the EU has a framework – the Partnership for Modernization, negotiated with Medvedev – that could potentially be very positive.
Russia’s accession to the World Trade Organization in 2011 should also help to ensure that it plays by international rules, as occurred with China when it joined the WTO.
Russia’s adherence to the WTO’s legal framework should begin to make economic relations with it much more stable and predictable.
Previously, Russia’s admission to the WTO had been blocked by Georgia, which lifted its veto last year after a feat of elegant diplomacy that established a border-control mechanism without recognizing the breakaway regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia either as part of Georgia or as independent countries.
That solution, while complicated, is a good outcome for the region.
Given the scale of Ukraine’s current problems and dysfunction, an elegant solution may neither be available nor sufficient.
Ukraine, with which I have been engaged since its independence, has been a great frustration to me.
I was involved in the negotiations that helped to bring about a peaceful resolution of the Orange Revolution of 2004-2005.
But subsequent infighting between the revolution’s leaders, Yulia Tymoshenko and Viktor Yushchenko, was so destructive that Viktor Yanukovych, whose efforts to manipulate the 2004 presidential election incited the revolution, is now President and Tymoshenko is in jail.
For the EU, Ukraine continues to be a serious problem.
A comprehensive free-trade and association agreement with the Union remains unsigned, owing to the incarceration of Tymoshenko and others.
Fortunately, given the Union’s attraction for most ordinary Ukrainians, there is still hope that simple realism will persuade Yanukovych and Ukraine’s ruling elite to return to a path that would allow for the association agreement to be signed.
Europe’s soft power has changed many things in many countries over the past two decades, spurring leaders and citizens to reform their economies and embrace or strengthen democratic values and institutions.
It can continue to do so in Turkey, Russia, and Ukraine, or, through inattention and inaction, Europe could lose credibility, influence, and economic opportunities.
Europe’s Time to Learn
PRINCETON – Crises are a chance to learn.
For the past 200 years, with the exception of the Great Depression, major financial crises originated in poor and unstable countries, which then needed major policy adjustments.
Today’s crisis started in rich industrial countries – not only with sub-prime mortgages in the United States, but also with mismanagement of banks and public debt in Europe.
So what will Europe learn, and what relevance will those lessons have for the rest of the world?
Europe’s contemporary problems offer striking parallels with previous problems on the periphery of the world economy.
In successive waves of painful crisis – in Latin America in the 1980’s, and in East Asia after 1997 – countries learned a better approach to economic policy and developed a more sustainable framework for managing public-sector debt.
Today it is Europe’s turn.
The European crisis is coming full circle.
Initially a financial crisis, it morphed into a classic public-debt crisis after governments stepped in to guarantee banks obligations.
That, in turn, has created a new set of worries for banks that are over-exposed to supposedly secure government debt.
Sovereign debt no longer looks stable.
One of the most important precedents is the debacle of Latin American debt almost 30 years ago.
In August 1982, Mexico shocked the world by declaring that it was unable to service its debt.
For most of that summer, Mexico, with a projected fiscal deficit of around 11% of GDP, was still borrowing on international financial markets, though at an increasing premium.
Banks had reassured themselves with the belief that countries could not become insolvent.
But then a wide range of inherently different countries seemed to line up like a row of dominos.
While Mexico had a petroleum-based boom in the wake of the second oil-price shock of the 1970’s, Argentina suffered from economic mismanagement under a military dictatorship that then staged its disastrous invasion of the Falkland Islands/Malvinas.
Brazil had experienced an earlier version of its current economic miracle, with stunning growth rates financed by capital imports.
But in the end, these very different circumstances produced a common and inherently simple problem: over-indebtedness.
A Latin American default would have brought down the banking systems of all the major industrial countries, causing something like a replay of the Great Depression.
Exposure to Mexican debt alone represented some 90% of the capitalization of major US banks.
In the meantime, Latin America remained mired in what became widely known as “the lost decade.”
The contemporary European solution seems to be repeating the same time-buying tactics of the lost decade of the 1980’s in the developing world.
There is the same combination of international support, highly unpopular domestic austerity measures (which are bound to set off major protests), and the apparent absolution of banks from financial responsibility for problems that they produced.
Major European banks – in the United Kingdom, Germany, and France – have, like their 1980’s predecessors, built up a gigantic exposure to what they erroneously thought was safe debt.
A substantial immediate haircut on the sovereign debt of the vulnerable eurozone countries would be so destructive that it would set off a new round of bank panics.
Recognizing this problem, banks can hold their host governments to ransom.
That is why the crisis has become a challenge for the UK, Germany, and France.
The Franco-German initiative unveiled at Deauville in early November, which would require some possible measure of restructuring for debt issued after 2013, tried to avoid the immediate shock of a haircut.
But the pre-announcement of possible write-downs still led to a major wave of uncertainty about banks.
A long-term alternative requires some capacity to write down debt where it has reached excessive levels.
But it is also necessary to establish an iron-clad guarantee of some part of the outstanding debt, in order to remove fear of a complete write-down.
A mechanism for dealing in an orderly way with sovereign bankruptcy would be a major contribution to global governance, and to solving a longstanding problem of sovereign-debt markets.
Such proposals were widely discussed in the 1990’s and early 2000’s, and IMF Deputy Managing Director Anne Krueger pushed a Sovereign Debt Restructuring Mechanism that would have offered a legal path to imposing general haircuts on creditors, thereby ending the collective-action problems that impede the efficient resolution of sovereign bankruptcy.
If Europe could show – in the worst possible scenario of sovereign default – how such a process might operate, uncertainty would be reduced and markets would be reassured.
And, in the longer term, we would have a viable international model of how to tackle severe sovereign-debt problems.
Europe’s Triple Threat
PALO ALTO – Europe is suffering from simultaneous sovereign-debt, banking, and currency crises.
Severe economic distress and political pressure are buffeting relationships among citizens, sovereign states, and supranational institutions such as the European Central Bank.
Calls are rampant for surrendering fiscal sovereignty; for dramatic recapitalization of the financially vulnerable banking system; and/or for Greece and possibly other distressed eurozone members to quit the euro (or for establishing an interim two-tier monetary union).
In this combustible environment, policymakers are desperately using various vehicles – including the ECB, the International Monetary Fund, and the European Financial Stability Facility – in an attempt to stem the financial panic, contagion, and risk of recession.
But are officials going about it in the right way?
The sovereign debt, banking, and euro crises are closely connected.
Given their large, battered holdings of peripheral eurozone countries’ sovereign debt, many of Europe’s thinly capitalized banks would be insolvent if their assets were marked to market.
Their deleveraging inhibits economic recovery.
And the large fiscal adjustment necessary for Greece, Ireland, and Portugal, if not Italy and Spain, will be economically and socially disruptive.
Default likely would be accompanied by severe economic contraction – Argentina’s GDP fell 15% after it defaulted in 2002.
Despite stress tests, bailout funds, and continual meetings, a permanent workable fix has so far eluded European policymakers.
Failure will erect a huge obstacle to European economic growth for years to come, and could threaten the survival of the euro itself.
Disagreement among and between heads of state and the ECB over the Bank’s purchases of distressed sovereign debt have only added to the uncertainty.
A decent pan-European economic recovery, and successful gradual fiscal consolidation, would allow the distressed sovereign bonds to rise in value over time.
Until then, the jockeying will continue over who will bear the losses, when, and how. Will it be Greek citizens?
German, French, and Dutch taxpayers? Bondholders?
Financial institutions’ shareholders? And the fundamental problem is that how the battle is resolved will affect the amount of the losses.
Prices of bank shares and the Euribor-OIS spread (a measure of financial stress) signal a profound lack of confidence in the sovereign debt of distressed countries, with yields on ten-year Greek bonds recently hitting 25%.
The crisis affects non-Europeans too; for example, concern over the exposure of American banks and money-market funds to troubled European banks is harming US financial markets.
There are three basic approaches to resolving the banking crisis (which means resolving the fiscal adjustment, sovereign debt, and euro issues simultaneously).
The first approach relies on time, profitability, and eventual workout.
One estimate suggests that a 50% reduction in the value of peripheral countries’ sovereign debt (reasonable for Greece, but high for the others) would cause about $3 trillion in losses, overwhelming the capital of European banks.
But the banks are profitable ongoing enterprises in the current low-interest-rate environment, because they typically engage in short-term borrowing and longer-term lending at higher rates, with leverage.
Playing for time thus might enable them gradually to recapitalize themselves by retaining profits or attracting outside capital.
A strong, durable economic recovery would make such an approach workable.
Most European officials hope that, when combined with substantial public money to support troubled sovereign debt, it will.
The Obama administration adopted this option, following the unpopular Troubled Asset Relief Program, which injected hundreds of billions of public dollars into the banking system (most of which has been repaid).
But some US banks, including Bank of America and Citi, are still vulnerable, with considerable toxic assets (mainly related to home mortgages) on their balance sheets.
The second approach is rapid resolution.
But letting questionable banks gradually recapitalize themselves and resolving the bad debt later – perhaps with European Brady Bonds (zero-coupon bonds which in the 1990’s enabled US banks and Latin American countries to agree to partial write-downs) – won’t work if the losses are too large or the recovery is too fragile.
More rapid resolution may be necessary to prevent zombie banks from infecting the financial system.
The US Resolution Trust Corporation rapidly shut down 1,000 insolvent banks and Savings and Loans from 1989 to 1995 so that they would not damage healthy institutions.
Scaled to today’s economy, assets worth $1.25 trillion were sold off, with 80% of the value recovered.
The financial system rapidly returned to health.
This approach requires judgment and resolve in separating insolvent institutions from solvent ones.
Finally, there is the path of public capital.
If market-driven recapitalization is too slow, and closing failing institutions is impossible, a more extreme alternative is to inject public capital directly into the banks (rather than indirectly, as now, by propping up the value of the sovereign debt that they hold).
This approach prevents bank runs, because banks with more capital are safer.
But how much public capital should be used, and on what terms?
Private capital, of course, is preferable, but, given the risk that it will be wiped out by future public intervention, investors will be wary.
In the meantime, regulators are increasing banks’ capital ratios.
Europeans, both debtors and creditors, must address the banking problem forthrightly, and simultaneously with the euro, sovereign-debt, and fiscal-adjustment issues.
Pretending that banks that passed modest stress tests can be kept open indefinitely with little collateral damage is wishful – and dangerous – thinking.
Europe’s Troublesome Neighbors
PARIS – Geography has dealt Europe a mixed hand.
Europeans can congratulate themselves on being a relatively safe distance away from whatever tensions may accompany the rise of powers like India, Brazil, and, especially, China.
But Europe is bordered to its south and east by two great regions that give cause for significant concern.
Neither Russia nor the Islamic world is, thus far, adapting well to globalization.
The economies of both remain over-dependent on oil and gas exports.
In the Middle East, this exacerbates the problem of creating jobs for ballooning populations of young adults.
Russia, too, faces real demographic difficulties, though in the other direction as Russia’s population is projected to shrink by as much as 10% over the next 15 or 20 years.
Despite the understandable concerns of Finns, Poles, and others in Central and Eastern Europe, the relationship with Russia should be the easier of the two to manage.
The West’s relations with Russia since the end of the Cold War have resembled the meeting of two tectonic plates, with one progressively forced beneath the other.
The Georgia conflict of 2008 was the tremor that signaled substantial resistance to the western plate’s eastward movement.
But the shifts that have taken place left Russia much diminished in terms of its sphere of influence and military might.
To be sure, Vladimir Putin’s Russia is nationalistic, awkward, and disposed to dangerous trouble-making.
But it also faces acute social and public-health problems and has 1.3 billion Chinese on its eastern border, and it has important common interests with Europe, including trade in gas and oil and a shared preoccupation with Islamic extremism.
Handled with forbearance and firmness, relations with Russia should remain difficult but manageable.
With NATO backing off, the European Union stepping in with its Eastern Partnership initiative to shift continuing competition in the post-Soviet space onto a less antagonistic footing, and President Barack Obama demonstrating his willingness to assuage Russia’s damaged pride, major confrontation should be avoidable.
Europe ’s relations with the Islamic world are a lot trickier.
First, although Russia’s resentments may be fresher, those of the Muslim world run deeper, and are born of more profound interactions, past and present.
Second, whether one thinks of Al Qaeda’s terrorism or the presence of Western armies in Iraq and Afghanistan, Europe and the Islamic world have demonstrated a continuing willingness to deal violently with each other.
Third, even if Europeans are a disparate group, the Islamic world is infinitely more so.
Islam is its identifying glue – but how much else do Indonesia and Yemen, for example, have in common?
The Islamic world is riven by disputes between Arab and non-Arab, Sunni and Shia, and Salafi extremists and theological moderates.
Al Qaeda’s agenda is as much about the creation of a new Islamic caliphate as it is about waging jihad against the West.
Fourth, Europeans find it hard to stomach traditional Islamic attitudes towards, say, women or homosexuals.
Muslims find it hard to understand how we can believe our society is civilized when pornography and drunkenness are openly displayed.
To the extent that Europeans are Christian at all, we see religion as a matter of an individual’s relationship with his or her God; Muslims see it as an organizing social principle.
Ours is a guilt culture; theirs a shame culture.
Israel is, of course, the single issue on which the Islamic sense of resentment focuses.
It exemplifies Western hypocrisy – whether over nuclear non-proliferation, the refusal to deal with the elected Hamas, or readiness to criticize Russia for “disproportionate” use of force in Georgia while remaining quiet over 1,300 deaths in Gaza.
Unlike his two predecessors, Obama has had the courage to target the Israel-Palestine problem, the intractable seat of the infection, from the beginning of his presidency.
And he went to Cairo to address the Arab world with humility and respect, without shirking issues of human rights and individual freedom.
The risk in this American activism is that it will provide the excuse for Europeans to sit back and cheer while someone else does the heavy lifting.
But passivity would be a historic mistake.
America’s Middle East interests are not identical with those of Europe.
Protected behind its oceans, and applying its vast technological capacity to the goal of energy self-sufficiency, the United States is ultimately able to distance itself from the travails of the Middle East.
Once out of Iraq and Afghanistan, the US may find itself increasingly tempted to do just that.
For Europe, such distancing is impossible.
European security is inextricably bound up with the need to find and maintain a modus vivendi with the Muslim world.
Europe is not without leverage.
It has currently put on hold a deepened economic relationship with Israel: if Israel’s government continues to refuse to stop its colonization of the West Bank, Europeans should make clear that, as Israel’s most important export market, they have tougher options at hand.
And, given the determination of both the Israeli and Iranian governments to use each other’s intransigence as an excuse for their own, Europe must also be prepared to use its economic muscle on Iran if and when the mullahs reject Obama’s extended hand.
European military forces will also be required to play a crucial role in policing and guaranteeing a two-state settlement.
This makes it all the more important for Europe to wake up to where its real security interests lie, and to take responsibility for asserting them.
Europe’s Trust Deficit
BERKELEY – There is no shortage of talk nowadays about Europe’s deficits and the need to correct them.
Critics point to governments’ gaping budget deficits.
They cite the southern European countries’ chronic external deficits.
They highlight the eurozone’s institutional deficits – a single currency and a central bank but none of the other elements of a well-functioning monetary union.
Of course, in all of these areas, the critics have a point.
But none of these is the deficit that really matters.
The deficit that prevents Europe from drawing a line under its crisis is a deficit of trust.
First, there is deficient trust between national leaders and their publics.
We saw this most visibly in the person of former Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, who fortunately has been kicked to the sidelines of the political scene.
But even the most stalwart European leaders have lost their followers’ trust by baldly saying one thing today and the opposite tomorrow.
At the end of February, for example, German Chancellor Angela Merkel made a spectacle insisting that no bigger financial firewall was needed to protect other eurozone countries from a disorderly Greek default.
Not one more euro of German taxpayer money, she vowed, would be contributed for this purpose.
Yet everyone knew that once the Bundestag voted for the latest Greek rescue and enough time passed to acknowledge reality gracefully, Merkel would reverse course and argue that the eurozone needed a bigger firewall after all.
In fact, there is nothing at all graceful about this.
For politicians to say one thing now when everyone knows they will soon say the opposite is guaranteed to erode trust in Europe’s leaders.
Second, there is a lack of trust among European Union member states.
The real reason why the northern Europeans have been unwilling to provide a “big bazooka” – that is, extend more financial assistance to Southern Europe – is that they don’t trust the beneficiaries to use it wisely.
They fear, for example, that additional securities purchases by the European Central Bank, aimed at bringing down Spain’s borrowing costs, would only lead the Spanish government to relax its reform effort.
As a result, Germany and its allies are prepared to provide just enough assistance to keep the ship from capsizing, but not enough to set it on an even keel.
Third, there is lack of trust among the social groups called on to make sacrifices.
Italian taxi drivers would be prepared to allow more competition if they were sure that Italian pharmacy owners were willing to do likewise.
But if issuing more taxi medallions reduces cab drivers’ earnings, while pharmacists succeed in vetoing pro-competition measures to lower the cost of their services, the taxi drivers will end up worse off and the pharmacists will be enriched, which hardly seems fair.
In other words, lack of social trust blocks structural reform.
The Greek version of this dilemma, in which no one pays taxes because no one else pays taxes, is particularly stark.
Survey research has revealed that societies vary greatly in their levels of trust.
Economists, for their part, have shown that these different attitudes have deep historical roots.
In European regions where minority groups were persecuted 500 years ago, ethnic and religious conflicts have been more pervasive in recent times.
In parts of the Balkans long ruled by the Ottoman Empire, trust in government is lower than in nearby regions that just happened to have been ruled by the more efficient Habsburgs.
In regions where earlier inhabitants engaged in farming rather than herding, forcing them to cooperate more extensively, their descendants are more likely to form bonds of trust today.
Evidently, attitudes are passed down through the generations.
They are embedded in societies in the form of culture.
Simply put, when it comes to trust, history casts a long shadow.
Historians have long emphasized the importance of such “path dependence” – that events in the distant past continue to shape outcomes in the present.
Yet they also point to exceptional windows in time when it is possible for societies to shift away from their established paths.
A crisis, when the viability of established arrangements is called into question, is just such a window.
The euro crisis thus offers Europe an opportunity to reestablish trust.
Its national leaders need to reestablish the trust of their constituents by offering them straight talk.
EU member states need to rebuild their trust in one another.
And European countries facing the need for wrenching structural reforms need to restore social trust at home.
If this opportunity to rebuild trust is squandered, it will be difficult, if not impossible, for Europe to address its fiscal, economic, and institutional deficits.
Europe’s Ukrainian Linchpin
BERLIN – Revolutions, it is said, almost always devour their children.
Obviously, this is also true for the “color revolutions” – first in Georgia, and now in Ukraine, where President Viktor Yushchenko, the hero of the “Orange Revolution” in 2004, was voted out in the first round of presidential elections a few weeks ago, having received less than 6% of the vote.
By that point, Ukraine’s springtime of freedom had already deteriorated into a very visible development standstill, owing to a mixture of incompetence and corruption that cried out for change.
Regardless of which of the remaining candidates will be elected in the upcoming runoff – the incumbent Prime Minister Yuliya Tymoshenko or Viktor Yanukovych – the Orange Revolution will have come to an end.
So it is worth looking back to the hopes that were linked to those wonderfully expectant days and nights on Maidan Square in the center of Kiev, and to Yushchenko’s electoral victory.
It was a victory of democracy and independence over electoral fraud and naked power.
But what happened in the winter of 2004/2005 was not only about the Ukrainian people’s democratic right to self-determination and their national independence, but also about the future of the European order as it had emerged from the Cold War’s end.
At the time, Europe immediately understood the challenge and reacted effectively.
The elections had to be repeated, and democracy won.
Was this, in hindsight, all in vain?
By no means!
Although Ukraine is in big economic and social trouble, it should not be forgotten that it has, until today, been saved from the fate of becoming a “guided” democracy in the Russian mold.
Independent media and freedom of speech have not been restricted in Ukraine, and elections since 2004 have been judged free and fair by both international observers and the parties themselves.
All this cannot be taken for granted in Eastern Europe.
Moreover, regardless of who wins the presidential runoff, fears about Ukraine’s independence will not, in contrast to 2004/2005, be an issue.
This too, is a step forward that should not be underestimated.
Frustrated by Ukraine’s immobilism and corruption, Europe has turned away from the country – a stance that could turn out to be a significant strategic mistake.
Ukraine is one of the cornerstones on which the European order rests after the Cold War.
Europe and Russia meet in Ukraine, and its fate will not only be a crucial factor in defining European security, but will also play a substantial role in future European-Russian relations.
With an independent, democratic Ukraine, European-Russian relations will have a completely different, and much more positive, character than if its role were to fundamentally change and history be reversed.
So the future of this big country is of great importance to Europe; in view of its own interests, therefore, Europe cannot afford an emotionally frustrated reaction.
Rather, the opposite is needed: massive economic and political investment, and closer cooperation.
Dealing with Ukraine will take patience and perseverance, but there is too much at stake to choose any other path.
This means that, when considering a “new eastern policy,” the European Union must focus first and foremost on Ukraine.
The EU’s eastern member states, in particular, must not lose their interest in Ukraine's future, otherwise the Union as a whole may soon do the same.
Here, Germany and Poland will play a central role, for both belong to the EU’s six big member states and have the necessary strategic awareness of Ukraine’s importance for Europe.
By contrast, the interests of France, the United Kingdom, Italy, and Spain don’t point in this direction.
This was another lesson learned in 2004.
Only if Germany and Poland, together with the smaller eastern member states, jointly advocate such an “eastern” and neighborhood policy towards Ukraine, will EU policy as a whole receive the necessary power and perseverance.
Thus, whether Europe effectively pursues its own interests in Eastern Europe will depend on coordination between the governments in Berlin and Warsaw, and between them and the EU in Brussels and the other member states.
Germany and Poland should also jointly make sure that Europe’s interest in an independent and democratic Ukraine is not directed against anyone — not just in Kiev, but also in Moscow.
Germany ’s new foreign minister has spoken of trying to recreate the old “Weimar Triangle” of France, Germany, and Poland.
That will not work, primarily because France shows little interest, and it is an idea whose time is past.
But cooperation on Ukraine might eventually lead to the creation of a far more meaningful Germany-Poland-Russia triangle that could give a new stimulus to Europe’s eastern policy.
Europe’s Uneven Growth Challenge
A year ago, the euro zone’s most important challenge was anemic economic growth.
But 2006 turned out to be a good year for growth in Europe, as surprising strength in exports sparked unexpected increases in domestic demand.
Germany, the euro zone’s biggest economy, had a particularly dramatic turnaround, with annual GDP up by 2.7% in 2006, the highest rate since 2000.
Not only has German resurgence raised overall growth in Europe, but it has also made growth less evenly balanced throughout the euro zone.
This is because Germany is growing faster than the other large economies, France and Italy.
Germany accomplished this feat by dramatically re-structuring its corporate sector.
From 2001 to 2005, there was a “silent revolution” in Germany.
While observers and commentators focused on the economy’s slow overall growth, behind the scenes, largely unnoticed, important changes were taking place.
Without fanfare, German workers accepted longer hours without increases in pay.
This allowed Germany to improve its competitive position in world markets vis-à-vis the other large euro-zone economies, where there were no productivity revolutions, silent or otherwise.
It took some time for the silent revolution to show concrete results.
But by 2006, both German exports and GDP were growing faster than in France and Italy.
Before the introduction of the euro, the reform gap between Germany and its larger neighbors would have been no problem for Europe.
The currencies of the reform laggards would have depreciated against that of Germany, and there might have been a supportive cut in interest rates as well.
This is no longer possible.
Superior German economic performance has bid up the euro and European interest rates to levels that, while comfortable for the Germans, put pressure on the euro zone’s laggards.
The appropriate level of the euro for the Germans is too high for the French and Italians.
The right interest rate for the French and Italians is too low for the Germans.
For reform laggards like France, Italy, and Portugal, currency union with an increasingly competitive Germany is forcing an unwelcome choice between revving up their own reforms and permanent stagnation.
This is no easy choice.
Even with political will, revving up the reform process is a difficult task and takes time.
Indeed, it took a motivated Germany four to five years to do it.
But the prospect of permanent stagnation for countries like France, Italy, and Portugal is unacceptable.
Chronic stagnation is too high a price to pay for adopting the euro.
Naturally, politicians are reluctant to face up to choices between the unacceptable (permanent stagnation), the unthinkable (leaving the euro), and the hard-to-do (reform).
So they are taking refuge in fantasy.
In France, for example, all current presidential candidates hold out the unrealistic prospect of staying in the currency union but watering down the independence of the European Central Bank and its price stability mandate, increasing “consultation” between governments and the ECB, and manipulating the euro to France’s advantage.
This is pure escapism.
Approval of fundamental changes in the currency union must be agreed by all members, and so will not be forthcoming.
Nor will ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet be intimidated by French pressure to pursue a softer monetary policy.
Trichet is a tough guy with a long history of standing up to the French politicians.
They couldn’t make him bend when, as Governor, he successfully defended the independence of the Bank of France, and they won’t make him bend now.
At the January meeting of the ECB’s Governing Council, for example, Trichet virtually pre-announced that European interest rates would be increased in March just before the April French elections.
The ECB President made it clear he will do his duty whatever the political pressure.
The defining factor in Trichet’s sense of duty is the Maastricht Treaty, which clearly states the prime objective of Europe’s central bank to be the promotion of price stability.
Some in France – and not just the left – want to change this.
One idea making the rounds is for the European Parliament to define the ECB’s objectives, on the basis that it is democratically elected – as if the Maastricht Treaty did not result from a democratic process.
This high-handed attempt to highjack the ECB and make it a servant of the European Parliament would mean chronically low European interest rates and a depreciated euro.
France would be off the reform hook, of course, but at the expense of Germany, which would face unwanted inflationary pressures.
This proposal illustrates how the reform gap, and the unbalanced growth that results from it, can debilitate the European fabric by setting one partner against the other.
To protect European cohesion as well as improve their own economic situation, France and Italy must reform at a faster pace than Germany rather than just waiting for Germany to slow down.