Airline pilots provide passengers with the latest scores; office-goers cluster around the nearest available television.
Cricketers occupy a place in India’s pantheon rivaled only by gods and Bollywood stars.
The performances of our heroes are analyzed with far more passion than any political crisis.
In no other country does a sport so often command the front pages of leading newspapers.
Cricket first came to India with decorous English gentlemen.
It took nearly a century for the “natives” to learn the sport, but when they did, they took to it like snakes to their charmers.
Today, the public’s obsession has made India into the sport’s global financial powerhouse, with advertisers and sponsors pouring unheard-of sums into the game.
It is estimated that India alone accounts for nearly 90% of cricket’s worldwide revenues, putting the game’s traditional guardians, England and Australia, in the shade.
India has become the most influential country in the sport’s governing body, the International Cricket Council, which has moved its headquarters from London to Dubai, which has no cricketing tradition but is closer to the sport’s new fulcrum in South Asia.
In April and May, the new Indian Premier League revolutionized the sport.
By bringing the world’s top players to India at unprecedented salaries (one Australian player was auctioned to his new team for $1.4 million, more than most cricketers previously earned in a lifetime), and by spicing up the game through such innovations as American cheerleaders, the IPL is transforming the sport.
When the traditional English cricket season opened in April, as it has for the last couple of centuries, seasoned British journalists ruefully reported that while the players and officials were dutifully present, their minds were far away, following the fortunes of the lucrative league in India.
I have often thought that cricket is really, in the sociologist Ashis Nandy’s phrase, an Indian game accidentally discovered by the British.
Everything about cricket seems ideally suited to the Indian national character: its rich complexity, the endless possibilities and variations that can occur with each delivery, the dozen different ways of getting out – all are reminiscent of a society of infinite forms and varieties.
A country where a majority of the population still consults astrologers can well appreciate a sport in which an ill-timed cloudburst, a badly prepared pitch, a lost toss, or the sun in the eyes of a fielder can transform a game’s outcome.
Even the possibility that five tense, exciting, hotly-contested, and occasionally meandering days of cricketing could still end in a draw seems derived from ancient Indian philosophy, which accepts that in life the journey is as important as the destination.
So, too, is the fact that cricket is a team game that showcases individual excellence.
Indians have long been resigned to defeat for their national side (though this is changing), but they have always managed to produce individual record-breakers – outstanding cricketers like the batsmen Sunil Gavaskar and Sachin Tendulkar, or the all-rounders Vinoo Mankad and Kapil Dev, who were considered to be among the world’s best players, even if the Indian teams to which they belonged lost more often than they won.
What offers better consolation than the thrilling endeavors of a gifted batsman or the magical wiles of a talented bowler, each performing his dharma , the individual doing his duty in a team game, just as in life each Indian fulfils his destiny within the fate of the collectivity?
Indeed, the sport both reflects and transcends India’s diversity.
It is entirely fitting that the Indian team has been led by captains from each of its major faiths – Hindus, Muslims, Parsis, Christians, and a colorful Sikh.
A land divided by caste, creed, color, culture, cuisine, custom, and costume is united in consensus around a great conviction: cricket.
Thanking Bangladesh
NEW DELHI – This month, India’s parliament took the first step toward a potentially momentous decision: to settle a boundary dispute with Bangladesh that dates back to the 1947 partition of the subcontinent.
An agreement in this area would provide a major boost to the already warm bilateral relationship, not least by bolstering Bangladesh’s position in the region.
The demarcation of the India-Pakistan border by the British was a slapdash affair, concocted by a collapsing empire in headlong retreat from its responsibilities.
The border itself was hastily drawn by Sir Cyril Radcliffe, a lawyer who had never visited India before receiving the assignment, and caused numerous practical problems.
In the eastern part of Pakistan, which became Bangladesh in 1971, Radcliffe’s frontier created two sets of anomalies.
In some cases, one country refused to relinquish territory to the other, resulting in so-called “adverse possessions”; in others, Radcliffe left small areas of one country completely surrounded by the other’s territory.
With 111 Indian enclaves spread over 17,000 acres in Bangladesh, and 51 Bangladeshi enclaves spread over 7,110 acres in India, a settlement would involve a net transfer of some 40 square kilometers (15.4 square miles) of territory from India to its eastern neighbor.
That is not a huge area.
Yet it has taken nearly seven decades to make real progress toward resolving the anomalies.
At first, the hostility between India and Pakistan that arose soon after partition thwarted any discussion of the issue.
In 1971, though, Bangladesh’s independence from Pakistan, facilitated by India, allowed for the possibility of a solution, and a land-boundary agreement was concluded in 1974.
But a military coup in Bangladesh strained the bilateral relationship and stymied the deal.
Despite improved ties in the 1990s, successive Indian governments were unable – or unwilling – to risk their political capital by legitimizing the territorial transfer and settling the dispute.
Indeed, the one prime minister who did press for an agreement, Manmohan Singh, was met with strong domestic resistance, including from a coalition ally, making it impossible to gain enough votes to adopt the required constitutional amendment.
The then-opposition Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) went so far as to block the bill in parliament, with the upper house’s then-opposition leader, the lawyer Arun Jaitley, arguing that India’s territory is integral to its constitution and thus “cannot be reduced or altered by an amendment.”
Now, three years after thwarting Singh’s efforts, the BJP has taken over India’s government, following its resounding electoral victory in May.
And it has reversed many of its policy positions, including on the boundary with Bangladesh.
During her first trip abroad after becoming foreign minister, the BJP’s Sushma Swaraj traveled to Dhaka, Bangladesh’s capital, where she pledged to follow through on the land-boundary agreement, referring it to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on External Affairs for review.
The committee, which I head, deliberated over three weeks of hearings, summoning senior representatives from the foreign and home ministries, as well as the government of the most affected state, West Bengal.
On December 7, we unanimously recommended that the parliament ratify the constitutional amendment.
Prime Minister Narendra Modi subsequently announced his support for the deal.
Even Jaitley, now India’s finance minister and a prominent cabinet member, has not expressed any opposition.
And, given that Bangladesh gains the most from the settlement, both officially expanding its territory and enhancing its position relative to India, the deal should face no resistance there.
In short, the deal’s implementation seems all but assured.
The only potential sticking point in India is the perception that it is surrendering its territory.
To prevent such a misperception from hampering the bill’s passage through India’s parliament, the country’s leaders must explain to the public that neither India nor Bangladesh will be relinquishing territory that it actually controls at the moment.
The territory being exchanged comprises lawless enclaves, where the nominal sovereign lacks real authority.
In fact, India has no access to the enclaves within Bangladesh that it supposedly rules; there are no customs posts, border markings, post offices, or police to reflect India’s control.
The people inhabiting these enclaves are theoretically Indian citizens, but they lack the rights and privileges that their counterparts elsewhere in India enjoy.
Eliminating the anomalies will merely regularize the reality; the loss of territory will occur purely on paper.
The only potential change is that some residents of the Indian enclaves may migrate to India after the settlement, if they so choose.
Otherwise, they will become citizens of Bangladesh.
Given that the enclaves’ residents have presumably lost much of their cultural or personal ties with India since 1947, most are expected to remain where they are.
A land-boundary agreement’s impact would thus be most apparent in the two countries’ diplomatic relationship.
Already, Bangladesh’s Awami League government, which returned to power this year after a controversial election that was boycotted by the principal opposition party, has embraced an unprecedented level of cooperation with India on security and counter-terrorism issues.
Under less friendly regimes, Bangladesh had been a haven for terrorist and militant groups that wreaked havoc in India.
Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina’s government has not just denied these groups shelter; it has actively intercepted them, arrested some of their leaders, and even handed wanted terrorists over to the Indian government.
If terrorist bombs are no longer going off in the Indian state of Assam, it is thanks to the government in Dhaka.
Giving Bangladesh legal rights to territory within its own borders is the least India can do to express its gratitude.
How India’s Caste System Survives
NEW DELHI – On January 17, Rohith Vemula, a PhD candidate at the University of Hyderabad in India’s Telangana state, hanged himself.
Even in a country of 1.2 billion people, a single death can have a major impact.
Vemula was a Dalit – a member of what was once known as the “untouchables,” at the bottom of the Hindu caste system.
He was also a leader of the Ambedkar Students Association at Hyderabad University, seeking to promote Dalit rights.
In death, Vemula has achieved something he could not have imagined: He has become a national hero, his tragedy emblematic of the toxic durability of caste in India’s development narrative.
Unlike race, caste is invisible: a person’s face does not indicate it.
Yet it retains a powerful hold on Indian society, limiting the opportunities available at all stages of life.
To be a Dalit is to wear an invisible stigma that dogs one’s daily interactions.
Vemula’s death has reminded Indians once again that the more than 300 million who belong to the lowest castes, as well as the “tribals” or indigenous people, still face discrimination, prejudice, hostility, and even violence on each step of the social ladder.
To be sure, India’s government has made significant efforts to redress the situation.
Nine days after Vemula’s death, India celebrated the 66th anniversary of the adoption of its constitution, which sought to combat the country’s rigid social stratification with the world’s first and most comprehensive affirmative-action program.
Designated castes and tribes were guaranteed not only equality of opportunity, but also positive outcomes, aided by quotas for educational institutions, government jobs, and even seats in parliament and state assemblies.
These quotas, or “reservations,” were granted based on people’s (presumably immutable) caste identities.
It was a small step toward compensating the millions of unfortunates who had suffered daily the injustices and humiliations of “untouchability.”
Over the last 66 years, politicians have maintained a strong commitment to affirmative action.
Though originally intended to expire after ten years, the reservations have been extended for 70, with further extensions certain when they come up for renewal in 2020.
The quotas remain the “third rail” of Indian politics; one touches it at one’s peril.
Yet Dalits feel only marginally better off than their wretched forebears.
And, indeed, they remain behind the advanced castes in terms of all socioeconomic indicators, from education levels to family income.
Vemula was admitted to his university on merit, not through the reservation system.
Yet he faced all the prejudice that would be directed at any Dalit.
He left behind a passionate letter outlining his mistreatment at the hands of an insensitive and bureaucratic university administration.
The ultimate indignity was the withholding of a fellowship on which he depended to support not only himself, but also his single mother – a punishment for his political activism.
In fact, intensifying his letter’s pathos, he requested that part of the money the university owes him be paid to his family to cover debts he incurred as a result of being denied his fellowship.
Clearly, reservations of public-sector jobs and college seats alone have failed to end the discrimination.
Vemula’s death sparked a wave of public protests, with leading politicians flocking to Hyderabad to add their voices to the growing clamor against not just the university, but also the government – especially Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who remained silent for nearly a week after the tragedy.
Finally, Modi spoke emotionally at the Dalit-majority Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University in Lucknow (named for an iconic Dalit leader who had chaired the Constitution Drafting Committee), pleading that the issue not be politicized: “Politics has its place, but a mother lost her son.”
Yet politics is integral to the problems highlighted by the tragedy.
India’s first prime minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, had hoped that caste consciousness would wither away after independence.
But the opposite has happened.
Because caste was such a powerful source of self-identification, it proved to be a useful tool for political mobilization in India’s electoral democracy: When Indians cast their vote, they too often vote their caste.
Granting sops to various castes proved a major vote-getting tactic for India’s politicians.
If India is to eliminate the discrimination and indignities faced by members of its lower castes, it must transcend the politics of identity and focus on broader development goals and socioeconomic challenges.
This will be no easy feat – especially as Indians compete for scarce opportunities in an overpopulated land.
So long as prejudice persists, politicians in India’s contentious democracy will exploit it.
January 30 marked the 68th anniversary of the assassination of Mahatma Gandhi, who fought not merely for independence, but also for a more just, equal, and moral India.
The country must see in the Vemula tragedy a reminder of the vital need to rededicate ourselves to Gandhi’s ideals, so that bright Dalit students are not driven to despair – or worse.
It may be a pious hope, but it is the very foundation of Indian nationhood.
India’s Cow Vigilantes
NEW DELHI – Indian politics continues to amaze and appall.
The surge in cow vigilantism – a uniquely Indian phenomenon that has lately begun to flourish under the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) government – is no exception.
Many orthodox Hindus, particularly in the northern Indian states that comprise the so-called Cow Belt, worship the cow as gau mata, the “mother of all,” which provides nourishment and sustenance through its milk – not its meat.
Refusing to eat beef is common in these states.
But it is not always a personal choice.
Several Indian states have passed laws outlawing cow slaughter, and some have prohibited the possession and consumption of beef altogether.
Cow slaughter and beef consumption are fully legal in just five of India’s 29 states, mainly in the south and northeast.
In the past, cow-protection laws have been weakly enforced, if at all; the police have better things to do than to check people’s kitchens, after all.
But since the victory of the Hindu-chauvinist BJP in the 2014 general election, a wave of religious triumphalism has swept India, bringing with it not just new cow-protection laws, but also vociferous demands for their strict enforcement.
Gau Rakshak Samitis, or “cow protection societies,” have been revived, and their members sometimes take it upon themselves to ensure that cows are not slaughtered or eaten.
Making matters worse, the cause of cow protection has now been linked to another persistent and destructive custom in Indian society: violence against Muslims and Dalits (formerly called “untouchables”).
Indeed, the Cow Belt, where cow vigilantism is most rampant, is also a hub of atrocities against Dalits, 63% of which occur in just four states: Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, and Rajasthan.
It is no coincidence that these are also the states where the BJP fared best in 2014.
The link between cows and Dalits is well known.
Cows may be considered holy, but they are not immortal, and when they die (ideally of natural causes), someone must dispose of their carcasses.
For centuries, that job has fallen to Dalits, who collect the carcasses, skin them and sell their hides to tanners and leather-makers, deliver the meat to Muslim butchers (where it is legal), and bury or cremate what remains.
It is a livelihood for a group with few economic opportunities – one that benefits the many Hindus who would not want to perform such an unpleasant task.
But several recent incidents have shaken the foundations of this arrangement.
In the state of Gujarat, four Dalit youths caught skinning a cow were stripped, tied, and beaten with iron rods by cow vigilantes who accused them of killing the animal (they had not).
In BJP-ruled Madhya Pradesh, two Dalit women were assaulted for supposedly carrying illegal cow meat (it was legal buffalo meat).
In Punjab, two young Dalits were beaten and urinated upon for the same “crime.”
A 16-year-old Kashmiri Muslim boy was murdered for having hitched a ride on a truck that was transporting cattle.
Such incidents have heightened the sense of vulnerability felt by many who do not necessarily share the vigilantes’ reverence for cows. They have also led to serious economic challenges for some groups.
Farmers who raise their cows with care and respect may not be able to afford to continue caring for those that are too old to produce milk.
In the past, they would address this by quietly selling the aged cows either to local butchers or to those who would transport them to states where cow slaughter is legal.
But, because that would be far too dangerous in the current political climate, many farmers are being driven into debt caring for old cows, while the cow population in India becomes increasingly unsustainable.
Moreover, Dalits are increasingly refusing to dispose of cow carcasses.
After the Gujarat incident, one group of Dalits in the state declared outright their intention to suspend their traditional duties.
“If the cow is your mother,” they challenged upper-caste Hindus, “why don’t you bury her?”
Where has the central government been as all of this has been happening?
Initially, it did not condemn cow vigilantism.
India’s social justice minister, whose principal responsibility is to promote the welfare of India’s Dalits, expressed regret not for the vigilantes’ violent actions, but for the fact that they were spurred by ill-founded rumors.
This view was reflected in the government’s response to an attack in Uttar Pradesh, where a mob lynched a Muslim and beat his son nearly to death, simply because they suspected that he had killed a cow.
Rather than leaping to the victims’ defense, the authorities launched a forensic investigation into whether the meat in his refrigerator was beef (it was not).
The implication was clear: violence is unjustifiable only if the victim has not actually killed or eaten a cow.
But on August 6, Prime Minister Narendra Modi finally broke his silence on the issue, warning people to beware of the fake Gau Rakshaks (protectors of cows) who are trying to create social conflict.
“All states should take stern action against these people,” he declared.
Modi’s words surely came as a relief to those who doubted the government’s willingness to stand up against its own sympathizers.
Yet cow vigilantism is far from extinguished in India.
If the Dalits allow rotting cow carcasses to pile up around the country, perhaps the stink will finally overwhelm it.
But, with Hindu chauvinism going strong, many Indians will still have plenty of reasons to hold their noses.
India’s Demonetization Disaster
NE W DELHI – On November 8, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi announced that, at the stroke of midnight, some 14 trillion rupees worth of 500- and 1,000-rupee notes – 86% of all the currency in circulation – would no longer be legal tender.
With that, India’s economy was plunged into chaos.
Modi’s stated goal was to make good on his campaign pledge to fight “black money”: the illicit proceeds – often held as cash – of tax evasion, crime, and corruption.
He also hoped to render worthless the counterfeit notes reportedly printed by Pakistan to fuel terrorism against India.
Nearly a month later, however, all the demonetization drive has achieved is severe economic disruption.
Far from being a masterstroke, Modi’s decision seems to have been a miscalculation of epic proportions.
The announcement immediately triggered a mad scramble to unload the expiring banknotes.
Though people have until the end of the year to deposit the notes in bank accounts, doing so in large quantities could expose them to high taxes and fines.
So they rushed to gas pumps, to jewelry shops, and to creditors to repay loans.
Long queues snaked in, out, and around banks, foreign-exchange counters, and ATMs – anywhere where people might exchange the soon-to-be-defunct notes.
But, upon getting to the front of the line, people were often met with strict withdrawal limits, because, in a display of shocking ineptitude, not enough new currency was printed prior to the announcement.
Worse, the new notes’ design prevents them from fitting into existing ATMs, and their denomination – 2,000 rupees – is too high to be useful for most people, especially given that the government’s failure to print enough smaller-denomination notes means that few can make change.
India’s previously booming economy has now ground to a halt.
All indicators – sales, traders’ incomes, production, and employment – are down.
Former Prime Minister Manmohan Singh estimates that India’s GDP will shrink by 1-2% in the current fiscal year.
But, as is so often the case, the impact is not being felt equally by all.
India’s wealthy, who are less reliant on cash and are more likely to hold credit cards, are relatively unaffected.
The poor and the lower middle classes, however, rely on cash for their daily activities, and thus are the main victims of this supposedly “pro-poor” policy.
Small producers, lacking capital to stay afloat, are already shutting down.
India’s huge number of daily wage workers can’t find employers with the cash to pay them.
Local industries have suspended work for lack of money.
The informal financial sector – which conducts 40% of India’s total lending, largely in rural areas – has all but collapsed.
India’s fishing industry, which depends on cash sales of freshly caught fish, is wrecked.
Traders are losing perishable stocks.
Farmers have been unloading produce below cost, because no one has the money to purchase it, and the winter crop could not be sown in time, because no one had cash for seeds.
Despite all of this, ordinary Indians have reacted with stoicism, seemingly willing to heed Modi’s call to be patient for 50 days, even though it could be much longer – anywhere between four months and a year – before the normal money supply is restored.
The government’s assiduous public relations – which portrays people’s difficulties as a small sacrifice needed for the good of the country – seems to have done its job.
“If our soldiers can stand for hours every day guarding our borders,” one popular social media meme asks, “why can’t we stand for a few hours in bank queues?”
But the sacrifice extends far beyond queues.
Hospitals are turning away patients who have only old banknotes; families cannot buy food; and middle-class workers are unable to buy needed medicine.
As many as 82 people have reportedly died in cash queues or related events.
Furthermore, it seems likely that many of the short-term effects of the demonetization could persist – and intensify – in the longer term, with closed businesses unable to reopen.
It could also cause lasting damage to India’s financial institutions, especially the Reserve Bank of India, whose reputation has already suffered.
Perhaps the worst part is that these sacrifices are not likely to achieve the government’s stated goal.
Not all black money is in cash, and not all cash is black money.
Those who held large quantities of black money seem to have found creative ways to launder it, rather than destroying it to avoid attracting the taxman’s attention, as the government expected.
As a result, most of the black money believed to have been in circulation has now flooded into banks, depriving the government of its expected dividend.
On top of all of this, the government’s plan does nothing to control the source of black money.
It will not be long before old habits – under-invoicing, fake purchase orders and bills, reporting of non-existent transactions, and blatant bribery – generates a new store of black money.
Many Modi supporters claim that the demonetization policy’s problems are a result of inept implementation.
But the truth is that its design was fundamentally flawed.
There was no “policy skeleton,” no cost-benefit analysis, and no evidence that alternative policy options were considered.
Judging by the blizzard of policy tweaks since the announcement, it seems clear that no impact study was carried out.
Yet, rather than recognize the mounting risks of the non-transparent policy environment he has created, Modi has been discussing going even further, moving India to an entirely “cashless society.”
Does he not know that more than 90% of financial transactions in India are conducted in cash, or that over 90% of retail outlets lack so much as a card reader?
Is he unaware that over 85% of workers are paid in cash, and that more than half of the population is unbanked?
Modi came to power in 2014 promising to boost growth, create jobs for India’s youthful population, and encourage investment.
His poorly conceived demonetization has made a mockery of these objectives, while bruising his reputation as an efficient and competent manager.
How long it will take for India to recover is anyone’s guess.
India’s Economy after Rajan
NEW DELHI – Raghuram Rajan’s decision not to seek a second term as Governor of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI, India’s central bank) was met with shock from those of us who have been cheering on the Indian economy.
While it is no secret that Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s government had its problems with Rajan, few believed that the government would take a step that so clearly undermines India’s interests.
The government never liked Rajan’s insistence on pursuing interest-rate cuts gradually in order to promote price stability; instead, it wanted to see them slashed aggressively, in order to spur growth.
Nor was the government particularly enthusiastic about Rajan’s role as a public intellectual.
And then, in the past few weeks, a toxic and ludicrous outburst of criticism from those close to the government erupted, focusing on Rajan’s performance and his supposed lack of “Indian-ness.”
Despite all of this, there were compelling reasons to believe that Modi’s government would keep Rajan on board.
First and foremost, losing Rajan controverts the Modi government’s commitment, unprecedented in recent history, to attracting foreign investment to India.
Since taking office in 2014, Modi has spent more time than any of his predecessors selling the so-called Indian dream to foreign investors – efforts that have helped to spur a surge in capital inflows.
The recent announcement that India will now, for the first time, allow 100% foreign ownership of firms in a broad swath of industries further reinforces the message that India is open for business.
But the positive impact of these changes may be tempered by Rajan’s departure.
After all, his stellar management of inflation, which has kept the Indian rupee stable, supported Modi’s efforts to attract foreign-direct investment.
The strengthening of other macroeconomic indicators under Rajan, including swelling foreign-exchange reserves and narrowing current-account deficits, also inspired confidence in would-be investors.
Given that a key motivation behind the official behavior that drove Rajan away was the ruling party’s opposition to his hawkish stance on inflation, it seems likely that investor confidence will eventually take a hit, though it may temporarily be masked by the announcement on relaxed foreign-investment norms.
Add to that the questions about the RBI’s independence that are sure to arise, and the extent to which Rajan’s departure could undermine Modi’s hard-won successes becomes clear.
A second reason why Rajan’s departure came as a shock is that the Modi government has a record of making tough choices, rather than resorting to populist policies, in its fiscal management.
Indeed, it has displayed remarkable restraint in keeping the fiscal deficit at prudent levels.
Yet it continues to blame a lack of demand on Rajan’s refusal to slash interest rates, rather than on, say, the finance ministry for failing to raise spending or cut taxes sufficiently.
This is not to argue that interest rates could not be lower in India.
In fact, there is room for debate on that topic.
But, in forming an opinion, a few facts should be kept in mind.
First, almost all historical instances of disinflation have been associated with a transition period when growth was negatively affected.
The countries that remained disciplined, such as Chile, ended up achieving sustained growth; those that gave up, like Argentina, ended up with high inflation and no growth.
Second, in explaining low investment and job creation, there are many potential culprits besides interest rates.
The debt overhang within India’s biggest companies and the large volume of bad assets held by its biggest banks have created an unholy nexus that is blocking sustainable growth – and that cannot be offset by interest-rate cuts.
The experience in Japan, where not even negative interest rates have been sufficient to spur growth in an economy burdened by so-called zombie banks, makes this starkly apparent.
Over the last two years, the hard work of the Modi government and the Rajan-led RBI has enabled India to distinguish itself among emerging-market economies.
As countries like China and Brazil have slipped in their economic management, India signaled that it is a mature economy, where prudent macroeconomic decisions are taken based on technical expertise, not political whim.
This raised its profile in the international arena substantially.
But, following the episode between Rajan and the government – and considering the unsavory manner in which it played out – there is reason to worry that India, too, may now stumble in its economic governance.
With commodity prices recovering, risks of a Chinese hard landing growing, and the European Union facing an uncertain future, that is an outcome that India can ill afford.
Rajan would have been the ideal candidate to guide Indian monetary policy in this testing time.
Now that he is gone, one can only hope that Modi and his government ensure that the next RBI governor is of comparable caliber, with the capability – and independence – to uphold the institution’s credibility through decisive action.
Once they find one, they should remember that good central-bank governors are not dispensable.
India Embraces the Welfare State
NEW DELHI – In recent weeks, India’s parliament, often justifiably derided for the frequent disruptions that mar its work, has surprised its detractors by passing two crucial pieces of legislation that could transform the lives of hundreds of millions of people.
The first, the Food Security Act, grants 67% of India’s population a right to 35 kilograms of rice or wheat for three rupees (less than five US cents) per kilo.
Together with related provisions that would provide meals to infants and expectant mothers, and subsidized pulses to supplement cheaply available food grains, the law will add $6 billion to India’s annual fiscal deficit.
But it would also abolish the risk of starvation and malnutrition in a land where too many have gone hungry for too long.
The second law assures fair – indeed generous – compensation to people, often small-scale farmers, whose land is acquired by the state for development purposes.
In a country where two-thirds of the population is still dependent on agriculture and small holdings are all that a majority of Indians live on, the new law helps those who have often felt exploited and deprived of their livelihoods by the state’s power of eminent domain.
From the Right to Information Act, which has empowered citizens and boosted government accountability and transparency, to the Right to Education Act, which has led to record-high school enrollment and pumped resources into moribund classrooms, the current government’s reforms have changed the face of Indian society.
One in five rural households benefit from the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, which provides employment mostly to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, and women in villages (in my own state, Kerala, 92% of the beneficiaries are women, whose lives have been transformed by their new income).
By raising the bargaining power of agricultural labor, the act’s passage has led to higher farm wages, greater purchasing power for the rural poor, and lower distress migration.
And sustained government investment in public health is reflected in steady improvement in India’s infant mortality rate, maternal mortality rate, and life expectancy.
These measures cost money, but they also enable the poor to break free of poverty.
When government policies keep India’s telecom rates among the lowest in the world, it ensures that the poor can have access to a technology that increases their autonomy.
When the government promotes food security, it is part of a bold effort to strengthen agriculture, which has led to record-high production of food grains.
At the same time, economic reform has not been abandoned.
Controversial budget provisions that had earlier deterred investors are being reviewed.
The decision to permit foreign direct investment in multi-brand retail and civil aviation has been pursued, even at the cost of losing a recalcitrant coalition ally.
Subsidies on diesel and cooking gas have been reduced in the face of vociferous opposition.
Pension reforms have been passed, and insurance reforms are on the anvil.
India has suffered, like most developing countries, from declining foreign investment, poor export performance, and a depreciating currency.
But even pessimistic estimates project 5% growth in the coming fiscal year, and a good monsoon should ensure a bumper harvest.
The measures that India should take to get its economic narrative back on track are the stuff of heated debate among economists and pundits.
But for the aam aadmi – the common man in whose name every party claims to speak – these debates pale in significance beside the major steps taken to build a social safety net in a country where everyone had been expected to fend for himself.
Cynics say the new measures are motivated by political considerations alone: the next general election is due by May 2014.
Before it was passed, one wit joked that the Food Security Bill meant “food for the poor, security for the ruling party, and the bill for the taxpayer.”
But it should be no surprise in a democracy that the government should pursue policies that are popular with a majority of voters.
The fiscal costs of such measures are high, but the average Indian is better off now than he or she was nine years ago.
Any government would feel vindicated by that record.
India’s Censored Fight Back
NEW DELHI – Go to see a movie in India nowadays, and despite the elaborate musical numbers and extravagant sets, you may well find the content pretty bland.
The reason is simple: the industry is reeling under severe censorship.
This flies in the face of India’s democratic tradition – and it needs to stop.
Censorship has a peculiar status in India.
When it comes to news media, print or broadcast, censorship is utterly unacceptable, even unthinkable.
Yet all films produced by India’s prolific film industry must be reviewed and approved by the Central Board of Film Certification, which has the authority to demand that scenes be cut or language changed before a film can be screened publicly.
The discrepancy is a matter of elitism.
Decades ago, the supposed guardians of India’s public morals decided that those with the education and good taste to read a newspaper can handle its contents, but ordinary people seeking diversion must be protected from the pernicious effects of the “wrong” kinds of entertainment.
To be sure, violence often makes it past the censors.
But sexuality is another story.
While images of nudity appear in urban glossy magazines to titillate the bourgeoisie, city-based censors make sure that villagers do not see a woman’s bare breast on a movie screen.
Until recently, not even a kiss could appear in a Bollywood movie; instead, as the man and woman tilted their heads toward each other, the camera would pan to two birds pecking or two flowers brushing together.
Other perceived threats to Indian culture include offensive language, gay themes, and unconventional views, especially on socially and politically sensitive topics.
Sentiments that we take for granted in the opinion pages of newspapers rarely find their way into Bollywood blockbusters.
Even on television, entertainment is subject to rules that don’t apply to news.
A fashion show, for example, would be rigorously reviewed to ensure that no non-conformist attire that shocks the sensibilities of Indian culture’s custodians makes it on screen.
Fashion channels have been taken off the air for showing models in revealing clothes.
India’s film industry has long suffered stoically under the pressure of the paternalistic censors.
But it has never had it so bad as it does under the current chief censor, Pahlaj Nihalani.
To get an idea of the scale of the Nihalani-led review board’s moral policing, a kiss in the James Bond movie Spectre was deemed too long (and therefore trimmed).
A sex scene in the superhero hit Deadpool got the same treatment.
Nihalani went so far as to declare that engaging in a long kiss “means you want to do sex in your house with your door open, and show to people the way you are doing sex.”
Needless to say, that comment attracted considerable derision.
Gay themes have also met with Nihalani’s disapproval, with the film Aligarh, about the persecution of a gay professor, receiving an “A” rating, which restricted the film to adults, despite the lack of nudity or sex.
The board demanded that the word “lesbian” be removed from another film.
Last month, Nihalni’s reign of cultural terror came to a head, with the review board demanding 72 cuts from the big-budget Bollywood film Udta Punjab (“Flying Punjab”), a gritty tale centered on the drug culture that is prevalent in the eponymous northwestern Indian state.
That decision was, it seems, entirely political.
Punjab is controlled by India’s governing Bharatiya Janata Party, in alliance with a powerful regional party, the Shiromani Akali Dal, neither of which was pleased by the film’s portrayal of the state they rule.
And, unsurprisingly, the cuts largely targeted scenes and dialogue highlighting the government’s failure to curb – and some politicians’ complicity in promoting – Punjab’s widespread drug abuse.
To add insult to injury, the censors asked the filmmakers to remove all 94 references to Punjab in the film, including from its title.
“All the characters are negative,” Nihalani reportedly said.
But when he declared that the film would “hurt the whole community,” what he really meant was that it would hurt the BJP and its allies.
(Nihalani, a BJP appointee, had made a campaign video for Prime Minister Narendra Modi.)
The fact that the cuts would have gutted the film – as if Woody Allen were forced to remove Barcelona from Vicky Cristina Barcelona – was apparently irrelevant.
But Nihalani failed to reckon with Udta Punjab’s feisty producer, Anurag Kashyap, a luminary of Bollywood’s avant-garde.
Kashyap launched a Twitter attack on Nihalani, calling him a “dictatorial man” and an “oligarch” – and not stopping there.
“I always wondered what it felt like to live in North Korea,” Kashyap tweeted.
“Now I don’t even need to catch a plane.”
Kashyap continued his resistance offline, taking the almost unprecedented step of suing the review board – and winning.
The Mumbai High Court ordered that the film be shown with only one scene cut.
It was promptly released, and has since broken all of India’s box-office records.
The offensive by Kashyap may have fired up an already frustrated film industry, which is united in wanting Nihalani gone.
Even one of Nihalani’s fellow review-board members, the filmmaker Ashoke Pandit, accused him of undermining the body’s credibility and even of threatening to “Talibanize” the industry.
But even if Nihalani is ousted, and the review board goes back to its old ways, India will still be a modern democracy engaged in the thoroughly undemocratic practice of limiting freedom of speech, if only in the film industry.
A government-appointed committee recently recommended that the board be confined to certification (or issuing audience ratings), with the power to censor content only in rare circumstances.
The recommendations should be adopted (though the report’s approval of full bans of films by the board is unacceptable).
The practice of film censorship is yet another relic of a bygone colonial era, the values of which Indians have too readily internalized.
Nearly seven decades after independence, Indians must recognize that our democracy is mature enough to end censorship.
Breaking Down India’s Internal Barriers
NEW DELHI – Of the many economic reforms crying out for immediate implementation in India, the most obvious is the long-pending Goods and Services Tax.
So why have India’s politicians failed to enact it?
The need for a GST is virtually indisputable.
As the billionaire Steve Forbes recently wrote in his eponymous magazine, “Outsiders are amazed that much of India resembles pre-revolutionary France, with many internal barriers standing in the way of economic efficiency and growth.”
He then pointed out that a GST is critical to enabling India, like the United States, to reap the benefits of its continent-size domestic market, as it would replace the “stifling hodgepodge of local taxes” that amount to “internal tariffs on the movement of goods.”
Indeed, India has a bewildering array of subnational taxes.
For example, taxes on commerce among India’s states require checkpoints at their borders, with long queues of trucks awaiting clearance.
As a result, shipping freight across the country is a logistical nightmare.
Sales taxes vary, and are augmented by “octroi” taxes on cross-border shipments of goods destined for local consumption.
Whereas the European Union is 28 sovereign countries with one common market, the Indian Union is one sovereign country with 29 separate markets.
Making matters worse, India’s multiple taxes and tax authorities create more opportunities for corruption and tax-avoidance.
A national GST would eliminate these problems.
For businesses, particularly those that have to transport goods across the country, the GST would be a boon.
It is estimated that the GST’s passage would add 1-2% to India’s GDP instantly.
So what is holding up the GST’s implementation?
In short, politics.
The GST was first introduced seven years ago by the Congress-led government in power at the time.
But it was delayed because of the fierce opposition of Narendra Modi, then-Chief Minister of the western state of Gujarat.
When Modi became Prime Minister last year, he and his Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) suddenly recognized the virtues of a GST, embracing the bill with great fanfare, but also with important amendments.
Pandering to BJP governments in Gujarat and Maharashtra, which claimed that, as “producer” states, they would lose out from a GST, Modi revised the bill to grant states the right to levy an additional 1% tax on outgoing goods.
And yet the bill already provides for states to be compensated for five years for any loss of revenue from the application of GST.
The change – a breathtaking act of petty politics – controverts the very spirit and intent of the GST.
If states were levying individual taxes on top of the GST, the national market would again be divided and distorted, with checkpoints returning on state frontiers to assess the value of the goods on their way out.
In short, India would be back to square one.
It gets worse.
In another act of political appeasement, the BJP government has introduced a number of exemptions.
By omitting alcohol, tobacco, petroleum products, and electricity – which together account for more than a quarter of all tax receipts – the government is significantly diluting the GST’s potential impact on the national economy.
Moreover, the BJP government has increased so many other taxes (which it simply should have eliminated) that the National Institute of Public Finance and Policy estimates that the GST would have to amount to as much as 27% to prevent revenue loss.
Far from reviving the economy, such a rate would cripple it.
Overall, the current government’s gutted version of the GST would, by some estimates, have no measurable effect on GDP at all.
The Congress party, now in opposition, refuses to support the adoption of the GST bill until the more effective version is restored.
It wants to abolish the extra 1% tax levied by the states and bring all kinds of goods within the GST’s ambit.
In order to reduce incentives for avoidance and thus augment revenues, Congress also wants to cap the GST at 18%.
And, to ensure fairness, it seeks the restoration of the GST Disputes Settlement Authority provided for in the original bill, so that the GST council administering the tax would not rule on its own decisions.
There are a few more minor objections, but these are the core issues holding up the adoption of the GST.
Instead of addressing these legitimate problems, Modi is accusing Congress of unconstructive opposition by thwarting reforms that it had once advocated.
But Congress will not back down, insisting that it will not allow the bill to pass through the upper house of parliament, where the BJP does not have a majority, until the government accepts the key amendments.
The resulting stalemate means that Modi’s plan to roll out the new tax at the start of the next fiscal year, on April 1, 2016, is probably dead in the water.
Some will see in this contretemps proof of the age-old argument that India’s democracy is an obstacle to development.
After all, it was democracy – specifically, the pressure to maintain adequate support – that led the Modi government to hollow out the GST concept.
And it is democracy – that is, the need to secure adequate support for the bill in parliament – that is enabling Congress to block any further progress until Modi relents.
These kinds of problems do not arise in top-down autocracies like China and Singapore.
Nonetheless, India is right to organize itself this way.
Its system of governance rests on the belief that an integrated process of bargaining, disagreement, reflection, and compromise – not top-down unchallenged decision-making – is the most effective route to wise, fair, and successful policymaking.
The GST bill that eventually emerges from this standoff will be better for having gone through these detailed, if time-consuming, debates.
When it is finally adopted, the chances that it will transform the Indian economy for the better are high.
India’s Economic Hotspots
MUMBAI – India’s economy could soon be on the move again.
The new government is re-establishing fiscal discipline and energizing the bureaucracy, fueling optimism that rising business confidence will re-activate investment, particularly in infrastructure.
But India’s overall growth prospects conceal a patchwork of economic opportunities that exist within states, districts, cities, and even towns – opportunities that companies can uncover only with careful research.
This acceleration would place India among the world’s fastest-growing large economies and increase the number of Indian consumers who can afford discretionary items from 27 million in 2012 to 89 million in 2025.
But the potential is far from uniform.
According to a new report, more than half of India’s GDP growth between now and 2025 will come from just eight states (Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, and Uttarakhand), home to just 31% of the country’s population.
Along with four dynamic city-states (New Delhi, Goa, Chandigarh, and Pondicherry), these states will be home to 50 million consumers, or 57% of the country’s middle-class households.
Indeed, per capita GDP in India’s highest-performing regions could grow to twice the national level.
This reflects several factors, including rapid urbanization, sustained investment in skills and infrastructure, and a shift from agriculture to industries such as automotive components, petrochemicals, pharmaceuticals, financial, and IT-enabled services.
By 2025, the economies of these regions will resemble those of middle-income countries.
Maharashtra’s consumer market of 128 million will wield purchasing power similar to that now seen in Brazil.
We have identified 49 such high-growth clusters, located in 183 districts nationwide.
In 2012, these areas accounted for half of India’s population, 70% of its GDP, and 71% of consumers.
They are also home to 250 of India’s 450 cities with populations above 100,000.
Interestingly, one-third of these clusters can be found in states that have delivered low to medium economic performance, or are located close to smaller, lesser-known towns in better-performing states.
The Nellore cluster in Andhra Pradesh, for example, has paddy, tobacco, groundnut, mango, and sugarcane farms.
The Bikaner cluster in Rajasthan is rich in oilseed and the quarrying and production of Makarana marble and limestone.
The more diversified Aurangabad cluster, in Maharashtra, is home to some of India’s largest seed companies, an active automotive, pharmaceutical, and sugar-manufacturing industry, and a tourism hub that includes the Ajanta and Ellora caves.
The location of these lesser-known clusters underscores the point that investors, seeking low-cost real estate and a skilled workforce, should look more carefully at India’s economic geography when deciding where to place their operations.
These locations could eventually become knowledge-based industry or services hubs, similar to those of large Indian cities such as Bengaluru, Hyderabad, and Pune – only cheaper.
As they continue to develop, India’s dynamic economic clusters will themselves need to invest in modern sanitation and water systems, education and health, airports, railways, and road links.
As such, they offer investors opportunities in many sectors, including consumer goods, financial services, housing, and infrastructure.
Given their structural advantages – including proximity to large urban centers for some – these clusters could generate some of the best returns on investment anywhere in India.
Companies hoping to catch India’s next growth wave might want to consider areas that seldom feature on investment lists, but that might offer better value than marquee destinations.
Maintaining Growth in India
MUMBAI – The global economy’s slowdown has not spared India.
Sustaining the growth that it needs to continue to lift millions of people out of poverty will require rethinking its economic-policy approach.
If India is to succeed, it will have to deepen regional and domestic demand, strengthen its macroeconomic institutions, and join in the fight for an open global system.
Diminished expectations abroad should not lead India to lower its ambitions.
Fulfilling these ambitions will require efficiency-boosting investments, particularly in infrastructure.
Every corner of the country should be linked to domestic and international markets through roads, railways, ports, and airports.
Inputs, such as energy, minerals, and water, must be made available at competitive prices.
The country should be linked to broader markets through mobile devices and broadband, and access to finance must be made easier, especially for those who traditionally have been excluded.
Plans to achieve these goals are being developed; they must now be implemented.
Moreover, human capital must be improved.
This presupposes higher investment in health care, nutrition, and sanitation, so that India’s citizens are healthy and able; education tailored to developing skills that are valued in the labor market; and the creation of jobs in firms that have an incentive to invest in training.
Achieving all of this requires that the bureaucracy focus on serving the economy, rather than – as has too often been the case – vice versa.
Promisingly, the political leadership has affirmed its belief in “minimum government, maximum governance.”
Fueling growth through domestic demand will have to be carefully managed.
As a country that does not belong to any power bloc, India cannot afford to put itself in the position of needing multilateral support – a trap into which even developed countries, like Portugal and Spain, have fallen.
There is the risk of overstimulation, with fiscal deficits fueling large current-account deficits and debts, which suddenly become unsustainable when money gets tight.
The few emerging economies that have avoided booms and busts have done so by adhering to sound policy frameworks.
Fiscal prudence is essential.
Whether India needs more institutions to control deficits and monitor the quality of its budgets is a question worthy of discussion.
A number of countries have independent organs that pronounce on budgets.
These bodies are especially important in providing budgetary estimates, particularly for unfunded long-term liabilities.
As the experience of developed countries has shown, long-term fiscal commitments, such as universal pensions and health care, can be easy to make, but difficult to fulfill.
On the monetary side, the Reserve Bank of India should focus on keeping inflation low and stable, ensuring optimal conditions for growth.
As it focuses on inflation, however, the RBI must recognize that emerging markets are not as resilient as industrial economies.
They are more fragile, and their households’ economic buffers and safety nets are thinner.
Disinflation, when necessary, cannot be as steep.
The RBI will also have to pay attention to financial stability.
This is normally a secondary objective, but it may become central if the economy enters a low-inflation credit and asset-price boom.
It will be important to remember that the central bank’s role is not to boost stock prices, but to ensure that the economy’s underlying fundamentals and its financial system enable sustainable growth.
India will run a current-account deficit for the foreseeable future, which means that it will need net foreign financing.
The most stable form of financing, foreign direct investment, has the additional benefit of bringing in new technologies and methods.
But India should not be railroaded into compromising its interests to attract FDI.
For example, India’s requirements for patenting a medicine are perfectly reasonable, regardless of what the international drug companies say.
But India must ensure that its policies are transparent, and that contractual disputes, especially over taxation, are quickly resolved.
Efforts to ensure this have already begun.
Finally, as a country that does not export vital natural resources and is dependent on substantial commodity imports, India needs an open, competitive, vibrant system of international trade and finance.
India’s energy security, for example, depends not on owning oil assets in remote fragile countries, but on ensuring that the global oil market works well and is not disrupted.
Strong, independent, multilateral institutions that can play the role of impartial arbiter in facilitating international economic transactions are in India’s interest.
For now, the international monetary system remains dominated by the frameworks implemented by developed countries.
Though this is slowly starting to change, there is a growing need for a rapid overhaul.
As developed countries struggle with slow growth and large debt burdens, their interest in an open global system can no longer be taken for granted.
Indeed, their policymakers’ attention is likely to turn inward amid growing demands for protectionist measures.
Responsibility for keeping the global economy open may thus fall on emerging countries like India.
That is why these countries must press for quotas and management reforms in multilateral institutions and inject new agendas, new ideas, and new thinking into the global arena.
India can no longer simply object to proposals by developed countries; it must put its own proposals on the table.
Our research departments, universities, and think tanks have to generate ideas that India’s representatives can use.
India can continue to thrive if it invests in physical and human capital and pursues prudent fiscal and monetary policies.
But this strategy also requires India to embrace its place on the international stage.
India’s Sacred Cows and Unholy Politics
NEW DELHI – The headlines out of India in recent weeks have often made sickening reading.
Startlingly, the central protagonist in most of these stories is that most peaceable and innocent of animals, the cow.
A Muslim man was beaten to death by a mob in a small town an hour from New Delhi in response to rumors that he had slaughtered and eaten a cow, sacred to Hindus.
Another man died after being attacked by villagers who believed he was involved in cattle smuggling.
And a trucker was killed in Udhampur, in the state of Jammu and Kashmir, over rumors that he had been involved in cow killings.
Three deaths in just three weeks.
Public officials, too, are getting in on the action.
After the chief minister of Karnataka, a member of the opposition Congress party, recently declared that he would eat beef, a politician from the ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) threatened to behead him if he follows through.
Likewise, 20 policemen stormed the canteen of the Kerala state government’s outpost in Delhi, because it advertised a “beef fry” on its menu.
Kashmiri legislator Engineer Abdul Rashid had his face smeared with black paint for throwing a “beef party.”
And the chief minister of BJP-ruled Haryana, Manohar Lal Khattar, declared that Muslims living in India would have to give up eating beef.
To be sure, there have been plenty of other repellent stories of intolerance that have nothing to do with cows.
Two children from the impoverished Dalit community recently burned to death in their own home, in an arson attack by upper-caste goons.
A prominent public intellectual had his face blackened with ink for organizing a book release for a former Pakistani foreign minister in Mumbai.
And Hindu zealots stormed a Cricket Control Board meeting to disrupt discussion of a possible India-Pakistan cricket series (which now seems unlikely to take place).
But none of these incidents has acquired the toxicity of the assaults on those deemed insufficiently respectful of the holy cow.
Indeed, a signal illiberal achievement of Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s BJP regime has been the revival of the cow as an instrument of political warfare.
And the recent spate of attacks reveals a serious problem with the country’s trajectory under Modi.
Of course, the cow has long had a place in Indian politics: the country’s constitution includes a provision explicitly urging a gradual movement toward full prohibition of cow slaughter – a ban that has already been implemented in most states.
For most of India’s existence, however, the default approach has essentially been “live and let live” – make your own choice about beef, and let others do the same.
I am a vegetarian myself, but I have never considered it my business what others eat.
Where beef was legally available, it was consumed not just by Muslims and other minorities, but also by many poorer Hindus, who could not afford other kinds of meat.
But that response was possible only so long as relatively liberal or moderate officials (including an earlier BJP-led coalition government) were in power.
The Modi government does not fit that description.
Instead, it is full of leaders who seem more concerned with what goes into other people’s mouths than what comes out of their own.
Modi’s government has given voice to a peculiar kind of Hindu chauvinism, one that embraces activist assertion of a narrowly constructed version of the faith.
It cannot be described as “fundamentalism,” for Hinduism is a religion singularly devoid of fundamentals: it lacks a single sacred book, a single version of divinity, and even the equivalent of a Sabbath day.
In fact, Hindus who eat beef can, like those who abjure it, find support for their beliefs in the religion’s ancient texts and scripture.
Rather, what Modi’s government has fostered is a form of subjective intolerance, with supporters, emboldened by the BJP’s absolute majority, imposing their particular view of what India should be, regardless of whom it hurts.
The state of Maharashtra’s recent beef ban – which threatens the livelihoods of a million Muslim butchers and truckers – would not have been imposed by any previous state government or supported by any previous administration in New Delhi.
Such bans are not really about beef, but about freedom.
Indians have generally felt free to be themselves, within their dynamic and diverse society.
It is that freedom that the BJP’s representatives and followers are challenging today.
The good news is that a backlash has already emerged.
Nearly 40 distinguished authors and poets have returned their prestigious Sahitya Akademi (Literary Academy) awards to protest the silence of the academy and other government bodies following the killing of three intellectuals by suspected Hindu hardliners.
A top scientist has now followed suit, returning his Padma Bhushan, the government’s third-highest honor.
As these gestures highlight the explosion of Hindu chauvinism, support for Modi has begun to erode.
When Modi came to power, foreign observers lauded him as just the kind of decisive, business-minded economic reformer that India needed in order to fulfill its massive potential.
During the election campaign, he seemed to recognize that achieving good economic results was more important than the politics of religious identity for which his party had been notorious.
To the dismay of many, Modi has underperformed economically, while the zealots have run amok, hijacking his development agenda.
And his silence in the face of it all confirms what many in India had feared: his economic sloganeering was merely a ploy to secure power.
Now that power is becoming a tool of the unsavory agenda pursued by the Hindu chauvinists who enabled his rise.
As a result, divisive politics is now overwhelming constructive economic policymaking.
Unfortunately for India, this is likely to continue until the cows come home.
India, Iran, and the Case for Double Standards
All but lost in the controversies surrounding Iraq and Iran is a major initiative involving a third “I” country: India.
Sometime this year, the United States Congress is likely to vote on the “US-India Civil Nuclear Cooperation Initiative,” signed when President Bush visited New Delhi in March.
The agreement paves the way for American exports of nuclear technologies and materials for use in India’s civilian nuclear program.
In return, India has pledged to open 14 of its 22 existing and planned nuclear power reactors, as well as all future civil reactors, to international inspection.
The agreement matters for at least two reasons.
First, the accord symbolizes the arrival of a new geopolitical relationship between the world’s two largest democracies that were often on opposite sides during the Cold War.
This development may be of historic importance if it not only leads to a deepening of US-Indian technical and economic ties, but also strengthens their ability to tackle regional and global challenges, ranging from the proliferation of nuclear weapons to climate change.
But the proposed US-India accord is attracting notice for a second, and far more controversial, reason: concern that it could weaken, rather than advance, efforts to resist the further worldwide spread of nuclear weapons.
Critics charge that the agreement undermines the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) by letting India have its cake (nuclear weapons) and eat it, too (by giving it access to nuclear fuel and technology).
They allege that the agreement creates a double standard, according to which only some countries may possess nuclear weapons.
To be fair, the critics are right, at least in part.
There is a double standard at work.
But there is nothing new about that.
The NPT, some four decades old, is based on a double standard that gives only five countries – China, France, Russia, the United Kingdom, and the US – the right (for how long is not defined) to possess nuclear weapons.
Moreover, the world seems to have learned to tolerate the reality that three other countries – Israel, India, and Pakistan – also possess nuclear weapons.
Where the critics of the proposed US-India accord are wrong is in charging that such a double standard is wrong when it comes to India because it opens the way for countries such as North Korea and Iran to develop nuclear weapons.
Not all countries are equal.
India is a democracy.
Transparency and the rule of law are the norm, and its government does all it can to fight terrorism.
There is no reason to believe that India will promote the spread of nuclear fuel, technology, or weapons to any other party or country; on the contrary, it is committed to preventing this.
This is not true of either North Korea or Iran.
The former is arguably the most closed, tyrannical, and militarized society in the world, with a long record of irresponsible exports of dangerous technologies.
Iran offers official support to terrorists and its president has threatened publicly to destroy Israel.
The world has good reason to be far less tolerant of what North Korea or Iran do in the realm of nuclear weapons and to reject their calls for equal treatment with India.
Indeed, if there is a danger in the proposed US-India accord, it is the possibility that either North Korea or Iran might conclude that it is only a matter of time before the world comes to accept their nuclear status.
Here the US and others must disabuse them.
The message seems to have gotten through to North Korea; we have seen no nuclear weapons test, despite its probable ability to so.
China, the transit route for most of what goes enters and leaves North Korea, understands that were North Korea to cross this red line, it would risk US military reprisal and possibly lead Japan and/or South Korea to rethink their nuclear weapons policy.
None of these outcomes is in China’s strategic interest.