On June 16th, the rebellious oligarch Mikhail Khodorkovsky and his comrade-in-arms Platon Lebedev finally began to face the judges of the Meshchansky district court.
No doubt, this case will attract the Russian and international press.
Hearings began just the day before Khodorkovsky's trial opened in another case that is no less significant.
But this case is not about oligarchs trying to interfere in politics; it is about a group of artists and curators whose professional activities have unexpectedly turned into a political hot potato.
In January 2003, a gang of Russian Orthodox activists destroyed an exhibition in the Sakharov Museum and Public Center called "Caution!
Religion."
The organizers of the exhibition stated that they wanted to attract attention to the new role of religious institutions in Russian life.
But the Orthodox fundamentalists found the art blasphemous and offensive, and some trashed the exhibition.
Last December, prosecutors charged two Sakharov Museum officials and three of the exhibition's organizers with inciting religious hatred. They now face prison terms of up to five years.
The vandals, meanwhile, were hailed by church officials as heroes. All charges against them were dismissed.
The vandals had influential protectors.
All of them were members of the congregation of St. Nicholas in Pyzhi, whose archpriest, Alexander Shargunov, is a well-known radical fundamentalist.
In 1997, he established a movement called the Social Committee For the Moral Revival of the Fatherland.
In 2001, the committee's Web site carried instructions on how to vandalize "immoral" billboards by splashing paint on them.
Followers promptly destroyed 150 billboards in Moscow.
A group of well-known nationalist intellectuals, including film director Nikita Mikhalkov, artist Ilya Glazunov, and writers Valentin Rasputin and Vasily Belov, weighed in with a petition calling the exhibition a "new stage of conscious Satanism."
They wrote that Russia's enemies were bent on humiliating the powerless "Russian people, their objects of worship, and their historic values."
Who, precisely, were these powerful enemies?
The intellectuals didn't identify them, but the fascist political party Pamyat (Memory) did not hesitate.
The appeal posted on its Web site called on Orthodox Christians to protect "our Lord Jesus Christ" from "Yid-degenerates," using the most derogatory Russian term for Jews.
These alarming events in the art world have taken place against a background of rising nationalism and Orthodox assertiveness in Russia.
The Orthodox Church has acquired enormous political clout in recent years, and few politicians risk offending it.
The Sakharov Museum exhibition was subjected to a vituperative media campaign, and the matter was almost immediately taken up in the Duma, where nationalist deputies vied with each other to denounce the artists and laud the vandals.
In February 2003, the Duma passed a decree stating that the Sakharov museum exhibition's purpose was to incite religious hatred and to insult believers and the Orthodox Church.
The state prosecutor was ordered to take action against the organizers, with 265 of 267 deputies approving the measure.
In April 2003, the Duma voted to toughen the law against inciting religious hatred by adding prison terms of up to five years for offenders.
In December 2003, Sakharov Museum director Yuri Samodurov was charged with actions "leading to the provocation of hatred and enmity."
If found guilty, he could be sentenced to up to five years in prison.
Church officials are not calling for that harsh a penalty.
In March 2004, the Moscow Patriarchy's External Relations Department issued a statement that surprised everyone. It asserted, in effect, that the Sakharov Museum exhibition organizers had committed an administrative rather than a criminal offense.
The difference is that administrative offenses are punished with fines, at most, not prison terms.
Such a softening of the church's position was probably the result of the public outcry in Russia's liberal press.
Yet the pogrom at the Sakharov museum provoked a chain reaction of similar attacks on contemporary art by Orthodox fundamentalists whom the church has been unable to control.
Anna Alchuk, an artist who participated in the exhibition in the Sakaharov Center and was later charged, said she had read all 14 volumes of evidence collected by the prosecutor, and that 11 volumes consisted entirely of letters from "working people" expressing outrage at the show and demanding that the artists be punished.
Almost none of the writers had seen the exhibition - most had signed form letters.
"The events around the exhibition discredit the Russian Orthodox Church, just as the fatwah condemning Salman Rushdie to death discredited Islam," said Elena Bonner, Andrei Sakharov's widow.
The outcome of the court hearings is difficult to predict, but it will answer the question of whether Russians have lost the freedom artistic self-expression that they gained after communism's fall.
Disillusion with "democracy Boris Yeltsin-style" has pushed President Vladimir Putin to search for an ideology based on nationalism and the glorification of the state. Putin calls it "managed pluralism."
As we can now see, the Social Committee For the Moral Revival of the Fatherland wants to be among the managers.
Russia and the Kosovo Card
TBILISI – Look before you leap is as sound a principle in foreign policy as it is in life.
Yet, once again, the Bush administration is preparing to leap into the unknown.
Even though lack of foresight is universally viewed as a leading cause of its Iraq debacle, the United States (with British backing probable) is now preparing to recognize Kosovo’s independence unilaterally – irrespective of the consequences for Europe and the world.
Kosovo has been administered since 1999 by a United Nations mission guarded by NATO troops, although it remains formally a part of Serbia.
Why the rush to give Kosovo independence?
Many serious disputes have gone unresolved for decades.
The Kashmir question has lingered since 1947, the Turkish occupation of Northern Cyprus since 1974, and Israel’s occupation of the West Bank from 1967.
Yet no one is suggesting that unilateral solutions be imposed in these potential flashpoints.
Nevertheless, the US – and most European Union members – argue that Kosovo’s situation is sui generis and will set no legally binding international precedent.
But Russia sees things very differently.
Indeed, it may seek to use this precedent to re-establish its authority over the nations and territories that were once part of the Soviet Union.
Spain and Cyprus with their worries over secessionist-minded regions, are worried by any possible precedent.
Romania fears the fallout from Kosovo’s unilaterally gaining independence on neighboring Moldova.
The worry is that Russia will unilaterally recognize the breakaway Moldovan territory of Transdnistria, which Russian troops and criminal gangs have been propping up for 16 years.
Ukraine – the great prize in Russia’s bid to recapture its former sphere of influence – is also deeply anxious.
It fears that Russia will encourage separatist tendencies in Crimea, where the ethnic Russian population forms a majority.
(Crimea was ceded to Ukraine by Nikita Khrushchev only in 1954).
Russia may decide to abuse the Kosovo precedent further to divide Ukraine’s population between Russian speakers and Ukrainian speakers.
But the biggest risks posed by unilateral recognition of Kosovo’s independence are in the South Caucasus, a region that abuts the tinderbox of today’s Middle East.
Here, there is a real danger that Russia may recognize breakaway regions in the South Caucasus, – and back them more strongly than it does now.
Even before Vladimir Putin became Russia’s president, the Kremlin was making mischief in Georgia, issuing Russian passports to citizens of Abkhazia (the largest breakaway region) and pouring money into its economy.
Russia’s supposed “peacekeeping troops” in Abkhazia and South Ossetia, Georgia’s other secession-minded region, have in fact protected their rebel governments.
Russia has also been enforcing a complete trade embargo on Georgia in the hope of weakening the resolve of its pro-Western president, Mikhail Saakashvili.
Should Russia recognize Abkhazia’s independence, Saakashvili might be tempted to respond militarily to prevent his country from unraveling.
Renewed conflict in Abkhazia would not only bring the risk of open warfare with Russia, but strain relations with Armenia, as there are near to 50,000 Armenians in Abkhazia who support the breakaway government.
Another risk in the South Caucasus is that Russia (with Armenian support) will recognize Nagorno-Karabakh’s self-proclaimed independence from Azerbaijan.
Nagorno-Karabakh, historically Armenian, endured a bloody secessionist war between1988 and 1994, with 30,000 killed and 14% of Azerbaijan’s territory occupied by Russian-backed Armenian forces.
Since then, oil has fuelled an Azeri military buildup.
So the government in Baku is far more prepared to respond to renewed warfare than it was in the 1990’s.
Moreover, it has neighboring Turkey on its side.
Turkey is already enforcing a punitive economic embargo on Armenia, including closure of its border.
The conflicts in Transdnistria and the South Caucasus are usually called “frozen conflicts,” because not much has happened since they began in the early 1990’s.
Any unilateral move to give Kosovo its independence is likely to unfreeze them – fast and bloodily.
And such potential bloodshed on Russia’s border may give Vladimir Putin the pretext he may desire to extend his rule beyond its constitutionally mandated end next March.
A New Cold War Order?
MOSCOW – As 2014 comes to a close, it is clear that the European and international political structures that have been in place since 1989 have failed the test of time.
Indeed, the world has not witnessed such a tense and fraught environment since the Cold War’s end, with bloodshed in Europe and the Middle East coming against the backdrop of a breakdown in dialogue between major powers.
The world, it appears, is on the brink of Cold War II.
Some even say that it has already begun.
Meanwhile, the world’s key international body – the United Nations Security Council – is scarcely playing a role or taking concrete action to stop the fires and the killing.
Why has it not acted with determination to evaluate the situation and develop a program of joint action?
One primary reason, I believe, is that the trust created by hard work and mutual effort in ending the Cold War has collapsed.
Without such trust, peaceful international relations in today’s globalized world are inconceivable.
But this trust was not undermined only yesterday; it happened long before.
The roots of the current situation lie in the events of the 1990s.
The Cold War’s end was supposed to mark the beginning of a path toward a new Europe and a safer world order.
But, instead of building new European security institutions and pursuing the demilitarization of Europe – as promised in NATO’s London Declaration of 1990 – the West, particularly the United States, declared victory.
Euphoria and triumphalism went to Western leaders’ heads.
Taking advantage of Russia’s weaknesses and the lack of a counterweight, they refused to heed warnings against claiming a monopoly on global leadership.
The events of the past few months are the consequences of shortsightedly seeking to impose one’s will while ignoring the interests of one’s partners.
A shortlist of such faits accomplis would include NATO enlargement, the war in Yugoslavia (particularly Kosovo), missile-defense plans, Iraq, Libya, and Syria.
As a result, what was a blister has now turned into a festering wound.
And it is Europe that suffers the most.
Instead of leading change in a globalizing world, the continent has turned into an arena of political upheaval, competition for spheres of influence, and military conflict.
The consequence, inevitably, is that Europe is weakening at a time when other centers of power and influence are strengthening.
If this continues, Europe will lose its influence in world affairs and gradually become irrelevant.
Fortunately, the experience of the 1980s suggests a way forward.
The international situation at the time was no less dangerous than it is today.
Yet we succeeded in ameliorating it – not just normalizing relations but ending the Cold War confrontation itself.
This was achieved primarily through dialogue.
But the key to dialogue is political will and setting the right priorities.
Today, the foremost priority should be dialogue itself: a renewal of the ability to interact, listen to, and hear one another.
Promising signs are now emerging, though initial efforts have yielded only modest and fragile results: the Minsk agreement on a ceasefire and military disengagement in Ukraine; the trilateral gas agreement concluded by Russia, Ukraine, and the European Union; and a halt to the escalation of mutual sanctions.
We must continue to move from polemics and mutual accusations to a search for points of convergence and a gradual lifting of sanctions, which are damaging to both sides.
As a first step, the so-called personal sanctions that affect political figures and parliamentarians should be lifted, so that they can rejoin the process of seeking mutually acceptable solutions.
One area for interaction could be to help Ukraine overcome the consequences of fratricidal war and rebuild the affected regions.
The same is true of global challenges and pan-European security.
Today’s key global problems – terrorism and extremism, poverty and inequality, climate change, migration, and epidemics – are worsening daily.
And, as different as they are, they share one key feature: none has a military solution.
Yet political mechanisms to solve these problems are lacking or dysfunctional, even as the continuing global crisis should persuade us to seek – without delay – a new model that can ensure political, economic, and environmental sustainability.
As for Europe’s security, only a pan-European solution is viable.
Indeed, attempts to address the problem by enlarging NATO or through an EU defense policy are counterproductive.
We need more inclusive institutions and mechanisms that provide assurances and guarantees to all.
Here the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, to which a lot of hope was attached, has so far not been up to the task.
That does not mean that the OSCE should be replaced with something new – especially since it has now assumed important control functions in Ukraine.
But the OSCE is, I would say, an edifice that requires major repairs and some new construction.
Years ago, former German Foreign Minister Hans Dietrich Genscher, former US National Security Adviser Brent Scowcroft, and other policymakers proposed creating a Security Council, or Directorate, for Europe.
I agreed with their approach.
Along the same lines, during Russian Prime Minister Dmitri Medvedev’s presidency, he called for the creation of a mechanism for European preventive diplomacy and mandatory consultations in the event of a threat to any state’s security.
Had such a mechanism been established, the worst events in Ukraine could have been averted.
Political leaders are, of course, to blame for filing away these and other “European ideas” in the archives.
But the blame must also be shared with the entire European political class, civil-society institutions, and the media.
Though I am, by nature, an optimist, I have to admit that it is very difficult not to be pessimistic as 2014 comes to a close.
Nonetheless, we must not submit to panic and despair, or allow ourselves to be drawn into a vortex of negative inertia.
The bitter experience of the past few months must be transformed into the will to reengage in dialogue and cooperation.
This is my appeal to our leaders, and to all of us, for 2015: Let us think, propose, and act together.
A New Sino-Russian Alliance?
CAMBRIDGE – Some analysts believe that 2014 ushered in a new era of Cold War-style geopolitics.
Russian President Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine and annexation of Crimea was met with heavy economic sanctions from Europe and the United States, weakening Russia’s ties with the West and leaving the Kremlin eager to strengthen ties with China.
The question is whether Russia will manage to build a real alliance with the People’s Republic.
At first glance, it seems plausible.
Indeed, traditional balance-of-power theory suggests that US primacy in power resources should be offset by a Sino-Russian partnership.
Perhaps more convincing, there seems to be historical precedent for such a partnership.
In the 1950s, China and the Soviet Union were allied against the US.
After US President Richard Nixon’s opening to China in l972, the balance shifted, with the US and China cooperating to limit what they viewed as a dangerous rise in the Soviet Union’s power.
With the collapse of the Soviet Union, that de facto US-China alliance ended, and a China-Russia rapprochement began.
In 1992, the two countries declared that they were pursuing a “constructive partnership”; in 1996, they progressed toward a “strategic partnership”; and in 2001, they signed a treaty of “friendship and cooperation.”
In recent years, China and Russia have cooperated closely in the UN Security Council and taken similar positions on Internet regulation.
They have used diplomatic frameworks – such as the BRICS group of major emerging countries (along with Brazil, India, and South Africa) and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (along with Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan) – to coordinate positions.
And Putin has struck up a good working relationship with Chinese President Xi Jinping, based on their shared domestic illiberalism and desire to counter American ideology and influence.
Their economic relationship, too, seems to be progressing.
Last May, shortly after the annexation of Crimea, Russia announced a $400 billion deal to supply 38 billion cubic meters (bcm) of gas to China annually for 30 years, beginning in 2019.
The contract, between Russia’s state-owned energy giant Gazprom and the China National Petroleum Corporation, entails the construction of a 2,500-mile gas pipeline to China’s Heilongjiang province (where, incidentally, the two countries nearly went to war a few decades ago).
Though the exact price remains secret, it appears that Russia offered major concessions, after nearly a decade of negotiations, to ensure the deal’s success.
Moreover, in November, Gazprom announced a framework agreement to deliver an additional 30 bcm of gas to China’s Xingjiang Province from western Siberia for 30 years via another new pipeline.
If the “eastern” and “western” pipelines are completed as planned, the 68 bcm they deliver to China annually would dwarf the 40 bcm that Russia exports to its current largest customer, Germany.
This may seem to portend an ever-deepening bilateral relationship.
But there is a hitch: the gas deals amplify a significant bilateral trade imbalance, with Russia supplying raw materials to China and importing Chinese manufactures.
And the gas deals do not make up for Russia’s lost access to the Western technology that it needs to develop frontier Arctic fields and become an energy superpower, not just China’s gas station.
In fact, the problems with a Sino-Russian alliance run even deeper.
With its economic, military, and demographic heft – China generates considerable unease in Russia.
Consider the demographic situation in eastern Siberia, where six million Russians live across the border from up to 120 million Chinese.
Furthermore, Russia’s economic and military power has been in decline, whereas China’s has exploded.
Anxiety over China’s conventional military superiority probably motivated, at least partly, Russia’s 2009 announcement of a new military doctrine explicitly reserving the right to first use of nuclear weapons – a stance that resembles America’s Cold War force posture, aimed at deterring superior conventional Soviet forces in Europe.
These imbalances suggest that Russia would resist a tight military alliance with China, even as the two countries pursue mutually beneficial tactical diplomatic coordination.
China’s willingness to cooperate with Russia also has its limits.
After all, China’s development strategy depends on its continued integration into the world economy – and, specifically, reliable access to American markets and technology.
The Chinese Communist Party’s legitimacy depends on strong economic growth, and it will not risk this strategy for some “authoritarian alliance” with Russia.
Even within multilateral forums, the relationship between Russia and China is far from balanced.
Given that China’s economy is larger than the other four BRICS economies combined, the group’s initiatives – including its new development bank – are likely to reflect a disproportionate Chinese influence.
And though the Shanghai Cooperation Organization has facilitated some diplomatic coordination, China and Russia remain locked in a struggle for influence in Central Asia.
The Sino-Russian alliance in the twentieth century was a product of China’s weakness following World War II and at the beginning of the Cold War – and, even then, it lasted little more than a decade.
Today’s China is strong, and unlikely to get too close to a Russia whose decline has been accelerated by its leader’s poor judgment.
In short, when it comes to a Sino-Russian alliance challenging the West, history is not likely to repeat itself.
Contrary to Putin’s hopes, 2014 will not be remembered as a year of successful Russian foreign policy.
The Challenge of Russia’s Decline
CAMBRIDGE – As Europe debates whether to maintain its sanctions regime against Russia, the Kremlin’s policy of aggression toward Ukraine continues unabated.
Russia is in long-term decline, but it still poses a very real threat to the international order in Europe and beyond.
Indeed, Russia’s decline may make it even more dangerous.
Make no mistake: what is happening in Ukraine is Russian aggression.
President Vladimir Putin’s pretense that Russian troops were not participating in the fighting was all but shattered recently, when a Russian fighter in Donetsk confirmed to the BBC Russian service that they are playing a decisive role in rebel advances.
Russian officers, he reported, directly command large military operations in eastern Ukraine, including the siege and capture of the important transport center of Debaltseve in February.
But the threat posed by Russia extends far beyond Ukraine.
After all, Russia is the one country with enough missiles and nuclear warheads to destroy the US.
As its economic and geopolitical influence has waned, so has its willingness to consider renouncing its nuclear status.
Indeed, not only has it revived the Cold War-era tactic of sending military aircraft unannounced into airspace over the Baltic countries and the North Sea; it has also made veiled nuclear threats against countries like Denmark.
Weapons are not Russia’s only strength.
The country also benefits from its enormous size, vast natural resources, and educated population, including a multitude of skilled scientists and engineers.
But Russia faces serious challenges.
It remains a “one-crop economy,” with energy accounting for two-thirds of its exports.
And its population is shrinking – not least because the average man in Russia dies at age 65, a full decade earlier than in other developed countries.
Though liberalizing reforms could cure Russia’s ailments, such an agenda is unlikely to be embraced in a corruption-plagued country with an emphatically illiberal leadership.
Putin, after all, has sought to promote a neo-Slavophile identity defined above all by suspicion of Western cultural and intellectual influence.
Instead of developing a strategy for Russia’s long-term recovery, Putin has adopted a reactive and opportunistic approach – one that can sometimes succeed, but only in the short term – to cope with domestic insecurity, perceived external threats, and the weakness of neighbors.
He has waged unconventional war in the West, while pursuing closer ties with the East, raising the likelihood that Russia will end up acting as China’s junior partner, without access to the Western capital, technology, and contacts that it needs to reverse its decline.
But Russia’s problem is not just Putin.
Though Putin has cultivated nationalism in Russia – according to Harvard University’s Timothy Colton, at a recent meeting of the Valdai Discussion Club, Putin called himself the country’s “biggest nationalist” – he found fertile ground to plow.
Given that other high-level figures – for example, Dmitry Rogozin, who last October endorsed a book calling for the return of Alaska – are also highly nationalistic, a successor to Putin would probably not be liberal.
The recent assassination of former Deputy Prime Minister and opposition leader Boris Nemtsov reinforces this assumption.
So Russia seems doomed to continue its decline – an outcome that should be no cause for celebration in the West.
States in decline – think of the Austro-Hungarian Empire in 1914 – tend to become less risk-averse and thus much more dangerous.
In any case, a thriving Russia has more to offer the international community in the long run.
In the meantime, the US and Europe face a policy dilemma.
On one hand, it is important to resist Putin’s challenge to the fundamental principle that states should not use force to violate one another’s territorial integrity.
Though sanctions are unlikely to change Crimea’s status or lead to withdrawal of Russian soldiers from Ukraine, they have upheld that principle, by showing that it cannot be violated with impunity.
On the other hand, it is important not to isolate Russia completely, given shared interests with the US and Europe relating to nuclear security and non-proliferation, terrorism, space, the Artic, and Iran and Afghanistan.
No one will benefit from a new Cold War.
Reconciling these objectives will not be easy, especially given Ukraine’s continuing crisis.
At February’s Munich Security Conference, many US senators advocated arming Ukraine – an approach that could exacerbate the situation, given Putin’s conventional military dominance there.
With German leaders, including Chancellor Angela Merkel, opposed to this approach, pursuing it would also split the West, strengthening Putin’s hand further.
Others at the conference argued that the West should change the game by expelling Russia from SWIFT, the international framework for clearing bank payments.
But critics point out that this would damage SWIFT and the West, whose banks would lose the hundreds of billions of dollars that Russia currently owes them.
For their part, the Russians have warned informally that this would be “the real nuclear option.”
Designing and implementing a strategy that constrains Putin’s revisionist behavior, while ensuring Russia’s long-term international engagement, is one of the most important challenges facing the US and its allies today.
For now, the policy consensus seems to be to maintain sanctions, help bolster Ukraine’s economy, and continue to strengthen NATO (an outcome that Putin undoubtedly did not intend).
Beyond that, what happens is largely up to Putin.
Putting Putin in his Place
BRUSSELS – At least six crises are testing Europe’s stability: regional chaos caused primarily by the war in Syria, a potential British exit from the European Union, an influx of refugees on a scale not seen since World War II, unresolved financial challenges, Russian expansionism, and the return of nationalism to mainstream politics.
Russian President Vladimir Putin has intentionally exacerbated at least four of these crises.
In addition to his adventurism in Ukraine, he has injected obstructionism into European politics through his support of populist and euroskeptic parties, escalated the conflict in the Middle East by his military intervention in Syria and, as a consequence, aggravated the refugee crisis.
The EU must wake up to the threat Putin poses and begin to counter his aggression.
The nationalism sweeping Europe, indeed, has been partly fueled by Russian funding of far-right political parties, the rise of which has prevented Europe from crafting a collective response to the refugee crisis.
In the United Kingdom, the pro-Putin UK Independence Party is nipping at Prime Minister David Cameron’s heels, so the government refuses to commit to taking Britain’s fair share of refugees.
Similarly, Sweden has closed its borders, in response to the far-right Sweden Democrats’ rapidly rising poll numbers.
This sorry calculus is being carried out across the continent.
Meanwhile, Putin has derailed the international community’s efforts to negotiate a political solution to the conflict in Syria, the root cause of the refugee crisis.
Russia’s support of the Syrian government’s assault on Aleppo has stymied the peace process, which depends on the cooperation of global players, regional powers, and the moderate opposition forces that Putin is bombing.
On February 15, at least 50 people, including women and children, were killed by missile attacks on schools and hospitals in northern Syria, according to the United Nations.
The French government called the attacks “war crimes” – and rightly so.
Russia denied involvement, but fragments of Russian-built missiles were found at the scene.
The aid group Médecins Sans Frontières has said that only Russia or the Syrian government could possibly be responsible for the attacks.
Moreover, the fighting around Aleppo has displaced about 50,000 people, according to the International Committee of the Red Cross.
Many of these desperate Syrians – consisting primarily of those who could not afford to flee sooner – will head toward Turkey and onward to Europe.
Russia is dropping bombs even as Putin claims to be supporting a ceasefire.
Clearly, he cannot be taken at his word, as the Kremlin’s record in Ukraine also shows.
With the United States distracted by its presidential election campaign, Europe’s leaders find themselves huddled alone, with the Russian bear gnawing at the door.
It is time for immediate action.
First, European governments must put a swift halt to Russian financing of political parties within Europe.
If necessary, the US Central Intelligence Agency should be asked to assist in identifying how these funds are transferred.
The effort must be sustained until the pipelines funneling Russian cash to European parties are shut down for good.
Second, the EU must prepare to impose enhanced economic sanctions on Russia.
UN Security Council Resolution 2254, which provides a road map for the Syrian peace process, obliges all actors, including Russia, to stop indiscriminate attacks against civilians.
If Russia fails to abide by its commitments, these sanctions should be triggered.
Third, the EU must work with Turkey and other regional actors to establish safe havens on the Turkish-Syrian border, where refugees from Aleppo and elsewhere are headed.
While this would entail some risk, there are no credible alternatives.
Finally, Europe must stop making Putin’s job easier for him and implement a collective approach to the influx of refugees.
As part of an emergency response, a European frontier force and coast guard must be established and charged with helping Greece manage its border, as well as saving lives and processing new arrivals.
At the same time, EU funds must be used to improve conditions in the refugee camps in Turkey, Jordan, and elsewhere, to provide their residents with at least some hope of being able to meet their basic needs.
And, yes, European leaders must agree to take a fair share of those in need, by allowing refugees to apply for asylum in the EU directly from the countries in which they are currently residing.
George Soros was right when he recently argued that the biggest long-term threat to the stability of the EU is Russia.
But he was wrong to suggest that the EU is set to buckle and collapse under the weight of the multiple crises it faces.
It is time for Europe to assert itself, harness its economic might, and use it to put Putin in his place.
Putin’s Winning Streak
CHENGDU – Since Russia invaded Crimea last summer, the West has relied on a strategy of economic sanctions and international isolation to compel the Kremlin to withdraw its support for the rebels in eastern Ukraine.
But Russian President Vladimir Putin’s recent series of diplomatic successes – in particular, with Iran, North Korea, and Pakistan – has all but negated the effectiveness of this strategy.
To be sure, Putin was shunned at last month’s G-20 summit in Brisbane, with the Australian hosts and Western leaders berating him in bilateral meetings for violating Ukraine’s sovereignty and creating a rift with its Western economic partners.
Putin left early, proclaiming that Western sanctions were harming European economies more than Russia anyway.
But Putin was not deterred, proceeding to launch major initiatives with countries of vital security concern to the West, boosting Russia’s diplomatic leverage and enhancing its value to its most important, albeit still coy, partner: China.
As Putin declared in a recent interview, his government is committed to ensuring that Russia does not become internationally isolated behind a new Iron Curtain.
With Iran, the Kremlin has launched a joint bank that will enable Russian companies to expand bilateral trade without using Western currencies or worrying about Western financial sanctions.
The deal builds on this summer’s “oil-for-goods” agreement, whereby Russia will exchange its own goods for as many as 500,000 barrels of Iranian oil daily.
Bilateral security cooperation also progressed, with the Russian Navy holding a three-day maritime exercise with Iran’s Caspian fleet.
So far, efforts to weaken Russia’s relationship with Iran – not to mention its other major Middle Eastern ally, Syria – have repeatedly failed.
In October, Russia’s United Nations ambassador, Vitaly Churkin, faulted the US-led initiative against the Islamic State for its failure to involve Iran and Syria, which he called “logical allies in the fight against terrorism in the region.”
Moreover, Russia has signed an agreement that will ensure that its own firms remain the dominant foreign players in Iran’s civil nuclear-energy sector, even if a nuclear deal leads Western powers to ease sanctions on Iran.
Under the terms of the deal, Russia will help Iran construct at least two more nuclear reactors – and as many as eight.
The new plants, like Iran’s first Russian-built reactor at Bushehr, would be subject to International Atomic Energy Agency monitoring and use only Russian-made nuclear fuel, which would be returned to Russia for storage to prevent Iran from developing dangerous nuclear technologies.
Still, Russia has agreed to train more Iranian nuclear experts, and may allow Iran to manufacture some of the components of the uranium fuel rods itself.
In North Korea, Russian diplomacy has made even more progress.
Last summer, Putin forgave 90% of North Korea’s $11 billion Soviet-era debt, and announced that the remaining $1 billion could be used as part of a “debt-for-aid” program, funding health, energy, and educational projects in the country.
This opened the way for new development projects and increased bilateral and regional investment.
For example, Russian firms are planning to help rebuild North Korea’s railway network in exchange for access to the country’s undeveloped mineral resources.
Russia has hosted more senior North Korean leaders than any other country this year, including the reclusive leader Kim Jong-un’s special envoy, Choe Ryong-hae, a senior official in the ruling Workers’ Party, who spent an entire week meeting with Russian political and economic leaders.
In fact, Russian officials have indicated that Putin is prepared to become the first head of state to meet with Kim, who is eager to deepen ties with Russia to compensate for his faltering relationship with China.
November was also a good month for Russian diplomacy in Pakistan, with Sergei Shoigu becoming the first Russian defense minister to visit the country since 1969.
During his stay in Islamabad, Shoigu and Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif signed an unprecedented agreement that could establish a framework for joint military exercises, reciprocal port visits, and a wide-ranging dialogue on regional security issues.
Moreover, the Kremlin has relaxed its opposition to Pakistan’s full membership in the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, along with China, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan.
And the Russian government has agreed to sell Pakistan as many as 20 Mil Mi-35 “Hind E” heavy attack helicopters to aid in the fight against terrorism and drug trafficking.
Until now, Russia has refrained from selling advanced military equipment to Pakistan, in order to avoid damaging its relationship with India.
But, as Russia’s strategic relationship with India has strengthened, including through a joint mechanism to purchase and deliver Russian weapons to the Afghan government, Putin has gained the confidence to bolster cooperation with Pakistan.
The announcement of several more bilateral deals during Putin’s recent visit to India suggests that his confidence was merited.
All of this could augment Russia’s leverage with China, which has an interest in increasing its influence over Iran, North Korea, and Pakistan, but has subtly sought to exploit Russia’s isolation.
Russia’s vast natural-gas wealth also appeals to China, which drove a hard bargain in the two countries’ recently concluded 30-year, $400 billion gas-supply deal.
By giving key regional actors alternatives to bowing to US pressure on issues like nuclear non-proliferation and the fight against terrorism, Russia’s recent maneuvers have complicated American diplomatic efforts considerably.
Though Putin has not broken from the international consensus on these issues, he could block progress in order to compel the US to change its policies toward Ukraine, Syria, and other countries.
As a result, a dangerous global security situation could become even more so.
Why Russia’s Economy Will Not Collapse
GENEVA – The rapid depreciation of the ruble, despite a dramatic – and seemingly desperate – late-night interest-rate hike by the Central Bank of Russia (CBR) last month, has raised the specter of Russia’s economic meltdown in 1998.
Indeed, the West has sought to animate that specter in its ongoing confrontation with Russian President Vladimir Putin.
But, though Russia’s economy is undoubtedly in trouble, a full-blown collapse is unlikely.
Oil and gas account for more than 60% of Russia’s exports; other primary commodities make up much of the rest.
Given this, the recent sharp decline in world oil prices obviously represents a major shock – large enough, when combined with the effect of increasingly strict Western sanctions – to provoke a sizeable recession.
To make matters worse, commodity prices are expected to remain low for some time.
In that case, the income loss would become much more than a temporary setback.
But Russia is no economic basket-case-in-waiting – at least not yet.
The situation today is very different from that in 1998, when Russia was running twin fiscal and current-account deficits.
Russia needed to borrow, and it was borrowing heavily in foreign currency.
This meant that as the ruble depreciated, Russia’s debts rose.
Eventually, default became inevitable.
By contrast, in recent years, Russia has enjoyed a sizeable budget surplus, and public debt is below 20% of GDP.
It is true that income from oil and gas, which represents the bulk of government revenues, has been halved when measured in dollars.
But the Russian currency has fallen by about the same percentage, meaning that the government’s income in rubles remains approximately unchanged.
Similarly, Russia’s current-account balance has been mostly in surplus in recent years.
Gross public and private external debt is below 40% of GDP, and much of it is denominated in rubles.
The sharp fall in export income is rapidly changing the situation, but Russia is starting from a comfortable position.
To panic would be premature.
The ruble’s free fall has been driven mainly by capital outflows.
Russia’s famous oligarchs have already stashed most of their wealth abroad, but they retain significant savings at home.
As the economic and political situation deteriorates, they are most likely pulling more money out.
Small savers have every reason to switch into foreign currency as well.
This has put the CBR in a challenging position.
The ruble’s depreciation is bound to fuel inflation, already around 11% and far above the CBR’s 5% target.
In that context, raising the interest rate sharply makes sense, and officials may be hoping that the hike will stem capital outflows – despite the risk that the decision, if interpreted as being aimed at defending the currency, could have the opposite effect.
The trouble is that the higher interest rates are bound to deepen Russia’s economic downturn, making the CBR an easy scapegoat.
Never mind that the central bank is not responsible for Russia’s troubles – the run on the ruble, the recession, and the flare-up of inflation – and that using interest rates to prevent capital outflows always fails.
Embattled politicians can be counted on to point the finger.
The threat to Putin is clear.
He risks the fate of his predecessor, Boris Yeltsin, who presided during a period of unusually low oil prices.
Until now, Putin has been lucky, coming to power just as oil prices started to rise.
Most Russian citizens credit him with two decades of rising living standards, following decades of decline.
Putin’s decision not to implement the unpopular reforms that would have created a strong non-oil export sector may have been bad for the economy’s long-term health, but it has allowed him to maintain widespread public support.
His economic good fortune, combined with his readiness to stand up to the West, has created a misguided impression in Russia that the country is, once again, a world power.
Many in the United States and Europe believe that ratcheting up economic pressure on Russia will help drive Putin out.
This is an enormously dangerous gamble.
As Russian living standards decline, Putin’s only viable strategy to remain in power will be an aggressive international posture.
Foreign military adventures, after all, are most appealing when the domestic front is on fire.
None of this means that the West should bow and forsake its principles.
But it does mean that the time has come for a diplomatic approach that does not depend on the prospect of Russia’s economic collapse.
Russia’s Ephemeral Middle East Alliances
NEW YORK – The United States has lost two asymmetric wars in modern times: one against the Vietcong in Vietnam, and another against terrorist groups in the Middle East.
When its defeat became apparent in Vietnam, the US pivoted away from the region, leaving the victor to clean up the mess – and, ultimately, to join the ASEAN structure of security and cooperation.
The Middle East has been more difficult to leave behind, despite America’s best efforts, and remains wracked by conflict and shaken by shifting alliances.
For Russian President Vladimir Putin, the region’s turmoil represents an important opportunity.
By gaining a foothold in the Middle East, he hopes to revive Russia’s long-faded image as a world power, restore its status as America’s main geopolitical foil, and gain bargaining chips with which to promote his more immediate concerns in Russia’s near-abroad.
Success in these areas, he calculates, will cement his power and popular support at home.
On these fronts, Putin has made some progress, embedding Russia firmly within Middle Eastern politics.
But Russia’s position in the region remains fragile.
It is not currently capable of helping to establish – much less oversee – a new regional order, for a simple reason: the Kremlin lacks true allies there.
To be sure, Russia does wield substantial influence in Syria (a Cold War legacy), and shared interests have enabled Putin to bond with some regional powers.
But no Middle Eastern country today is a captive client of the Kremlin in the way that, say, Egypt was during the Cold War.
Russia’s recent cooperation with Iran, for example, is no sign of a budding friendship, as some experts believe.
Though both governments support Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, and Iran allowed Russia to use its airbases in the fight against ISIS, Iran is keen to retain its role as Assad’s main patron.
Moreover, Iran would not want to jeopardize its efforts to rebuild its economic relations with the West – an objective that underpinned the international agreement on its nuclear program concluded in 2015.
As for Russia, cooperating with Iran in a broader Middle East policy would destroy its standing among the region’s Sunni powers.
Meanwhile, countries like Turkey and Egypt are largely engaging with Russia in a kind of protest, amid tensions with their closer allies in the West.
Turkey, for example, was, until recently, at loggerheads with Russia over Turkey’s downing of a Russian warplane near its border with Syria last November.
But Turkey has now reconciled with Russia, and wound down its role in the fight against Assad, Russia’s main partner in the region.
This does not reflect some realization on Turkey’s part that Russia is a critical actor worth keeping on side.
Rather, Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan wants Russia’s help in Turkey’s fight against Syria’s Kurds, whose nationalist ambitions Erdoğan is eager to contain, lest they incite separatism among Kurds in Turkey.
Erdoğan is frustrated with Turkey’s Western allies, which have done his country no favors on the Kurdish issue.
On the contrary, the Syrian Kurds are America’s most efficient partner in the war against the Islamic State (ISIS), which both Turkey and Russia are also fighting.
Arming the Kurdish militias, as US President Barack Obama is now considering, would push Erdoğan further into Putin’s arms.
Given Putin’s interest in dividing NATO, he would warmly welcome such an outcome.
There are also economic incentives for the Russia-Turkey pairing, including about $30 billion in annual trade.
Russia, weighed down by low commodity prices and persistent Western sanctions, is also eager to boost energy exports to Turkey.
But the potential of the Turkey-Russia relationship is limited.
For starters, whatever tensions exist between Erdoğan and the West, the Turkish president knows better than to risk the security guarantees afforded by NATO.
Given this, any collusion with Putin in Syria is likely to be shallow and short-lived.
Russia, for its part, has no interest in bolstering Turkey’s position as a major regional power.
After all, it has long competed with Turkey for influence in the Black Sea and the Middle East.
Russia’s reaction to Turkey’s rapprochement with its erstwhile ally Israel – with which it had been at loggerheads since 2010, when Israeli commandos stormed a Turkish ship that was part of a flotilla seeking to deliver aid to Gaza – reflects this rivalry.
At first, Russia’s reaction was lukewarm, largely because, given Israel’s role as a rising energy power in the Middle East, the reconciliation jeopardized Russia’s plans of boosting energy exports to Turkey.
But Putin subsequently endorsed the move, not because he likes the idea of Turkey, which also has close ties with Hamas, gaining a greater say in the affairs of Gaza, but because he wanted to present Russia as a key regional actor.
Indeed, Putin next announced that he would be willing to host peace talks between Israel and Palestine.
As he surely knows, Russia lacks the leverage, economic and otherwise, that would be needed to produce a deal.
But he seems to have decided that the suggestion would reinforce the view of Russia as a regional player rivaling in importance Turkey or even the US.
The truth, however, is that the US remains indispensable to any solution to the Israel-Palestine conflict.
More broadly, the urge for Western-style freedom and democracy remains the dream of the Middle East’s younger generations; it has merely been obscured by the autocratic response to the Arab Spring uprisings, and the subsequent proliferation of radical Islamists.
The US is now focused on a rising Asia.
Instead of employing the weapons of war, it is using the tools of globalization – in particular, trade and investment linkages – to help shape the region’s development.
When the Middle East is ready, the US will surely do the same there.
And when that happens, whatever isolated military footholds and ephemeral alliances Russia has maintained will quickly be lost.
Like the Soviet Union in Central and Eastern Europe, today’s Russia has no place in a region undergoing socioeconomic reform and democratic transitions.
Getting to Yes with Putin
PARIS – In the showdown with Russia over Ukraine, the weaknesses and divisions in European policy have been as encouraging for Russian President Vladimir Putin as America’s hesitant approach to Syria was.
If Europe is to act responsibly, three key concepts should define its policy toward Russia: firmness, clarity, and a willingness to find an acceptable compromise.
Without firmness, nothing is possible.
To be sure, Europe and the US made mistakes in the aftermath of the Soviet Union’s collapse.
The US, in particular, can be accused of acting arrogantly and unnecessarily humiliating Russia.
But the Soviet Union’s demise was the result of a long string of missteps, beginning with pre-Soviet Russia’s inability to come to terms with modernity.
Post-Soviet Russian leaders have yet to confront those failures.
By adopting an aggressive, revisionist stance, Putin has made a historic and strategic mistake.
Putin’s model should have been Peter the Great.
His ambition should have been to tie Russia’s future to that of Europe.
Instead, Putin turned for inspiration to Nicholas I, the most reactionary of Russia’s nineteenth-century czars.
The failure of Putin’s policy can be seen by comparing Russia with China.
The gap between the two – in terms of each country’s behavior and achievements – has never been greater.
At the G-20 Summit in Brisbane this month, China played its hand masterfully, highlighting its goodwill, particularly on the issue of climate change.
Russia, meanwhile, appeared self-isolated – pathetically so, given the impact of its seclusion on its economy.
Russia’s stock exchange is collapsing.
Its currency has lost 30% of its value.
The price of oil and gas – the mainstay of the Kremlin’s budget – has fallen by more than 25%.
In contrast to China, Russia’s economy depends heavily on its energy resources, leaving it vulnerable when global energy markets head south.
Putin’s only strength lies in Europe’s weakness and irresolution.
So Europe’s goal must be to set clear limits on Putin’s ambitions.
Whether he is seeking to weaken Ukraine or to enlarge Russia’s territory, Europe’s response must be firm.
Putin must be convinced that he cannot do either without paying a cost that Russians will not willingly bear.
Given the Kremlin’s ambiguous behavior – if not its deliberate policy of deceit – it seems obvious that France should not deliver a Mistral-class assault warship, which it previously agreed to sell to Russia.
It is far better for France to be perceived as an unreliable arms dealer than as an irresponsible strategic actor, caring only about its mercantile interests.
Firmness must be accompanied by clarity.
Putin is no longer the leader he was when he came to power in 2000, nor even the leader he was in 2008, when he grabbed pieces of Georgia by force.
Under his increasingly centralized and authoritarian rule, he has combined ultra-religious nationalism with Soviet-era tactics and practices.
It is a dangerous and volatile mix, relying on principles and methods that led Russia’s empires – Czarist and Soviet – to failure and ruin.
Firmness and clarity are indispensable.
But they are not sufficient to formulate a coherent European policy.
The goal cannot be simply to contain Russia.
A compromise must be reached.
True, Russia lacks the means to achieve Putin’s aims.
But the rest of the world nonetheless needs the Kremlin’s cooperation and goodwill as it pursues efforts such as the containment of Iran’s nuclear ambitions and the fight against the Islamic State.
As long as Russia remains intent on achieving unacceptable outcomes, accompanied by hints of nuclear saber rattling, reaching a compromise will be difficult.
Putin is far from an ideal partner with whom to attempt to reconcile the two key principles of international law: the right of a people to self-determination and the sanctity of national borders.
But doing so is not impossible.
Any compromise will have to address the future of Crimea, now under Russian domination, and maintain Ukraine’s independence.
Putin must be convinced that by gaining Crimea, he has lost Ukraine.
For their part, Ukrainian leaders will have to make a commitment not to join NATO, in exchange for Russia’s acceptance of Ukraine’s right to enter the European Union.
The progressive removal of sanctions would follow, allowing all parties to concentrate their energies on other priorities, be they economic or strategic.
In its negotiations with Russia, Europe holds the stronger cards.
But as long as they are poorly played, as they have been up to now, Putin will continue to win every hand.
A War of Values With Russia
COPENHAGEN – Russian authorities recently threatened to aim nuclear missiles at Danish warships if Denmark joins NATO’s missile-defense system.
This was obviously an outrageous threat against a country that has no intention of attacking Russia.
But it also reflects a more fundamental factor in the Kremlin’s foreign policy: desperation to maintain Russia’s strategic influence at a time of unprecedented challenges to its authority.
Of course, Russia’s leaders know very well that NATO’s missile defense is not directed at their country.
When I served as NATO Secretary General from 2009 to 2014, we repeatedly emphasized that the purpose was to defend Alliance members from threats originating outside the Euro-Atlantic area.
Anyone with even a rudimentary knowledge of physics and engineering – two subjects at which Russians excel – can see that the system is designed to do precisely that.
Russia’s nuclear threats, against Denmark and others, are the hallmark of a weak country in economic, demographic and political decline.
NATO has not aggressively victimized Russia, as Kremlin propaganda claims.
The current conflict between Russia and the West – centered on the crisis in Ukraine – is, at its core, a clash of values.
Recall how the Ukrainian conflict began: Tens of thousands of Ukrainian citizens from all parts of society demanded, in overwhelmingly peaceful demonstrations, an association agreement with the European Union.
No one was calling for a pogrom against Ukraine’s Russian-speakers, despite the Kremlin’s claims to the contrary.
And NATO membership was not part of the deal.
Yet Russia reacted swiftly and harshly.
Long before violence engulfed the protests, Russian officials began accusing the demonstrators of being neo-Nazis, radicals, and provocateurs.
As soon as Ukraine’s then-President Viktor Yanukovych fled Kyiv, Russian President Vladimir Putin began engineering the annexation of Crimea.
This was not only a gross violation of international law; it also directly contravened Russia’s oft-stated insistence that no country has the right to ensure its security at the expense of another.
The Ukrainian demonstrators marched against their government, not Russia’s.
Indeed, the notion that Ukraine could pose a military threat to Russia is nothing short of absurd.
Even if Ukraine were a NATO member, a war of aggression against Russia would be an absurd scenario, as it would not serve any of the allies’ interests.
For Russia, the threat posed by the Ukrainian protesters was existential.
In demanding change, freedom, and democracy – right on Russia’s doorstep, no less – the protesters challenged Putin’s model of “sovereign democracy,” in which the president eliminates all opposition, restricts media freedom, and then tells citizens that they can choose their leaders.
The Kremlin feared that if the Ukrainians got what they wanted, Russians might be inspired to follow their example.
That is why Russia’s leaders have been so keen to label Ukraine’s leaders as Russophobes and fascists.
It is why they have portrayed the Baltic States for years as dysfunctional oppressors of their Russian citizens.
And it is why they are now portraying the EU as decadent, immoral, and corrupt.
The Kremlin is trying desperately to convince Russians that liberal democracy is bad, and that life under Putin is good.
That requires not only spreading damaging lies at home, but also sowing violence and instability among its neighbors.
In the face of a massive Russian propaganda assault, the West must continue to stand up for Ukraine, as well as for Georgia and NATO members like Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania.
Despite whatever pain we incur, we must maintain – and, if necessary, deepen – sanctions against Russia and reinforce NATO’s front line.
And we must face up to the reality that, at long last, we may have to pay for our defense.
The West’s greatest strength is democracy; it is what has enabled us to secure peace for two generations and bring an end to communist rule in Europe almost without a shot being fired.
Though liberal democracy is far from perfect, it remains the best defense against extremism and intolerance – and the most powerful facilitator of human progress.
If the West allows Russia to attack its neighbors simply because they might inspire Russians to seek reform, it will send the message that democratic values are not worth defending.
It will undermine the West’s role as a model of prosperity and freedom that societies worldwide hope to emulate.
And it will eliminate not only the West’s remaining moral authority, but also the sense of purpose that animates NATO.
Such an approach would expose the West to attacks by Putin and similar aggressors.
And it would be a slap in the face to all of the courageous men and women worldwide who risk their lives every day in the pursuit of freedom and democracy.
No one should be fooled by the Kremlin’s spin doctors.
The conflict in Ukraine is not about Ukraine. Nor is it about Russia, or even about NATO.
It is about democracy. The West must respond accordingly.
Putin in Denial
WASHINGTON, DC – As 2014 came to a close, an enormous financial crisis erupted in Russia.
World oil prices had fallen by almost half since mid-June, and the ruble plummeted in December, finishing the year down by a similar margin.
Russia’s international reserves have fallen by $135 billion, and inflation has reached double digits.
Things are only going to get worse.
The current oil price will force Russia to cut its imports by half – a move that, together with the continuing rise in inflation, will diminish Russians’ living standards considerably.
Add to that ever-worsening corruption and a severe liquidity freeze, and a financial meltdown, accompanied by an 8-10% decline in output, appears likely.
Russia’s ability to negotiate its current predicament hinges on its powerful president, Vladimir Putin.
But Putin remains unprepared to act; in fact, so far, he has pretended that there is no crisis at all.
In both of his major public appearances in December, Putin referred simply to the “current situation.”
In his New Year greeting, he boasted about the annexation of Crimea and the successful Winter Olympics in Sochi, carefully avoiding any reference to the economy.
But, with the economy in free fall, Putin cannot pretend forever.
And when he finally does acknowledge reality, he will have little room for maneuver.
Of course, Putin could withdraw his troops from eastern Ukraine, thereby spurring the United States and Europe to lift economic sanctions against Russia.
But this would amount to admitting defeat – something that Putin is not prone to do.
Likewise, short of initiating a major war, Putin has few options for driving up oil prices.
Moreover, even before the oil-price collapse, crony capitalism had brought growth to a halt – and any serious effort to change the system would destabilize his power base.
In fact, Putin’s leadership approach seems fundamentally incompatible with any solution to Russia’s current economic woes.
Though accurate and timely statistics on Russia’s economy – needed to guide effective measures to counter the crisis – are readily available to the public online, Putin claims not to use the Internet.
Instead, the journalist Ben Judah reports, Putin receives daily updates on Kremlin politics, domestic affairs, and foreign relations from his three key intelligence agencies.
His actions suggest that he considers economic data to be far less important than security information – perhaps the natural attitude of a kleptocrat.
To be clear, there is no dearth of economic expertise among Russian policymakers.
On the contrary, Russia’s key economic institutions boast competent managers.
The problem is that policymaking is concentrated in the Kremlin, where economic expertise is lacking.
Indeed, the last of the economic heavyweights – all of them holdovers from the 1990s – in Putin’s personal circle was Alexei Kudrin, who resigned as Finance Minister in 2011.
Unlike in the US, none of Russia’s top economic managers sits on the National Security Council.
Putin has usurped authority not just from his more knowledgeable colleagues, but also from the prime minister, who has traditionally served as Russia’s chief economic policymaker.
Indeed, since Putin returned to the presidency in 2012, Prime Minister Dmitri Medvedev has been all but irrelevant.
In short, Putin – who is no economic expert – makes all major economic policy decisions in Russia, delivering orders to top managers of state-owned enterprises and individual ministers in ad hoc, one-on-one meetings.
As a result, Russian economic policymaking is fragmented and dysfunctional.
Nowhere is this lack of coordination more obvious than in the sensitive currency market.
In Russia, unlike in most other countries, the central bank does not retain the exclusive right to intervene.
When the ruble tumbled in December, the finance ministry – which holds almost half of Russia’s foreign reserves, $169 billion, in two sovereign-wealth funds – deemed the central bank’s intervention to be insufficient.
So it announced that it would sell $7 billion from its reserves to boost the ruble – a move that caused the exchange rate to overshoot on the upside.
When the exchange rate plummeted again, the Kremlin urged the five largest state-owned exporting companies to exchange a portion of their assets into rubles, leading to another overshoot, followed by yet another sharp decline.
Clearly, such uncoordinated interventions are exacerbating currency-market turmoil, with the ruble’s value fluctuating by 5% – and as much as 10% – in a single day.
Russia’s fiscal situation, determined by Putin’s arbitrary budget management, is hardly better.
Putin’s priorities are clear: first come the military, the security apparatus, and the state administration; second are the major infrastructure projects from which he and his cronies make their fortunes; social expenditures (primarily pensions), needed to maintain popular support, come last.
Suddenly, oil revenues are no longer sufficient to cover all three.
As hard as the finance ministry may try to balance expenditures and revenues, it lacks the needed political weight.
Last year, the central government delegated more education and health-care expenditures to regional bodies, without allocating more resources – and there was nothing anyone could do about it.
If Putin wants to save Russia’s economy from disaster, he must shift his priorities.
For starters, he must shelve some of the large, long-term infrastructure projects that he has promoted energetically in the last two years.
Though the decision in December to abandon the South Stream gas pipeline is a step in the right direction, it is far from adequate.
Likewise, Putin should follow Finance Minister Anton Siluanov’s sensible recommendation to cut public expenditure, including on social programs and the military, by 10% this year.
But experience suggests that Putin is unlikely to do so.
Russia faces serious – and intensifying – financial problems.
But its biggest problem remains its leader, who continues to deny reality while pursuing policies and projects that will only make the situation worse.
Russia’s Hybrid War Against the West
BRUSSELS – The United States FBI and CIA have both concluded that Russia ran a hacking and disinformation campaign aimed at influencing the US presidential election in Donald Trump’s favor.
We may never know how successful Russia’s cyber operation was, but we do know that the Kremlin got the result it wanted.