She was examining the papers of Thomas Parran, US surgeon-general from 1936-1948, when the Tuskegee research was already in full swing. So, too, she found, was the previously unknown Guatemalan experiment.
For years, Tuskegee has been a byword for ethical abuses in scientific research – to the extent that President Bill Clinton apologized to its surviving “subjects.”
Hard as it may be to believe, as Reverby was to discover, the abuse in Guatemala was even more egregious.
As Reverby put it, “I’d spent nearly two decades explaining that there had been no inoculation at Tuskegee, that while the PHS had used deplorable ethics, they had never infected anyone with syphilis.” That was not true in Guatemala.
There, “the US government’s health service had deliberately infected 427 Guatemalan men and women, prisoners and mental patients, with syphilis.”
The US prosecutors at Nuremberg didn’t know about the Guatemala experiments, so there’s no allegation of deliberate hypocrisy.
But the case is no less troubling for that.
How could the public-health authorities override medicine’s basic ethical rule – “First do no harm”?
Why was informed consent from the research “subjects” considered unnecessary?
Could such a thing happen again?
Most experts believe that the answer to the last question is no – at least not in the same form.
In fact, one should view the Guatemalan study, with its incontrovertible horrors, as an extreme example of the biggest ethical problems in research today.
Now, as then, richer developed countries are able to put pressure on weaker, poorer ones.
A report in 2010 revealed that foreign citizens made up more than three-quarters of all the subjects in clinical trials conducted by US firms and researchers.
The US Food and Drug Administration inspected only 45 of these sites, about 0.7%.
There is no suggestion that Third World patients are deliberately being made ill when research is outsourced – unlike in the Guatemalan case – but that does not attenuate the inherent vulnerability of populations lacking basic medical care or experiencing epidemics.
During a major meningitis epidemic in northern Nigeria in 1996, the drug company Pfizer supplied doctors with the oral antibiotic Trovan, which the firm wanted to test against the most effective known drug, Ceftriaxone, as a “control.”
This procedure is consistent with the general consensus in research ethics that the control group must receive the best-known treatment for comparison.
The Trovan trial nonetheless caused a storm of controversy, for two reasons.
First, even if the trials proved favorable, Trovan was never intended for sale in Africa, but rather for the US and European markets.
Second, the sparsely staffed clinical teams were already facing measles and cholera epidemics as well.
As Jean Hervé Bradol, who was president of Médecins sans Frontières at the time and led its African teams, put it: “It was not a time for a drug trial at all.
Apart from one recommendation – to create a government compensation program for Third World nationals harmed by trials intended to benefit First World subjects – US Presidential Commission for the Study of Bioethical Issues, chaired by Dr. Amy Gutmann, the president of the University of Pennsylvania, did not get much beyond vague notions of community engagement and transparency.
But, with 70% of all drug trials now conducted by private companies, such concepts won’t go very far towards tougher regulation.
And why should government should pay the costs anyway?
Because private companies reap the benefits of the trials that do succeed, they should also shoulder the risks.
Facing Down Mental Illness
DAVOS – Contrary to common perception, mental illness is a problem that is neither new nor unique to the developed world.
What we call schizophrenia and bipolar disorder are recognizable in literature dating back to ancient Greece, and The Anatomy of Melancholy, published in 1621 by the English scholar Robert Burton, remains one of the most astute descriptions of depression.
Today, low- and middle-income countries account for most of the morbidity and 75% of the suicides that result from mental illness.
What is new, and encouraging, is the heightened attention now being given to the problem.
Last year at Davos, I helped launch a new&nbsp;Global Agenda Council on Mental Health, after a study by the World Economic Forum and Harvard School of Public Health projected that the global economic costs of mental illness over the next two decades would exceed the costs of cancer, diabetes, and respiratory ailments combined.
With the stakes so high, the human and economic case for leaders to take mental health seriously is clearly compelling.
As policymakers act, they would be wise to bear in mind that mental disorders are brain disorders.
Too many people dismiss mental illnesses as problems of character or lack of will, rather than recognizing them as serious, often fatal, medical disorders.
The brain is a bodily organ just like any other.
We should no more blame a person for a malfunctioning brain than for a malfunctioning pancreas, liver, or heart.
People with brain disorders deserve exactly the same level and quality of medical care as we expect when confronted with disorders of any other part of the body.
Consider depression, the most common mental illness, which must be distinguished from the sadness, disappointment, or frustration we all experience in our lives.
William Styron’s 1989 memoir, Darkness Visible, rightly calls “depression” a weak word for a debilitating condition that is marked by hopelessness, helplessness, and dread.
In extreme forms, depression can be so disabling that the thought of getting out of bed or making a phone call becomes overwhelming.
Functioning effectively at the workplace can be intensely challenging, which is reflected in the growing recognition of a condition known as “presenteeism,” a variation on “absenteeism”: depressed employees are physically present but mentally absent.
Mental illnesses can often lead to other health problems.
Brain disorders like depression and schizophrenia greatly increase the risk of developing chronic ailments, such as cardiovascular and respiratory diseases.
People with mental illnesses and substance-abuse issues are at increased risk of infectious diseases like HIV/AIDS.
Furthermore, mental disorders have a profound impact on the outcome of other illnesses.
After a heart attack, for example, the prognosis depends on the presence or absence of depression more than on virtually any measure of cardiac function.
That is why health-care policymakers should embrace a simple adage: “no health without mental health.”
Indeed, mental illnesses can be as fatal as physical ones.
Suicide causes more deaths than homicide.
Around 7% of people with major depressive disorder will take their own lives.
Globally, more than 800,000 people kill themselves every year.
The number of people scarred by a loved one’s death is much greater; every suicide has many victims.
Tackling the problem will require innovative approaches.
It is not enough simply to make treatment available.
People with psychotic disorders may deny that they are ill, and those suffering from depression may be too consumed by self-loathing to feel worthy of help.
Even in the developed world, it is estimated that only about half of all people suffering from depression are diagnosed and treated.
According to the World Health Organization, in developing countries, 76-85% of people with severe mental disorders are not treated.
We need sensitive ways to identify those at risk and to help those who are most disabled.
Not everybody with a mental illness needs expensive drugs, hospital care, or even direct access to highly trained psychiatrists.
We may not have the equivalent of a vaccine for measles or a bed net for malaria, but low-cost, highly effective interventions are possible for most people either at risk for, or already suffering from, a mental illness.
In low-resource environments, local residents or family members can be trained to provide brief, effective psychotherapies that treat moderate forms of depression or anxiety.
Phone- or Internet-based therapy can be used as well.
That said, it should be acknowledged that treatments for mental illness remain far from infallible.
Of those who get help, only about half receive the right treatment, and about half of those receiving treatment regress.
The only way to improve these percentages is to deepen our understanding of normal and abnormal brain functioning.
We need research to develop better treatments for brain disorders in general, and for mental illnesses in particular.
Fortunately, some important initiatives launched in the last year are moving us in the right direction.
In April, the United States National Institutes of Health introduced a ten-year&nbsp;BRAIN Initiative, joining similar efforts in the European Union, Israel, Japan, China, Australia, and Canada.
We have also seen unprecedented levels of support from philanthropists.
In the US, for example, $650 million was donated recently to the Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research.
In the United Kingdom, a new charity,&nbsp;MQ, is awarding funds for research on psychological treatments.
Breakthroughs in biomedical research offer hope that cures for brain disorders will be found.
By broadening access to existing treatments and investing in research to develop new therapies, we can aspire to eliminate one of the oldest and most widespread causes of human misery.
The Promise of Bank Mergers
BARCELONA – The banking business has fallen on hard times.
The combination of persistent low interest rates, increasing regulatory compliance costs, and the rise of new competitors taking advantage of financial technologies (fintech for short) has produced, in Europe in particular, excess capacity and low profitability – and a strong temptation to merge.
In a difficult market, mergers – by enabling banks to cut costs, share information-technology platforms, and increase market power, thereby relieving pressure on margins and rebuilding capital – make sense.
And the banks know it.
Witness the recent merger talks between Deutsche Bank and Commerzbank, both of which have faced huge declines in market capitalization.
So a wave of mergers may be on the way.
The question is whether that approach really can solve banks’ problems and benefit society.
To be sure, mergers and acquisitions are not always a matter of escaping trouble.
In fact, M&A activity – both the number and size of transactions – was picking up before the 2008 global financial crisis, including across borders within and beyond the eurozone.
After peaking in 2007, such activity diminished, as domestic restructuring took precedence, particularly in countries such as Greece and Spain, which had to implement difficult adjustment programs.
Moreover, the M&A approach does not always work.
In October 2007, a consortium formed by the Royal Bank of Scotland, Fortis, and Banco Santander acquired ABN AMRO – the world’s biggest bank takeover to date.
RBS and Fortis failed soon after and had to be rescued.
Nonetheless, supervisory bodies favor mergers to save banks in trouble.
Competition authorities tend to be more reluctant, recognizing the danger that large-scale mergers can consolidate an anti-competitive market structure, while creating even more “too big to fail” banks that may cause financial instability in the future.
But they are often overruled or compelled to acquiesce.
The US Department of Justice agreed to the merger between Wells Fargo and Wachovia, among others, soon after the 2008 financial crisis, and the UK Office of Fair Trade was overruled in the merging of HBOS and Lloyds.
Competition is not the only source of merger-related tension among authorities.
There is also friction between national supervisors, who prefer domestic mergers, and supranational supervisors, who prefer cross-border mergers within their jurisdiction (the eurozone, in the European Central Bank’s case).
The benefits of cross-border consolidation are that market power is diluted in a large market, and more diversification is obtained, though these gains come at the price of weakened cost synergies.
From the banks’ perspective, cross-border mergers may potentially be the better option, as long as they occur within a single supervisory framework.
That way, they can benefit from common supervision and resolution.
The eurozone’s new supervisory framework, supervised by the ECB and possessing a common resolution authority, reflects this recognition of the benefits of cross-border mergers.
But Europe lags when it comes to such mergers, owing to a broader lack of financial integration.
Indeed, in the European Union, member countries’ own banks tend to be the dominant players in the domestic market – say, BNP Paribas in France or UniCredit in Italy.
In the United States, by contrast, the same large banks – such as Bank of America, JPMorgan Chase, and Wells Fargo – tend to dominate a large number of different states.
US banks have had more space to diversify.
For European banks – which must navigate vast differences in culture, language, and law in pursuing cross-border mergers – this has been much more difficult, especially because many of them also need to cut overcapacity drastically.
As a result, in the near term, European banks are more likely to pursue domestic – or, at most, regional – consolidation.
For the United Kingdom, which voted in June to “Brexit” the EU, the situation is particularly complicated.
The UK long benefited from an open policy on acquisitions by foreign banks, which allowed, for example, the Spanish Santander Group to bid for Britain’s Abbey National in 2001.
But Brexit will probably move supervision of UK-based banks out of the EU framework, raising the cost of cross-border deals and implying a loss to British consumers.
As the UK banking sector’s competitiveness suffers, the temptation to return to the kind of light-touch regulation that enabled the crisis in the first place could intensify.
As for the rest of Europe’s banks, now might be the time to consider the merger option.
Mergers are no silver bullet, but they could help to alleviate serious problems relatively quickly – though, in the longer term, the banks would still have to tackle the legacy of heavy and rigid structures and rebuild their reputations, with a strong focus on consumer service and fairness.
At the same time, if a merger strategy is to work for the good of society, competition must be preserved.
If incumbents simply continue to get larger, blocking new competitors from entering the market, they will end up facing intrusive regulatory compliance programs and higher capital requirements.
New market entrants would have more flexibility and thus might be able to offer new, more appealing deals to customers.
This is why bank supervision and competition policy must work in tandem to ensure a level playing field.
On one hand, regulations must apply to all firms performing banking functions, including new fintech institutions.
On the other hand, implicit subsidies to too-big-to-fail banks must be dropped.
Bank mergers hold much promise, particularly in Europe.
To realize their potential will require the right policy mix, focused on consumer protection and fair competition.
Europe’s banks and banking authorities will need to step up their game.
The Great Leader Revival
LONDON – Two hundred years have passed since the battle of Waterloo, where Napoleon’s calamitous defeat made such a huge dent in his country’s self-image that General Charles de Gaulle, in his history of the French army, simply omitted it.
Nonetheless, Napoleon, like de Gaulle, would both easily make it onto any list of history’s great leaders – assuming, of course, that one considers “greatness” to be an individual trait.
Marx and Tolstoy would say that there is no such thing as a “great leader.”
For Marx, the class struggle in France created the circumstances in which a “grotesque mediocrity” – that is, Napoleon – was morphed into a hero.
As far as Tolstoy was concerned, Napoleon was not a particularly good general, and was carried to victory by the courage and commitment of all of the individual French soldiers who won the Battle of Borodino.
Whether or not Napoleon was great, the question remains whether any leader could merit that description.
And if so, who?
There seem to be two particularly important criteria for great leadership, both noted by the political philosopher Isaiah Berlin.
First, does the leader recognize which way the winds of history are blowing?
Otto von Bismarck did, as did his fellow German Konrad Adenauer; both, in Bismarck’s memorable phrase, could hear “the rustle of God’s cloak.”
Second, does a leader have important choices to make?
Of course, if decisions are forced upon a leader, he or she cannot really be credited with (or blamed for) them.
So the key is that the leader has the opportunity to consider alternatives, and choose the right one for his or her country.
This is why de Gaulle is almost certain to be on any list of great leaders.
Almost single-handedly, he rescued France from the relegation zone after World War II.
After returning to power in 1958, he rescued his country a second time, putting down two attempted coups, ending the war in Algeria, and inspiring the Fifth Republic’s constitution.
Much like British Prime Minister Winston Churchill, de Gaulle gave the French a new worldview that established their place in the post-war global order.
In fact, the worldviews that de Gaulle and Churchill established for their countries turned out to be a little too influential.
Their successors continued to perceive the world – and their countries’ role in it – in ways that constrained rational discussion and distorted decision-making for years.
As a result, no subsequent leader of either country has matched them.
But there is one other British prime minister who may come close: Margaret Thatcher, a highly contentious figure, who was loved by some and loathed by others.
Even her resignation, 25 years ago this year, was spurred by a mutiny in her own cabinet and party.
But one does not need to be universally liked – or even likable – to be a great leader.
And the fact is that not even Thatcher’s detractors can deny her impact.
Beyond being the first woman prime minister in Britain, and among the first anywhere, Thatcher helped to reverse Britain’s economic decline.
Her assault on excessively powerful trade unions, moreover, made Britain governable, at a time when the country seemed to be slipping into drift and disorder.
Given this, she is certainly a candidate for “great leader” status.
Similarly, China’s Deng Xiaoping may qualify as a great leader, despite having a record that is far from squeaky clean.
Beyond undertaking dark deeds as one of Mao’s lieutenants, Deng played a decisive role in ordering the massacre in Tiananmen Square in 1989.
But Deng also unleashed the market, setting the country on the path toward unprecedented growth and prosperity that ultimately lifted hundreds of millions of Chinese out of poverty.
Many would regard Lee Kuan Yew, Singapore’s founder and longtime prime minister, as great, though he probably would have welcomed the opportunity to test his mettle in a larger arena.
And, in fact, it seems that size does affect one’s ability to secure great-leader status.
I mean no insult to the House of Luxembourg when I say that it is unlikely that a great leader will emerge from that tiny country, especially given its generally uncontentious politics.
The United States is certainly big enough to produce great leaders.
And some presidents have indeed done great things.
Harry Truman and Dwight Eisenhower – no intellectual giants, to be sure – showed excellent judgment as they established the post-war international order that has supported peace in much of the world for decades.
Others, including Ronald Reagan and Bill Clinton, have had great gifts – say, the ability to inspire or a talent for persuasion.
John F. Kennedy was a little of both.
He did one great thing: resolving the Cuban Missile Crisis.
And his gift for motivating people was unmatched; indeed, it outlasted him, with his assassination cementing a powerful legacy.
In Africa, there has been no great figure since the death of South African President Nelson Mandela, who combined courage, authority, and magnanimity in graceful abundance.
In fact, he is among the most charismatic and charming leaders I have met; the other two – former United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan and former US Secretary of State Colin Powell – also are either African or African-American.
And what of today?
The only contemporary European who can lay claim to the mantle of greatness is German Chancellor Angela Merkel, the European Union’s de facto leader.
Like former Chancellor Helmut Kohl, she tends to be underestimated at first, but gets the big decisions right.
Kohl delivered generous terms for German reunification; Merkel has stood up to Russian President Vladimir Putin on his interventionism in Ukraine, and she has taken a generous approach to the migration crisis.
Marx and Tolstoy were, I believe, wrong.
Political leadership – and the men and women who exercise it – can make a real difference, for better or worse.
Merkel is today’s leading example of that, as she provides the direction Europe needs to tackle the challenging existential crisis that it faces.
Merkel in China
NEW DELHI – German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s second visit to China in a year comes against the backdrop of dire forecasts of a difficult September for the eurozone.
Mindful of such concerns and persistent pessimism in global financial markets, Merkel is now taking bold political initiatives at home and overseas.
Indeed, her China trip should be seen as an effort to assert leadership across the eurozone.
At home, Merkel recently sent out a clear message to her critics that Germany must pay a price for eurozone leadership.
She cautioned her colleagues against loose talk about a “Grexit” – Greece’s exit from the eurozone – and assured visiting Greek Prime Minister Antonis Samaras that Germany remained committed to his country’s membership of the eurozone.
While it required courage to take such a tough stance, doing so helped to bolster her position at home and throughout the eurozone.
There is now no doubt that Merkel is willing to commit Germany to the cause of preserving both the European Union and the eurozone, and that she will work to achieve that goal.
If she succeeds, she will emerge as the first great European leader of the twenty-first century.
This stance suggests that Merkel appreciates the essence of the argument that François Heisbourg, the chairman of the council of the International Institute for Strategic Studies (IISS), advanced in a recent essay: a federal arrangement does not fall apart because of problems at the periphery but because of “failure at the heart of the system.”
Merkel has come to terms with Germany’s position – and that it must act to preserve the unity of the whole.
The eurozone (and probably the EU) cannot be saved in Greece or Finland if it cannot be saved in Germany.
Committing Germany to that objective is precisely what Merkel has defined as her political goal for the rest of her term in office.
Within hours of declaring her leadership at home, Merkel announced her visit to Beijing.
The timing was highly significant: Merkel goes to China, the emerging global power, after declaring her own commitment to strengthening the eurozone, if not the EU as a whole, as a credible pole of an emerging multipolar world.
In recognition of Germany’s growing significance, Chinese Prime Minister Wen Jiabao welcomed a delegation of German business leaders to Beijing this May with the words: “Stronger Chinese-German cooperation is good for the two countries, good for China-EU relations, and good for world prosperity and stability.
The strategic dimension of Chinese-German relations, therefore, can only be strengthened, not weakened.”
There are several dimensions to the bilateral relationship.
Germany needs both China’s markets and the funds that its government can deploy to purchase German and European bonds.
It also has more than 7,500 enterprises operating in China, with gross investment totaling $18.5 billion.
Moreover, Germany has sold $15 billion worth of technology to China, and bilateral trade hit a high of $169 billion in 2011, accounting for 30% of total China-EU trade.
The two countries have set a bilateral trade target of $280 billion for 2015.
Trade, however, is not the only immediate concern.
Far more important, especially for Germany, is to get China to invest in and hold its bonds.
In mid-August, at the First IISS Oberoi Lecture in Mumbai, Klaus Regling, the CEO of the European Financial Stability Facility, underscored the importance of Chinese demand for EFSF bonds and China’s role in stabilizing the eurozone.
Regling also revealed that there is now increased and frequent coordination between monetary authorities in the United States, Germany, and China, drawing attention to the fact that the “old Triad” of the dollar, euro, and yen may now have been replaced by a “new Triad” of the dollar, euro, and Chinese renminbi.
While Regling spoke of an emerging “multipolar monetary system,” his remarks clearly indicated the functioning of a “tripolar” system.
Lying at two ends of that monetary triangle, the eurozone and China have acquired a geopolitical stake in helping each other.
Hans Kundnani and Jonas Parello-Plesner of the European Council on Foreign Relations view the China-Germany relationship as one that will shape the overall China-EU relationship.
Like many strategic analysts, they worry whether Germany, in pursuit of purely short-term economic interests, might forsake long-term strategic interests and concerns about human rights, environmental problems, press freedoms, and other political and geopolitical issues.
It is significant, therefore, that German political parties have emphasized the need for Merkel to raise such matters in her talks with Chinese leaders.
However, Merkel’s focus may well remain on trade, investment, and currency flows.
After all, unless she can turn around the eurozone, her rising profile at home and in Europe could easily wither.
What this means is that to secure German leadership of Europe, and her own leadership of Germany, Merkel has to “walk on two legs,” so to speak.
She needs to balance both geo-economic and geopolitical factors – both interests and values – in advancing Germany’s relations with China.
Mexico’s Powerful Energy Reforms
MEXICO CITY – Mexico is poised to become Latin America’s economic star in the coming decade.
The government’s recent reform of the energy sector will contribute directly to economic performance by reducing the cost of manufacturing.
In the context of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), the resulting increase in manufacturing competitiveness promises to boost Mexico’s growth substantially.
Until the government adopted the necessary constitutional amendment and enacted the associated enabling legislation, Mexico’s energy sector was entirely state-owned.
The sector’s most important component, Pemex, owned all of Mexico’s oil and gas reserves, and was exclusively responsible for exploration, production, and retail distribution.
Electricity production and distribution, too, was entirely in the hands of the government.
Pemex’s limited technical know-how meant that it could not fully develop and exploit Mexico’s vast oil and gas resources.
There are substantial oil reserves that require deep-water drilling technology that the company lacks.
There are also old wells that have stopped producing but that could be made productive again with modern technologies.
And there are potential gas and oil fields that can be tapped only with the new technologies of fracking and horizontal drilling.
Until the reform, energy reserves had long been regarded as a national patrimony that could be developed only by Pemex.
Because the constitution prohibited any direct or indirect foreign ownership, there was no way to provide incentives for foreign firms to share their technology.
But that foreign technology offered such important potential gains that President Enrique Peña Nieto was able to marshal a majority in the Mexican congress to amend the constitution and pass legislation that will bring foreign energy firms to the country.
Opening the energy sector completes the agenda of economic integration that began when NAFTA was approved in 1994.
That agreement transformed Mexico from a very closed economy with few manufacturing exports into an economy that is now closely linked with the United States.
The expansion of Mexican oil and gas production will consolidate those links and contribute to North American energy independence.
Mexico’s manufactured exports have increased tenfold since NAFTA began, with roughly 80% now going to the US.
Many multinational US companies have located plants in Mexico as part of their overall production process, which is closely tied to inputs sourced domestically.
Indeed, manufacturing relations between the US and Mexico are such that some 40% of the value added in Mexican exports to the US is actually of US origin.
The new energy reforms will also allow Mexico to benefit from lower-cost gas from Canada.
The price of gas in the US and Canada is only about half the current price in Mexico (and less than half the price in Europe and Asia).
Mexican access to cheaper gas will boost Mexican petrochemical industries and lower energy costs for manufacturing.
Experts estimate that the cost of electricity to Mexican manufacturers could fall by as much as 20%.
Privatizing Pemex and the national electric company will also allow trained, professional managers to replace state bureaucrats and bring an end to trade unions’ current major role in the management process.
Furthermore, privatization will remove the constraints on investment that the government budget has imposed on Pemex and the electric company.
Even before the energy-sector reforms, Mexico had been pursuing sound macroeconomic policies for a considerable period of time.
As a result, the country has benefited from low inflation, small fiscal deficits, and manageable current-account deficits.
And, though Mexico operates a free-floating exchange-rate regime, the peso’s value against the dollar has been stable.
None of this is to deny that Mexico still must confront other significant problems.
For example, primary and secondary education needs improvements that the teachers’ unions are blocking, and criminal activity, much of it drug-related, makes personal security a serious concern throughout the country.
But, despite such problems, the energy and electricity reforms, and the deeper links with the US and Canada that they imply, promises to accelerate Mexico’s growth rate, boost employment and income, and thus raise Mexicans’ standard of living.
Facing the Fourth Industrial Revolution
MEXICO CITY – The current era of innovation, in which cutting-edge technologies are disrupting entire economic sectors at a breathtaking rate, has been called the Fourth Industrial Revolution.
It is also the theme of the World Economic Forum’s annual meeting this week in Davos, Switzerland – and rightly so.
In the coming years, the scope and pace of innovation will transform how we produce, distribute, and consume.
To maximize the benefits, we must take steps now to prepare our economies and societies, with a focus on three key areas: education, the business environment, and connectivity.
Human capital is vital to an economy’s success, and Mexico is no exception.
That is why my government is focusing so heavily on improving education at all levels.
For example, we recently launched “Education Infrastructure Notes,” private investment vehicles that will allow us to channel roughly $3 billion to improve elementary-school facilities within the next three years.
In addition, during the current school year, we have delivered tablet computers to almost half of Mexico’s 2.3 million fifth-graders.
We are also working to ensure that current and future generations gain the skills they will need to thrive in an evolving labor market.
Last year, more than 110,000 students in Mexico earned degrees in areas such as engineering, manufacturing, and construction – a higher figure than in some of the most developed countries, including France, Germany, and the United Kingdom.
To reinforce this progress, we are also increasing public investment in science and technology at universities and public research centers throughout the country.
In the last three years alone, the number of scholars in our National Researchers System has increased by 26%, and we have almost doubled public expenditure on research, development, and innovation.
Recognizing the vital importance of the linkages among government, industry, and academia, we have also increased the number of technology-transfer offices to support the development of new products and businesses in areas such as biotechnology, energy, and information technologies.
At the same time, we are working tirelessly to improve the business and investment environment.
For starters, we have made major strides toward macroeconomic stability.
Our central bank has established an independent monetary policy that ensures price stability and low inflation; in fact, in November, the annual inflation rate, at 2.21%, was the lowest in Mexico’s history.
For the first time in decades, all energy-sector activities are open to private capital – a strategy that will attract an estimated $12.6 billion in investment every year.
Similarly, enabling foreign investment in the telecommunications sector has lowered prices for landline and cellular services, while improving quality and coverage.
Given that micro, small, and medium-size enterprises are the main drivers of Mexico’s economy, we are using digital tools to make it quicker and easier for entrepreneurs to start their own businesses, while facilitating their access to commercial bank funding.
Our Young Credit Program gives entrepreneurs a loan of up to $9,000; for those seeking to consolidate an ongoing business, the total may be as much as $150,000.
The third key step to prepare our economy for the Fourth Industrial Revolution is connectivity.
Mexico is one of the few countries that formally recognize the right of its people to a broadband Internet connection.
So far, we have established 65,000 public places, such as schools, libraries, and squares, with broadband connections.
This will help us to reach our goal of providing high-speed Internet service to 70% of households and 85% of micro, small, and medium-size businesses.
But connectivity is not only digital; physical infrastructure is also vital.
Already, Mexico is a manufacturing powerhouse and one of the world’s top sellers of goods like television sets, vehicles, auto parts, computers, and mobile phones.
Improved infrastructure would enable us to boost the value and variety of our export-oriented industries.
That is why we are channeling more than $460 billion toward building and modernizing thousands of kilometers of roads and highways, as well as expanding and improving our mass transit and railway systems.
Other large-scale infrastructure projects include a new international airport in Mexico City and seaport development that will almost double existing capacity on the Pacific Ocean and the Gulf of Mexico.
In the long run, we will make Mexico a world-class logistics platform.
Finally, Mexico is committed to continue boosting foreign trade, a powerful growth engine.
Over the last three years, we have expanded our network of free-trade agreements to include the Pacific Alliance and, more recently, the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
That will make a total of 13 free-trade agreements, providing preferential access to 52 countries with 1.3 billion potential consumers.
Our government has already made critical decisions to prepare Mexico’s economy for what lies ahead – and is backing them up with concrete action.
We must build on this progress to address outstanding challenges, including rising demand for a wide range of specialized knowledge professionals and an urgent need to improve connectivity, especially in remote rural areas (where 9% of Mexico’s population lives).
We must give our citizens and businesses the tools they need to take advantage of the opportunities that the Fourth Industrial Revolution creates, and ensure that future generations, too, can reach their full potential in a rapidly changing world.
Mexico’s Growth Problem
PRINCETON – When Mexico’s then-President Carlos Salinas de Gortari and his American counterpart, Bill Clinton, signed the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) more than 20 years ago, the hope was that the Mexican economy would be swept forward by a rising wave of globalization.
By many measures, that hope has been amply fulfilled.
Mexico’s foreign-trade volume (exports plus imports) climbed steadily after NAFTA entered into force, roughly doubling, to more than 60% of GDP.
Net foreign investment inflows relative to GDP tripled.
Though Mexico is an oil exporter, its manufactured exports have led the way, as the economy has become ever more tightly integrated into North American supply chains.
The automotive and steel industries, once inefficient and kept alive by protectionist trade barriers, are now highly productive and thriving.
Like so many other countries, Mexico was initially hit hard by Chinese competition in global markets, particularly after China became a member of the World Trade Organization at the end of 2001.
Nonetheless, Mexico’s proximity to the US market and its conservative monetary, fiscal, and labor-market policies have provided significant protection.
Dollar wages, moreover, have grown much more slowly than in China; As a result, labor is now some 20% cheaper in Mexico in relative terms.
Taking productivity trends into account, unit labor costs have also risen less than in China and other major competitors, allowing Mexico to recover since the mid-2000s some of the market share it had previously lost.
The gains have come not only on the external front.
Remarkably, Mexico’s exceedingly high levels of inequality have begun to fall since 1994, thanks in large part to reforms in social policy and educational improvements.
Mexico’s success shows up everywhere, except where it counts the most over the long term: overall productivity and economic growth.
In both areas, there has been disappointment galore.
Incredible as it may seem, average growth in total factor productivity (TFP) – a measure of the efficiency with which the economy’s resources, human and physical, are used – has been negative since the early 1990s.
As a result, living standards in Mexico have fallen further behind the US and most emerging-market economies.
Probably no other country in the world presents a starker contrast between external success and domestic failure.
What lies behind the apparent paradox is the phenomenon of “the two Mexicos,” the McKinsey Global Institute’s evocative term for the extreme dualism that characterizes Mexico’s economy.
Large firms, oriented toward the global economy, have done quite well, whereas traditional, informal firms – exemplified by the ubiquitous neighborhood tortillerías – have performed poorly while continuing to absorb the bulk of the economy’s work force.
The successes of the former have been nullified by the drag exerted by the latter.
But excitement about Mexico’s prospects is on the rise.
President Enrique Peña Nieto has launched a new wave of reforms, spearheaded by liberalization of the energy sector, which will allow foreign investment in oil exploration and production.
The state-owned oil company Pemex, a monopoly for three-quarters of a century, will finally face domestic competition.
Even an observer as sober as Harvard University’s Martin Feldstein gushes about Mexico, declaring that Peña’s reforms position the country to become “Latin America’s economic star in the coming decade.”
Yet Mexico’s NAFTA experience should make us extremely cautious about such prognostications.
We have seen even more comprehensive reforms falter.
Will the energy reforms produce another false dawn?
Policymakers need to bear in mind two lessons from Mexico’s frustrating encounter with globalization to date.
First, external trade and foreign investment on their own cannot lift an economy in the absence of the simultaneous development of productive capabilities at home.
The reason that East Asia’s export superpowers – Japan, South Korea, and China – experienced growth miracles was that their governments worked on both fronts at once.
Yes, they pushed their firms toward global markets.
But they also engaged in a broad range of industrial policies to ensure that these firms were growing and diversifying into new product lines.
In fact, domestic producers were often protected from foreign competition at home to ensure that they remained profitable enough to undertake the requisite investments.
Countries like Mexico can no longer revert to import protection.
So they will have to experiment with alternative strategies of support for domestic enterprises.
The second lesson is the need for pragmatism in policy design.
For too long, Mexico’s economic policies have reflected the view that the real economy will take care of itself once the “fundamentals” (macroeconomic stability, openness, and basic regulations) are in place.
In the words of the Mexican economist Enrique Dussel Peters, this is the “macroeconomist” mindset , which is very different from the problem-solving “engineer” mindset that has traditionally characterized Asian policymaking.
Mexican officials will need to develop a broader dialogue and partnership with the private sector in order to diagnose and remove the sector-specific obstacles faced by domestic firms.
Such collaboration is especially important for the medium-size firms at the cusp of breaking into the big leagues.
They will need to act less like “macroeconomists” and more like “engineers.”
Mexico’s failure to grow remains a puzzle, for which there is no simple explanation.
It is unlikely that a single grand strategy – whether it is opening up the oil sector, improving access to finance, fighting informality, or, for that matter, altering industrial policy – can unlock the gates to rapid, broad-based growth.
This uncertainty underscores the need for an agile, responsive government that can move on diverse fronts simultaneously, learn about the problems confronting the real economy, and respond pragmatically.
Mexico is Burning
MEXICO CITY – The last time Mexico experienced a political crisis more serious than the one it is undergoing today was in 1994, when a group of so-called Zapatista guerrillas staged a semi-armed uprising in the southern state of Chiapas.
The president’s handpicked successor was assassinated, and, as if that was not enough, the value of the peso had plummeted by nearly 70%.
Today’s crisis is not quite as bad, but it is getting close.
In December 2012, President Enrique Peña Nieto took office under inauspicious circumstances.
He was elected with just 38% of the vote, without a majority in either house of Congress, and with the opposition in control of Mexico City, the capital.
The presidential runner-up, opposition leader Andrés Manuel López Obrador, questioned the results of the election.
Peña Nieto faced serious challenges.
His Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) had governed Mexico for 70 years, until it was swept out of power in 2000.
A large majority of Mexican voters continued to suspect it of corruption, authoritarianism, and economic incompetence.
Peña Nieto’s predecessor, Felipe Calderón, had bequeathed him a war on drugs that had already caused more than 60,000 deaths; at least another 22,000 Mexicans were missing.
At first, it looked like Peña Nieto would be able to turn things around.
He cut a deal with both opposition parties – the center-right National Action Party (PAN) and the center-left Party of the Democratic Revolution (PRD) – and proceeded to win significant legislative changes.
He was hailed as a world-class reformer.
The country was living the “Mexican Moment,” as his handlers labeled it, and appeared to be on the verge of fulfilling, at long last, its great promise.
Two years on, success seems to be slipping through Peña Nieto’s hands.
The country and its increasingly grey-haired president are experiencing one tragedy, scandal, or disappointment after another.
The price of oil, from which the government obtains one-third of its revenue, has plunged 40% in six months.
With last year’s economic growth expected to be 2%, following just 1.1% growth in 2013, Mexico will barely have grown faster during the first third of Peña Nieto’s six-year term than it did during the last quarter-century.
Meanwhile, a pact Peña Nieto made with his predecessor is returning to haunt him.
In exchange for support in the Senate for energy-sector reform, he gave Calderón and his aides a tacit blanket pardon for any conceivable misdeeds committed by Calderón’s presidential administration.
This hurts Peña Nieto’s image in exactly the areas in which Mexicans most mistrust their leaders: violence and graft.
The massacre of 22 civilians by the army last June in Tlatlaya, a small town west of Mexico City, and the disappearance and subsequent murder and incineration of 43 students, also close to the capital, was not a new type of development in Mexico.
Extrajudicial executions and disappearances were common under Calderón.
But this time something snapped.
Protests erupted across Mexico.
The government mishandled both episodes, believing that they would blow over.
Peña Nieto has yet to visit Iguala, the town where the students were abducted and murdered.
He waited a month after they disappeared before meeting with their parents, and spent a week in China and Australia in the middle of the crisis.
Meanwhile, charges of corruption have been piling up.
Just hours after Peña Nieto canceled a contract with a Chinese railroad company to build a fast train north of Mexico City, it was revealed that his wife had acquired an ostentatious home – thanks to a mortgage extended to her by the Mexican partner of the Chinese railway firm.
The conflict of interest was so brazen, even by Mexican standards, that the first lady – a popular former telenovela actress – quickly announced that she would sell the mansion.
Then, in early December, the Wall Street Journal revealed that Peña Nieto’s finance minister, Luis Videgaray, had also purchased a home in late 2012, just before taking office, from the same contractor, with a similar mortgage.
On the second anniversary of Peña Nieto’s inauguration, his approval rating had dwindled to 39%, with 58% of the public disapproving of his performance.
Peña Nieto has tried to soldier through the crisis by promising reforms aimed at improving security and strengthening the rule of law.
The trouble with this strategy is what no Mexican president has been willing to acknowledge: the country has never experienced the rule of law.
Before the advent of democracy in 2000, order was imposed by the iron hand of a corrupt, authoritarian state.
When its grip was loosened, any semblance of law and order disappeared.
Unless and until this is recognized, reforms in this area will lack credibility for Mexicans and foreign investors alike, and thus are unlikely to be effective.
Unfortunately, Peña Nieto, whose party ruled Mexico in the bad old days, is unlikely to be the president who breaks the mold.
Mexico was once accustomed to crises (even if it hasn’t had one for 20 years); but they typically erupted at the end of a presidential term.
Peña Nieto has four more years in office, and he is constrained by the political elite that brought him to power from implementing the drastic measures – a cabinet reshuffle, criminal accountability for corruption and human-rights violations, and radical judicial reforms – that Mexico needs.
But the alternative could be worse: a populist backlash that destroys much of what Mexico has achieved over the last two decades.
Mexico Breaking Good?
MEXICO CITY – For a glimpse of the average American’s understanding of the relationship between the United States and Mexico, one only has to watch the critically acclaimed television series Breaking Bad.
Set in Albuquerque, New Mexico, a few hundred miles from the border, the series chronicles the rise and fall of Walter White, a high school chemistry teacher who becomes a methamphetamine tycoon.
Most of the characters on the US side of the border are portrayed with sympathy and depth.
The main protagonist’s step-by-step descent into the drug underworld unfolds with such subtlety that each individual decision he makes along the way seems almost reasonable.
Unfortunately, the other side of the border receives more superficial treatment.
In one scene, two Mexican hit men ruthlessly slaughter a dozen innocent compatriots who could bear witness to their border crossing.
In another episode, members of the Mexican Federal Police are seen assaulting a drug lord in his hacienda, with the implication that they are only doing the bidding of a rival dealer.
“Breaking Bad” is brilliant television, but it is regrettable that so many Americans see only this side of things.
Mexico has profound security problems in some regions, but it is also a country that just might be on the threshold of a huge political and economic transformation.
Indeed, for a couple of years now, Mexico’s GDP growth rates have been near the top of the OECD, and recently above Brazil’s.
Rather than continue fighting (as in the US) after a heated presidential election, Mexico’s major political parties appear poised to cooperate on a number of critical structural reforms that could energize economic growth for decades to come.
The agenda includes an expansion of the tax base to reduce dependency on oil, an initiative to increase competition in media and telecommunications, and a constitutional change that will permit the state-owned oil company Pemex to enter into joint ventures with foreign firms.
This last reform is critical, because much of Mexico’s geology is very similar to that of the southwestern US.
In principle, Mexico’s economy should be benefiting from the same shale-gas revolution that is providing a huge boost to the US, where natural-gas prices are now less than one-quarter of what Europeans pay.
Mexico is already enjoying a manufacturing boom that has increased its exports to the US, following a long secular decline.
With China’s wages soaring and rising oil prices driving up shipping costs, production in Mexico is suddenly looking much more attractive, even taking security concerns into account.
Of course, any number of things can go wrong.
First and foremost, the political elite might suddenly back away from essential structural reforms, and the Mexican business community’s current optimism could collapse.
It wouldn’t be the first time.
There is also a risk that foreign investors, who already are starting to like Mexico, might come to love it a little too much.
A huge influx of capital could lead to a significant appreciation of the peso’s exchange rate, causing an increase in Mexico’s currently very attractive labor costs.
Or the US could slip into recession (though modest growth is certainly the central scenario nowadays).
Then there is the matter of security, which constitutes a huge tax on business in many parts of Mexico.
For example, one important achievement of former President Felipe Calderón’s administration was to push through a 140-mile highway connecting the interior city of Durango and the Pacific port at Mazatlán.
Traversing extremely rough terrain with 200 tunnels and bridges, it promises to cut the transit time by three or four hours.
Except for the weather, the highway has the feel of Switzerland.
But the new road has raised concerns, particularly in the US, that it could serve as a smuggling route for drugs and weapons, so the military feels obliged to set up checkpoints.
Unfortunately, early anecdotal evidence suggests that these safeguards may ultimately slow down traffic by roughly the same amount of time that the project was meant to speed it up!
Mexican leaders acknowledge the country’s internal problems, but place three of them at America’s doorstep.
First and foremost, the US generates the huge demand for illicit drugs that sustains the entire Latin American mafia, just as the US experiment with alcohol prohibition in the 1920’s fueled the rise of gangsters like Al Capone.
No one knows precisely the Mexican drug cartels’ annual profits, but they certainly amount to billions of dollars.
Second, the US, with its incredibly lax restrictions on gun purchases, serves as a veritable arms depot for rich Mexican drug lords.
True, they could arguably acquire similar weapons elsewhere, but not necessarily as cheaply and conveniently.
Finally, the US could do more to curtail money laundering.
One simple step would be to restrict the circulation of $100 bills, which are mostly used in the underground economy.
Many of the problems that characterize the complex US-Mexican relationship will be ameliorated if Mexico can sustain rapid economic growth.
Net immigration to the US, which has already tapered off, might reverse.
The US stands to benefit as much as Mexico if conditions south of the border begin breaking good.
Mexico’s Paradox of Reform
Sometimes no reform is better than the wrong type of reform.
That seems to be the case in Mexico, which recently passed new tax and electoral laws – but not the ones the country needs.
While tax reform was high on President Felipe Calderón’s agenda during last year’s presidential campaign, electoral reform was not.
Instead, it has been imposed upon him by a strange and extreme version of political horse-trading.
Opposition legislators wanted electoral reform, but no new taxes; the administration wanted more revenues, but no new election laws.
Both sides got part of what they wanted, and Mexico got the short end of the stick.
An alternative minimum tax was established, along with a slight increase in gasoline taxes, but both were so watered down that they barely add up to anything.
The one positive feature of the reforms – a scheme aimed at ensuring equal radio and television airtime for parties during electoral campaigns – was tainted by serious legislative omissions.
Given the absence of any regulation regarding fairness in news coverage of campaigns, the blatant corruption of many news organizations, and the absence of a current affairs program on national, prime-time television, banning the purchase of airtime merely erects an insurmountable barrier to potential new political entrants.
Against this backdrop, the ejection of the IFE directors stands out all the more glaringly.
While the IFE undoubtedly committed several serious public-relations mistakes during last year’s election, it remains one of Mexico’s most respected institutions, with credibility ratings that are regularly double or triple those of Congress and the three political parties.
The IFE shepherded Mexico through several crisis in 2006, when the PRD’s presidential candidate, Andrés Manuel López Obrador, refused to accept his razor-thin margin of defeat and took his battle to the streets.
Now, the same people who certified that last year’s vote was free and fair, and that Calderón had indeed won, are being fired for exactly that reason.
Their removal, as everyone in Mexico acknowledges, is a sop to the PRI and the PRD in exchange for Calderón’s miserly tax reform.
Bismarck was right when he said one should never look too closely at how laws and sausages are made.
Unfortunately, the attack on the IFE’s autonomy is not an isolated event in Latin America.
Although independent central banks have been crucial in helping the region achieve macroeconomic stability over the past two decades, they, like electoral authorities, are being subjected to increasing pressure.
Venezuelan Preseident Hugo Chávez has openly proposed abolishing the central bank’s independence, submitting a constitutional reform that would allow him to use the country’s international reserves as he sees fit.
Likewise, electoral commissions there and in Bolivia, Ecuador, Nicaragua, and, according to some accounts, in Argentina are being packed with political loyalists.
Mexico now seems poised to join this dubious club.
It shouldn’t, and if anyone should know that, it is Calderón.
It is understandable that he wishes to distinguish himself from his predecessor, Vicente Fox, who was unable to get meaningful reforms through Congress.
But it is not reasonable to do so by proposing a cure that is worse than the disease.
Mexico’s War of Choice
MEXICO CITY – Three years ago this month, Mexican President Felipe Calderón donned military fatigues and declared a full-scale war on drugs, ordering the Army into Mexico’s streets, highways, and villages.
Back then, Calderón received broad support, both domestically and from abroad, for what was viewed as a brave, overdue, and necessary decision. Tangible results were predicted to come soon.
Moreover, George W. Bush’s administration quickly promised American support – the so-called Mérida Initiative, signed in February, 2007 – and public-opinion polls showed that Calderón had, in one fell swoop, left behind the travails of his close and questioned electoral victory, gaining the trust of the Mexican people.
But today, things look very different.
At a recent debate with, among others, Fareed Zakaria of Newsweek and CNN, Asa Hutchison, the former head of the United States Drug Enforcement Agency, the main question was whether the US was to blame for Mexico’s drug war.
I pointed out that neither the US nor Mexico was to blame; only Calderón was.
Just like Bush’s invasion of Iraq, Mexico’s drug war was a war of choice.
It was a war that Calderón should not have declared, that cannot be won, and that is doing enormous damage to Mexico.
Today, a growing number of Mexicans shares this view.
As the war drags on, positive results are nowhere to be seen, while violence in the country is escalating.
On December 9, for example, according to the daily newspaper Reforma , 40 people died in firefights between police and army forces and the drug cartels.
More than 6,500 fatalities will have occurred this year alone, topping last year’s total, which was double that in 2007.
I believe that Calderón declared this war because he felt the need to legitimize himself before Mexico’s people, given the doubts surrounding his victory in the 2006 presidential election – doubts that his supporters, like me, never shared.
And I believe that it is unwinnable because it fails to comply with the tenets of the Powell Doctrine, elaborated 18 years ago by Colin Powell, then Chairman of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff, in relation to the first Gulf War.
Powell enumerated four conditions that must be satisfied in order to succeed in a military operation. One was deployment of overwhelming force, which the Mexican military lacks.
Another was definable victory, which one never has in a war on drugs (a term first used by Richard Nixon in the late 1960’s).
The third condition was an exit strategy at the outset, which Calderón lacks, because he can neither withdraw in defeat in his own country, nor withdraw and declare victory.
Calderón still does enjoy the support of the public – Powell’s fourth condition – but he is beginning to lose it.
Over the past three years, more than 15,000 Mexicans have died in the drug war.
Human Rights Watch, Amnesty International, and the United Nations Human Rights Council Universal Peer Review have all documented, with more or less evidence and precision, a proliferation of abuses and an absence of accountability for them.
Of the more than 220,000 people arrested on drug charges since Calderón took office, three-quarters have been released.
Only 5% of the remaining 60,000 or so have been tried and sentenced.
Meanwhile, acreage used for poppy and marijuana production has risen, according to the US government, to 6,900 and 8,900 hectares, respectively.
Restrictions on the transshipment of cocaine from South America to the US have made only a dent in street prices, which spiked in 2008 but have stabilized in 2009 at levels well below their historical highs in the 1990’s.
According to the US government’s International Narcotics Control Strategy Report (INCSR), opium, heroin, and marijuana seizures have decreased since Calderón began his drug war, and drug production in Mexico is on the rise.&#160;In 2008, according to the US State Department, potential heroin production reached 18 metric tons, up from 13 metric tons in 2006, as production of opium gum rose to 149 metric tons, from 110 metric tons.
Cannabis production grew by 300 metric tons over this period, to 15,800 metric tons.
In other words, since Calderón began his war on drugs, more Mexican drugs are on the market, not less.
There is no easy way out of this quagmire.
The National Police Force that Mexico’s last three presidents – Ernesto Zedillo, Vicente Fox and Calderón – have tried to build is still far from ready to replace the Army in drug-enforcement tasks.
American assistance, as a US General Accounting Office report made clear in early December, is barely trickling in.
Indeed, by some accounts, only 2% of the projected $1.3 billion in aid has been disbursed.
Perhaps the least bad solution would be to proceed by default: gradually allow the drug war to vanish from television screens and newspapers, and have its place taken by other wars: on poverty, on petty crime, and for economic growth.
This may not be ideal, but it is better than prolonging a fight that cannot be won.
Policy “Crimes”
STANFORD – When the Berlin Wall fell a quarter-century ago this November, pundits led by Francis Fukuyama proclaimed the end of history – the triumph of democratic capitalism over all rival systems.
America’s economic success and the collapse of communism fed the narrative.
The long political, intellectual, and, at times, military confrontation that we knew as the Cold War was over.
Indeed, at a meeting in Warsaw in the winter of 1990, General Wojciech Jaruzelski, Poland’s President and communist party boss, declared to me and my cabinet colleagues that “The forces of history have inevitably led us to capitalism.”
He could not free himself of the Hegelian dialectic, but he admitted that communism had gotten history’s end point entirely wrong.
A couple of decades later, various forms of capitalism have worked wonders for some former communist and socialist countries.
Poland is an excellent example of a successful economic and political transition.
But capitalism is far from flourishing everywhere.
North Korea, which never had a transition and maintains heavy-handed central planning, is an economic basket case.
And soft socialism combined with subsidized “national champions” is decaying in France.
Moreover, in many countries, capitalism arrived without democracy.
China is an obvious example of capitalist success and lagging political reform.
For these countries, honest competition at the ballot box, free and open debate, and respect for minority rights – the foundation of liberal democracy – are not currently on the agenda.
The champagne corks were popped prematurely in 1989.&nbsp;
Indeed, precisely because liberal democracy did not triumph worldwide, many pressing crises now require attention and action.
But we must also focus – in the media and in the classroom – on the less dramatic but nonetheless dangerous attacks on democracy and democratic values, including in the Americas, where statist regimes and others have been attacking freedom of speech and of the press.
Venezuela currently has none of these ingredients.
So it is not surprising that massive government deficits financed by explosive monetary growth have caused the currency to collapse, with multinationals writing down the value of their Venezuelan subsidiaries each time the official exchange rate is lowered.
Nor is it surprising that, with inadequate foreign exchange, the country is having difficulty paying its bills, or that price controls and police-state regulation have severely worsened food shortages.
Finally, amid widespread speculation that Venezuela may indeed default on up to $80 billion of foreign debt, it is not surprising that yields on its sovereign debt have hit 15%.
Venezuela, with some of the world’s largest hydrocarbon reserves, should be enjoying an era of prosperity amid high oil prices.
But corruption, political control of the national oil company, and nationalization of foreign-owned oil assets have caused exactly the opposite.
(Disclosure: I serve on the board of one such company, ExxonMobil, which is awaiting the results of arbitration in international court.)
The combination of authoritarian rule, extreme populism, socialist ideology, and incompetence under former President Hugo Chávez and Maduro has wreaked havoc on Venezuela.
But when Hausmann, a Venezuelan citizen and former government minister, discusses an important question that is being asked by investors around the world, he is not merely chastised, but threatened.
The implication is clear: Speak out and you may be jailed.
This is not the first such treatment of a prominent economist in Latin America.
A decade ago, it was Domingo Cavallo, who, as Argentina’s finance minister, had pegged the peso to the dollar to bring down the 1,000% inflation that was destroying the economy – and the fabric of society.
When he abruptly ended the peg in 2001, a severe recession followed, and he was arrested and jailed.
Fortunately, international outrage, including a campaign organized by North American economists, helped to free Cavallo.
I do not agree with all of the policies advocated by Cavallo or Hausmann, or any other policymaker for that matter.
But should we really criminalize not corruption or self-dealing, but policy disagreements?
Do we want every new government to jail its political opponents – as Ukraine’s deposed President Viktor Yanukovych did to former Prime Minister Yuliya Tymoshenko – because it rejects the policies they enacted or condemns the perceived outcomes?
We have not fallen so far yet in the United States.
But even here, it has become far too common to impugn the motives and values, not just the ideas, of those with whom we disagree.
Journalists, politicians, and public intellectuals who should know better routinely argue not just that policies and proposals are wrong-headed, but that the proponents themselves must be evil to have enacted or suggested them.
Criticism and disagreement should not be allowed to curdle into the hateful vitriol that demeans so much public discourse today.
Words have consequences and can inflame thuggery or worse.
Even attempted suppression of free and open debate, or official delegitimization of those with alternative policy proposals, is dangerous.
Such outrages must be resisted, before more people like Cavallo and Hausmann are threatened – and before the disease spreads to North America and Europe.
An Economist for the Ages