I played it, the ref allowed it. That’s a question you should ask him.”
Sports today are highly competitive, with huge amounts of money at stake, but that does not mean it is impossible to be honest.
In cricket, if a batsman hits the ball and one of the fielders catches it, the batsman is out.
Sometimes when the ball is caught the umpire cannot be sure if the ball has touched the edge of the bat. The batsman usually knows and traditionally should “walk” – leave the ground – if he knows that he is out.
Some still do.
The Australian batsman Adam Gilchrist “walked” in the 2003 World Cup semi-final against Sri Lanka, although the umpire had already declared him not out.
His decision surprised some of his teammates but won applause from many cricket fans.
An Internet search brought me just one clear-cut case of a footballer doing something equivalent to a batsman walking.
In 1996, Liverpool striker Robbie Fowler was awarded a penalty for being fouled by the Arsenal goalkeeper. He told the referee that he had not been fouled, but the referee insisted that he take the penalty kick.
Fowler did so, but in a manner that enabled the goalkeeper to save it.
Why are there so few examples of such behavior from professional footballers? Perhaps a culture of excessive partisanship has trumped ethical values.
Fans don’t seem to mind if members of their own team cheat successfully; they only object when the other side cheats. That is not an ethical attitude.
(Though, to their credit, many French football followers, from President Nicolas Sarkozy down, expressed their sympathy for Ireland after Henry’s handball.)
Yes, we can deal with the problem to some extent by using modern technology or video replays to review controversial refereeing decisions.
But, while that will reduce the opportunity for cheating, it won’t eliminate it, and it isn’t really the point.
We should not make excuses for intentional cheating in sports.
In one important way, it is much worse than cheating in one’s private life.
When what you do will be seen by millions, revisited on endless video replays, and dissected on television sports programs, it is especially important to do what is right.
How would football fans have reacted if Neuer had stopped play and told the referee that the ball was a goal?
Given the rarity of such behavior in football, the initial reaction would no doubt have been surprise.
Some German fans might have been disappointed.
But the world as a whole – and every fair-minded German fan too – would have had to admit that he had done the right thing.
Neuer missed a rare opportunity to do something noble in front of millions of people.
He could have set a positive ethical example to people watching all over the world, including the many millions who are young and impressionable.
Who knows what difference that example might have made to the lives of many of those watching?
PARIS – Whatever happened to the “Arab Spring”?
When demonstrations erupted in Tunisia, Egypt, and Libya, ultimately leading to the demise of three old and weary dictatorships, no one knew which forces, institutions, and procedures would emerge from the protesters’ demand for democracy.
And yet, despite the unprecedented and unforeseeable nature of events – or perhaps because of it – hope ran high.
What has happened since shows clearly what everyone knew (or should have known) all along: nothing about regime change is simple.
None of the three countries has yet found a stable institutional solution that can defuse intensifying internal tensions and respond effectively to popular demands.
Other countries in the region, including Yemen and some of the Gulf states, have experienced varying degrees of turmoil as well.
Sectarian violence is once again consuming Iraq, while clashes between anti-regime factions in Syria are becoming ever more frequent, with Islamists seeking to gain the upper hand ahead of the political transition that would occur should the government collapse.
Even in Morocco, a king with absolute power as Commander of the Faithful has been forced by intense public outrage to move toward a system more inclusive of political Islam.
Likewise, developments in the region’s two non-Arab powers suggest that neither is immune to instability.
In Turkey, recent protests have highlighted growing opposition to Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s overweening power and divisive, religious-based social policies.
In Iran, much of the middle class backed the most moderate of the candidates acceptable to the country’s Islamic guardians in June’s presidential elections.
Several related factors underlie the region’s chronic instability.
One is underdevelopment.
While oil has made a few presidents and princes staggeringly rich, the rest of the population has received little benefit.
Hunger is widespread; indeed, poverty and inequality have fueled much of the popular mobilization in the region.
But the region’s protest politics also reflects growing rejection of dictatorship and arbitrary rule.
Despite these countries’ lack of a tradition of open dissent, globalization has made it plain to all that economic development requires regime change.
Finally, political Islam is common to all of the region’s conflicts, and should not be viewed – as it often is – in isolation from these countries’ economic woes.
Simply put, Islam – one of the world’s great religions, practiced by nearly one-quarter of humanity – missed its development takeoff.
There are no easy ways out of underdevelopment without challenging traditional lifestyles, customs, and social relations.
Indeed, religions do not resist the pressures of economic change well.
For Jews, given the absence of a homeland, development occurred among the diaspora, with civil emancipation in Europe giving rise to reformist movements aimed at reconciling faith and modernity.
Similarly, Christianity, whether Catholic or Orthodox, blocked economic development for centuries, until internal reformists redefined theological positions on money and banking, the nature of progress, and science and technology.
It is no accident that religious reform in Scandinavia, Germany, England, the Netherlands, and the United States gave rise to today’s global capitalism.
This dynamic extends even to officially atheist China.
Orthodox Communism, a perfect secular simulacrum of religion, has been the primary victim of development since China launched its market reforms in 1979.
Islam also has its reformists.
Consider the mission entrusted to Rifa’a al-Tahtawi, the great Egyptian scholar sent to Europe by Mohammed Ali in 1826 to learn about Western civilization and to try to forge an understanding between it and Islam.
But everywhere in the Arab world, without exception, reformists have been jailed, killed, or reduced to political impotence.
In the absence of an analog to the West’s Industrial Revolution, Muslims (and especially Arabs) have faced multiple humiliations and partial colonization over the past two centuries.
The resulting legacy of grievance, shame, and anger is part of what underpins the region’s current malaise.
Indeed, some of the street demonstrations leave no doubt that many people are moving away from religion altogether.
This is as visible in Egypt and Tunisia as it is in Turkey.
But the grim reality for the Islamic world is that, in times of widespread uncertainty, the forces of tradition tend to speak more loudly and clearly than those of change.
Peace in this huge and strategically vital region – and thus in the world – can prevail only if its countries manage, despite their turmoil, to protect themselves from ideological extremes and political excesses.
The importance of this should be abundantly clear to Westerners, whose modern civilization grew out of religious dissent that was initially met by the violence of the Inquisition and the Counter-Reformation.
If Islam, particularly in the Middle East, is on a similar trajectory, long-term instability in the region is all but assured.
Mutual understanding is the only way to moderate the consequences.
Islam as a Tool of Modernization
A big worry in Iraq and the wider Middle East is that Islam and modernization are enemies.
But Malaysian history over the past three decades shows that this belief is mistaken.
In fact, Islamization has proved to be an effective political means of reconciling the majority of Malays to the country’s rapid economic development.
In the early 1970’s, when it was still an overwhelmingly agrarian country and Islamization was just gaining momentum, Malaysia embarked on its so-called “New Economic Policy” (NEP), designed to help the majority Malays gain a bigger share of the country’s wealth.
After three decades of spectacular economic growth, many Malays have become prosperous and content not only through secular capitalism, but through the country’s renewed sense of Islamic identity, one which – for the most part – embraced modernization.
(Of course, paradoxes appear every now and then, such as when globalization is advocated alongside demands for stronger censorship.)
Islamic-minded politicians such as Anwar Ibrahim gained prominence when Islamization took off in the 1970’s.
But the Islam they promoted was not backward looking; instead, it sought to shape a modernizing economic policy that took note of Muslim sensibilities.
Faced with the grassroots popularity of this movement, by 1982 the government of then Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamed decided to co-opt Anwar Ibrahim into his United Malays National Organisation (UMNO), the dominant party within the country’s ruling coalition.
The strategy worked well, and helped defuse Islamic opposition to the wrenching changes that accompanied the country’s rapid economic modernization.
During the 1990’s, however, Anwar increased his influence within the party, unsettling many of the old guard.
Matters came to a head after the 1997 financial crisis, when Anwar, the deputy prime minister, adopted an even more economically liberal approach than Mahathir.
Partly in response to this challenge, Anwar was sacked. 
Anwar’s bizarre trial and sentencing on charges of sodomy and abuse of power invigorated the reformasi movement, as growing anti-UMNO and anti-Mahathir sentiments took hold among Islamic-minded Malays.
This culminated in poor electoral results for the ruling coalition in November 1999.
The Islamist party, Parti Islam SeMalaysia (PAS), took power in the states of Kelantan and Trengganu and strongly threatened UMNO in other northern states.
The personal conflict between Mahathir and Anwar thus led to an apparent rupture between Malaysia’s Islamist political forces and the modernizers of UMNO.
So, once again, Mahathir felt pressure to adopt a strategy aimed at preventing Islam from becoming a tool of opposition.
This impulse strongly affected his choice of a successor when he decided to step down as prime minister.
His choice of Abdullah Badawi, the current prime minister, helped UMNO regain the Islamist moral high ground that the PAS had been claiming.
It was the beginning of America’s global “war on terror” in 2001, however, that brought the political march of the Islamist parties to a screeching halt, as it provided an excuse for the government to crack down on the Malay right and the PAS.
But this only renewed UMNO’s desire to portray itself as sufficiently Islamist.
So, before stepping down, Mahathir went so far as to declare Malaysia a de facto Muslim state.
Eyebrows were raised and questions were asked about the lengths to which Mahathir would go to counteract the Islamist appeal.
This trend continues.
One of Badawi’s first acts after taking over as prime minister in October 2003 was to introduce the concept of Islam Hadhari.
This vague term was finally fleshed out with a list of ten principles in September 2004, all but one of which, however, was without religious connotations.
Nevertheless, this move appeared to be all that was needed for Islam-minded voters to return to the fold of the ruling front.
In the general election in March 2004 – the first since Mahathir stepped down after 22 years in power – moderate Muslims helped Abdullah Badawi to a landslide victory.
The release of Anwar Ibrahim soon afterwards raised the new premier’s prestige further as a leader who could heal intra-Malay, and intra-Muslim, conflicts.
Since then, Abdullah Badawi has been popularizing the concept of “Hadhari,” shaping it as a means to shift Islam’s focus from its sanctioning function to its civilizing potential and rendering it less ideological.
In Malaysia today, Islam is being presented as a generator of civilization and culture, and not merely as a source of religious inspiration.
This has helped to counter extremist tendencies domestically and provides a conceptual platform for moderate Islam.
Islam Hadhari tries to project the idea that UMNO’s materialism and nationalism do not contradict Islam.
With various feints and strategies, Malaysia has effectively managed the tensions between a secular, modernizing agenda and the Islamic faith that the Malays profess.
By making Islamists and Islamist sentiments a part of the process of modernization, Malaysia demonstrates that Islamic faith and economic growth can be reconciled if politicians are clever enough not to treat them as contradictions.
Reviving Islam’s Enlightenment
SEATTLE – In 1877, the great French novelist Victor Hugo wrote, “Invading armies can be resisted; invading ideas cannot be.”
Nowadays, the power of ideas, for good or for evil, is something we need to take into account, particularly in contemplating Islamic radicalism.
The recent terrorist attacks in France, Kuwait, and Tunisia are only the latest reminders of how important it is to understand that, behind these outrages, there are serious ideas, not simply angry, frustrated criminals.
Violent Islamic jihadist movements do not pose an existential danger to Europe or North America.
They may occasionally be able to carry out deadly terrorist acts, but they have no chance of destroying or taking over Western societies.
Panicked attempts to march into Muslim countries and extirpate the threat have been counterproductive, serving only to increase the appeal of Islamic extremism.
Most Muslims reject the harshest versions of Islam, but many – if not most – harbor sympathy for the idea of struggling against the dictates of the West and returning the faith to its past strengths and glories.
It would be wrong to assert that only a tiny minority of Muslims back the actions of the extremists or that fundamentalist factions have hijacked a religion of which they are completely unrepresentative.
Islamic radicals enjoy enough support to be a serious threat in their part of the world.
It is important to understand how this happened.
Harsh, radically conservative Islamic theologies have been around almost since the death of the Prophet Muhammad in 632, but they have been repeatedly contested by more tolerant, moderate schools of Muslim thought.
Like the Christian and Jewish Bibles, the Koran is open to interpretation, whether quite liberal or dogmatic and repressive.
In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, many Muslim thinkers – most famously Jamal al-Din al-Afghani – believed that embracing many of the ideals developed in the West during the Enlightenment was the only way to promote progress.
Al-Afghani and others wrote that Islam’s rejection of Western science and progress was a misinterpretation of the Koran.
But, as the twentieth century progressed, Muslim reformists lost ground to secular nationalists emphasizing socialism as the path to modernization.
The promise of secularism, however, proved hollow, with countries like Egypt, Libya, Iraq, and Syria sinking into despotism and corruption.
This provided fertile ground for anti-Western, reactionary, violent versions of Islam.
These strains have many intellectual roots.
But perhaps the single most important modern source is the writing of the Egyptian scholar Sayyid Qutb.
Together with other fundamentalists, such as the Pakistani philosopher Abul A'la Maududi, Qutb argued that true Islam had been infiltrated and corrupted by outside ideas.
Only when it was reclaimed would two centuries of humiliation at the hands of Western imperial powers and, more recently, the nascent state of Israel be reversed.
God would side once more with Muslims against their enemies, whom Qutb called “Crusaders and Jews.”
Dictatorships in North Africa and the Middle East tried to suppress the Islamic conservatives.
But Saudi Arabia – a bastion of conservatism – used its oil wealth to counter secular modernizers and any kind of reformed Islam, financing fundamentalist missionaries and conservative mosques throughout the Islamic world.
Qutb was executed by the Egyptian dictator Gamal Abdel Nasser in 1966 as part of a brutal but unsuccessful attempt to eliminate the Muslim Brotherhood.
In fact, the crackdowns only strengthened the conservative Islamists, whose faith helped them survive the repression.
And they served to convince young, discontented Muslims that extremism was the only possible solution to their societies’ weakness and lack of opportunity.
Confronting ideas with military means is a sure path to defeat.
When Western powers send soldiers into Muslim countries, attempt to bomb extremists into submission, prop up brutal dictatorships, or blindly support every Israeli policy, they confirm the claims of the radical Islamists, driving new adherents into their arms.
The real battlefront is the arena of ideas.
Instead of armed, panicky overreactions, what is needed is cultural exchanges.
There are plenty of serious intellectuals in Islamic societies who want to revive the reformist call for the embrace of some of the ideas of Western Enlightenment: the value of science, the importance of liberal tolerance, and the need for free and open discussion.
Western scholars who understand Islam and speak some of the many languages of its practitioners need to support these intellectual movements.
Hawks in the West may try to dismiss actions like these as weak.
But while they may do little in the short run, they are sure to prove critical over the long term.
After all, the force that brought down communism in Europe – a far more dangerous ideology than radical Islam – was not simply military containment, but also the power of ideas and ideals.
Islamic Evangelism
Many believe that religious revival and political radicalism among Muslims who reside in the West reflects the traditions and conflicts of the Middle East or the wider Muslim world.
But Islamic Salafism (fundamentalist religious radicalism) is above all a consequence of the globalization and Westernization of Islam, and of the decoupling of culture and religion more generally.
All forms of religious fundamentalism rely on the notion of a "pure" religion independent of cultural variations and influences.
Today's Islamic revival shares the dogmatism, communitarianism, and scripturalism of American evangelist movements: both reject culture, philosophy, and even theology to favor a literalist reading of sacred texts and an immediate understanding of truth through individual faith.
Recent books published in the West reflect this, with titles like What is Islam? , What Does It Mean To Be A Muslim? , and How To Experience Islam?
It is easy to fast during Ramadan in Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Egypt, even if one does not want to.
But a Muslim living in Europe is confronted with the necessity of objectifying the religion. Ulemas (religious scholars) are useless for believers who must search for purely religious criteria that are no longer linked to a given culture.
The real issue is not a theoretical question about Islam, but concerns the religious practices of Muslims.
The forms of religiosity in Islam today are more or less the same as those found in Catholicism, Protestantism, and even Judaism.
Contemporary adherents insist more on personal faith and individual spiritual experience.
Such "born again" believers rebuild their identities through their rediscovery of religion.
With Islamic fundamentalism, too, we are not witnessing a traditional religion asserting itself against the Christian West.
When the Taliban came to power in Afghanistan in 1996, they initially had excellent relations with the Americans, and Westerners could travel freely in Afghanistan between 1996 and 1998.
The Taliban were not fighting Western culture, but traditional Afghan culture.
Why forbid owning songbirds?
Why ban kites?
The rationale is common to all forms of fundamentalism: this world exists to prepare believers for salvation.
The state's role is not to ensure social justice and the rule of law, but to create opportunities - even through coercion - for believers to find salvation.
The Taliban's argument was simple: if your bird starts singing while you are praying, you will be distracted and your prayer will be nullified.
If you are a good Muslim, you will start again from the beginning.
But, because we are unsure that you are a good Muslim, it is easier to forbid owning songbirds, so that they cannot jeopardize your salvation.
Similarly, kites get tangled in trees, and if you climb the tree to free it, you might look over your neighbor's wall and see a woman without her veil, which would put you in sin.
Why risk burning in hell for a kite?
Better to ban them.
Fundamentalism is thus not a protest by original cultures under threat; it reflects these cultures' disappearance.
So it is a grave mistake to link modern forms of fundamentalism with the idea of a clash of civilizations.
Young people do not become fundamentalists because their parents' culture is ignored by Western civilization. Fundamentalist religiosity is individual and generational, a rebellion against the religion of one's parents.
Of course, religious fundamentalists of whatever stripe often emphasize similar codes, norms, and values.
When Pim Fortuyn in Holland decided to wage a campaign against Muslim influence, he was defending sexual freedom, not traditional Christian values.
But on this subject and others - say, family and abortion - religious Muslims in Europe side with conservative Christians.
Nevertheless, such commonalities do not explain political and radical Islam.
Osama Bin Laden is much more the expression of deracination than of a tradition of political violence in Islam.
Muhammad Atta, Zacharias Moussaoui, and Kamel Daoudi were "born again" in Marseilles, London, and Montreal, not in Egypt or Morocco (and they all broke ties with their families).
Moreover, young radicals go to fight in Bosnia, Chechnya, Afghanistan, or Kashmir rather than in their countries of origin, because they do not regard the Middle East as the heart of a Muslim civilization under siege by crusaders.
They live in a global world; they do not perceive themselves as Middle Easterners.
The irrelevance of traditional culture explains the growing number of converts in all the recently discovered radical networks.
The members of the Beghal network in France were roughly one-third converts.
The French police arrested a German citizen with a Polish name in connection with the terrorist attack on the synagogue in Djerba, Tunisia.
Richard Reid, who tried to blow up a British airplane, José Padilla, accused of plotting a "dirty bomb" attack in the United States, and John Walker Lindh, the American Taliban, are all converts.
In Europe, conversion is typically confined to underprivileged neighborhoods, populated by young people with no job prospects who generally live in an underground economy of delinquency.
The radical and violent left in Europe today has abandoned these zones of social exclusion.
Radicals used to learn to handle a Kalashnikov and hijack planes with the Palestinians. Now they learn to handle a Kalashnikov and hijack planes with Al Qaeda.
Their quest for mythic, messianic, transnational movements of liberation remains the same, as does the enemy: America's imperial colossus.
They are the product not of Western or Middle Eastern history, but the fusion of all histories, of globalization.
They are at home in a homeless world.
Countering Islamic Extremism
PRINCETON – Last month, US President Barack Obama hosted a three-day summit on “Countering Violent Extremism."
That term has already spawned a new abbreviation, “CVE," used no fewer than 12 times in a Fact Sheet released by the Obama administration on February 18.
The Fact Sheet also uses the term “violent extremism" 21 times.
How many times do terms like “Islam," “Islamic," or “Muslim" appear?
Zero.
There is not even a reference to the “Islamic State."
That entity is referred to only by the initials “ISIL."
This is not an accident; it is part of a strategy to win the support of mainstream Muslims.
Riham Osman, speaking on behalf of the Muslim Public Affairs Council, which participated in the summit, said that using terms like “radical Islam" harms the cause of stopping the violence.
This may partly reflect the Muslim community's understandable fears that associating Islam with terrorism and violence would contribute to an increase in attacks on, or discrimination against, all Muslims.
Another reason that has been offered for not referring to “Islamic radicalism" or the “Islamic State" is that to do so concedes the terrorists' claims that they are acting in accordance with Islam's teachings.
That might draw others, who regard themselves as pious Muslims, to join them.
Finally, the repeated use of “Islamic" as part of the description of enemy groups may make it appear that the West is “at war with Islam."
That could lead more moderate Muslims to fight alongside the extremists, thus broadening the conflict and making it more difficult to end.
Yet there are also problems with seeking to avoid these terms.
The first problem is political.
The conservative US Senator Ted Cruz, who may be about to announce his candidacy for the Republican presidential nomination, has said, “You cannot defeat an enemy if you refuse to acknowledge what it is."
That line could win votes.
Indeed, it is never a good idea for a politician to appear to be denying what we can all see before our eyes.
Moreover, because it is obvious to everyone that most violent extremism is being carried out in the name of Islam, avoiding the word is unlikely to prevent attacks on Muslims in response to this violence.
A further problem becomes apparent as soon as we ask why it is important that mainstream Muslim leaders stand up in public and say that their religion opposes killing innocent people, or that those who die when committing such acts are not “martyrs" and will not be rewarded in the afterlife.
Why should Muslim leaders, in particular, make such statements, rather than Christian, Buddhist, Jewish, or Hindu leaders?
The answer, once again, is obvious.
But it is obvious only because we already know that groups like Al Qaeda, the Islamic State, and the Taliban are not obeying the precepts of Christianity, Buddhism, Judaism, or Hinduism.
At the Washington summit, Obama said that “all of us have a responsibility to refute the notion that groups like ISIL somehow represent Islam, because that is a falsehood that embraces the terrorist narrative."
At least this statement, unlike the White House Fact Sheet, acknowledges that groups like the Islamic state claim to be Islamic.
Otherwise, what would be the relevance of this statement to “countering violent extremism"?
Nonetheless, Obama's assertion that “all of us" have this responsibility needs to be more narrowly directed.
If I tried to get into a debate with any moderately well-educated Islamic State supporter about whether that organization is true to the teachings of Islam, I would lose the argument.
I am not sufficiently expert in the Islamic tradition to be confident that extremists are misinterpreting it, and few of us are.
The responsibility to which Obama was referring rests with those who are much more learned in Islam than “all of us."
Even for people who are learned in Islam, discharging the responsibility Obama has placed on them will not be easy, as a reading of Graeme Wood's revealing recent account demonstrates.
Wood presents a picture of people driven by a firm belief in Islam, and knowledgeable about its key texts.
Anyone familiar with Christian fundamentalism in the United States should be able to discern a pattern in the attitudes taken by religious fundamentalists, independently of the religion to which they adhere.
The Islamic State's spokesmen insist on following the original precepts laid down by the Prophet Mohammed and his earliest followers, understood literally and with no adjustment for different circumstances.
Like Christian fundamentalists, they see themselves as preparing for – and helping to bring about – the apocalypse.
Let me emphasize that I am not saying that the beliefs of today's Christian fundamentalists are morally on a par with those of today's Muslim fundamentalists.
There is a vast moral difference between those who oppose the taking of innocent human life and those who kill people because of their nationality, or what they say, or because they are “apostates."
But the fundamentalists' worldviews are similar in important respects, regardless of the religion to which they adhere.
By now, the problem with trying to counter those who seek new recruits for “violent extremism" without focusing on this extremism's Islamic basis should be clear.
Those considering joining an extremist Islamic group should be told: You believe every other religion to be false, but adherents of many other religions believe just as firmly that your faith is false.
You cannot really know who is right, and you could all be wrong.
Either way, you do not have a sufficiently well-grounded justification for killing people, or for sacrificing your own life.
Granted, some people are not open to reasoning of any kind, and so will not be swayed by such an argument.
But others may be.
Why rule it out in advance by denying that much extremist violence is religiously motivated?
Memaksimalkan Keuangan Syariah demi Pembangunan Berkelanjutan
WASHINGTON, DC – Hampir sepertiga populasi dunia yang hidup dalam kemiskinan ekstrem berada di negara anggota Organisasi Kerja Sama Islam (OKI).
Di 21 dari 57 negara anggota, kurang dari setengah penduduk bisa mengakses sanitasi yang memadai.
Empat persen anak yang dilahirkan di negara-negara tersebut meninggal sebelum usia 5 tahun.
Sederhananya, walaupun memiliki potensi besar, banyak negara OKI kesulitan mewujudkan pembangunan berbasis luas (broad-based development).
Bagi sebagian besar negara, “kutukan sumber daya” (resource curse) sedang menghantui; di negara-negara lainnya, kepemimpinan yang lemah dan lembaga gagal adalah kedua faktor yang dipersalahkan.
Belum lagi fakta bahwa mayoritas (sekitar 71%) dari 125 juta penduduk yang dilanda konflik dan bencana alam berada di negara-negara OKI.
Ketidakstabilan menciptakan tekanan besar pada anggaran negara.
Tapi negara-negara mempunyai pilihan.
Terutama, modal yang sudah terkumpul di beberapa sistem keuangan di negara-negara OKI bisa berperan besar dalam pemenuhan tujuan-tujuan pembangunan – apalagi jika keuangan Islam/syariah diterapkan hingga mencapai potensi sepenuhnya.
Keuangan syariah memiliki keunggulan dibandingkan produk-produk keuangan konvensional.
Larangan riba (bunga bank) dan keharusan bahwa investasi dikaitkan dengan sektor ekonomi riil, serta pendekatan syariah tentang sistem bagi hasil (profit-and loss-sharing), menambah stabilitas sektor keuangan.
Keuangan syariah juga bisa meningkatkan inklusi keuangan, sebab sistem ini melibatkan orang, baik itu karena alasan budaya atau agama, yang terkecualikan dari sistem keuangan tradisional.
Ini barangkali satu alasan mengapa keuangan syariah meningkat 10-12% per tahun selama kurang lebih 10 tahun terakhir.
Jika peran keuangan syariah dalam revitalisasi dan diversifikasi perekonomian negara-negara OKI ingin dioptimalkan, pemerintah harus menjalankan beberapa reformasi penting.
Pertama, perlu ada lembaga-lembaga hukum lebih kuat yang melindungi hak kepemilikan dan menjamin penegakan kontrak.
Selain itu, agar warga sepenuhnya percaya pada produk-produk keuangan islam, industri harus diatur dan tunduk pada standar.
Kebijakan pajak negara juga perlu direvisi guna mencegah diskriminasi terhadap instrumen-instrumen keuangan syariah.
Kelompok Bank Dunia bekerja dengan sejumlah mitra untuk membantu perwujudan perubahan-perubahan tersebut.
Selain itu, Kelompok Bank Dunia telah meluncurkan proyek-proyek investasi yang menggunakan pembiayaan islam di sejumlah negara di kawasan Asia dan Afrika.
World Bank Treasury telah mengeluarkan berbagai jenis instrumen keuangan syariah, termasuk dua Sukuk (obligasi yang memenuhi prinsip syariah tentang bagi hasil), yang sudah menghasilkan $700 juta.
Sama halnya, International Financial Cooperation, unit sektor swasta Bank Dunia, telah mendirikan perusahaan penerbit sukuk, IFC Sukuk Company, yang sudah mengeluarkan sertifikat perwalian (trust certificate) berjumlah $100 juta pada tahun 2015.
Lembaga asuransi risiko politik di bawah Kelompok Bank Dunia, Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA), telah menyediakan jaminan investasi yang sesuai syariah sebanyak $427 juta bagi sebuah proyek infrastruktur di Djibouti dan asuransi risiko politik untuk investasi telekomunikasi di Indonesia.
Selain itu, bersama Kelompok Bank Pembangunan Islam, PBB, dan donor lainnya, Bank Dunia membentuk suatu fasilitas gabungan untuk membantu negara-negara yang terkena dampak terburuk dari ketidakstabilan dengan skema pinjaman konsesi (concessional finance), yang meliputi instrumen keuangan syariah bagi Lebanon dan Yordania guna membantu kedua negara menanggung biaya bantuan untuk pengungsi Suriah.
Teknologi terbaru bisa berperan besar dalam menjadikan sistem keuangan lebih inklusif, terutama bagi kelompok-kelompok yang menghadapi hambatan-hambatan terbesar dalam hal akses.
Contohnya, sekitar 90% pengungsi Suriah bisa mengakses smartphone yang seharusnya bisa dipakai mengakses layanan keuangan.
Kita perlu mengerahkan upaya agar kita mampu mendayagunakan teknologi-teknologi yang ada.
Terakhir, terdapat tujuan-tujuan kemanusiaan.
Memang benar, upaya tengah dilakukan agar wakaf (dana abadi umat), zakat (harta yang wajib dikeluarkan), dan berbagai jenis instrumen keuangan islam bisa disalurkan secara efektif dan efisien demi memenuhi kebutuhan kemanusiaan.
Keuangan syariah bisa menjadi solusi yang sangat dibutuhkan guna memecahkan tantangan-tantangan pembangunan di negara-negara Muslim.
Kemampuan sistem ini untuk memperkuat stabilitas keuangan, memajukan inklusi keuangan, dan menggerakkan pembangunan berkelanjutan dapat memacu perubahan transformasi di sekitar kawasan Asia dan Afrika.
Untuk meraih potensi ini, keuangan syariah, sama halnya dengan sistem konvensional, memerlukan lingkungan pendukung (enabling environment) yang sesuai, ditandai dengan kesempatan atau persaingan (playing field) yang setara, kerangka hukum yang memadai, dan kerja sama yang efektif.
Islamic Finance Unbound
WASHINGTON, DC – While uncertainty continues to roil global markets, driving many investors into full retreat, one part of the financial sector is expanding exponentially: Islamic-law-compliant financial assets have grown from about $5 billion in the late 1980’s to roughly $1.2 trillion in 2011.
This asset class, which is characterized by shared risk between institutions and clients, avoided many of the most severe consequences of the global financial crisis that began in 2008.
This resilience, along with several other key features, underpins the high performance and growing popularity of Islamic finance.
The global financial crisis adversely affected a small number of Islamic financial institutions as the real economy contracted and some issuers of Islamic bonds defaulted.
But the risk-sharing inherent to Islamic finance made such instruments more resistant to the first round of financial contagion that hit in 2008.
Leading economists, such as Harvard University’s Kenneth Rogoff, have suggested that Islamic finance demonstrates the advantages of more equity and risk-sharing over the conventional bias in favor of debt instruments.
Several distinctive features have made Islamic financial institutions relatively stable throughout the crisis.
One such feature is that Islamic finance emphasizes asset-backing, thereby ensuring a direct link between financial transactions and real economic activities.
Institutions’ savings and investment returns are closely linked, because they are determined by the real sector, not the financial sector.
This creates a flexible adjustment mechanism, should unanticipated shocks occur.
It also ensures that real asset and liability values are always equal, while prohibiting excessive leverage and several forms of complicated securitization.
Moreover, Islamic finance is more equitable: lenders and borrowers share risks and rewards, which increases the focus on long-term goals and discourages excessive short-term risk-taking.
In short, Islamic financial institutions treat their clients like business partners.
They therefore have strong incentives to evaluate financing requests carefully, and to assist borrowers in bad times, thus reducing the pressure to sell assets at “fire-sale” prices and minimizing the likelihood of financial contagion.
Finally, the Islamic financial framework protects deposit balances, and prevents excessive credit growth.
Islamic financial instruments are currently available in at least 70 countries, and today represent about 0.5% of global financial assets.
But the prospects for continued rapid growth are strong.
In its November 2011 “Global Islamic Banking Report,” Deutsche Bank projects a 24% compounded annual growth rate in Islamic assets over the coming three years.
There are five main reasons for this forecast:
·&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; Islamic finance offers savers and investors practical alternatives to conventional instruments.
·&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; The quality of Islamic financial services is improving, and these services are not limited to particular clients.
·&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; Conventional multinational financial institutions are increasingly offering Islamic assets, and there is growing interest in them in London, Luxembourg, and other world financial capitals.
·&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; The commodity boom in some Muslim countries has generated surpluses that need to be allocated through financial intermediaries and sovereign wealth funds.
·&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; Islamic financial instruments can comply with sharia – Islam’s moral code and religious law – as well as send signals of change compatible with recent developments in several Muslim-majority countries.
But realizing the potential of Islamic finance requires strong supervisory oversight.
Financial institutions need to enhance pre-lending screening and post-borrowing monitoring.
It is also problematic that, in many countries, debt receives advantageous tax treatment, which favors leverage over equity and profit/loss-sharing arrangements.
This should change.
Moreover, mortgages, mutual insurance, leasing, and microfinance are underdeveloped in Islamic finance; insolvency and bankruptcy procedures must be improved; and mechanisms to deal with “Islamic bond” defaults must be established.
Finally, Islamic financial institutions must address concerns about liquidity-risk management, compliance with Basel III (the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision’s most recent global regulatory standard), international accounting standards, and corporate governance.
While recent reports emphasize the size and growth of Islamic financial assets and instruments, it is the quality of services, continued financial innovation, and sound risk-management practices that will ultimately define their success.
By addressing its shortcomings, Islamic finance could encourage inclusive growth in many developing countries.
If Islamic finance can resolve key regulatory and corporate-governance issues, it has the potential to meet more people’s banking and investment needs, expand its reach, and contribute to greater financial stability and inclusion in the developing world.
That is something that everyone should welcome.
Islamicizing Malaysia
Malaysian society is now gripped by a fundamental question: is the country, which is more than half Muslim, an Islamic state?
In practice, various religious and ethnic groups give Malaysia a distinctly multi-cultural character.
But the Malaysian constitution provides room for arguments on both sides of the question, and the relatively secular status quo is facing a serious challenge.
Drafted by a group of experts in 1957, under the auspices of the country’s former British rulers, the constitution includes two seemingly contradictory clauses.
On the one hand, Article 3 states that Islam is the religion of the federation, and that only Islam can be preached to Muslims.
On the other hand, Article 11 guarantees freedom of religion for all.
As a result, Malaysia has developed both a general civil code, which is applied universally, and Islamic law, which is applied only to Muslims in personal and family matters.
Recently, however, some Muslim groups have pressed the government to proclaim Malaysia an Islamic state, on the basis of Article 3 and the Muslims’ population majority.
Ultimately, they would like Malaysia to be governed by Islamic law.
For years, there was little need to resolve this constitutional issue.
For example, if a Muslim decided to renounce his faith, the matter would be handled outside the legal system, or conversion records would be sealed.
Today, however, every Malaysian must declare a religious affiliation, which is registered with the government – a requirement that has made it difficult for a Muslim to leave Islam without formalizing the change of status through the legal process.
The country is now riveted on the fate of ordinary citizens like sales assistant Lina Joy and former religious teacher Kamariah Ali, who are trying to change their religious affiliation through the legal system.
Muslim professional organizations and the Islamic opposition political party hold the view that renunciation of Islam is punishable by death.
Likewise, the defense by Malaysian civil reform movements of individuals’ freedom of conscience has been denounced by some religious leaders as an attack on Islam.
Currently, Malaysia has no law that would impose the death penalty on apostates.
Yet public movements have been formed to highlight this Islamic tenet.
If it is not applied, the argument goes, there will be a massive exodus of Muslims to other faiths.
The immediate goal is to keep the courts from allowing Lina Joy or Kamariah Ali to convert.
Attempts by other democratic civil society groups to debate this issue in peaceful public forums have been thwarted by threats of violence from a coalition of Muslim non-governmental organizations calling themselves BADAI (the Malay acronym for Coalition against the Inter-Faith Commission).
Concerned about sparking an ethnic clash, Prime Minister Abdullah Ahmad Badawi has proclaimed a ban on open discussion of these issues, threatening to arrest Internet news providers and activists if they continue to fan such debates.
Badawi is right to be worried.
Since independence, national politics in Malaysia has reinforced group identity, especially among ethnic Malays, an exclusively Muslim community.
Identity politics allowed ethnic Malays to assert their claims to control over land, language, and religion.
All attempts to reduce Malay influence serve to mobilize this community – in both ethnic and religious terms.
Malay politicians have learned how to play this card very effectively.
Ethnic Malays’ special status has long been codified in affirmative action policies giving them special economic benefits.
However, as Malaysia engages with the global economy, these privileges may eventually be removed in order to heighten the country’s competitiveness.
As a result, many Malay-Muslims increasingly worry about the loss of familiar economic and political safeguards.
In particular, tensions have grown between the Malay majority and the country’s large Chinese minority, which has been quicker to benefit from Malaysia’s economic opening to the world.
Moreover, efforts to Islamicize the state comes at a time when conflict in the Middle East has further politicized Muslim movements in Malaysia.
They view themselves as counter-forces to cultural domination by the West, asserting their religious identity in the face of what they regard as imperializing ideas like secularism and human rights.
Small disputes are magnified by this underlying conflict.
Disagreements are increasingly depicted as being rooted in an East-West divide, as a struggle between believers and apostates.
Many Muslims are wary of this brand of identity politics.
They recognize that the intolerance of Islamist groups can easily be turned against moderate Muslims.
But all Malaysians must learn how to manage pressures that seem to be pushing their country’s constituent communities away from one another.
Defending a multi-cultural national identity in the face of religious intolerance is thus the great challenge facing Malaysia’s state and society.
Ending Blowback Terrorism
NEW YORK – Terrorist attacks on civilians, whether the downing over Sinai of a Russian aircraft killing 224 civilian passengers, the horrific Paris massacre claiming 129 innocent lives, or the tragic bombing in Ankara that killed 102 peace activists, are crimes against humanity.
Their perpetrators – in this case, the Islamic State (ISIS) – must be stopped.
Success will require a clear understanding of the roots of this ruthless network of jihadists.
Painful as it is to admit, the West, especially the United States, bears significant responsibility for creating the conditions in which ISIS has flourished.
Only a change in US and European foreign policy vis-à-vis the Middle East can reduce the risk of further terrorism.
The recent attacks should be understood as “blowback terrorism”: a dreadful unintended result of repeated US and European covert and overt military actions throughout the Middle East, North Africa, the Horn of Africa, and Central Asia that aimed to overthrow governments and install regimes compliant with Western interests.
These operations have not only destabilized the targeted regions, causing great suffering; they have also put populations in the US, the European Union, Russia, and the Middle East at significant risk of terror.
The public has never really been told the true history of Osama bin Laden, Al Qaeda, or the rise of ISIS in Iraq and Syria.
Starting in 1979, the CIA mobilized, recruited, trained, and armed Sunni young men to fight the Soviet Union in Afghanistan.
The CIA recruited widely from Muslim populations (including in Europe) to form the Mujahideen, a multinational Sunni fighting force mobilized to oust the Soviet infidel from Afghanistan.
Bin Laden, from a wealthy Saudi family, was brought in to help lead and co-finance the operation.
This was typical of CIA operations: relying on improvised funding through a wealthy Saudi family and proceeds from local smuggling and the narcotics trade.
By promoting the core vision of a jihad to defend the lands of Islam (Dar al-Islam) from outsiders, the CIA produced a hardened fighting force of thousands of young men displaced from their homes and stoked for battle.
It is this initial fighting force – and the ideology that motivated it – that today still forms the basis of the Sunni jihadist insurgencies, including ISIS.
While the jihadists’ original target was the Soviet Union, today the “infidel” includes the US, Europe (notably France and the United Kingdom), and Russia.
At the end of the 1980s, with the Soviet retreat from Afghanistan, some elements of the Mujahideen morphed into Al Qaeda, Arabic for “the base,” which referred to the military facilities and training grounds in Afghanistan built for the Mujahideen by bin Laden and the CIA.
After the Soviet withdrawal, the term Al Qaeda shifted meaning from the specific military base to the organizational base of jihadist activities.
Blowback against the US began in 1990 with the first Gulf War, when the US created and expanded its military bases in the Dar al-Islam, most notably in Saudi Arabia, the home of Islam’s founding and holiest sites.
This expanded US military presence was anathema to the core jihadist ideology that the CIA had done so much to foster.
America’s unprovoked war on Iraq in 2003 unleashed the demons.
Not only was the war itself launched on the basis of CIA lies; it also aimed to create a Shia-led regime subservient to the US and anathema to the Sunni jihadists and the many more Sunni Iraqis who were ready to take up arms.
More recently, the US, France, and the UK toppled Muammar el-Qaddafi in Libya, and the US worked with the Egyptian generals who ousted the elected Muslim Brotherhood government.
In Syria, following President Bashar al-Assad’s violent suppression of peaceful public protests in 2011, the US, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, and other regional allies helped to foment a military insurgency that has pushed the country into a downward spiral of chaos and violence.
Such operations have failed – repeatedly and frequently disastrously – to produce legitimate governments or even rudimentary stability.
On the contrary, by upending established, albeit authoritarian, governments in Iraq, Libya, and Syria, and destabilizing Sudan and other parts of Africa deemed hostile to the West, they have done much to fuel chaos, bloodshed, and civil war.
It is this turmoil that has enabled ISIS to capture and defend territory in Syria, Iraq, and parts of North Africa.
Three steps are needed to defeat ISIS and other violent jihadists.
First, US President Barack Obama should pull the plug on CIA covert operations.
The use of the CIA as a secret army of destabilization has a long, tragic history of failure, all hidden from public view under the agency’s cloak of secrecy.
Ending CIA-caused mayhem would go far to staunch the instability, violence, and anti-Western hatred that fuels today’s terrorism.
Second, the US, Russia, and the other permanent members of the United Nations Security Council should immediately stop their infighting and establish a framework for Syrian peace.
Finally, the long-term solution to regional instability lies in sustainable development.
The entire Middle East is beset not only by wars but also by deepening development failures: intensifying fresh water stress, desertification, high youth unemployment, poor educational systems, and other serious blockages.
More wars – especially CIA-backed, Western-led wars – will solve nothing.
By contrast, a surge of investment in education, health, renewable energy, agriculture, and infrastructure, financed both from within the region and globally, is the real key to building a more stable future for the Middle East and the world.
Democracy’s Missing Meaning
NEW YORK – The decision to abandon relative peace and prosperity for brutal war and instability may seem irrational.
But young people, born and raised in democratic societies, have increasingly been yielding to the appeal of death-dealing groups like the Islamic State, leaving their homes and families to wage jihad in faraway places.
Why has democracy lost the allegiance of these restless spirits, and how can it recapture the hearts and minds of others who would follow suit?
The philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche once wrote that humans would rather will nothingness than not will anything at all.
The leaden despair of lifelessness, impotence, and hopelessness is vastly less appealing than intensity – even if that intensity is found in violence, death, and destruction.
In short, it is a matter of meaningfulness, the presence of which motivates us, connects us to one another, and orders our lives.
If it is missing – if, say, democratic ideals and institutions are failing to provide a palpable enough sense of community and purpose – people seek a sense of meaning elsewhere, which in some cases leads them to malevolent causes.
This is the cultural challenge facing democracy today, and those who wish to maintain the freedom and promise of democratic societies ignore it at their peril.
It is a challenge that should be recognized not only for what it says about living conditions in advanced democratic countries worldwide, but also because any crisis is also an opportunity – in this case, to recapture the meaning that lies at the heart of democracy.
The appeal of groups like the Islamic State to young people reared in democratic countries highlights these societies’ growing disparities in educational and economic opportunity, which are breeding cynicism, resignation, and anger among those who find themselves locked out of the social elite.
Feelings of hopelessness and despair at the center incite extremism at the fringes.
Elites in the advanced democracies – say, the top 1% of income earners – can hardly take comfort from such conditions.
Even the most insular globetrotter, flitting from one market or cultural playground to another, must consider their children.
What culture will they absorb?
From where will they derive their sense of hope for the future?
Defenders of democracy must now determine not only how to create jobs and ensure material prosperity for today’s young people, but also how to feed their souls on the way.
If they fail, as we have seen, others will fill the void, potentially with a call for mayhem in the name of messianic futurity.
To win this high-stakes contest, democratic societies must look beyond battlefield victory and focus on winning hearts and minds through the power of ideas and the promise of meaningfulness – just as the Islamic State has done.
The notion that democracies can fend off such forces, with their well-resourced and media-savvy ideological apparatuses, with guns alone is a sure loser.
This is a battle of meanings, and it can be won only with ideas that inspire hope, action, and coherence of self and community.
The effort should begin with a publicly commissioned gathering of a broad cross-section of political scientists, anthropologists, theologians, philosophers, and artists, among others, from across the political spectrum, convened from universities and similar institutions around the world. Over a predetermined period, they would produce a clear, plainly written report to the public.
The report should address, tenaciously and honestly, key questions about democracy’s vitality today.
What lies at the wellsprings of democratic life?
How is it best expressed, performed, instituted, and safeguarded?
What is democracy’s best message of hope, and its most credible promise of future flourishing?
What are the deep cultural, intellectual, and spiritual sources for freedom, tolerance, and productivity?
We live in a dangerous time.
With democratic ideals under threat around the world, including within democratic countries, their shared cultural and ideological foundations cannot be taken for granted.
The meaning and vitality of life in a democracy cannot be allowed to fade.
The challenge ahead demands a concerted response from our deepest thinkers and most creative artists.
This is our purpose today; we must commit ourselves to it as passionately as democracy’s enemies pursue theirs.
Blinded By ISIS
MADRID – The general consensus emerging since last month’s carnage in Paris seems to be that the Islamic State (ISIS) can be defeated only by a ground invasion of its “state.”
This is a delusion.
Even if the West and its local allies (the Kurds, the Syrian opposition, Jordan, and other Sunni Arab countries) could agree about who would provide the bulk of ground troops, ISIS has already reshaped its strategy.
It is now a global organization with local franchised groups capable of wreaking havoc in Western capitals.
In fact, ISIS has always been a symptom of a deeper malady.
Disintegration in the Arab Middle East reflects the region’s failure to find a path between the bankrupt, secular nationalism that has dominated its state system since independence and a radical brand of Islam at war with modernity.
The fundamental problem consists in an existential struggle between utterly dysfunctional states and an obscenely savage brand of theocratic fanaticism.
With that struggle, in which most of the region’s regimes have exhausted their already-limited stores of legitimacy, a century-old regional order is collapsing.
Indeed, Israel, Iran, and Turkey – all non-Arab-majority countries – are probably the region’s only genuinely cohesive nation-states.
For years, key states in the region – some of them, like Saudi Arabia and Qatar, darlings of the West – have essentially paid protection money to jihadists.
Yes, America’s wars in the region – as destructive as they were stupid – bear a substantial part of the blame for the mayhem now engulfing the Fertile Crescent.
But that does not exculpate the Arab fundamentalist monarchies for their role in reviving the seventh-century vision that ISIS (and others) seek to realize.
ISIS’s army of psychopaths and adventurers was launched as a “startup” by Sunni magnates in the Gulf who envied Iran’s success with its Lebanese Shia proxy, Hezbollah.
It was the combination of an idea and the money to propagate it that created this monster and nurtured its ambition to forge a totalitarian caliphate.
For years, the Wahhabis of Arabia have been the fountainhead of Islamist radicalism and the primary backer and facilitator of extremist groups throughout the region.
As former US Senator Bob Graham, the lead author of the classified Senate report on the terror attacks of September 11, 2001, put it earlier this year, “ISIS is a product of Saudi ideals” and “Saudi money.”
Indeed, Wikileaks quotes former US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton accusing Qatar and Saudi Arabia of collusion “with Al Qaeda, the Taliban, and other terrorist groups.”
That raises an obvious question: When regimes in the region collaborate with terrorist groups, how can intelligence cooperation with them, let alone a coalition to fight Islamic extremism, be credible?
The so-called pro-Western regimes in the Arab Middle East simply do not see eye to eye with the West about the meaning and implications of the war on terror, or even about what violent radicalism is.
That is just one reason why an invasion of the caliphate, with local armies supported by Western airstrikes, could have devastating unintended consequences – think of George W. Bush’s invasion of Iraq.
Indeed, even if such a division of labor could be agreed, a ground invasion that denies ISIS its territorial base in Iraq and Syria would merely push it to redeploy in a region that is collapsing into various no man’s lands.
At that point, “Caliph” Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, or some future would-be caliph, would invariably fuse the region’s mounting governance chaos with a global jihadi campaign – a process that, as we have seen in Paris and elsewhere, has already started.
The ideological and strategic rift between ISIS and Al Qaeda notwithstanding, an alliance against the common enemy – the incumbent Arab regimes and the West – cannot be entirely discounted.
Osama Bin Laden himself never ruled out the idea of establishing a caliphate.
Indeed, his terrorism was perceived as a prelude to it.
At the same time, Syria and Iran might exploit the inevitable chaos to expand their presence in Iraq, and all parties, including Turkey, would oppose a central role for the Kurds.
The latter have proven themselves to be tremendously reliable and capable fighters, as the battles to liberate the cities of Kobani and Sinjar from ISIS control have shown.
But no one should think that they can be the West’s tool for subduing the Sunni heartland of Iraq and Syria.
Nor is it clear that the West is capable of compensating the Kurds with full-fledged statehood.
The geostrategic constraints that have prevented Kurdish independence for centuries are even more acute today.
Some of the consequences of a Western-backed Arab invasion of the caliphate are no less predictable for being “unintended.”
It would eventually stir up mass sympathy for the caliphate throughout the region, thus providing ISIS with a propaganda victory and further inspiration for alienated young Muslims in Europe and elsewhere to fight the "Crusaders" and the Muslim "traitors" aligned with them.
The only realistic alternative is more – much more – of the same.
That means a constant and resolute effort to stop the caliphate’s expansion, cut off its sources of finance, deepen and expand intelligence cooperation among credible allies, end the oil-rich monarchies’ collusion with terrorist groups, and encourage reform (without engaging in grand state-building projects).
The Arab Middle East is not susceptible to quick fixes.
It requires profound indigenous change that might take the better part of this century to produce.
For now, turning the caliphate into yet another failed state in the region seems to be the best possible outcome.
The Ransom Dilemma
PRINCETON – Anyone who does not share the ideology of the so-called “Islamic State” in Iraq and Syria is likely to agree that it is wrong for the group’s adherents to behead some of those they have held hostage.
Much more controversial, however, are the secret decisions by European governments to pay such groups ransoms for the release of their nationals.
Although the Islamic State’s hostages have come from several countries, so far it has beheaded only those from the United States and the United Kingdom.
The only European hostage reported to have been executed directly by the Islamic State appears to have been a Russian, Sergey Gorbunov, but little is known about him.
No friend or relative has come forward, and no video of his death has been released.
Russian officials have publicly doubted that he was a Russian citizen.
On the other hand, the Islamic State has released 15 hostages, including citizens of Italy, France, Switzerland, Denmark, and Spain.
Rukmini Callimachi, reporting for the New York Times, has explained the difference in treatment.
The US and UK governments have a long-standing policy of refusing to pay ransoms to terrorist organizations.
Moreover, when Michael Foley, brother of James Foley, one of the hostages, received a ransom demand, the FBI warned him that under US law, to pay money to terrorists is a crime.
Foley was later executed.
By contrast, for more than a decade several European governments have been willing to pay terrorists millions of euros for the release of their captive citizens, or have facilitated the payment of ransoms by relatives and friends of hostages.
This is notwithstanding the United Nations Security Council’s unanimous adoption in January of a resolution opposing payment of such ransoms, and a similar declaration at last year’s G-8 summit – which was signed by some of the governments that have continued to pay.
France has, according to Callimachi, paid more ransom money than any other country – a total of $58 million since 2008, including a single payment of $40 million in 2013 for four French citizens captured in Mali.
But French policy may be changing.
After France participated in airstrikes against the Islamic State in September 2014, an Algerian jihadist group captured Hervé Gourdel, a French tourist, and threatened to execute him unless France renounced its participation in the operations.
This time France stood firm, with Prime Minister Manuel Valls saying that to retreat one inch would be to hand victory to the militants.
Gourdel was beheaded.
The pressure on governments to pay ransoms, or at least facilitate the payment of ransoms by families desperate to save their loved ones’ lives, is understandable.
It is an application of the so-called “Rule of Rescue”: our perceived duty to spend almost any amount to save an identifiable victim, such as a trapped miner, an injured mountain climber, or an extremely premature baby.
We are far less willing to invest in saving lives when the victims cannot be identified in advance, even when the number of lives saved would be higher – for example, by providing better road safety or education in preventive health measures.
The Rule of Rescue should be understood as a rule about human psychology, not about morality.
Applying it can seem justifiable if we put ourselves in the position of a captive, or imagine that our child, parent, or spouse has been captured by terrorists who make a credible offer to release our loved one for a ransom.
But this argument trades on our inability to put ourselves in the position of any of the larger number of people killed by the Islamic State and other terrorist groups.
They have become victims only because the estimated $125 million in ransom money paid to such groups over the past six years has enabled them to arm more militants to carry out lethal attacks.
We ought to use our resources to save the most lives; and, overall, paying ransoms is likely to lead to more lives being lost.
Moreover, the additional military strength that terrorists gain from ransom revenue is not the only harm caused by paying ransoms.
Ransoming one Western hostage creates an incentive for militants to capture another.
Graeme Wood, a journalist who spent four years working in the Middle East, notes that journalists in dangerous areas were always at risk of being kidnapped or killed for ideological reasons; but it does not help that a Western journalist could be worth millions of dollars, a sum he calls “universally motivating.”
General John Allen, a former US commander in Afghanistan and now President Barack Obama’s special envoy to the international coalition fighting the Islamic State, argues that we cannot know how many Americans have not been kidnapped because the group knows that it will not receive ransoms for them.
He points out that “the fact that there are Americans in the region who were never taken because [the Islamic State and its allies] knew there was no advantage to doing so needs to be factored in.”
Governments that pay ransoms are saving the lives of some of their citizens, but putting the remainder of their citizens – and others – at greater risk.
The refusal to pay ransoms to terrorists can seem callous, but in truth it is the only ethical policy.
Every government should adhere to it.
Flights From Freedom
LONDON – Among the most chilling developments in the rise of the Islamic State is that so many citizens of Western countries have joined the group’s ranks, becoming suicide bombers and beheading hostages.
Why do hundreds of Muslims, many of them educated and from middle-class backgrounds, leave comfortable Western democracies to join a brutally barbaric movement?
What makes young men and women susceptible to the extremist Islamist message?
As he watched the rise of the Nazis in the 1930s, Sigmund Freud described the dangerous appeal of authoritarian leaders and the satisfying self-aggrandizement that their followers experience when they subsume their personalities in an ideology or group.
For those acolytes, freedom is a psychologically burdensome condition.
As one of Freud’s disciples, Erich Fromm, famously argued, the urge to escape the demands of free choice – by adopting rigid beliefs or norms of conformity – can be especially compelling for those whose sense of a strong autonomous identity or a capacity to think for themselves is not fully developed.
The contemporary democracies from which Western jihadis defect offer an unprecedented degree of freedom.
It is hard to think of a form of political community that requires so little allegiance from its members, proposes so few shared norms, and enforces so few behavioral guidelines.
In nearly every aspect of our lives – morals, manners, sexuality, family structure, careers, and religious beliefs – we Westerners are essentially free to do as we like.
This may seem like a highly desirable state of affairs, conducive to the cultivation of a good life.
But in the last few decades, Western democracies have been undergoing a marked identity crisis, manifested in an unwillingness to articulate organizing ethical principles or to project democratic values onto the international stage.
Internally, there is widespread disengagement from the political system and a growing sense of radical disaffection among some citizens, especially the young.
There also appears to be a widespread increase in psychological dysfunction, ranging from anorexia and obesity to attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and widespread depression, all of which have led to a massive increase in the consumption of psychoactive drugs.
Such symptoms and syndromes cannot be understood in purely economic terms, if only because they are as prevalent among the middle class as they are among the poor.
What is possible, however, is that the Western ethos of unhampered freedom and permissive tolerance fails to provide some people with the psychological scaffolding needed to construct an identity that can cope with the demands and pressures of constant individual choice.
We develop our identities in relation to others.
The incorporation of cultural assumptions, ideas, and aspirations structures our perception of the world and provides us with psychological and moral orientation.
In today’s open, multicultural societies, the need to choose is ever-present, whether the issue is banal (Which toothpaste should I buy?) or essential (Where do I find sources of purpose or meaning in my life?).
But, with no shared cultural norms on which to base decisions regarding, say, how to achieve wellbeing or to direct one’s life, how can one distinguish between good and bad choices?
What counts as right or wrong, serious or spurious?
In a sense, Westerners who choose to embrace fanatical Islamist ideology are an extreme manifestation of a much wider phenomenon.
The Islamic State’s ruthlessly rigid creed relieves its followers of the disorienting burden of autonomous thought or choice.