I can think of few more useful guides to that challenge than Keynes, Polanyi, and Tocqueville.
Thirty Years of “Test-Tube” Babies
MELBOURNE – Louise Brown, the first person to be conceived outside a human body, turned 30 last year.
The birth of a “test-tube baby,” as the headlines described in vitro fertilization was highly controversial at the time.
Leon Kass, who subsequently served as chair of President George W. Bush’s Council on Bioethics, argued that the risk of producing an abnormal infant was too great for an attempt at IVF ever to be justified.
Some religious leaders also condemned the use of modern scientific technology to replace sexual intercourse, even when it could not lead to conception.
Since then, some three million people have been conceived by IVF, enabling otherwise infertile couples to have the child they longed for.
The risk of having an abnormal child through IVF has turned out to be no greater than when parents of a similar age conceive though sexual intercourse.
However, because many IVF practitioners transfer two or three embryos at a time to improve the odds of a pregnancy occurring, twins and higher multiple births are more common, and carry some additional risk.
The Roman Catholic Church has not moved away from its opposition to IVF.
In a recently released instruction, Dignitas Personae, the Church’s Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith objects to IVF on several grounds, including the fact that many embryos are created in the process, and few survive.
This outcome is not, however, very different from natural conception, for the majority of embryos conceived by sexual intercourse also fail to implant in the uterine wall, with the woman often not even knowing that she was ever “pregnant.”
In addition, the Vatican objects to the fact that conception is the result of a “technical action” rather “a specific act of the conjugal union.”
But while any couple would prefer to conceive a child without the intervention of doctors, that option is not available for infertile couples.
In those circumstances, it is harsh to say to a couple that they cannot have their own genetic child at all.
It also appears contrary to the broad thrust of the Church’s teaching about marriage and the family as the appropriate context for rearing children. Dignitas Personae says that new human life should be “generated through an act which expresses the reciprocal love between a man and a woman.”
But if by that the Church is referring to sexual intercourse, then it surely has an unduly narrow view of what kinds of acts can express reciprocal love between a man and a woman.
Taking the several inconvenient and sometimes unpleasant steps required to have a child together by means of IVF can be, and often is, the result of a much more deliberate and reciprocally loving act than sexual intercourse.
A better objection to IVF is that in a world with millions of orphaned or unwanted children, adoption is a more ethical way of having a child.
If that is the argument, however, why should we single out couples who use IVF?
Why not, for example, criticize Jim Bob and Michelle Duggar, the Arkansas couple who recently had their 18th child?
Yet Michelle Duggar was named “Young Mother of the Year” in Arkansas in 2004, when she had already given birth to 14 children.
I haven’t noticed the Vatican telling them that they should be adopting instead of conceiving so many children.
Religious opposition notwithstanding, the use of IVF by infertile couples of normal reproductive age has been widely accepted around the world, and rightly so.
But in countries where the Church’s influence remains strong, IVF’s opponents are fighting back.
In Poland, for example, proposed new legislation would drastically restrict its availability.
Elsewhere, the ethical debate is not about IVF itself, but the limits of its use.
Last November, Rajo Devi, a 70-year-old Indian woman, became the world’s oldest mother, thanks to IVF.
She and her 72 year-old husband have, she says, longed for a child through 55 years of marriage.
Her husband’s sperm appears to have been used, but news reports are unclear about the source of the egg.
Some will find it grotesque to become a mother at an age when most women are grandmothers, but the more significant question is what kind of care such children will have if their parents die or become incapable of rearing them.
Like many people in rural India, Devi lives in an extended family with other relatives, so she is confident that there would be others to bring up her child if necessary. 
But, as this example suggests, the impact of parental age on a child’s welfare will vary from one culture to another.
Becoming a mother at 70 is more acceptable for someone living in a joint family than it would be for Western couples living in their own home without close relatives or friends nearby.
This Recovery is Different
BRUSSELS – The misguided belief that “this time is different” led policymakers to permit the credit boom of the early 2000’s to continue for too long, thus preparing the ground for the biggest financial crisis in living memory.
But now, when it comes to recovery, the belief that this time should not be different might be equally dangerous.
Many policymakers and economists have observed that the recovery from the 2007-2008 financial crisis has been much slower than most recoveries of the post-war era, which needed only a little more than a year, on average, to restore output and employment to their previous levels.
By this standard, the current recovery is unacceptably slow, with both output and employment still below the previous peak.
Policymakers thus feel justified in using all available macroeconomic levers to achieve a recovery that resembles those of the past.
In doing so, officials are reluctant to take into account that the recent crisis resulted from an unprecedented credit boom gone bust. To some extent, it should have been logical to expect an unprecedented upturn as well.
When the crisis erupted, many hoped for a V-shaped recovery, notwithstanding a substantial body of research showing that recoveries from recessions caused by a financial crisis tend to be weaker and slower than recoveries from “normal” recessions.
The observation that recoveries following a financial crisis are different suggests that standard macroeconomic policies might not work as one would usually expect.
And a transatlantic comparison suggests that this may indeed be the case.
One would expect that the shock from the financial crisis should be comparable for the United States and the eurozone, given that they are of similar size, exhibit a similar degree of internal diversity, and experienced a similar increase in house prices (on average) in the years preceding the bust.
Moreover, the relative increase in debt (leverage) in the financial system was similar on both sides of the Atlantic.
And, indeed, US economic performance has been very similar to that of the eurozone since the start of the crisis: GDP per capita today is still about 2% below the 2007 level on both sides of the Atlantic.
The unemployment rate in the US and the eurozone has increased by about the same amount as well – three percentage points.
Of course, one can point to particular countries in Europe that are mired in recession.
But the US also has depressed areas.
For Ireland and Spain, read Nevada and California (and, for Greece, read Puerto Rico).
The proper comparison is thus between the average of two continental-sized economies, both of which are characterized by considerable internal diversity.
These similarities in economic performance are striking, given that macroeconomic policy in the US and the eurozone has been so different.
The US let its fiscal deficit rise above 10% of GDP, compared to less than 6% of GDP in the eurozone.
Measured over a five-year period (2007-2012), the US has thus not done any better than the eurozone, although it has relied on a much larger dose of fiscal expansion.
In the US (and the United Kingdom), the general government deficit today is still around 8% of GDP, compared to a little more than 3% of GDP in the eurozone, and the US debt/GDP ratio has increased by more than 41 percentage points, compared to “only” 25 points in the eurozone.
In fact, the economy that has imbibed the strongest dose of expansionary policy has recovered less: GDP per capita in the UK today is still 6% below the 2007 level.
Of course, one could argue that the UK was particularly exposed to the bust, because financial services make up a large part of its GDP.
But the fact remains that its economy, supposedly the most flexible in Europe, has not recovered from the shock five years later, despite massive fiscal and monetary stimulus, coupled with a substantial devaluation.
On balance, it thus seems that this time – or, rather, this post-crisis environment – really is different, and that macroeconomic policies have done little to improve matters.
Countries like the US and the UK, which are accumulating debt at a record pace, are betting that deficit spending will eventually pay off in a stronger economy.
But they risk ending up with debt/GDP ratios north of 100%, which would leave them at the mercy of financial markets should sentiment turn against them.
History suggests that interest rates will not remain at record-low levels indefinitely, and that when change comes, it might be abrupt.
Why should we expect this time to be different?
Thailand’s Democratic Disorder
BANGKOK – From Thailand to Turkey to Ukraine, the relationship between ruling majorities and electoral minorities has become combustible – and is threatening to erode the legitimacy of democracy itself.
The unfolding crisis in Bangkok – where a political minority has taken to the streets to bring down Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra’s democratically elected government – is a case in point.
Yingluck’s Pheu Thai Party (PTP) won an outright majority in Thailand’s 2011 general election, gaining 265 MPs in the 500-member lower house.
But the opposition Democratic Party – which returned 159 MPs, mainly from Bangkok and southern Thailand – has lately been staging protests in the capital.
The so-called “People’s Committee for Democratic Reform” – led by former Democratic Party MP Suthep Thaugsuban and supported by the Bangkok-based establishment – has effectively attempted to stage a coup.
The protests began when the government tried to enact amnesty legislation that would have overturned the conviction of former Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra – Yingluck’s brother and the PTP’s founder, who was overthrown by the military in 2006 – on charges of corruption and abuse of power.
(It also would have superseded the murder charges brought against the Democratic Party’s leader, former Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva.)
But Yingluck’s subsequent attempt to backtrack on the amnesty measure failed to mollify the opposition.
In fact, the street protests intensified, fueled by a new grievance.
The Yingluck government had refused to accept the Constitutional Court’s ruling against a bill to change the senate from a half-appointed to a fully elected chamber.
The government asserted that the court did not have jurisdiction over constitutional amendments.
The People’s Committee viewed this rejection as an attempt to pressure the king into countersigning the law – and thus as a threat to royal prerogatives and the king’s exalted role in Thailand.
The People’s Committee’s position deserves explanation, if not agreement.
Since the turn of the century, Thaksin’s party machines, powered by his populist policies, have overcome constant challenges – from both the military and the Constitutional Court – to beat the conservative-royalist Democrats in every election.
Opposition forces, fed up as much with Thaksin’s corrupt practices as with his longstanding popularity, have recently begun seizing government ministries and calling for a royally appointed government.
If they succeed, PTP supporters will likely descend on Bangkok, much as they did in 2009-2010, after a “judicial coup” dissolved Thaksin’s People’s Power Party, the PTP’s predecessor, and the Democrats formed a coalition government.
But, this time, the protesters will be even angrier, and the stakes will be much higher, because the monarchy’s role in Thailand’s electoral democracy will be called into question.
The mere plausibility of such an outcome underscores Thailand’s deep political polarization.
The PTP’s supporters are happy with a system that grants them a political voice – indeed, predictable electoral majorities – and that safeguards their rights.
But the minority – which comprises up to two-fifths of the electorate – is at a loss.
Its legitimacy and influence depend not on winning electoral majorities, but on its strong alliances with the military, bureaucracy, and judiciary in defense of a traditional hierarchy that places the king at its apex.
Making matters worse, voters on both sides are tuning in only to views with which they agree, rather than attempting to understand and reconcile opposing arguments.
Social media – the much-lauded catalyst of democratization in authoritarian countries – has exacerbated the trend toward polarization in Thailand, just as it has in other electoral democracies that are struggling with a widening majority-minority divide, like Turkey and Malaysia.
In emerging democracies, electoral minorities tend to be tied to the old establishment, and often oppose change led by popular upstarts.
Feeling marginalized and resentful, they may turn to public platforms like social media and the streets to advance their causes and undermine their opponents’ authority.
The proliferation of information technology, together with the unprecedented popular participation that it has fueled, means that electoral minorities have a growing number of increasingly powerful tools at their disposal to organize movements aimed at paralyzing their countries’ governments and even shortening leaders’ terms in office.
Indeed, with so much seemingly at stake, a four- or five-year term may seem too long to wait for change.
But, while the right to peaceful protest is critically important in a democracy, electoral minorities should not use endless demonstrations to take the political system hostage.
In order to create a peaceful, stable, and effective democratic system, electoral minorities must accept the ballot box as the arbiter of political legitimacy.
At the same time, majorities should not view an electoral victory as a license to act without regard for minority concerns.
While the government must deliver for its constituents, it must also protect its opponents’ rights.
To this end, Thailand urgently needs a new social contract that allows elected representatives to do their jobs, without marginalizing the establishment-based minority.
Increasingly complex majority-minority dynamics are shaping the democratization prospects of a number of countries, and could influence democracy’s durability as a system of government.
Thailand’s experience suggests that efforts to subvert the system by thwarting the will of the majority may ultimately be fruitless, though not before imposing extremely high costs on everyone.
Climate and Competitiveness
BERLIN – As Europe’s debt crisis fades, another economic disaster seems to be looming – the price of energy.
Since the early 2000’s, average electricity prices for Europe’s industries have more or less doubled, and European companies now pay twice as much for gas as their US competitors do.
Are Europe’s highly ambitious climate policies – which seek to increase costs for “bad” energy sources – destroying the continent’s industrial base?
At first glance, the numbers seem to support the doomsayers.
How can such a huge price gap not have an impact on competitiveness?
But if high energy prices lead to declining exports, how is it that Germany, which boasts some of the world’s most ambitious climate policies, has doubled its exports since 2000?
In fact, empirical evidence shows that in many cases, further reducing carbon-dioxide emissions might help to make industries more competitive.
Exploring this potential could open up significant opportunities not only to combat climate change, but also to foster Europe’s long-term economic robustness.
Since 2005, when the European Union introduced its Emissions Trading System, German industry has achieved massive gains in market share, despite energy prices having risen much faster than in the US and elsewhere.
According to OECD estimates, the relative export performance of high-cost Germany increased by 10% from 2005 to 2013, while US exports grew only 1.2% faster than demand in the rest of the world.
In 2013, both German and US exports fell slightly in relative terms – hardly a sign of an energy-driven competitiveness divide.
The same holds true, though at a more modest level, even for energy-intensive industries, like chemicals.
Despite already-high and rising energy prices, Europe’s chemical industry has grown at about the same rate as the rest of the economy since 1995.
Today, EU chemical companies specialize in high-value products, and Europe exports much more of them than it imports.
The reason is simple: there is more – much more – to competitiveness than energy prices.
Indeed, estimates for Germany show that for most of its industrial base, energy costs account for a mere 1.6% of gross value added.
Thus, even rapidly rising energy prices imply only a limited additional cost burden for firms.
Of course, this burden is higher for industries such as chemicals.
But energy-intensive industries usually benefit from exemptions on carbon charges.
And, even in these sectors, competitiveness must be defined in a much broader sense than that given simply by comparing cost statistics.
For example, factors like highly qualified labor, or the benefits of being integrated into well-functioning clusters, probably play a more important role.
Clearly, such considerations provide no guarantee that rising energy prices will not at some point seriously challenge European competitiveness.
Indeed, new investment in chemical plants has grown only slowly for years now.
But, while this risk must be taken seriously, history suggests that there may well be a way out that does not require rolling back climate policies.
What is notable is that rising energy prices have been accompanied not only by relatively robust competitiveness, but also by huge reductions in CO2 emissions.
Europe’s chemical industry has halved its greenhouse-gas emissions compared to 1990, while increasing output by 20%.
This suggests that rapidly reducing emissions may sometimes even help to maintain a firm’s competitiveness.
In a pilot study on specific chemical products for the European Climate Foundation, experts from McKinsey identified the potential for a further 50-75% reduction in CO2 emissions.
Moreover, in an estimated 60-70% of cases, exploring the additional abatement opportunity would have no effect – or would even strengthen – the industry’s competitiveness.
This is because greater reliance on recycling, for example, reduces costs – and thus enhances companies’ competitiveness – while reducing emissions and driving new approaches like cross-sector innovation.
It would certainly not be wise to allow Europe’s energy bill to explode in the name of ambitious climate policies.
There are smarter ways to reduce emissions than just raising costs for industry and consumers.
But it would be equally senseless to push for less ambitious policies, thereby stalling progress in the fight against climate change, without being sure that doing so would improve European competitiveness.
The new paradigm should focus on finding ways to reduce CO2 emissions in ways that ultimately help to produce better products at lower cost.
This will also help European producers capture new markets in emerging countries, which will increasingly demand the high-value chemical products that Europe already produces competitively.
The last thing a crisis-weary Europe needs is a new competitiveness gap.
But ambitious climate targets, as Germany and other successful European economies have shown, are not the problem. They could even be part of the solution.
Threading the Fiscal Needle
PALO ALTO – Elections often turn on the state of the economy, especially in hard times.
When growth and jobs are down, voters throw out incumbents – whether Spanish leftists, French rightists, or Dutch centrists.
The United States is no exception.
Three years into the Great Depression, Herbert Hoover was trounced by Franklin Delano Roosevelt.
In 1980, following a severe bout of stagflation, Ronald Reagan routed Jimmy Carter.
At the same time, economic performance depends to a considerable extent on economic policy.
The Great Depression was intensified by poor monetary policy, tax hikes, and protectionist trade policies.
Likewise, loose US monetary policy in the middle of the last decade helped to set the stage for the Great Recession by contributing significantly to an explosion of leverage and fueling the housing bubble that burst in 2007-2008.
The outcome of two related policy battles will be key to the economic and political outlook in both the US and Europe.
The first is between “austerity” and “growth” –&nbsp;that is, short-term deficit reduction and additional fiscal stimulus.
Many on the left, on both sides of the Atlantic, argue that more, not less, government spending is required to lift their economies out of recession.
Those on the right believe that governments’ top priority should be fiscal consolidation.
In Europe, large deficits and exploding debt-to-GDP ratios have alarmed creditors and provoked political tension.
In particular, Germany demands more fiscal belt-tightening from heavily indebted Southern European countries, whose unions (and voters) are rejecting further austerity.
While the US has thus far avoided the bond market’s wrath, American political leaders confront the same problem of debt and fiscal sustainability. &nbsp;
The second battle involves long-run structural issues: slowing the growth of government spending, reforming taxes, and increasing labor-market flexibility.
In Europe, for example, raising the retirement age for public pensions and shrinking government employment would curtail welfare-state excesses.
In the US, Reagan’s victory in 1980 appeared to signal that America would stop well short of the European social-welfare model.
But President Barack Obama and his congressional allies have rejected the consensus that government should be only a last resort for those in need, in favor of greater dependence, for both individuals and firms, on entitlement programs and other public spending, targeted tax breaks, regulations, and loans.
Separating the budget’s effects on the economy from those of the economy on the budget is tricky.
There are several cases – Ireland and Denmark in the 1980’s, for example – in which fiscal consolidation helped to expand the economy in the short run, as lower interest and exchange rates boosted confidence enough to stimulate demand.
Of course, if many of the world’s economies attempt to consolidate simultaneously, with interest rates already low and some of the largest in a monetary union, such a favorable result is less likely.
But the evidence on whether additional deficit-financed spending would quickly revive economic growth is mixed.
In a recent survey, “Fiscal Policy for Economic Growth,” I concluded that short-run multipliers – the total change in economic activity resulting from higher government spending – could theoretically be as large as two when the central bank has reduced its target interest rate to zero.
In other words, one dollar spent by the government could boost GDP by two dollars in the very short run.
The catch is that the multiplier turns negative by year two: extra government spending contracts, rather than expands, medium-term and long-term economic growth.
Moreover, the short-run effect is lower in highly indebted countries, and can even be negative during economic expansions if households and firms, expecting higher taxes to pay for future spending, save, rather than spend, the cash.
Postponing fiscal consolidation risks aborting it, but consolidating too aggressively risks temporarily hindering growth.
But those now demanding further deficit-financed stimulus must confront considerable evidence that an overhang of public debt impedes growth for a long time.
In a recent paper following up on their book This Time is Different, the economists Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff concluded that debt/GDP ratios above 90% tend to be associated with an annual growth slowdown of a full percentage point for 23 years.
Thus, a debt overhang cumulatively costs more in lost income than a deep recession does.
Wise policy simultaneously considers short-, medium-, and long-term effects.
Both Europe and the US badly need long-run reforms, for example, of public pensions and health care.
Europe requires structural labor-market reform and must resolve its sovereign-debt overhang, banking crises, and the euro’s future.
America must reform its tax code to raise revenue across a wider array of people and economic activity (half the US population pays no federal income tax, and the tax code either excludes or favorably treats many income sources).
Over the next several years – the medium term – all countries should implement difficult-to-reverse fiscal consolidation, which would persuade the private sector that a gradual or delayed adjustment, primarily on the spending side of the budget, will occur.
Successful consolidation generally relies on spending cuts rather than tax increases – indeed, at a ratio of five or six to one.
The US in the 1980’s and 1990’s reduced spending by 5% of GDP and balanced its budget while growing strongly.
Canada, in the past two decades, has decreased spending by 8% of GDP and similarly prospered.
In the short run, spending flexibility is appropriate only if medium- and long-term measures are in place.
That compromise – between Germany and Southern Europe, and between US Republicans and Democrats – should be economically and politically feasible.
With many citizens now struggling, political leaders face a daunting task: adopt credible medium- and long-term reforms without derailing the economy in the short term.
They have little economic – and perhaps even less political – margin for error.
The Three Fears Sinking Global Markets
LONDON – January is usually expected to be a good month for stock markets, with new money gushing into investment funds, while tax-related selling abates at the end of the year.
Although the data on investment returns in the United States actually show that January profits have historically been on only slightly better than the monthly norm, the widespread belief in a bullish “January effect” has made the weakness of stock markets around the world this year all the more shocking.
But the pessimists have a point, even if they sometimes overstate the January magic.
According to statisticians at Reuters, this year started with Wall Street’s biggest first-week fall in over a century, and the 8% monthly decline in the MSCI world index made January’s performance worse than 96% of the months on record.
So, just how worried about the world economy should we be?
Three fears now seem to be influencing market psychology: China, oil and the fear of a US or global recession.
China is surely a big enough problem to throw the world economy and equity markets off the rails for the rest of this decade.
We saw this in the first four days of the year, when the sudden fall in the Chinese stock market triggered January’s global financial mayhem.
But the Chinese stock market is of little consequence for the rest of the world.
The real fear is that the Chinese authorities will either act aggressively to devalue the renminbi or, more likely, lose control of it through accidental mismanagement, resulting in devastating capital flight.
Such a scenario seemed quite plausible for a few weeks last summer, and it reemerged as a threat in the first two weeks of this year.
By the end of January, however, market sentiment had moved back in favor of stability in China.
This calm could be disrupted again if China’s foreign-exchange reserves show another huge monthly loss, and the authorities’ efforts to manage an orderly economic slowdown will remain the biggest source of legitimate concern for financial markets for many years ahead.
But, judging by market behavior in the second half of January, the fear about China has subsided, at least for now.
That cannot be said about the market’s second great worry: collapsing oil prices.
From the moment investors stopped panicking about China, in the second week of January, stock markets around the world started falling (and occasionally rebounding) in lockstep with the price of oil.
Unlike the reasonable concern about China, market sentiment seems simply to have gotten the relationship between oil and the world economy wrong.
In anything but the very short term, the correlation between oil prices and stock markets should be negative, not positive – and will almost certainly turn out that way in the years ahead.
When oil prices plunge by 10% daily, this is obviously disruptive in the short term: credit spreads in resources and related sectors explode, and leveraged investors are forced into asset fire sales to meet margin calls.
Fortunately, market panic now seems to be subsiding, as oil prices reach the lower part of the $25-50 trading range that always seemed appropriate in today’s political and economic conditions.
Now that oil prices are stabilizing at a reasonable long-term level, the world economy and non-commodity businesses should benefit.
Low oil prices increase real incomes, stimulate spending on non-resource goods and services, and boost profits for energy-using businesses.
Yet, despite these obvious benefits, most investors now seem to believe that falling oil prices point to a collapse in economic activity, which brings us to the third fear haunting financial markets this winter: a recession in the global economy or the US.
Past experience suggests that oil prices are not a useful leading indicator of economic activity.
In fact, if oil-price movements have any relevance at all in economic forecasting, it is as a contrary indicator.
Every global recession since 1970 has been preceded by a big increase in oil prices, while almost every decline greater than 30% has been followed by accelerating growth and higher equity prices.
The widespread view that plunging oil prices augur recession is a clear case of the belief that this time is different – a belief that typically takes hold in financial markets at the peaks and troughs of boom-bust cycles.
Finally, what about the falling stock market itself as an indicator of recession risks?
One could quote the great economist Paul Samuelson, who famously quipped in the 1960s that the stock market had “predicted nine of the last five recessions.”
There is, however, a less reassuring answer.
While markets are often wrong in predicting economic events, financial expectations can sometimes influence those events.
As a result, reality can sometimes be forced to converge towards market expectations, not vice versa.
This process, known as “reflexivity,” is a powerful force in financial markets, especially during periods of instability or crisis.
To the extent that reflexivity works through consumer and business confidence, it should not be a problem now, because the oil-price collapse is a powerful antidote to the stock-market decline.
Consumers are gaining more from cheap oil than they are losing from falling stock prices, so the net effect of recent financial turmoil on consumption should be positive – and stronger consumption should feed through to business revenues.
A greater worry is the workings of reflexivity within the financial system itself.
Bankruptcies among small energy-sector companies, which are of limited economic importance themselves, are creating pressures in global banking and reducing the availability of credit to healthy businesses and households that would otherwise be beneficiaries of cheaper oil.
Fears of a Chinese devaluation that has not happened (and probably never will) are having the same chilling effect on credit in emerging markets.
Meanwhile, banking regulators are continuing to tighten lending standards, even though economic conditions suggest they should be easing up.
In short, nothing about the condition of the world economy suggests that a major slowdown or recession is inevitable or even likely.
But a lethal combination of self-fulfilling expectations and policy errors could cause economic reality to bend to the dismal mood prevailing in financial markets.
Three Paths for Indebted Democracies
CHICAGO – Democratic governments are not incentivized to take decisions that have short-term costs but produce long-term gains, the typical pattern for any investment.
Indeed, in order to make such investments, democracies require either brave leadership or an electorate that understands the costs of postponing hard choices.
Brave leadership is rare. So, too, is an informed and engaged electorate, because the expert advice offered to voters is itself so confusing.
Economists of different persuasions find it difficult to reach a consensus about the necessity of any policy.
Consider, for example, the cacophony of arguments about government spending: is it the only thing keeping depression at bay, or is it moving us steadily down the road to perdition?
The debate does not lead to agreement, moderate voters do not know what to believe, and policy choices ultimately follow the path of least resistance – until they run into a brick wall.
The build-up of public debt in industrial countries (which was rising briskly well before the Great Recession pushed it to near-unsustainable levels) reflects this kind of calculus.
The public rewards democratic governments for dealing with the downside risk caused by competitive markets – whether by spending to create jobs or by rescuing banks that have dodgy securities on their balance sheets.
Even if inaction (or action oriented towards the longer term) is the best policy, it is not an option for democratically elected politicians, whom voters expect to govern, which inevitably means action with the potential for quick results.
A sympathetic press amplifies heart-rending stories of lost jobs and homes, making those counseling against intervention or advocating longer-term fixes appear callous.
Democracies are necessarily softhearted, whereas markets are not; government action has expanded to fill the gap.
With governments in many developed countries now reaching the limits of their gap-filling capacity, three undesirable possibilities loom large (in addition to the desirable possibility that they will have no choice but to undertake long-postponed reforms that will create sustainable growth with less need for government buffers).
One is that they intervene directly in markets, both domestic and across borders, to reduce competition and volatility while they rebuild their buffering capacity.
Another is that they muzzle democracy to suppress public anger.
A third is that they find scapegoats.
All three were tried during the Great Depression of the 1930’s. The results were not encouraging.
One factor diminishing the likelihood of governments intervening more directly in markets is that the recent crisis seems to have discredited government as much as it discredited the financial sector.
During the Great Depression, matters were different.
As economic collapse caused the public to lose faith in the private sector and markets, faith in government grew.
For example, in the United States, public support for President Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal was broad-based throughout the 1930’s.
One possible reason for the difference in attitudes today is that bankers were visibly punished in the 1930’s.
Legislation such as the US Glass-Steagall Act clipped their wings.
Many bankers also suffered direct losses as their banks collapsed, or as investigations exposed them to public ridicule, and even jail.
Today, by contrast, broad segments of the public see the big banks and big government as being run by the same elites who created the crisis, and then spent public money under one guise or another bailing the banks out.
Even as bankers are back to reaping enormous bonuses, taxpayers have been left to foot the bill for the economic collapse.
Many workers are unemployed and in danger of being evicted from their homes, while no important banker has been put in jail.
The biggest banks now account for an even larger share of the financial sector after benefiting from a government rescue, while efforts like the Dodd-Frank Act to legislate more constraints on banks have been lobbied into shadows of their original selves.
The elite, whether in government or big business, seems to look after itself and no one else.
In the US, this sentiment has fueled the Tea Party, which coalesces around opposition to government expansion (and to elites more generally), even if that expansion is aimed at regulating big banks (presumably because government regulations tend to be shaped by the powerful among the regulated).
Movements like the Tea Party have thus tended keep in check those who, after a crisis of the sort that America has had, typically want more government action, including curbing markets and competition.
The US is not alone in having a discredited government.
In the eurozone, in addition to the perceived nexus between banks and governments, the governing elite’s willingness to embrace European integration, and taxpayer-financed cross-border financial support, without broad public consultation has generated a similar sentiment.
In Japan, two decades of relentless economic malaise has decimated the public’s faith in politicians and the government bureaucracy.
The second undesirable possibility – that governments with little spending capacity to assuage public anger turn against democracy and free expression – is also remote for now.
Democratic institutions in industrial countries are stronger, and have deeper roots, than was the case in the 1930s.
That leaves the third undesirable possibility, the search for unprotected scapegoats upon whom public anger can be dissipated.
Unfortunately, several countries are taking this path, with undocumented immigrants and Muslims being the first targets.
Politicians who seek scapegoats might argue that they mean no harm to their targets, and that they are helping their societies to avoid worse possibilities.
But, as the 1930’s showed, it is hard to imagine any possibility worse than where this type of behavior can lead.
Which Way for US Foreign Policy?
BANGALORE – When US President Barack Obama recently spoke at the United Nations about countering the Islamic State, many of his critics complained that he put too much emphasis on diplomacy and not enough on the use of force.
Comparisons were made with Russian President Vladimir Putin’s military intervention in Syria’s civil war; and, with the US presidential election campaign shifting into high gear, some Republican candidates accused Obama of isolationism.
But such charges are partisan political rhetoric, with little basis in rigorous policy analysis.
It is more accurate to see the current mood as a swing of the US foreign policy pendulum between what Columbia University’s Stephen Sestanovich has called “maximalist” policies and “retrenchment” policies.
Retrenchment is not isolationism; it is an adjustment of strategic goals and means.
Presidents who followed policies of retrenchment since the end of World War II have included Dwight Eisenhower, Richard Nixon, Jimmy Carter, and now Obama.
No objective historian would call any of these men isolationists.
Eisenhower ran for president in 1952 because he opposed the isolationism of Robert Taft, the leading Republican candidate.
While Nixon believed the US was in decline, the others did not.
All of them were strong internationalists when compared to the true isolationists of the 1930s, who bitterly opposed coming to the aid of Britain in WWII.
Historians can make a credible case that periods of maximalist over-commitment have done more damage to America’s place in the world than periods of retrenchment.
Domestic political reaction to Woodrow Wilson’s global idealism produced the intense isolationism that delayed America’s response to Hitler.
The escalation of the war in Vietnam under Presidents John F Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson produced the inward-looking turn of the 1970s.
And George W. Bush’s misguided invasion of Iraq created the current mood of retrenchment.
If that mood is to become an issue in the 2016 presidential campaign, as early campaign rhetoric suggests, Americans should drop the false debate about isolationism and instead address three fundamental questions about the future of the country’s foreign policy: How much?
How interventionist?
And how multilateral?
The first question is how much the US should spend on defense and foreign policy.
Although some argue that America has no choice but to curtail its outlays in these areas, this is not the case.
As a share of GDP, the US is spending less than half of what it did at the peak of the Cold War, when the century of American leadership was being consolidated.
The problem is not guns vs. butter, but guns vs. butter vs. taxes.
Without a willingness to raise revenues, defense expenditure is locked in a zero-sum tradeoff with important investments such as education, infrastructure, and research and development – all of which are crucial to America’s domestic strength and global position.
The second question concerns how and in what ways the US should become involved in other countries’ internal affairs.
Obama has said that America should use military force, unilaterally if necessary, when its security or that of its allies is threatened.
When not, but conscience urges the country to act – against, say, a dictator killing a large number of his citizens – the US should not intervene alone and should use force only if there is a good prospect of success.
These are reasonable principles, but what are the thresholds?
The problem is not new.
Nearly two centuries ago, John Quincy Adams, America’s sixth president, was wrestling with domestic demands for intervention in the Greek war for independence when he famously said that the US “goes not abroad in search of monsters to destroy.”
But what if forbearance in a civil war like Syria’s allows a terrorist group like the Islamic State to establish a safe haven?
The US should stay out of the business of invasion and occupation.
In an age of nationalism and socially mobilized populations, foreign occupation, as Eisenhower wisely concluded in the 1950s, is bound to breed resentment.
But what takes its place?
Is air power and the training of foreign forces enough?
Particularly in the Middle East, where revolutions are likely to last for a generation, a smart combination of hard and soft power will be difficult to achieve.
Recent speeches by the US presidential candidates show that debate about the first two questions has already begun.
But the US ignores the third question at its peril.
How can America bolster institutions, create networks, and establish policies for managing transnational issues?
Leadership by the most powerful country is important for the production of global public goods.
Unfortunately, America’s domestic political gridlock often blocks this.
For example, the US Senate has failed to ratify the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, despite its being in America’s national interest – indeed, the US needs the convention to support its position on how to resolve competing territorial claims in the South China Sea.
Similarly, Congress failed to fulfill an American commitment to support the reallocation of voting power within the International Monetary Fund to emerging-market countries, though doing so would cost very little.
This paved the way for China to launch its Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (which the US then mistakenly tried to block, at considerable cost to its reputation.)
And there is strong Congressional resistance to setting limits on carbon emissions in the run-up to the UN Climate Change Conference in Paris in December.
How much to spend on foreign affairs and how to intervene in distant crises are important questions.
But Americans should be equally concerned that their country’s “exceptionalism” is degenerating into “exemptionalism.”
How can the US maintain global leadership if other countries see Congress constantly blocking international cooperation?
That debate has yet to begin.
Three Strikes Against the Drug War
MEXICO CITY – The last two months have witnessed more far-reaching changes on the drug-policy scene in Latin America and the United States than in all previous decades combined.
Three fundamental shifts have occurred, each of which would be important on its own; taken together, they may be a game-changer that finally ends the hemisphere’s failed war on drugs.
First and foremost were the referenda on marijuana legalization in the US states of Colorado and Washington on November 6.
For the first time, voters in the country that is the world’s largest consumer of illicit drugs in general, and marijuana in particular, approved propositions legalizing possession, production, and distribution of cannabis – and by relatively broad margins.
While a similar initiative failed in Oregon, and Proposition 19 (which called for limited legalization of cannabis) was defeated in California in 2010 (by seven percentage points), the outcome in Colorado and Washington sent a powerful message to the rest of the US.
The results have not only created a conflict between US federal law and state legislation, but also signal a shift in attitudes not dissimilar to that concerning same-sex marriage.
Just as important, however, was President Barack Obama’s reaction to the Colorado and Washington votes – both states that he won easily in his re-election bid.
The legal and political challenges implied are no minor matter: marijuana remains an illicit substance under US federal law and international conventions that America has adopted.
On other issues – notably immigration – Obama rejects claims of states’ rights and insists on federal authority.
Moreover, the topic remains highly sensitive: while public-opinion polls in 2012 indicate for the first time a small majority in favor of legalization, opponents remain vehement.
Nonetheless, in an interview on December 14, Obama made three path-breaking statements.
First, he said that enforcing federal marijuana legislation in Colorado and Washington was not a priority of his administration; he had “other fish to fry.”
Second, he reiterated his own opposition to legalization, but then added: “at this point.”
For the first time, a sitting US president hinted at a possible, perhaps even likely, change of future policy.
Finally, Obama advocated holding a “national conversation” on the question of state versus federal legislation on such issues.
The importance of these statements cannot be overestimated.
The third change in recent months occurred in one of the world’s largest drug-supplying countries: Mexico, through which practically all of the illegal drugs shipped to the US – cocaine, heroin, marijuana, and methamphetamines – must pass.
On December 1, Enrique Peña Nieto succeeded Felipe Calderón as President.
As happens almost everywhere, the transition became a moment to scrutinize the outgoing government’s policies, even if the new administration does not intend to modify those policies in the short term.
Fortunately for Mexico, history seems to be judging Calderón’s “war on drugs” severely.
Indeed, The Washington Post reported in late November that internal government documents, made available to its Mexico City correspondent, showed that more than 25,000 people disappeared during Calderón’s six-year term, in addition to the roughly 60,000 deaths directly linked to the drug war.
The advocacy group Human Rights Watch wrote a public letter to the new president, asking what he intends to do about the thousands of missing Mexicans.
Then, in a series of leaks and explicit statements, the new government pointed out the previous policies’ high legal, bureaucratic, and financial costs, and that many more crimes of all types were committed, despite sharply higher spending on law enforcement and security.
In short, the most recent emblem of the traditional, internationally imposed drug-enforcement approach, based on punitive and prohibitionist policies, is turning out to be a catastrophic failure, costing Mexico dearly while producing no results for the country, the rest of Latin America, or the US.
Consequently, the main advocates of this approach (Calderón, former Colombian President Alvaro Uribe, the current and former presidents of Brazil, and America’s conservatives and security establishment) are losing public support.
Proponents of a different strategy (Presidents Juan Manuel Santos and Otto Peréz Molina of Colombia and Guatemala, respectively, among others), based on public-health premises and legalization, are gaining ground.
Uruguay is expected to approve legislation fully legalizing marijuana in January; the Organization of American States is scheduled to deliver a report to the region’s heads of state at mid-year on alternative drug-enforcement strategies and existing “best practices” in other countries.
And more US states will most likely either approve full-fledged marijuana legalization or its medicinal use (18 states already allow it).
A sea change in drug policy seems to be in the making.
It will not occur overnight, or everywhere, or in regard to all drugs.
But, after decades of bloodshed, repression, and criminalization, things have begun to move in the right direction.
It’s a pity it took so long.
Thrifty China, Spendthrift America
The saving rate in China is the highest of any major country.
China’s gross saving rate (the percentage of GDP that is not consumed immediately), which includes both public and private saving, is around 50%.
By contrast, the saving rate in the United States is the lowest of any major country – roughly 10% of GDP.
Almost all other countries fall between these two extremes.
Differences in saving rates matter a lot, and must be a major reason that China’s annual economic growth rate is now a full six percentage points higher than in the US.
If people are saving half their income, their investments in capital have the potential to propel the economy at a rapid pace.
Saving in China is in part a virtuous circle: rapid economic growth leads to high saving, which in turn sustains rapid growth.
The difference between Chinese and US saving rates has been growing for decades.
In the early 1980’s, China’s saving rate was twice as high.
Now it is five times higher.
Why are these trajectories so different?
Unfortunately, explaining saving rates is not an exact science. Some patterns across countries are obvious.
Oil-rich countries tend to save a lot.
Countries with serious internal crises or conflicts tend to save little.
But neither of these patterns tells us anything about the difference between the US and China.
Some part of the high saving rates in China since the early 1980’s might be due to the decline in public confidence about health care, retirement benefits, and education, and a weakened sense of job security.
However, the same factors seem to be working in the same direction for saving in the US, too.
Engrained habits probably exlain more about China’s saving rate.
When incomes are growing rapidly, as they are in China, it is easier to save because people are not yet accustomed to a higher standard of living and do not mind terribly much maintaining a lower one for a while longer.
They also tolerate enterprise or government policies that encourage high saving.
For example, the uptrend in saving in China began at around the same time as its one-child policy was implemented in 1979. This prevented the birth rate from rebounding after the Cultural Revolution of 1966-76.
The late Nobel laureate economist Franco Modigliani, in his last major published paper in 2004 (co-authored with Shi Larry Cao), argued that this demographic change explains much of the increase in the saving rate, as Chinese substituted investment in capital for investment in children.
But income growth and demographics do not explain everything.
After all, the virtuous circle of high savings and rapid growth operates more strongly in China than in other developing countries where incomes are rising and birth rates are falling.
This suggests that there are other, deeper factors that underlie the differences in Chinese and US saving rates – factors that reflect different life experiences and how these experiences are filtered through the two countries’ cultures.
Moreover, while economic inequality is on the rise in both countries, Chinese and Americans comprehend this very differently.
In the US, widely called “the land of opportunity,” the shame of being poor is unbearable, and there are no cultural resources to enable such people to maintain self-esteem, especially when the country is so successful overall.
As inequality deepens, many who fall behind struggle to save face, consuming in order to maintain the appearance of success.
At the same time, those who rise from low economic status revel in their newfound wealth by engaging in spectacular displays of personal spending.
By contrast, poor people in China mostly view their personal situation as transitional.
People still remember the Cultural Revolution and view themselves as survivors of a shared traumatic experience, underpinning a commitment to collective sacrifice in order to rebuild the country.
There is no shame in being poor in China if one reflects that one’s children or grandchildren will be wealthy and successful.
On the contrary, as in postwar Germany, it is a matter of pride that one is working hard through a difficult situation that will later be remembered as a historic transition.
In the US, one’s income is a dark secret that one might not reveal even to one’s own spouse.
In China, people tell each other how much they earn with relative ease.
Especially in Chinese villages, people know how their neighbors are faring.
Conspicuous consumption becomes less important when people already know your income.
Of course, Chinese increasingly consume fancy new cars and designer clothes. But there is relatively less pleasure in public displays of consumption at a time when the prevailing national story is one of triumph over adversity.
More vivid in people’s minds are the stories they will one day tell their grandchildren about their travails and their economic heroism.
China will most likely be saving more than the US for years to come.
But, as the next generation takes control in China, this will change.
Today’s children will not view their own life stories from the perspective of the difficulties China has experienced.
As this change unfolds, the enormous willingness to save, and to tolerate high-saving government policies, will fade.
Tibet’s Peace of the Grave
PRAGUE – The recent events in Tibet and adjoining provinces are causes for deep concern.
Indeed, the dispersal of a peaceful protest march organized by Tibetan monks, which led to a wave of unrest that was brutally suppressed by the Chinese military and police, has caused indignation all over the democratic world.
The reaction of the Chinese authorities to the Tibetan protests evokes echoes of the totalitarian practices that many of us remember from the days before communism in Central and Eastern Europe collapsed in 1989: harsh censorship of the domestic media, blackouts of reporting by foreign media from China, refusal of visas to foreign journalists, and blaming the unrest on the “Dalai Lama’s conspiratorial clique” and other unspecified dark forces supposedly manipulated from abroad.
Indeed, the language used by some Chinese government representatives and the official Chinese media is a reminder of the worst of times during the Stalinist and Maoist eras.
But the most dangerous development of this unfortunate situation is the current attempt to seal off Tibet from the rest of the world.
Even as we write, it is clear that China’s rulers are trying to reassure the world that peace, quiet, and “harmony” have again prevailed in Tibet.
We all know this kind of peace from what has happened in the past in Burma, Cuba, Belarus, and a few other countries – it is called the peace of the graveyard.
Merely urging the Chinese government to exercise the “utmost restraint” in dealing with the Tibetan people, as governments around the world are doing, is far too weak a response.
The international community, beginning with the United Nations and followed by the European Union, ASEAN, and other international organizations, as well as individual countries, should use every means possible to step up pressure on the Chinese government to
allow foreign media, as well as international fact-finding missions, into Tibet and adjoining provinces in order to enable objective investigations of what has been happening; release all those who only peacefully exercised their internationally guaranteed human rights, and guarantee that no one is subjected to torture and unfair trials; enter into a meaningful dialogue with the representatives of the Tibetan people.
Unless these conditions are fulfilled, the International Olympic Committee should seriously reconsider whether holding this summer’s Olympic Games in a country that includes a peaceful graveyard remains a good idea.
Tiger Mothers or Elephant Mothers?
MELBOURNE – Many years ago, my wife and I were driving somewhere with our three young daughters in the back, when one of them suddenly asked: “Would you rather that we were clever or that we were happy?”
I was reminded of that moment last month when I read Amy Chua’s Wall Street Journal article, “Why Chinese Mothers Are Superior,” which sparked more than 4,000 comments on wsj.com and over 100,000 comments on Facebook.
The article was a promotional piece for Chua’s book, Battle Hymn of the Tiger Mother, which has become an instant bestseller.
Chua’s thesis is that, when compared to Americans, Chinese children tend to be successful because they have “tiger mothers,” whereas Western mothers are pussycats, or worse.
Chua’s daughters, Sophia and Louise, were never allowed to watch television, play computer games, sleep over at a friend’s home, or be in a school play. They had to spend hours every day practicing the piano or violin.
They were expected to be the top student in every subject except gym and drama.
Chinese mothers, according to Chua, believe that children, once they get past the toddler stage, need to be told, in no uncertain terms, when they have not met the high standards their parents expect of them.
(Chua says that she knows Korean, Indian, Jamaican, Irish, and Ghanaian mothers who are “Chinese” in their approach, as well as some ethnic-Chinese mothers who are not.)
Their egos should be strong enough to take it.
But Chua, a professor at Yale Law School (as is her husband), lives in a culture in which a child’s self-esteem is considered so fragile that children’s sports teams give “Most Valuable Player” awards to every member. So it is not surprising that many Americans react with horror to her style of parenting.
One problem in assessing the tiger-mothering approach is that we can’t separate its impact from that of the genes that the parents pass on to their children.
If you want your children to be at the top of their class, it helps if you and your partner have the brains to become professors at elite universities.
No matter how hard a tiger mom pushes, not every student can finish first (unless, of course, we make everyone “top of the class”).
Tiger parenting aims at getting children to make the most of what abilities they have, and so seems to lean towards the “clever” side of the “clever or happy” choice.
That’s also the view of Betty Ming Liu, who blogged in response to Chua’s article: “Parents like Amy Chua are the reason why Asian-Americans like me are in therapy.”
Stanley Sue, a professor of psychology at the University of California, Davis, has studied suicide, which is particularly common among Asian-American women (in other ethnic groups, more males commit suicide than females).
He believes that family pressure is a significant factor.
Chua would reply that reaching a high level of achievement brings great satisfaction, and that the only way to do it is through hard work.
Perhaps, but can’t children be encouraged to do things because they are intrinsically worthwhile, rather than because of fear of parental disapproval?
I agree with Chua to this extent: a reluctance to tell a child what to do can go too far.
One of my daughters, who now has children of her own, tells me amazing stories about her friends’ parenting styles. One of them let her daughter drop out of three different kindergartens, because she didn’t want to go to them.
Another couple believes in “self-directed learning” to such an extent that one evening they went to bed at 11 p.m., leaving their five-year-old watching her ninth straight hour of Barbie videos.
Tiger mothering might seem to be a useful counterbalance to such permissiveness, but both extremes leave something out.
Chua’s focus is unrelentingly on solitary activities in the home, with no encouragement of group activities, or of concern for others, either in school or in the wider community.
Thus, she appears to view school plays as a waste of time that could be better spent studying or practicing music.
But to take part in a school play is to contribute to a community good.
If talented children stay away, the quality of the production will suffer, to the detriment of the others who take part (and of the audience that will watch it).
And all children whose parents bar them from such activities miss the opportunity to develop social skills that are just as important and rewarding – and just as demanding to master – as those that monopolize Chua’s attention.
We should aim for our children to be good people, and to live ethical lives that manifest concern for others as well as for themselves.
This approach to child-rearing is not unrelated to happiness: there is abundant evidence that those who are generous and kind are more content with their lives than those who are not.
But it is also an important goal in its own right.
Tigers lead solitary lives, except for mothers with their cubs.
We, by contrast, are social animals.
So are elephants, and elephant mothers do not focus only on the well-being of their own offspring. Together, they protect and take care of all the young in their herd, running a kind of daycare center.
If we all think only of our own interests, we are headed for collective disaster – just look at what we are doing to our planet’s climate.
When it comes to raising our children, we need fewer tigers and more elephants.
Time for a Carbon Tax
WASHINGTON, DC – Over the last few decades, oil prices have fluctuated widely – ranging from $10 to $140 a barrel – posing a challenge to producers and consumers alike.
For policymakers, however, these fluctuations present an opportunity to advance the key global objectives – reflected in the Sustainable Development Goals adopted last September and the climate agreement reached in Paris in December – of mitigating climate change and building a more sustainable economy.
Recent oil-price fluctuations resemble the classic cobweb model of microeconomic theory.
High prices spur increased investment in oil.
But, given long lags between exploration and exploitation, by the time the new output capacity actually comes on stream, substitution has already taken place, and demand often no longer justifies the available supply.
At that point, prices fall, and exploration and investment decline as well, including for oil substitutes.
When new shortages develop, prices begin rising again, and the cycle repeats.
The cycle will continue, though other factors – such as the steadily declining costs of renewable energy and the shift toward less energy-intensive production processes – mean that it will probably spin within a lower range.
In any case, a price increase is inevitable.
Against this background, today’s very low prices – below $35 a barrel at times since the beginning of this year – create a golden opportunity (which one of the authors has been recommending for over a year) to implement a variable carbon tax.
The idea is simple: The tax would decrease gradually as oil prices rise, and then increase again when prices eventually come back down.
If the adjustments are asymmetric – larger increases when prices fall, and smaller decreases when prices rise – this system would gradually raise the overall carbon tax, even as it follows a counter-cyclical pattern.
Such an incremental increase is what most models for controlling climate change call for.
While $375 per ton is a very high price, reflecting the particularly low price of oil today, even a lower carbon price – in the range of $150-250 per ton – would be sufficient to meet international climate goals over the next decade.
With this approach, policymakers could use the market to help propel their economies away from dependence on fossil fuels, redistributing producer surplus (profits) from oil producers to the treasuries of importing countries, without placing too large or sudden a burden on consumers.
In fact, by stabilizing user costs, it would offer significant gains.
The key to this strategy’s political feasibility is to launch it while prices are very low.
Once it is in place, it will become a little-noticed, politically uncontroversial part of pricing for gasoline (and other products) – one that produces far-reaching benefits.
Some of the revenue could be returned to the public in the form of tax cuts or research support.
Despite the obvious benefits of a variable carbon tax, no country has capitalized on today’s low oil prices to raise carbon prices in this or a similar form, though US President Barack Obama’s call for a tax on oil suggests that he recognizes the opening low prices represent.
This should change.
The opportunity to implement a policy that is simultaneously sensible, flexible, gentle, and effective in advancing national and global goals does not arise very often.
Policymakers must seize it when it does. The time for a variable stabilizing carbon tax is now.
Time for America to Turn South
Whatever John Kerry does about Latin America if he is elected President of the United States in November, the election could initiate a sea-change in US-Latin American relations - even or perhaps mainly if George W. Bush is reelected.
Kerry has never shown much interest in the region, while Bush has largely ignored it since the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.
But the unlikely nature of a shift in relations does not make it any less necessary.
The need for change in America's policy toward the rest of the hemisphere is two-fold.
First, never in recent times has anti-American sentiment run so strong and deep in Latin America.
Poll after poll shows that Latins feel more negatively about the US than at any time since the 1960's.
In contrast to that era, popular hostility is not really motivated by US actions in or toward Latin America; but today's anti-Americanism still complicates life greatly for democratic leaders in the hemisphere, and for America itself.
Second, and more importantly, the substantive issues of conflict on the US-Latin American agenda are heating up.
They will not go away by themselves, and failure to address them will probably only make them worse.
The list of problems facing Latin America is long, but the salient themes are easily distinguishable.
First and foremost is economic growth, which for the past few years - indeed, for the past two decades - has been dismal.
In countries where trade and investment is concentrated in ties with the US, this is a central issue in the bilateral relationship.
At this stage, we know that free-trade agreements are useful, but are not silver bullets.
The US has a much larger role to play than simply promoting trade liberalization in the region.
The US must help these countries build up their infrastructure, educational and legal systems, competitiveness, and transparency.
In all these areas, a pro-active policy of American support is crucial.
Why should the US bother?
Why should it care whether Latin American countries closely linked to it by trade, investment, tourism, and retirees do better or worse, grow or stagnate, become more competitive or lose ground globally?
There are many reasons for the US to pay greater attention to Latin America, but three stand out.
First, and perhaps least self-evident, is energy.
Countries like Mexico, Venezuela, and Colombia supply up to 40% of US oil imports, and could easily replace unstable suppliers in the Middle East.
Second, America has a strong security interest in the region.
Access to the US from many countries in Latin America is much easier than from Europe or Asia, owing to the volume of traffic, the number of flights, the comparative laxity of exit controls, and the porousness of borders.
If the US, as its leaders clearly believe, will be threatened for years to come by terrorist groups, the latter will inevitably conclude, as millions have done before, that the easiest way into the US is through Latin America.
Cooperation on security matters is desirable for America, and indispensable for the countries of the region.
The consequences of a new terrorist outrage originating from any nation south of the US-Mexican border would be devastating for that country, let alone for the victims of such an attack.
But the most significant issue coming to the fore in hemispheric relations is immigration.
Traditionally a Mexican, Central American, and Caribbean matter, it has now reached Brazil, Colombia, Venezuela, Ecuador, and beyond.
Every flight from Sao Paulo to Mexico City carries dozens of low-income Brazilians, who have already paid their pollero , or "people-smuggler," to route them on from the Mexican capital to the northern border.
The New York Times recently published an exceptional description of Ecuadorian polleros transporting their human cargo to the coasts of Guatemala and then onward through Mexico to the US.
Colombian displaced persons and Venezuela's middle class are fleeing to Miami.
Most dramatically, more Mexicans than ever before are risking their lives and paying up to $3,000 to enter the "promised land."
Last year, I visited the main jumping-off point on the US-Mexican border: El Sasabe on the Sonora-Arizona border.
In the month of May, before the summer's searing and deadly heat, local authorities estimated a daily average of 1,000 migrants attempting to cross.
Another visit this year generated a new estimate: from 1,500 to 1,800 crossings every day.
America cannot stem this tide by closing its borders; but it can regulate the tide by legalizing and humanizing it, and by helping to create conditions in Latin America where life-threatening emigration is not the only way out.
A first-term Kerry administration or a second-term Bush presidency must make this a high foreign policy priority.
All of these issues are crucial to the US: jobs, immigration, security, energy.