As one participant put it, “The debate has shifted from what to do to how and when to do it.”
Many of the other themes flowed from this general conclusion.
A shift to services-led growth and an innovations-based development strategy were highlighted.
At the same time, there was considerable concern about the recent resurgence of state-owned enterprises, which has tilted the distribution of national income from labor to capital – a major impediment to China’s pro-consumption rebalancing.
The World Bank and the China Development Research Center (the CDF’s host) had just released a comprehensive report that addressed many aspects of this critical issue.
But the CDF’s formal proceedings never even hinted at the elephant in the chambers of Diaoyutai.
There was no mention of Bo Xilai and what his dismissal meant for China’s domestic politics in this critical year of leadership transition.
While it is easy to get caught up in the swirling tales of palace intrigue that have followed, I suspect that Bo’s removal holds a far deeper meaning.
Chinese officials faced the risk of a dangerous interplay of political and economic instability.
Hit by a second external demand shock in three years – first, America’s subprime crisis, and now Europe’s sovereign-debt crisis – any outbreak of internal political instability would pose a far greater threat than might otherwise be the case.
Bo personified that risk.
He embodied the so-called “Chongqing model” of state capitalism that has been ascendant in China in recent years – government-directed urbanization and economic development that concentrates power in the hands of regional leaders and state-owned enterprises.
I spent some time in Chongqing – a vast metropolitan area of more than 34 million people – last summer.
I left astonished at the scope of the city’s plans.
Orchestrated by Chongqing Mayor Huang Qifan, the principal architect of the spectacular Pudong development project in Shanghai, the goal is to transform the Liangjiang area of Chongqing into China’s first inland urban development zone.
That would put Liangjiang on a par with coastal China’s two earlier showcase projects – Pudong and the Binhai area of Tianjin.
Yet this is the same state-dominated development model that came under heavy criticism at this year’s CDF – and that stands in sharp contrast to the more market-driven alternative that has gained broad consensus among senior Chinese leaders.
In other words, Bo was perceived not only as a threat to political stability, but also as the leading representative of a model of economic instability.
By dismissing Bo so abruptly, the central government has, in effect, underscored its unwavering commitment to stability.
This fits with yet another curious piece of the Chinese puzzle.
Five years ago, Wen famously warned of a Chinese economy that was in danger of becoming “unstable, unbalanced, uncoordinated, and unsustainable.”
I have repeatedly stressed the critical role that Wen’s “Four Uns” have played in shaping the pro-consumption strategy of the “Next China.”
Wen’s critique paved the way for China to face its rebalancing imperatives head on.
But, in their formal remarks to the CDF this year, China’s senior leadership – including Premier-designate Li Keqiang – dropped all explicit references to the risks of an “unstable” Chinese economy.
In short, the Four Uns have now become three.
In China, such changes in language are no accident.
The most likely interpretation is that those at the top no longer want to concede anything when it comes to stability.
By addressing economic instability through pro-consumption rebalancing, and political instability by removing Bo, stability has gone from a risk factor to an ironclad commitment.
There can be no mistaking the Chinese leadership’s core message nowadays.
They are the first to concede that their growth and development strategy is at a critical juncture.
They worry that the “reforms and opening up” of Deng Xiaoping are in danger of losing momentum.
By addressing the interplay between economic and political risks to stability, the government is clearing the way for the next phase of China’s extraordinary development.
I would not advise betting against their commitment to achieving that goal.
China’s Struggle to Slow
BEIJING – At the opening of the annual session of China’s parliament, the National People’s Congress (NPC), Premier Wen Jiabao announced that the government’s target for annual economic growth in 2012 was 7.5%.
With the global economy still struggling to recover, Wen’s announcement of such a significant dip in China’s growth rate naturally sparked widespread concern around the world.
But it is important to note that Wen was expressing a policy rather than forecasting performance.
The purpose of targeting a lower growth rate, he explained, is “to guide people in all sectors to focus their work on accelerating the transformation of the pattern of economic development and making economic development more sustainable and efficient.”
Fixed-asset investment is the most important engine of China’s growth.
As a developing country with annual per capita income of less than $5,000, there is still significant room for China to increase its capital stock.
But the growth rate of investment is too high.
The issue is not whether China needs more investment, but whether China’s absorption capacity can continue to accommodate the rapid investment growth of the past decade.
In this sense, the investment rate, which in China approaches 50% of GDP and is rising, can be regarded as a measure of the stress that fixed investment places on the economy.
It is not entirely an exaggeration to say that the economy’s capacity for investment growth has reached its limit.
The recent high-speed rail debacle is a case in point.
In 2003, China built its first high-speed-rail project.
As a key component of the RMB4 trillion ($630 billion) stimulus package introduced during the 2008-2009 global financial crisis, investment in high-speed-rail construction increased by leaps and bounds.
By the end of 2010, China’s operational high-speed-rail network surpassed 8,000 kilometers, with an additional 17,000 kilometers under construction.
By contrast, all Western countries combined took a half-century to build a total of 6,500 kilometers.
Built in such haste, catastrophe was almost inevitable.
Investment growth that surpasses an economy’s absorption capacity will lead to a rapid deterioration in the efficiency of investment, which in turn will harm long-term growth prospects.
Evidence of this in China today is all too prevalent.
To reverse this trend, some respite in investment growth is not only necessary, but also inevitable in a profit-driven economy.
While China’s investment rate should be brought down to a sustainable level, an equally, if not more, important challenge is to adjust the structure of investment.
For many years, the single most important category of investment in China has been real-estate development, which accounts for roughly 10% of GDP and a quarter of total investment.
But resources need to be allocated to projects that build up human capital, provide public goods, and foster creativity and innovation.
Adjusting the investment structure, however, will inevitably cause investment growth to decelerate, at least in the transitional period, thus leading to a slowdown in overall GDP growth.
International trade has played a pivotal role in China’s economic development over the past 30 years.
However, the global market is no longer able to absorb China’s massive exports, not to mention the immediate impact of economic malaise in Europe and the United States on export demand.
Moreover, rising labor costs and a stronger renminbi will also undermine China’s export sector, causing GDP growth to slow this year.
In other words, lowering the GDP growth rate to 7.5% without making China’s growth pattern even more irrational is an impossible mission.
So a more likely growth scenario for 2012 is that China’s growth will be lower than in 2011, but still significantly higher than 7.5%.
Correspondingly, its investment-driven growth pattern will be strengthened further, though at a slowing pace.
Otherwise, a policy-induced hard landing would be difficult to avoid.
Indeed, how to achieve a more moderate growth rate without causing a hard landing is one of the most severe challenges confronting the Chinese government.
A hard landing is simply not an option.
With the country’s fiscal position still positive, it is difficult to image that the Chinese leadership would be so headstrong about “accelerating the transformation of the pattern of economic development” as to risk such an outcome.
Even if it is, GDP-obsessed and debt-ridden local governments are likely to strive to achieve the highest possible growth rates for themselves, while paying lip service to Wen’s call for a slowdown.
That is why, despite the official target, most Chinese economists still bet on a growth rate well above 8% for 2012.
China’s Struggling Public Intellectuals
Is China’s political environment loosening up, or is the government cracking down?
It’s hard to tell.
President and Communist Party General Secretary Hu Jintao sometimes seems to be going both ways simultaneously.
For example, Hu has decided to honor the memory of his mentor, former General Secretary Hu Yaobang, in order to burnish his aura as a reformist.
But, in many ways, Hu Jintao’s tenure as the head of the fourth generation of Communist leaders, which began when he became party secretary in 2002, differs sharply from that of his mentor.
Hu Yaobang was a founder of the China Youth League, regarded as a relatively liberal institution in the People’s Republic, who in the 1980’s promoted political reforms and rehabilitated virtually all the victims of the Mao Zedong’s purges.
By contrast, the younger Hu has narrowed the public space for political discourse that had opened up during the latter years of his predecessor, Jiang Zemin, when market pressure was forcing media outlets to be more daring and wide-ranging.
Since taking over, Hu Jintao has arrested a number of outspoken journalists in an effort to rein in the media.
His government has also detained an array of public intellectuals who have been critical of its policies, including cyber-dissidents Liu Di and Shi Tao (who was arrested thanks to Yahoo’s collaboration with the police in identifying him) and freelance writers Yu Jie and Liu Xiaobo.
Military doctor Jiang Yanyong was detained in 2003 after he publicly rebutted the Party’s assertion that the SARS epidemic had been brought under control.
In 2004, he was placed under surveillance when he called on the Party to revise its judgment of the 1989 Tiananmen demonstration.
Hu’s leadership has tried to draw public attention to the growing gap between rich and poor.
But its reaction to the book A Survey of Chinese Peasants, which is based on interviews over several years with farmers in the poor province of Anhui, was a telling reminder that public intellectuals are not welcome to contribute to that effort.
The authors, the husband-and-wife team of Chen Guidi and Wu Chuntao, who spent their early years in the countryside, described in detail the imposition of unfair taxes by local officials and the authorities’ rapacious seizure of land farmed by rural residents.
The increasingly impoverished lives of peasants that the book vividly documented resulted from the very abuses of power that Hu Jintao had declared himself to be against.
Yet, in February 2004, one month after its publication, A Survey of Chinese Peasants was banned.
Hu’s government has also tightened controls over the media.
Reports on peasant and worker demonstrations against corrupt officials and illegal property confiscations have been banned.
Those who dare to protest, such as Beijing University journalism professor Jiao Guobiao, are silenced.
Similarly, Wang Yi, a law lecturer at Chengdu University who called for freedom of speech and association, was barred from teaching.
The liberal journal Strategy and Management was closed down.
Even the editor-in-chief of China Youth Daily, the newspaper affiliated with Hu Jintao’s own China Youth League power base, which had been aggressive in exposing official corruption, was recently detained.
Hu Jintao’s rule is not a return to the Mao Zedong era.
Despite the regime’s vast means of censorship, its embrace of new communications technologies like the Internet make it increasingly difficult for the party to maintain effective control over people’s views.
Moreover, persecution of political dissenters does not now reach far beyond the accused to involve their associates.
While scores have lost their positions and others have been imprisoned, most are briefly detained and then allowed to find other jobs in China’s burgeoning civil society.
By comparison with the late 1990’s, however, the space for political discourse has undeniably narrowed, crushing expectations that the country would continue on a liberalizing course.
Hu Jintao may have made a genuflection to his more liberal mentor, but in the two decades since the elder Hu’s fall from power, even as private space has expanded, China has become a politically far less open society.
Reforming China’s Commanding Heights
MILAN – Chinese President Xi Jinping’s massive anti-corruption campaign has advanced a number of key objectives: It has gone a long way toward restoring confidence in the Communist Party’s commitment to a merit-based system; countered a decades-old pattern of public-sector domination; reduced the power of vested interests to block reform; and bolstered Xi’s popularity among private-sector actors, if far less so with the bureaucracy.
In short, Xi’s effort to root out corruption has empowered both the Party and the reformers.
The question is how far they will take their reform ambitions.
Xi is certainly not finished yet, having outlined a set of legal reforms at last month’s Fourth Plenum of the Communist Party aimed at creating a more level playing field for the public and private sectors.
If implemented properly, the reforms will create a more efficient system for the creation and enforcement of contracts, ease the path for market entrants, and strengthen the application of China’s competition laws.
Greater fidelity to the rule of law will also lead to the creation of a legal and financial infrastructure that reduces fraud in the private sector, including in financial reporting.
That, together with increased access to capital, will help to accelerate the development of the services sector, which is needed to create urban employment.
Better management of China’s considerable public assets – which include $3.5-4 trillion of foreign-exchange reserves, substantial land holdings, and majority ownership of the state-owned enterprises that dominate the economy – would complement these efforts.
Indeed, it could help to boost competition, encourage innovation, strengthen the financial system, and expand access to capital.
The question is how China could achieve this.
As it stands, China’s economy follows, to some extent, the old Leninist “commanding heights” model, with the Party holding all political power and controlling major enterprises and sectors, even as the burgeoning private sector drives growth and employment.
In this context, the kind of “meritocratic professionalism” that China is pursuing is important; but it is no substitute for genuine competition in the public or private sector – at least not if innovation and structural change are the goals.
Of course, Xi could simply declare that China’s version of state capitalism has worked well in the past, and will continue to do so.
But experience with the microeconomic dynamics of advanced economies (where China is headed) makes this a weak stance – and, thus, one that Xi is unlikely to take.
The alternative would be to embark on a sustained program of privatization to shrink the asset side of the state’s huge balance sheet.
But China’s balance sheet has served it well, enabling the extraordinarily high rates of investment that have fueled rapid growth.
Meanwhile, many advanced economies have suffered considerably from their balance-sheet composition, with limited, poorly measured assets and outsize debt and non-debt liabilities.
In fact, given an increasingly unequal distribution of income between capital and labor (as well as across the income spectrum for labor) a larger store of public assets certainly has merit, as it equalizes the distribution of capital and wealth, albeit indirectly.
Not only can public assets be used to cushion shocks and counter adverse trends; they can also help fund an expansion of social insurance.
The problem in China is not the volume of state-owned assets, but their concentration in a few companies and industries – a situation that poses risks to economic performance.
Given this, the logical solution is not to dispose of the state’s asset holdings, but to diversify them over time.
Such an approach would have a number of benefits.
First and foremost, it would reconcile a large state balance sheet with an expanding role for markets, bolstering employment, stimulating innovation, and advancing the economy’s structural transformation.
To this end, public investment in infrastructure, human capital, and the economy’s knowledge and technology base would remain crucial.
Furthermore, the diversification of China’s asset holdings would deepen its financial markets considerably.
Over the next several years, as the traded or tradable share of the state-owned sector’s market capitalization increased from today’s low base of 10-15%, more institutional investors, such as pension funds and insurance companies, would become involved in Chinese equity trading, which is currently dominated by retail investors.
This would augment savings options for an increasingly affluent population and strengthen support for long-term investment and development.
Debt markets would also benefit from such an initiative.
Blurring the line between the private and the state-owned sectors would, over time, reduce the latter’s privileged access to – and overuse of – bank financing, leading to the expansion of corporate bond markets.
With public entities like the social security system and sovereign-wealth funds holding more diversified asset portfolios, incentives would be substantially reduced for market intervention favoring incumbents in which the state owned a large share.
This, along with enhanced enforcement of competition law, would go a long way toward leveling the playing field in markets.
Clearly specified fiduciary responsibilities and governance would help to ensure that publicly held assets were managed to maximize long-term risk-adjusted returns, with the state and citizens as beneficiaries and the market as the arbiter of efficiency and innovation.
The best-managed state-owned enterprises could emerge – or remain – as successful and prominent players, adapting to expanded market competition and combining innovation with economies of scale.
Indeed, public-sector asset management could be “outsourced,” with private asset managers competing for the job.
This would accelerate the development of the asset-management sector, with far-reaching benefits for savers and investors.
China does not have to give up the safety net provided by large asset holdings to allow markets to play a decisive microeconomic role.
It can abandon the commanding heights model and develop its version of “state capitalism” to support the best of both worlds.
All that is needed is a persistently strong government commitment to the public interest – and, of course, a skillfully executed reform strategy.
A Growth Agenda for China
MILAN/BEIJING – At a time when the United States is poised to turn inward, China’s economic performance is more important globally than ever.
Whether China can achieve sustainable growth patterns in the coming years will depend upon a number of key factors.
One of the leading external factors shaping China’s prospects will be its relationship with the US under President Donald Trump.
Ideally, the two governments would work together to negotiate mutually beneficial trade and investment agreements, with sensitivity to the challenges faced by both sides.
But the opposite outcome – the escalation of mutually damaging trade and investment disputes – is also a distinct possibility.
Political uncertainty is also on the rise in Europe.
While its impact on China would not be as direct as Trump’s actions, it is a source of significant medium-term risks for the entire global economy.
Within Asia, a key factor shaping China’s economic prospects is progress on Chinese-led regional trade and investment agreements.
In particular, investments in regional development via the “one belt, one road” initiative and the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank may produce expanded trade and growth in Asia (and beyond), though the effects will not be immediate.
The fourth major external factor relates to exchange rates.
As it stands, the renminbi is facing significant depreciation pressure, caused largely by a surge in capital outflows.
Meanwhile, the US dollar is strengthening in anticipation of Trump’s fiscal expansion.
China’s performance will depend partly on how these dynamics play out.
But, beyond the external uncertainties and headwinds, China faces a slew of internal challenges, which may well present even greater risks to its economy.
Those challenges – including weaknesses in the real economy and the private sector, overcapacity, excessive leverage, and high housing prices – are rooted largely in the financial sector’s mounting problems and the failure of China’s leaders to address them.
Consider efforts to promote investment in the real sector.
The People’s Bank of China has been providing spurts of liquidity to the market, in the hope of relieving financial constraints on productive private businesses and industries.
But the monetary-policy transmission mechanism is broken, and liquidity is not making it to the real economy.
Instead, China’s banks continue to allocate credit largely to state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and local-government financing vehicles (LGFVs).
Credit to the state sector ends up flowing not into productivity-enhancing investments, but into the housing market (fueling price bubbles) and industries with excess capacity (fueling even more overcapacity and enabling companies to avoid much-needed restructuring).
While LGFVs use the low-cost loans to build infrastructure, the social returns of those investments are often low; and, after decades of rapid infrastructure construction, the marginal returns are declining.
Meanwhile, local governments’ leverage continues to rise.
SOEs may also use the unregulated shadow banking system to re-lend at higher interest rates the cheap money they receive to private businesses, which cannot borrow reliably from the formal banking system.
Whereas the interest rate of a one-year loan in the formal banking system is around 5%, the average one-year interest rate in the Wenzhou shadow banking market (to cite one example) was around 16% in November.
This state of affairs is jeopardizing the entire economy.
Banks are bailing out bankrupt companies, while private firms – especially small and medium-size enterprises – continue to get squeezed.
Given that the private sector is generally significantly more productive than SOEs or LGFVs, generating much higher returns on investment, the absence of hard budget constraints on troubled SOEs clearly must be addressed.
Of course, China’s leaders have known this for a while, and have created a reform agenda that seeks to reform the SOEs, while unleashing the private sector’s potential.
But it is still a work in progress.
Convincing banks to lend to private enterprises, rather than to SOEs and LGFVs, will require substantial structural shifts in China’s economy.
For financial institutions, SOEs and LGFVs represent much lower risk than private businesses, regardless of how leveraged or uncompetitive they are.
After all, because SOEs and LGFVs are implicitly guaranteed by central or local governments, they are highly unlikely to default.
Banks know (or believe) that if an SOE or LGFV faces bankruptcy, the government will step in with favorable policies and subsidies, tax cuts, and low-cost financing instruments.
In some cases, banks have no choice but to lend to failing SOEs; their provincial government may demand that they provide large low-cost loans to a struggling and unproductive firm, particularly if it contributes significantly to local fiscal revenue and employment.
Given that private firms enjoy no such official protections and thus play on a field that is nowhere near level, they must be substantially more productive and competitive than the SOEs.
And even then, if the SOEs with which they are competing struggle too much, they are vulnerable to policy shifts that increase their disadvantage further.
Simply put, the Chinese financial sector’s bias in favor of SOEs is contributing to some of the biggest risks faced by China’s economy.
Investors’ recognition of these risks may be one driver of capital outflows, meaning that distortionary incentives in the financial system are also contributing to the downward pressure on the exchange rate.
China has made great strides in recent years in implementing reforms that boost domestic private consumption.
And, despite the barriers it faces, the country’s private sector has become highly dynamic and innovative.
Earlier reforms are now bearing fruit, and this has helped to sustain economic growth.
But achieving faster, more resilient growth will require China to eliminate the biases, protections, and implicit guarantees favoring SOEs in the marketplace and in the financial system.
Only then can monetary policy achieve its goal: supporting productive investment, innovation, the scaling of private-sector businesses, and real economic growth.
China’s State-Owned Enterprises at a Crossroads
HONG KONG – China has lately been facing harsh criticism for the direction of its reforms of state-owned enterprises, particularly its strengthening of the role of Communist Party committees in SOE management.
But while this might seem like a step backward for China’s market-oriented reforms, there are good reasons to boost oversight, at least for now.
With China undergoing a fundamental transformation into an innovation-driven, knowledge-based, and services-led economy, its leaders must think carefully about how to reform the SOEs so that they can contribute to the new economy.
In the past, the role of the SOEs was clear.
Over the last three decades, they underpinned China’s emergence as a global manufacturing powerhouse, by spearheading China’s infrastructure-construction boom.
In the process, they became dominant, especially in sectors prone to natural monopolies (such as telecommunications and power) and key strategic sectors (such as steel, coal, and banking).
But the traditional single-sided markets where SOEs lead are now being disrupted by new technology firms like Alibaba and Tencent, which straddle multi-sided markets of production, logistics, and distribution by using unified platforms that benefit from economies of scale.
By creating platforms for consumers and small-scale producers – what is essentially public infrastructure – these firms have directly challenged the SOE business model.
New digital platforms respond quickly and efficiently to public needs.
These businesses are more collaborative or sharing than the traditional business of manufacturing, allowing consumers and smaller start-ups to shape products and services, from design to distribution.
Given China’s population of 1.3 billion – a major competitive advantage in terms of innovation and purchasing power – these platforms can disrupt the incumbent one-sided market producers by offering superior scale, speed, and convenience, including access to global markets.
Meanwhile, the SOEs’ obsolete business model – not to mention strong inertia – makes it difficult to identify and respond to new opportunities in providing public goods in a changing economy.
China’s state-owned telecommunication companies and banks, for example, have failed to respond to new technological challenges.
Even traditional private companies like Huawei and Midea have done much better, adjusting to shifting consumer demand and changing factor costs by retooling as quickly as possible, acquiring, for example, robot technology and product designs from the West.
Such responsiveness is particularly critical today, when the inexorable logic of technological progress is demanding a transformation of China’s growth model.
With demand for consumer hardware and durables falling, China must begin to develop its own higher-tech products, while building a strong services sector.
And with world exports of goods declining – both cyclically and as a result of the growth slowdown in the advanced economies – China must activate its domestic consumer base.
But the inability to update the roles and business models of SOEs is holding China back in this regard.
SOEs may enjoy privileged access to bank credit, natural resources, and land, but they also suffer from rigid governance and high staff turnover, spurred by President Xi Jinping’s anti-corruption campaign.
When it comes to key personnel, the Communist Party establishment calls the shots.
So, for SOEs to make changes, there must be consensus among internal and external officials in charge of business, industrial policy, and politics.
In the late 1990s, public listings of SOEs had the twin benefits of securing new resources for tackling legacy losses and propelling governance and productivity gains.
Today, however, privately owned technology platforms, many of which are listed abroad, have captured much of the valuation gains of the new economy.
As a result, policymakers are struggling to find a way to finance the creative destruction of outdated SOEs burdened by debt, excess capacity, and obsolete equipment.
It is this uncertainty that seems to have spurred the authorities to rethink their original, more aggressive reform plan.
They recognize that, when economic and financial systems comprise intricate networks of a variety of interlocking and interdependent elements, changes to one component – especially one as dominant as China’s state sector – can have far-reaching consequences.
With the recent adjustments to the reform strategy, China’s leaders have bought themselves some time to figure out where the SOEs can fit into the new economy.
The answer probably lies in new public infrastructure challenges – the kind that the advanced economies are already facing – including issues related to information security and competition.
If SOEs shift their business models to provide platform and regulatory services at low cost, taking advantage of economies of scale, they can help, for example, to manage the use of information by the large private platforms.
Or they might help to guide the entry of foreign tech giants like Facebook and Google into the Chinese market, to ensure that those companies do not become too dominant.
State-owned banks, for their part, might be able to provide multi-tiered financing for the millions of small and medium-size enterprises that are eager to shape and enrich the new economy.
Finally, SOEs can enter into public-private partnerships with local businesses to handle the construction and management of transport and traffic systems, urban drainage, and bodies responsible for food safety, pollution control, and public security.
The good news is that the Chinese government, at both the national and local levels, has plenty of assets with real value, amounting to more than 140% of GDP.
Those assets can help to smooth the transition to this new SOE business model, such as by plugging the holes in the social security system and addressing legacy liabilities, including those arising from past corruption, non-performing loans, and inadequate provision of public goods and services.
China’s SOEs are at a crossroads.
Given the high stakes of reform, the country’s leaders are right to take some time to assess their options.
Whichever route they take is sure to be challenging.
But those challenges pale in comparison to the problems that would arise from sticking to the old SOE model.
Asia’s Dammed Water Hegemon
NEW DELHI – As if to highlight that Asia’s biggest challenge is managing the rise of an increasingly assertive China, the Chinese government has unveiled plans to build large new dams on major rivers flowing to other countries.
The decision by China’s State Council to ride roughshod over downstream countries’ concerns and proceed unilaterally shows that the main issue facing Asia is not readiness to accommodate China’s rise, but the need to persuade China’s leaders to institutionalize cooperation with neighboring countries.
China is at the geographical hub of Asia, sharing land or sea frontiers with 20 countries; so, in the absence of Chinese participation, it will be impossible to establish a rules-based regional order.
How, then, can China be brought on board?
This challenge is most striking on trans-boundary rivers in Asia, where China has established a hydro-supremacy unparalleled on any continent by annexing the starting places of major international rivers – the Tibetan plateau and Xinjiang – and working to reengineer cross-border flows through dams, reservoirs, barrages, irrigation networks, and other structures.
China – the source of trans-boundary river flows to more countries than any other hydro-hegemon – has shifted the focus of its dam-building program from dam-saturated internal rivers to international rivers after having already built more large dams than the rest of the world combined.
Most of China’s dams serve multiple functions, including generating electric power and meeting manufacturing, mining, irrigation, and municipal-supply water needs.
By ramping up the size of its dams, China now not only boasts the world’s largest number of mega-dams, but is also the biggest global producer of hydropower, with an installed generating capacity of 230 gigawatts.
The State Council, seeking to boost the country’s already-large hydropower capacity by 120 gigawatts, has identified 54 new dams — in addition to the ones currently under construction — as “key construction projects” in the revised energy-sector plan up to 2015.
Most of the new dams are planned for the biodiversity-rich southwest, where natural ecosystems and indigenous cultures are increasingly threatened.
After slowing its dam-building program in response to the serious environmental consequences of completion in 2006 of the Three Gorges Dam – the world’s largest – China is now rushing to build a new generation of giant dams.
At a time when dam building has largely petered out in the West – and run into growing grassroots opposition in other democracies like Japan and India – China will remain the nucleus of the world’s mega-dam projects.
Such projects underscore the zero-sum mentality that seemingly characterizes China’s water-policy calculations.
By embarking on a series of mega-dams in its ethnic-minority-populated borderlands, China is seeking to appropriate river waters before they cross its frontiers.
Asia, the world’s driest continent in terms of per capita freshwater availability, needs a rules-based system to manage water stress, maintain rapid economic growth, and ensure environmental sustainability.
Yet China remains the stumbling block, refusing to enter into a water-sharing treaty with any neighbor – much less support a regional regulatory framework – because it wants to maintain its strategic grip on trans-boundary river flows.
Among the slew of newly approved dam projects are five on the Salween, three on the Brahmaputra, and two on the Mekong.
China has already built six mega-dams on the Mekong – the lifeblood for continental Southeast Asia – with its latest addition being the 254-meter-high Nuozhadu Dam, whose gargantuan reservoir is designed to hold nearly 22 billion cubic meters of water.
The current dam-building plans threaten the Salween River’s Grand Canyon – a UNESCO World Heritage site – and the pristine, environmentally sensitive areas through which the Brahmaputra and the Mekong flow.
These three international rivers originate on the Tibetan plateau, whose bounteous water resources have become a magnet for Chinese planners.
The Salween, which runs from Tibet through Yunnan Province into Burma and Thailand, will cease to be Asia’s last largely free-flowing river, with work on the first project – the giant, 4,200-megawatt Songta Dam in Tibet – to begin shortly.
The State Council’s decision reverses the suspension of dam building on the Salween announced by Premier Wen Jiabao in 2004, after an international uproar over the start of multiple megaprojects in the National Nature Reserves, adjacent to the world heritage area – a stunning canyon region through which the Salween, the Mekong, and the Jinsha flow in parallel.
This reversal is consistent with the pattern established elsewhere, including on the Yangtze: China temporarily suspends a controversial plan after major protests in order to buy time while public passions cool, before resurrecting the same plan.
Meanwhile, China’s announcement of three new dam projects on the Brahmaputra, the main river running through northeastern India and Bangladesh, has prompted the Indian government to advise China to “ensure that the interests of downstream states are not harmed” by the upstream works.
Water has emerged as a new divide in Sino-Indian relations.
China’s new focus on building dams in the southwest of the country also carries larger safety concerns.
Indeed, Chinese scientists blamed the massive 2008 earthquake that struck the Tibetan plateau’s eastern rim, killing 87,000 people, on the newly constructed Zipingpu Dam, located next to a seismic fault.
The weight of the water impounded in the dam’s massive reservoir was said to have triggered severe tectonic stresses, or what scientists call reservoir-triggered seismicity.
China’s rush to build more dams promises to roil relations across Asia, fostering greater competition for water and impeding the already slow progress toward institutionalizing regional cooperation and integration.
If China continues on its current, heedless course, prospects for a rules-based order in Asia could perish forever.
China’s Threat to Russia
Last week, Russia and China held joint military maneuvers in the presence of both Russian President Vladimir Putin and Chinese President Hu Jintao.
But a new strategic alliance between the two countries is not likely, as it is China that poses the greatest strategic threat to Russia, although many in the Kremlin seem blind to this as they rattle sabers at America and the West.
Indeed, China officially considers several regions in Russia’s Far East to be only “alienated” from it.
China’s territorial claims on Russia are often noted in Chinese grade school geography textbooks, which include a number of Russian Far Eastern regions within China’s borders.
This is consistent with the Chinese strategic concept of “vital space,” which includes all spheres of a state’s strategic activities, on land, at sea, under water, in the air, and in space.
The dimensions of “vital space” are determined by a country’s economic, scientific, technical, social, and military capabilities – in essence, its “total power.”
According to Chinese theorists, the “vital space” of great powers extends far beyond a state’s borders, whereas the “vital space” of weak countries is limited to strategic boundaries that do not always correspond to the borders of their national territory.
Today, China has territorial claims against 11 of its 24 neighbors, including India, Japan, Vietnam, and the Philippines, in addition to Russia.
In China’s relations with all of them, the potential use of military force was and remains an important factor.
In September 2006, China’s People’s Liberation Army (PLA) conducted an unprecedentedly large 10-day exercise, involving the Shenyang and Beijing military districts, the two most powerful of China’s seven military districts.
Shenyang abuts the Russian Armed Forces’ Far Eastern District, and the Beijing district shares a border with Russia’s Siberian Military District.
During the exercises, Shenyang units advanced 1,000 kilometers into the Beijing district, where they engaged in joint war games.
To military observers, the Beijing/Shenyang exercises seemed to be practice for a possible offensive operation against Russia, because exercises on such a scale are undertaken only at the final stage of a multi-year program to train troops to enact specific strategic and operational plans.
The geography of the exercises, and the offensive nature of the tasks undertaken, leaves little doubt that Russia was cast in the role of “potential adversary.”
Such a show of force is an ancient, traditional Chinese political technique.
Paradoxically, these exercises were undertaken during a period when bilateral political and economic ties appeared on the surface to be at their highest point.
Russia has an important place in Chinese geopolitical calculations, as a supplier of both modern weaponry and energy resources needed to continue its modernization.
Therefore, the Chinese are doing everything possible to strengthen their economic and political position in Russia, and to draw Russia into their sphere of influence.
And China is succeeding, most importantly by consistently reinforcing Putin’s anti-American and anti-Western agenda.
While Beijing/Shenyang exercise should have indicated to Russian leaders that China’s intentions toward Russia may not always be benign, Russia’s political and military leadership seem not to sense any threat; on the contrary, they continue to sell the Chinese advanced weapons.
Russia’s current diplomatic tilt, indeed, is clearly against its own long-term national security interests.
China will never be interested in Russia’s economic and political modernization, for it prefers Russia to remain a source of mineral and energy resources and a vast “strategic rear” in its looming challenge with the United States.
Likewise, the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), which just concluded its annual meeting, is in China’s eyes a tool of regional policy that helps strengthen China’s influence and control over Central Asia’s natural resources at the expense of Russia.
No nation threatens China’s land borders.
China can solve its domestic problems, such as separatism, by itself.
China is militarily self-sufficient and needs military cooperation under the SCO framework only in order to free its hands if any conflict should arise that affects its interests.
In fact, conflict between Russia and China is possible precisely in Central Asia, given the clear differences in the two countries’ economic and political interests in that region.
Aside from control of the region’s energy supplies, water has become a potential source of conflict, given China’s serious shortages.
Yet, while the Chinese clearly understand these contingencies and are preparing themselves to deal with them diplomatically and militarily, the Kremlin remains myopically obsessed with the phantom threat of America.
Thus, as the Kremlin dreams of re-establishing its domination over what Russians refer to as the “near abroad” (Ukraine, Belarus, the Baltic countries, and the other post-Soviet states), China is increasingly looking at Russia as its own “near abroad.”
Will the Kremlin finally wake up to this?
Thirty-six years ago, Richard Nixon and Mao Zedong turned world politics upside down, as both America and China realized that it was the Soviet Union, and not each other, that posed the greater threat.
Vladimir Putin needs his own “Nixon moment.”
Alienating the West is a foolish strategy when the greatest long term threat to Russia comes from the East.
Global Growth – Still Made in China
NEW HAVEN – Despite all the hand-wringing over the vaunted China slowdown, the Chinese economy remains the single largest contributor to world GDP growth.
For a global economy limping along at stall speed – and most likely unable to withstand a significant shock without toppling into renewed recession – that contribution is all the more important.
For example, while the United States is widely praised for a solid recovery, its GDP is expected to grow by just 2.2% in 2016 – enough to contribute just 0.3 percentage points to overall world GDP growth, or only about one-fourth of the contribution made by China.
But even after transitioning from the “old normal” to what the Chinese leadership has dubbed the “new normal,” global economic growth remains heavily dependent on China.
There are three key implications of a persistent China-centric global growth dynamic.
Defining a Chinese hard landing as a halving of the current 6.7% growth rate, the combined direct and indirect effects of such an outcome would consequently knock about one percentage point off overall global growth.
In such a scenario, there is no way the world could avoid another full-blown recession.
Finally (and more likely in my view), there are the global impacts of a successful rebalancing of the Chinese economy.
The world stands to benefit greatly if the components of China’s GDP continue to shift from manufacturing-led exports and investment to services and household consumption.
Under those circumstances, Chinese domestic demand has the potential to become an increasingly important source of export-led growth for China’s major trading partners – provided, of course, that other countries are granted free and open access to rapidly expanding Chinese markets.
A successful Chinese rebalancing scenario has the potential to jump-start global demand with a new and important source of aggregate demand – a powerful antidote to an otherwise sluggish world.
That possibility should not be ignored, as political pressures bear down on the global trade debate.
All in all, despite all the focus on the US, Europe, or Japan, China continues to hold the trump card in today’s weakened global economy.
While a Chinese hard landing would be disastrous, a successful rebalancing would be an unqualified boon.
That could well make the prognosis for China the decisive factor for the global economic outlook.
While the latest monthly indicators show China’s economy stabilizing at around the 6.7% growth rate recorded in the first half of 2016, there can be no mistaking the headwinds looming in the second half of the year.
In particular, the possibility of a further downshift in private-sector fixed-asset investment could exacerbate ongoing pressures associated with deleveraging, persistently weak external demand, and a faltering property cycle.
But, unlike the major economies of the advanced world, where policy space is severely constrained, Chinese authorities have ample scope for accommodative moves that could shore up economic activity.
And, unlike the major economies of the developed world, which constantly struggle with a tradeoff between short-term cyclical pressures and longer-term structural reforms, China is perfectly capable of addressing both sets of challenges simultaneously.
To the extent that the Chinese leadership is able to maintain such a multi-dimensional policy and reform focus, a weak and still vulnerable global economy can only benefit.
The world needs a successful China more than ever.
Market Manipulation Goes Global
NEW HAVEN – Market manipulation has become standard operating procedure in policy circles around the world.
All eyes are now on China’s attempts to cope with the collapse of a major equity bubble.
But the efforts of Chinese authorities are hardly unique.
The leading economies of the West are doing pretty much the same thing – just dressing up their manipulation in different clothes.
Take quantitative easing, first used in Japan in the early 2000s, then in the United States after 2008, then in Japan again beginning in 2013, and now in Europe.
In all of these cases, QE essentially has been an aggressive effort to manipulate asset prices.
It works primarily through direct central-bank purchases of long-dated sovereign securities, thereby reducing long-term interest rates, which, in turn, makes equities more attractive.
Whether the QE strain of market manipulation has accomplished its objective – to provide stimulus to crisis-torn, asset-dependent economies – is debatable: Current recoveries in the developed world, after all, have been unusually anemic.
But that has not stopped the authorities from trying.
In their defense, central banks make the unsubstantiated claim that things would have been much worse had they not pursued QE.
But, with now-frothy manipulated asset markets posing new risks of financial instability, the jury is out on that point as well.
China’s efforts at market manipulation are no less blatant.
In response to a 31% plunge in the CSI 300 (a composite index of shares on the Shanghai and Shenzhen exchanges) from its June 12 peak, following a 145% surge in the preceding 12 months, Chinese regulators have moved aggressively to contain the damage.
Official actions run the gamut, including a $480 billion government-supported equity-market backstop under the auspices of the China Securities Finance Corporation, a $19 billion pool from major domestic brokerages, and an open-ended promise by the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) to use its balance sheet to shore up equity prices.
Moreover, trading was suspended for about 50% of listed securities (more than 1,400 of 2,800 stocks).
Unlike the West’s QE-enabled market manipulation, which works circuitously through central-bank liquidity injections, the Chinese version is targeted more directly at the market in distress – in this case, equities.
Significantly, QE is very much a reactive approach – aimed at sparking revival in distressed markets and economies after they have collapsed.
The more proactive Chinese approach is the policy equivalent of attempting to catch a falling knife – arresting a market in free-fall.
There are several other noteworthy distinctions between China’s market manipulation and that seen in the West.
First, Chinese authorities appear less focused on systemic risks to the real economy.
That makes sense, given that wealth effects are significantly smaller in China, where private consumption accounts for just 36% of GDP – only about half the share in more wealth-dependent economies like the US.
Moreover, much of the sharp appreciation in Chinese equity values was very short-lived.
Nearly 90% of the 12-month surge in the CSI 300 was concentrated in the seven months following the start of cross-border investment flows via the so-called Shanghai-Hong Kong Connect in November 2014.
As a result, speculators had little time to let the capital gains sink in and have a lasting impact on lifestyle expectations.
Second, in the West, post-crisis reforms typically have been tactical, aimed at repairing flaws in established markets, rather than promoting new markets.
In China, by contrast, post-bubble reforms have a more strategic focus, given that the equity-market distress has important implications for the government’s capital-market reforms, which are viewed as crucial to its strategy of structural rebalancing.
Long saddled with a bank-centric system of credit intermediation, the development of secure and stable equity and bond markets is a high priority in China’s effort to promote a more diversified business-funding platform.
The collapse of the equity bubble calls that effort into serious question.
Finally, by emphasizing a regulatory fix, and thereby keeping its benchmark policy rate well above the dreaded zero bound, the PBOC is actually better positioned than other central banks to maintain control over monetary policy and not become ensnared in the open-ended provision of liquidity that is so addictive for frothy markets.
And, unlike in the West, China’s targeted equity-specific actions minimize the risk of financial contagion caused by liquidity spillovers into other asset markets.
With a large portion of China’s domestic equity market still closed, it is hard to know when the correction’s animal spirits have been exhausted.
While the government has assembled considerable firepower to limit the unwinding of a spectacular bubble, the overhang of highly leveraged speculative demand is disconcerting.
Indeed, in the 12 months ending in June, margin financing of stock purchases nearly tripled as a share of tradable domestic-equity-market capitalization.
While Chinese equities initially bounced 14% off their July 8 low, the 8.5% plunge on July 27 suggests that that may have been a temporary respite.
The likelihood of forced deleveraging of margin calls underscores the potential for a further slide once full trading resumes.
More broadly, just as in Japan, the US, and Europe, there can be no mistaking what prompted China’s manipulation: the perils of outsize asset bubbles.
Time and again, regulators and policymakers – to say nothing of political leaders – have been asleep at the switch in condoning market excesses.
In a globalized world where labor income is under constant pressure, the siren song of asset markets as a growth elixir is far too tempting for the body politic to resist.
Speculative bubbles are the visible manifestation of that temptation.
As the bubbles burst – and they always do – false prosperity is exposed and the defensive tactics of market manipulation become both urgent and seemingly logical.
Therein lies the great irony of manipulation: The more we depend on markets, the less we trust them.
Needless to say, that is a far cry from the “invisible hand” on which the efficacy of markets rests.
We claim, as Adam Smith did, that impersonal markets ensure the most efficient allocation of scarce capital; but what we really want are markets that operate only on our terms.
China’s Abnormal Stock Market
LONDON – China’s stock market has plunged yet again, this time by 8.5% – the market’s second-largest fall in a single day, and the largest since the global financial crisis.
The roller-coaster ride is far from over.
In fact, China’s stock market is more like a casino than an amusement-park attraction.
Retail investors account for 85% of trades, in contrast to other major markets, where institutional investors – with their relative abundance of information – are the biggest traders.
The result, no surprise, is an extremely volatile market, in which rumor and emotion play an outsize role in driving outcomes.
And that volatility is the other reason why the casino metaphor applies: China’s stock market can rise or fall by double digits without triggering a wider economic crash – at least so far.
For example, China’s GDP growth was unaffected (in fact, the economy was growing at nearly 10%) when the stock market lost half of its value between 2001 and 2005 – or, for that matter, when the market then recovered (only to fall dramatically again after the 2008 financial crisis).
Since then, China’s stock market has been a global laggard – that is, until the past year, when it became the best performing in the world, rising by more than 150%.
And yet the roller-coaster pattern continues: the 8.5% plunge came when the market re-opened on a Monday that followed the largest two-day rise since 2008.
That rise had been preceded by a loss of nearly one-third of the market’s value from mid-June to early July.
This volatility highlights the challenges of ensuring a smooth process of financial liberalization in China.
After extensive government intervention prohibited some selling of shares and froze trading for the bulk of the market, prices rebounded.
Yet intervention is unlikely to prevent another crash.
The reason is that the Chinese stock market is not wholly liquid or globally integrated.
Moreover, it is dominated by captive money from Chinese savers – the retail investors.
Indeed, it was not until 2009 that most shares on China’s stock exchanges were tradable.
Until the reforms that began in 2005, two-thirds of shares were non-tradable and held by state-owned enterprises (SOEs) or legal persons, which are typically state-controlled entities.
Indeed, private firms still comprise a minority of China’s listed companies, though today fewer than 30% of shares cannot be traded.
To be sure, that has led to a huge infusion of liquidity over just the past few years.
But China also imposes capital-account restrictions on portfolio-investment flows, which means that its stock markets remain relatively closed.
Until the recent launch of the Shanghai-Hong Kong Connect corridor, which links the two markets, international investors could not directly buy A-shares on the mainland exchanges.
Direct purchases remain subject to a quota, in the form of a limited number of so-called Qualified Foreign Institutional Investor licenses.
By the same token, aside from the very wealthy, who benefit from personal connections and other devices, the hundreds of millions of ordinary Chinese savers who have achieved middle-class status do not have easy access to global markets.
Moreover, returns on deposits are low (and had been negative), and the state-dominated financial system offers few diversified products.
As a result, housing and domestic equities are the main investments available to them.
But then the housing market stalled, as fears of a property bubble spurred a government clampdown on credit, leaving the stock market the place for middle-class savers to put their money.
The ensuing boom was a mirror image of the pattern between 1998 and 2001, when the housing market was liberalized and the stock market fell.
The big question now is whether the recent volatility will spill over into other asset markets and the real economy.
The double-digit drop in the Shanghai Composite Index since June has not triggered an economic crisis largely because fewer than 10% of Chinese households participate in the stock market, and equities comprise less than 15% of household assets.
But even a small fraction of Chinese households experiencing paper losses still amounts to tens of millions of people.
That has caused enough concern for the government to act, including by relaxing collateral requirements to permit real-estate assets to be used to cover margin calls.
It was, in fact, the authorities’ clampdown on margin borrowing, together with a loss in confidence as global markets declined, that is thought to have triggered the market meltdown.
And that, too, is a feature of a market dominated by small traders: the “herding” behavior that fuels major booms and busts becomes more prevalent, because individuals assume that others have better information.
The result, as we are now witnessing, is that a moderate sell-off can easily turn into a stampede.
And government intervention to block the exits is inadequate.
On the contrary, until China’s stock market opens up and its institutional foundation becomes predictable, volatility will be its only guiding rule.
The Contradictions of China’s Communist Capitalism
BERKELEY – The recent dizzying plunge in the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges has posed a unique test for China’s Communist rulers.
So long as the markets were rising, the paradox of vigorous capitalist development overseen by the world’s largest and strongest Communist party confounded only academics and old-school Marxists.
As the Chinese Communist Party elite and their relatives, foreign financial institutions, and some Chinese small investors (enabled by margin lending) made money on stocks, no one bothered to comprehend the mutant creature they were milking.
But now, as the realization sinks in that Chinese stock prices will not keep rising indefinitely, the CCP is taking desperate, if clumsy, measures to control the correction.
All new initial public offerings have been halted, and much trading has been curtailed; the central bank has been asked to help the China Securities Finance Corporation induce investors to buy shares and thus stabilize the market.
Indeed, even the country’s sovereign wealth fund has gotten into the act.
But, unlike in other capitalist economies, money is not the only tool at the authorities’ disposal.
If your brokers in China advise you to sell shares, they must be careful not to appear to be rumormongers, subject to official punishment.
And there are reports that sales of large holdings may trigger investigations by the authorities.
Causing public disorder or financial instability can be a serious offense in China, where conspiracy theories about foreigners’ efforts to undermine the economy abound.
What Chinese officials desire is a capitalist stock market without the possibility of large losses that can shake confidence in the CCP’s credibility and control.
But that is a market that no one has yet invented.
The spectacle of a communist regime trying to jack up a casino-like capitalist market is just one of the many contradictions that have been accumulating in almost every corner of China’s economy and politics.
And now, their weight is perhaps becoming too heavy for the Party hierarchy to bear.
Indeed, the composition of the CCP is itself a contradiction.
The revolutionary party of peasants and workers is now dominated by businessmen, college students, and professionals.
One-third of the people listed in the Hurun Report, the Shanghai-based monitor of China’s wealthiest people, are Party members.
The average wealth of the richest 70 members of the National People’s Congress, China’s parliament, far exceeds $1 billion.
(The richest 70 members of India’s parliament or even the US Congress, both now controlled by right-wing political parties, are substantially less wealthy.)
Of course, President Xi Jinping’s recent drive against corruption high and low has made many Communist Party plutocrats jittery.
But questions abound as to whether the corruption charges being brought against the so-called “tigers” are a fig leaf for an old-fashioned purge of Xi’s rivals in the Party and the military.
Ordinary Chinese generally support the anti-corruption drive; it is they who usually initiate protests and point fingers at dishonest officials.
But, if such protests attract too much attention, it is more likely that they will be quashed and their leaders repressed than that the corruption will be stopped.
In 2008, for example, following the Sichuan earthquake, thousands of children died when their shoddily built schools collapsed.
For a while, tales of corruption in the schools’ construction dominated even the official news.
In the end, however, it was the protesting parents and teachers of the dead children who were detained and harassed by the state.
Yet the rule of law in the Party’s eyes is a law that it dictates, interprets, and enforces.
Chinese citizens’ references to the constitution (especially article 35, which guarantees freedom of speech, press, assembly, and association) and constitutionalism in general are routinely censored, and lawyers who cite the constitution in court are frequently detained.
Mao famously speculated on the nature of contradictions in a 1937 essay: “The law of contradiction in things, that is, the law of the unity of opposites, is the fundamental law of nature and of society.”
One wonders, though, if even he could have grasped, much less managed, the contradictions of communist capitalism.
A False Alarm About China
MANILA – To hear some pundits tell it, China’s economic miracle – one that lifted 300 million people out of poverty and shifted the world’s geopolitical center of gravity – is coming to a tumultuous end.
The volatile stock market and the renminbi’s “surprise” depreciation are signs of imminent economic collapse, according to this view, as risky investments and high levels of government debt put the brakes on decades of turbo-charged output growth.
Fortunately, there is little reason to believe such dire predictions, or that the market gyrations that have been driving recent headlines represent anything more than short-term volatility.
After all, equity-price movements are a poor predictor of the real economy’s performance.
Indeed, when Chinese GDP was growing strongly during 2010-2013, stock prices were falling.
More recently, when stock prices began soaring during the first half of 2015, the economy’s slowdown had already begun.
As the American economist Paul Samuelson famously quipped, “The stock market has called nine of the last five recessions.”
China’s growth has slowed largely as a result of changes in its fundamentals: less favorable demographics, a shift in emphasis from exports and public investment to the service sector and domestic consumption, and lower demand from advanced economies.
But China’s past success also contributed to this slowdown, in the form of higher wages, which narrow the scope for rapid growth based on low-cost labor and technological catch-up.
Additional signs of weakness, including soft data on exports and investment, emerged in the first half of 2015.
But other important indicators – like retail sales and housing – show upticks.
And, perhaps most important, the country’s labor market remains healthy, creating some 7.2 million new urban jobs – many of them in services – in the first half of 2015.
Meanwhile, wage growth remains strong and uninterrupted.
China’s growth rate may be lower than 7% this year, but I do not believe that it will end up very far from the government’s target of “about 7%.”
The volatility in equity prices in recent months has more to do with the peculiarities of China’s stock markets than with the country’s underlying economic fundamentals.
In more developed economies, such as the United States and Europe, many institutional investors – who tend to be focused on long-term fundamentals – help stabilize stock markets.
By contrast, the Chinese markets are dominated by retail investors, who are more likely to pursue short-term gains and engage in momentum trading, thereby exacerbating volatility and creating a greater disconnect between equity prices and real economic growth.
Moreover, the firms listed on China’s stock exchanges are not representative of the country’s companies.
Majority state-owned firms account for two-thirds of the market value of the country’s exchanges, for example, though they are responsible for no more than one-third of Chinese GDP and an even smaller share of employment.
The rise and fall of the Chinese stock market should also be understood in the context of Chinese households’ limited options for storing savings.
The run-up in prices took place at a time when deposit interest rates were officially capped.
When the alternatives are few and provide only low returns, the equity market looks more attractive, especially if – as was the case – the country’s major newspapers are running bullish editorials about stock prices.
More recent developments may have contributed to the downward pressure on prices, including discussion about abolishing interest-rate ceilings on deposits (the cap on term deposits of one year or more was removed on August 25).
The greater ease with which wealthy households can move savings out of the country, along with an anticipated increase in interest rates in the United States, was likely another contributing factor.
Furthermore, as Harvard’s Jeffrey Frankel has pointed out, regulators increased margin requirements several times this year, making it harder to buy stocks with borrowed money.
And, as with all stock markets, shifts in sentiment that are not connected to fundamentals can also drive volatility.
Whether China’s economy can continue to grow rapidly will depend far more on its ability to reform than on how its stock markets perform.
If China is to thrive in the long term, raising its aggregate productivity is key.
This means that it will need to overhaul its state-owned firms and the financial sector so that resources can flow to the most productive investment projects.
Lowering the tax burden on firms – including the payroll tax – would also be useful.
Reforms that increase the flexibility of the labor market are also in order.
While China used to have a relatively flexible labor market in the manufacturing sector, firms’ reallocation of workers based on market needs has become more difficult in recent years.
Greater flexibility might not stimulate short-term growth, but it would improve resilience to future negative shocks, whether they originate at home or abroad.
As long as China continues to pursue pro-market reforms, it will remain the largest single-country contributor to global GDP growth over the medium term – unperturbed by stock-market volatility.
If reforms stall, falling stock prices are likely to be the least of China’s worries.
China’s Stock-Market Red Herring
ROME – With the Shanghai Stock Exchange Composite Index down more than 40% since last June, investors worldwide are watching the decline with growing concern – but not because they are invested in the plummeting market (China’s stocks are overwhelmingly held by Chinese).
Rather, the fear is that plunging equity prices mean that China’s economy is going down the tubes.
But those seeking compelling clues about China’s economic future should look elsewhere.
Of course, it is true that China’s growth rate has slowed substantially, and there are plenty of reasons to believe that the deceleration is not temporary.
But none of those reasons has much to do with the stock market.
This disconnect is apparent in the fact that market prices are higher today than they were in 2014, the year when China surpassed the United States to become the world’s largest economy (in terms of purchasing power parity), a development that spurred bullish expectations.
What observers at the time did not seem to recognize was that China’s economy was already slowing.
According to official statistics, the growth rate averaged 10% in 1980-2010, but fell to 7-8% in 2012-2014.
At first, the slowdown actually contributed indirectly to a rise in stock prices, by spurring the People’s Bank of China to begin cutting interest rates in November 2014.
But by the spring of 2015, the market’s boom was looking a lot like a credit-fueled bubble.
The Shanghai index peaked on June 12, when the China Securities Regulatory Commission tightened margin requirements.
The truth is that China’s economic slowdown should not have surprised anyone.
The country’s three-decade run of 10% annual GDP growth was already unprecedented.
The question is why no country, not even China, managed to prolong its economic miracle?
Some offer broad explanations: countries fall into the middle-income trap or experience a regression to the mean in growth rates.
But, in China’s case, a number of specific factors may be at play.
The first factor is diminishing returns to capital, which weakened the growth-enhancing effects of, say, investment in transport infrastructure and residential construction.
Another is that urban land prices have been bid up, while the environment’s “carrying capacity” has been exhausted.
Then there are demographic challenges.
The working-age population has peaked, and the share of retirement-age population is rising fast – not least because of the country’s 35-year-long one-child policy, which was only recently rescinded.
Moreover, China’s once seemingly inexhaustible surplus of rural labor willing to migrate to urban areas has largely disappeared, causing wages to rise and the country’s competitive advantage in labor-intensive manufacturing to weaken.
The economy has shifted from manufacturing toward services, where there is less scope for productivity growth.
Moreover, room for catch-up gains with the developed economies in terms of technology, production processes, and management practices is shrinking, undermining productivity growth further – and leaving it up to China to do some innovating of its own.
Against this background, a shift to a trend annual growth rate of 5-7% is natural.
But that shift can happen in two ways: a soft landing, in which China continues to grow at the slower-but-sustainable trend rate, or a hard landing, involving a financial crisis and more severe economic recession.
Like Japan after the 1980s or South Korea in 1997-1998, China has depended significantly on investment and debt financing during its high-growth phase, raising the risk that excess capacity could lead to financial crisis as the economy slows.
And, indeed, excess capacity is already a serious problem in many sectors.
Still, it is unclear what kind of landing China faces – not least because official statistics may be overstating current GDP growth considerably.
With official growth data usually aligning a little too closely with government targets to be credible, skeptics are turning to other, more tangible measures of economic conditions, pointing out that energy consumption, freight railway traffic, and output of industrial products like coal, steel, and cement has slowed sharply.
These statistics could, as many infer, indicate that China’s economy is growing at a rate much lower than the 7% the government claims.
But, as Nicholas Lardy persuasively argues, they could also reflect the economy’s shift from heavy manufacturing toward services – a shift that is highly desirable in helping China’s natural transition to the more sustainable trend.
It is still possible, then, that China is on track for a soft landing.
But success presupposes less reliance on investment spending and export demand, and more on domestic household consumption, to support growth.
Moreover, China must increase the flexibility of land and labor markets.
For example, insecure land rights in the countryside and the hukou (household registration) system in the cities continue to impede labor mobility.
More generally, markets’ role in shaping the economy must continue to grow.
State-owned enterprises must be reined in. The health-care, social-security, and tax systems must be reformed and strengthened.
And better environmental regulation is crucial.
Chinese leaders and economists already know all of this.
They adopted a list of reform objectives covering these areas in 2013.
And in the last two years, they have made progress in implementing some of them.
But there is still a long way to go, and success is by no means guaranteed.
As Shang-Jin Wei, the chief economist of the Asian Development Bank points out, progress on these reforms – not what happens in the stock market – is what will determine the fate of China’s economy.