America is not in absolute decline, and, in relative terms, there is a reasonable probability that it will remain more powerful than any other country in the coming decades.
We do not live in a “post-American world,” but we also do not live in the American era of the late twentieth century.
The US will be faced with a rise in the power resources of many others – both states and non-state actors.
It will also confront a growing number of issues that require power with others as much as power over others in order to obtain the country’s preferred outcomes.
America’s capacity to maintain alliances and create cooperative networks will be an important dimension of its hard and soft power.
The problem of America’s role in the twenty-first century is not one of (poorly specified) “decline,” but rather of developing the contextual intelligence to understand that even the largest country cannot achieve what it wants without others’ help.
Educating the public to understand this complex globalized information age, and what is required to operate successfully in it, will be the real transformational leadership task.
Thus far, we are not hearing much about it from the Republican candidates.
What’s Wrong With Turkey?
On December 16, Orhan Pamuk, one of Turkey’s most famous writers, will enter an Istanbul court to face a charge of “insulting the national identity” after he advocated open discussion of the Turkish genocide of 1.5 million Armenians in 1915 and 1916.
Pamuk faces three years in prison.
Turkey’s effort to fine and imprison those who do not toe the official line convinces me that I was correct to oppose opening negotiations on the country’s European Union membership.
In December 1999, the European Council granted Turkey the status of EU candidate-member, implying that Turkey would accede to the Union at some future, unspecified date.
The Council subsequently asked the European Commission to decide by October 2004 whether Turkey had sufficiently fulfilled the political criteria – including democracy, the rule of law, and respect for the rights of ethnic minorities – for membership.
That decision was one of the last taken by Romano Prodi’s Commission, of which I was a member.
Of its 30 members, 29 said that Turkey had fulfilled the criteria sufficiently to proceed. I was the lone dissenter.
The Commission’s own report on Turkey, prepared by Günter Verheugen, who was then in charge of EU enlargement, shaped my decision.
This report mentioned that in 2003 some 21,870 Turks submitted asylum claims in the EU, of which 2,127 were accepted.
In other words, the EU’s own governments acknowledged in 2003 that the Turkish government had persecuted more than 2,000 of its own citizens.
Meanwhile, the Commission published a progress report on Turkey that granted that reforms were continuing, albeit at a slower pace, under Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan’s mildly Islamic-minded government.
Yet the report also presented serious misgivings: human rights violations, including torture, continued; the military’s influence remained too high; freedom of speech was not universally observed; non-Muslim religious and cultural minorities faced discrimination; and violence against women was not opposed strongly enough.
Not much has changed since accession talks began this October.
Beyond the current persecution of Pamuk, unacceptable behavior abounds.
In March 2005, the police violently disrupted a demonstration to celebrate International Women’s Day.
In May, the largest teachers’ union was banned for promoting the education of Turkey’s 14 million Kurds in their own language.
Indeed, intolerance goes right to the top of the Turkish government.
Foreign Minister Abdullah Gül abruptly cancelled a recent press conference in Copenhagen when he spied a Kurdish journalist in the audience and the Danes refused to evict him.
Such actions and attitudes amply justify my dissent of October 2004.
But, even if these shortcomings were removed, Turkey should still not be admitted to the EU, because it is not a European country.
Christianity, feudalism, the Renaissance, the Enlightenment, democracy, and industrialization have made us what we Europeans are, but they have not made Turks who they are.
So I am not convinced that reforms in Turkey implemented at the insistence of the European Commission would continue after accession. Indeed, I suspect that there will be backsliding.
Moreover, Turkey’s accession would lead inevitably to that of Ukraine, Belarus, and Moldova, and perhaps of Georgia, Armenia, and Azerbaïdjan.
But they were necessary.
By the time I left the Commission, I was sitting on a pile of 1,500 such infringement proceedings.
In short, EU membership entails having to accept incisive measures that deeply affect a state’s internal affairs.
That will be impossible with such disparate members.
The EU would fall victim to what the historian Paul Kennedy calls “imperial overreach.” The EU would become unacceptably diluted.
That is why former French President Valéry Giscard d’Estaing feared that Turkey’s entry would lead to the EU’s breakup, and it is why former German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt said, “Accession of Turkey would be more than the EU could bear.”
But the strongest reason to oppose Turkey’s accession is a question of democracy: a majority of the EU’s population simply does not want it.
What Syria Means
NEW DELHI – Syria’s agony has generated a variety of unproductive responses: verbal condemnation of the excesses of President Bashar al-Assad’s regime; disagreements about the wisdom of armed intervention; and all-around confusion about the possibility of finding a viable long-term solution.
Worse, in this sorry state of affairs, the world may be getting a glimpse of a very ugly future.
First, let us try to disentangle some of the cat’s cradle of ironies and contradictions that are bedeviling efforts to end the violence in Syria.
Whereas Syria denies political freedom to its citizens, it tolerates significantly more social freedom than many other Arab countries, particularly Saudi Arabia, which is leading the charge to oust Assad.
Governed by minority Alawites (a Shia sect), Syria harbors a kaleidoscope of distinct groups: Arabs, Armenians, Christians, Kurds, Druze, Ismailis, and Bedouin.&nbsp;
It is this tolerance of cultural and religious diversity that could be endangered if the Sunni-inspired revolt sweeps the country.
And that is why Syria simultaneously generates revulsion at the regime’s atrocities and fear of what might follow if the regime is defeated.
In an ancient land such as Syria, there can be no examination of the problems of the present without reflecting upon the past.
History, after all, is always the mother of the present, and geography the progenitor.
In his history of the Arab world in the aftermath of World War I, A Peace to End all Peace, David Fromkin suggests that the Middle East today reflects the failure of the European powers to consolidate the political systems that they imposed.
Britain and its allies “destroyed the old order,” smashing Turkish rule of the Arabic-speaking Middle East.
But then they “created countries, nominated rulers, delineated frontiers, [and introduced] a state system” that would not work.
But, in the wake of the American-led wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, and the intervention in Libya, is not the same experiment being repeated almost a century later?
That is the question that realistic policymakers should be asking themselves as they ponder what to do in Syria.
In August 1919, British Foreign Minister Arthur Balfour summarized the essence of the problem that is now confronting policymakers.
“The unhappy truth,” he wrote, “is that France, England, and America have got themselves…so inextricably confused that no…satisfactory answer is now possible.”
Does that not sound familiar?
And is not an updated version of Syrian (and then Iraqi) King Faisal’s exhortation to Arabs – “Choose to be either slaves or masters of your own destiny” – echoed in the political pronouncements of new leaders in Egypt and elsewhere.
And let us examine the actions of the West in 1919 and the years that followed.
The French, as Fromkin reminds us, “shrank Syria, so that they could control it,” rewarding their “Christian allies by swelling the borders of Mount Lebanon with the Bekaa valley, the Mediterranean ports of Tyre, Sidon, Beirut and Tripoli, and…land…north of Palestine.
Thousands of Muslims [suddenly] belonged to a state dominated by Christians.”
Indeed, the great arc stretching from Cairo to the Hindu Kush threatens to become the locus of global disorder.
Little wonder that Iranian envoy Saeed Jalili, after meeting Assad in Damascus recently, announced that “Iran will absolutely not allow the axis of resistance, of which it considers Syria to be a main pillar, to be broken in any way.”
For Turkey, Syria’s plight is a strategic nightmare, because any breakup of Syria implies the possible rise of a greater Kurdistan, which would raise claims to a great swath of Turkish territory.
Is there a solution to this grim impasse?
Certainly, one will not be found in more United Nations resolutions, which is why US President Barack Obama is now believed to favor a “managed transition” in Syria that would not fatally erode the existing instruments of the Syrian state.
As Michael Ignatieff has wisely observed, Syria’s crisis has revealed that this is “the moment in which the West should see that the world has truly broken into two.
A loose alliance of struggling capitalist democracies” is faced by Russia and China.
Western countries’ national interests will no longer determine the moral and political impulses of today’s global community.
Indeed, whatever the outcome, Syria’s agony has underscored a further irreversible weakening of the West’s dominant global role.
Three New Lessons of the Euro Crisis
WASHINGTON, DC – While some observers argue that the key lesson of the eurozone’s baptism by fire is that greater fiscal and banking integration are needed to sustain the currency union, many economists pointed this out even before the euro’s introduction in 1999.
The real lessons of the euro crisis lie elsewhere – and they are genuinely new and surprising.
The received wisdom about currency unions was that their optimality could be assessed on two grounds.
First, were the regions to be united similar or dissimilar in terms of their economies’ vulnerability to external shocks?
The more similar the regions, the more optimal the resulting currency area, because policy responses could be applied uniformly across its entire territory.
If economic structures were dissimilar, then the second criterion became critical: Were arrangements in place to adjust to asymmetric shocks?
The two key arrangements that most economists emphasized were fiscal transfers, which could cushion shocks in badly affected regions, and labor mobility, which would allow workers from such regions to move to less affected ones.
The irony here is that the impetus toward currency union was partly a result of the recognition of asymmetries.
Thus, in the aftermath of the sterling and lira devaluations of the early 1990’s, with their resulting adverse trade shocks to France and Germany, the lesson that was drawn was that a single currency was needed to prevent such disparate shocks from recurring.
But this overlooked a crucial feature of monetary unions: free capital mobility and elimination of currency risk – indispensable attributes of a currency area – could be (and were) the source of asymmetric shocks.
Currency unions, in other words, must worry about endogenous as much as exogenous shocks.
Free capital mobility allowed surpluses from large savers such as Germany to flow to capital importers such as Spain, while the perceived elimination of currency risk served to aggravate such flows.
To investors, Spanish housing assets seemed a great investment, because the forces of economic convergence unleashed by the euro would surely push up their prices – and because there was no peseta that could lose value.
These capital flows created a boom – and a loss of long-term competitiveness – in some regions, which was followed by an all-too-predictable bust.
To the extent that monetary and fiscal arrangements fail to reduce or eliminate moral hazard, the risk that capital flows create these endogenous asymmetric shocks will remain commensurately high.
A second insight from the case of the eurozone, advanced by the economist Paul de Grauwe, is that currency unions can be prone to self-reinforcing liquidity crises, because some vulnerable parts (Greece, Spain, Portugal, and Italy at various points) lack their own currencies.
Until the European Central Bank stepped in last August to become the central bank not just of Germany and France, but also of the distressed peripheral countries, the latter were like emerging-market economies that had borrowed in foreign currency and faced abrupt capital outflows.
These “sudden stops,” as the economists Guillermo Calvo and Carmen Reinhart call them, raised risk premiums and weakened the affected countries’ fiscal positions, which in turn increased risk, and so on, creating the vicious downward spiral that characterizes self-reinforcing crises.
The most appropriate analogy is with a country like South Korea.
In the aftermath of the Lehman Brothers collapse in 2008, South Korea needed dollars, because its firms had borrowed in dollars that domestic savers could not fully supply.
Thus, it entered into a swap arrangement with the Federal Reserve to guarantee that South Korea’s demand for foreign currency would be met.
Of course, the euro crisis was not just a liquidity crisis.
Several countries in the periphery (Greece, Spain, and Portugal) were responsible for the circumstances that led to and precipitated the crisis, and there may be fundamental solvency issues that need to be addressed even if the liquidity shortfall is addressed.
Finally, a less well-recognized insight from the euro-crisis concerns the role and impact of a currency union’s dominant members.
It is often argued that the United States, as the major reserve-currency issuer, enjoys what then French Finance Minister Valéry Giscard d’Estaing famously called in the 1960’s an “exorbitant privilege,” in the form of lower borrowing costs (a benefit estimated to be worth as much as 80 basis points).
There was always a downside – previously ignored but now highly salient in our mercantilist era – to this supposed privilege.
If investors flock to “safe” US financial assets, these capital flows must keep the dollar significantly stronger that it would be otherwise, which is an unambiguous cost, especially at a time of idle resources and unutilized capacity.
But, in the case of Germany, exorbitant privilege has come without this cost, owing solely to the currency union.
Weakness in the periphery has led to capital flowing back to Germany as a regional safe haven, lowering German borrowing costs.
But, yoked to weak economies such as Greece, Spain, and Portugal, the euro has also been much weaker than the Deutschemark would have been.
In effect, Germany has had the double exorbitant privilege of lower borrowing costs and a weaker currency – a feat that a non-monetary-union currency like the US dollar cannot accomplish.
The future of the eurozone will be determined, above all, by politics.
But its development so far has forever changed and improved our understanding of currency unions.
And that will be true regardless of whether the eurozone achieves the closer fiscal and banking arrangements that remain necessary to sustain it.
What the West Can Do
TBILISI – Given the tremendous damage that Russia has inflicted on Georgia, it is easy to conclude that the Kremlin has achieved its objectives.
But, so far, Russia has failed in its real goal – getting rid of Mikheil Saakashvili, Georgia’s pro-democracy, pro-American president.
To be sure, Russia has tightened its control of the separatist enclaves of South Ossetia and Abkhazia.
It shattered the Georgian military, grievously damaged Georgia’s economy, and stirred up discord within the Western alliance.
For three years, it has tried every conceivable tactic to bring Saakashvili down – fomenting a domestic uprising, imposing an economic blockade, beefing up its forces in the enclaves, and finally a war.
Yet Georgia’s president remains in power.
Here in Tbilisi, tension is understandably high.
Russian tanks are less than 25 miles away, and the wheat fields along the main road to Gori were ablaze, set on fire by Russian troops, as I drove through Russian checkpoints to get to that deserted, occupied city.
(Most memorable sight: drunken Russian soldiers in stolen Georgian uniforms – “because they are better than ours.”)
Russia’s invasion of Georgia has reshaped the strategic landscape.
But, as the West debates how to “punish Russia,” it is vital to remember that the main front is still in Georgia.
Talk about taking away the 2014 Winter Olympics or ejecting Russia from the G-8 may (or may not) have some effect on the Kremlin, but the most important thing the West can do now is strengthen the government in Tbilisi.
The equation is simple: if Saakashvili survives, Vladimir Putin loses.
The intense personal hatred between these men overlays two centuries of tortured history between Russia and Georgia.
Many people report that Putin simply “loses it” when discussing the upstart Saakashvili, who led his country from near bankruptcy into a golden age of economic growth and the world’s highest rate of foreign direct investment relative to GDP.
All this has been halted by Russian tanks.
The Kremlin has probably lost its chance to remove Saakashvili by overt force, although sinister, more stealthy means cannot be ruled out.
Having just dined with him in a public restaurant, I wish his security was a little tighter.
(His predecessor, Eduard Shevardnadze, was a near-miss target for several assassination attempts that are widely believed to have been Russian-directed.)
The Kremlin’s best hope now is that Georgia’s economy will crumble, its currency will collapse, and an unhappy populace, encouraged by some opposition leader (perhaps bankrolled by Russia), will force Saakashvili from power.
The Western response to this challenge must go beyond rhetoric.
What matters most right now is massive economic and military assistance.
Public commitments to help rebuild Georgia are the best way to prevent Russia from achieving its goal.
Prime Minister Vladimir Gurgenidze estimates that rebuilding railroads, bridges, ports and other infrastructure will cost at least $1 billion; this does not include humanitarian relief, refugee resettlement costs, or rebuilding Georgia’s military.
Gurgenidze also foresees negative economic growth, a huge budget deficit, and a collapse of tourism, which was just taking off in this beautiful country.
United States Senator Joseph Biden has called for an immediate $1 billion supplemental appropriation, a proposal quickly endorsed by Barack Obama.
But the Bush administration has not yet been specific on economic support.
Congress will be in session only briefly before the election, and a supplemental appropriation will pass only if President Bush pursues it vigorously as a bipartisan measure.
Even if delayed until next year, its immediate proposal by Bush and endorsement by both presidential candidates would help morale in Georgia.
The European Union, the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development must match American support.
In the long run, Georgia and Russia must coexist peacefully.
Here, Georgia must do its part.
Saakashvili, an immensely talented 41-year-old, saved his country from utter collapse in 2003.
But he must think strategically about the future.
On occasion, he has berated the Europeans for insufficient support – not a good tactic for someone trying to join the EU – and has used rhetoric about Russia that, while understandable, only increases the danger to himself.
Saakashvili cannot pick up his tiny country and move it to Mexico.
He has to manage the situation with greater care.
There will be consequences, of course, for Russia’s relations with the West.
(Bush’s inattentiveness to this Russian threat – dramatically illustrated by his literal embrace of Putin in Beijing as Russian tanks rolled into Georgia – may have led the Kremlin to think it could get away with its invasion.)
While the West will not going to war over Georgia, Russia must understand that it will pay for using force, or the threat of force, against neighbors that were once part of the Soviet space.
This is especially true for Ukraine and Azerbaijan, which are likely to be Moscow’s next targets for intimidation.
The rules of the post-Cold War world are changing – but not to the ultimate benefit of Russia, which has underestimated the unifying effect its actions will have on the West.
Exactly how these relationships evolve depends on what each side does in the coming weeks – especially in Georgia.
What to Expect From the 44th President
NEW YORK – Campaigns, be they political or military, are waged to be won, and the current American presidential campaign is no exception.
The Democratic and Republican candidates are doing all they can to distinguish themselves from an unpopular incumbent president and from one another in the remaining weeks before Americans vote.
For good reason, much attention is focused on foreign policy differences between the two nominees, which in many areas are both obvious and considerable.
Still, it is possible to discern some similarities between them, in part because some of their disagreements are not as pronounced as they seem, and in part because the constraints that the next president of the United States will face are certain to limit what either man could do in office.
Consider Iraq, the most divisive issue in American politics for the past five years.
Barack Obama regularly points out that the decision to go to war was deeply flawed; John McCain emphasizes how much things have turned around since early 2007, when US troop numbers were increased and US strategy revised.
Observers could be forgiven for thinking that they are speaking about two entirely different conflicts.
But what about the future?
No matter who wins this November, it is clear that Iraq will not dominate US foreign policy in the years ahead to anything near the degree that it has in recent years.
We are entering the post-Iraq era of American foreign policy.
Consistent with this, the US military presence is decreasing.
Where the two candidates differ is on the timing and pace of this drawdown, not on its general direction.
By contrast, the US commitment to Afghanistan will increase, and troop levels will climb.
Behind this prediction is a widely shared assessment that the trends in Afghanistan (unlike in Iraq) are negative, and that the US must strengthen its military presence there and revise its strategy if the Taliban are not to gain the upper hand.
It is also widely understood that Pakistan has become part of the problem.
Pakistan’s western reaches are now a sanctuary for militias and terrorists that are moving in and out of Afghanistan.
Here, Barack Obama appears more willing to have the US launch unilateral military raids against terrorists should the opportunity arise.
But whoever is elected will confront difficult choices if a nuclear-armed Pakistan remains unable or unwilling to act as an American partner and meet its responsibilities in the effort against terrorism.
A third area of some consensus (and some distance from George W. Bush) is climate change.
Under the next president, the US will no longer be a drag on international efforts to create a global regime that sets a ceiling on greenhouse gas emissions.
One result of this likely evolution in US policy is that pressure will shift to other countries, particularly China and India, to accept some limits on their own economic behavior.
A President McCain or Obama will take steps to improve America’s image in the world.
One of his first decisions will be to implement a ban on all forms of torture.
Also to be expected early on is a decision to close the facility at Guantánamo Bay, where terrorism suspects have been held for years without trial.
Iran is another area where the differences – at least initially – may not be as sharp as the campaign suggests.
Both candidates have stressed that an Iran with nuclear weapons would be unacceptable.
The victor will almost surely endorse a new diplomatic initiative aimed at ending Iran’s independent ability to enrich uranium.
Less clear are the details of such an initiative, or what the US would do if it were to fail.
The candidates’ statements on Iran do suggest two different philosophies of diplomacy.
Obama seems to regard meeting with foreign leaders as a normal component of foreign policy, to be employed as one of many tools.
McCain appears to embrace the view that such meetings are something of a reward, to be offered when preconditions are met (Iran comes to mind) and withdrawn when certain lines are crossed, as Russia was judged to have done this August in Georgia.
Despite such differences, either would carry out policies closer to those of Bush’s second term than his first.
With a strained military and a struggling economy, the next president will often have little choice other than to talk.
On other issues, such as trade, there are distinctions between the candidates.
McCain is a stronger advocate of free trade than Obama is.
But this difference may have less impact than meets the eye.
Congress plays a large role in trade policy, and the near certainty that the Democratic Party’s majority in Congress will grow after the election means that protectionism will grow as well.
Difficult economic times will make it hard to generate support for trade pacts, despite the current importance of export-oriented firms for the American economy.
There are real and important differences between the two candidates when it comes to how they would approach the world.
But there are also more similarities than might be evident from the debates and the campaign.
Aspects of the next president’s foreign policy are there to see if observers read between the lines and take as much note of what is not said as what is.
What Went Wrong with America
The latest edition of the Pew Global Attitudes Survey shows that favorable opinions of the United States have fallen again in 12 out of 15 countries polled, a sad reflection of a country’s loss of image.
How can America recover international legitimacy?
This is probably one of the most important challenges for today’s world, for America retains a unique power that should be used – and be perceived – as a force for good if global stability is to prevail.
Nearly two decades after the demise of the Soviet empire, what stands out is a prevailing sense of lost opportunities.
The US had a unique opportunity at the end of the Cold War to use its benevolent and enlightened superiority to establish a better international order.
But, for a combination of political and personal reasons, America lost time under the two presidencies of Bill Clinton.
Indeed, during this necessarily short and fragile “unipolar moment,” Clinton probably had an intuition of what America’s new responsibilities should be, but he did not deliver.
The defeat of the Democrats in the mid-term elections in 1994, followed by the Monica Lewinsky affair, hampered the effectiveness of one of America’s most energetic and gifted Presidents.
That failure was epitomized by the inability to impose a peace agreement on Palestinians and Israelis in 2000.
By contrast, George W. Bush did not lose time.
He did worse: he simply took a wrong turn – and he took it before 9/11, a traumatic event that reinforced, but did not create, America’s Manichean view of itself and its role in the world.
Three recent examples illustrate what went wrong with America, its loss of unique status, and its growing image as a partisan and unethical, if not destabilizing, force in the world.
Consider, first, the recent nuclear agreement signed between the US and India.
In strictly legal terms, there is nothing wrong, since India never signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
But in psychological and political terms, the deal signed could only be perceived as legitimizing for Iran’s nuclear ambitions, not to mention North Korea’s.
It was the ultimate proof that the Bush administration does not believe in universal norms.
A “good” country would be treated with extreme leniency, whereas a “bad” country would not.
Guantánamo, Abu Ghraib, and more recent war-crimes scandals have done much worse damage to America’s stature.
Regimes that systematically violate human rights have been quick to seize on every episode of US wrongdoing.
With its own human rights record in question, the US, which had been the democratic teacher of the post-war world, is in a much weaker position to give lessons and set standards.
Nor does the appearance of hypocrisy end there.
At a time when “democracy” and “democratization” have become the watchwords of US foreign policy, normalization of diplomatic relations with Gaddafi’s Libya, not to mention leniency towards Egypt and Saudi Arabia hardly boosts America’s credibility.
In global terms, the contrast between what America says and what it does has become glaring.
In February 2005, in a major speech in Paris during her first foreign trip as Secretary of State, Condoleezza Rice stated America’s ambition in the world.
She said essentially the following: “The role of the world is to improve the world.
America, as the most powerful and ethical country in the world, has a unique responsibility to perform.”
Eighteen months later, the results are falling far short of the goal.
On the contrary, the failures of US policy have contributed to reduce the legitimacy of America’s power further.
Despite the recent death of Zarqawi in Iraq, the situation there, and in Afghanistan, does not justify the continued Bush administration’s optimism.
As America’s legitimacy diminishes, new actors are appearing on the world stage – or returning for an encore.
Russia and China today are united not only by their energy deals, but also by both countries’ conviction that their time has come, and that the outside world needs them more than they need the outside world, particularly the US.
In strategic terms, the waning influence of a paralyzed Europe is also very bad news for America.
The US needs allies now more than ever, for the world is reverting to its pre-war multi-polar state.
Of course, given America’s objective military superiority, I would call it “asymmetrical multi-polarity.”
But the US is no longer the country that others seek to emulate, or that they look to for global leadership.
It is too early to dismiss America and proclaim the end of an imperial moment.
America retains unique qualities – particularly its ability to rebound.
The next US president should be able to capitalize on Americans’ fundamental optimism, pragmatism, and activism.
But he or she will face an uphill struggle to prove to the world that America can be a force for good, a democratic beacon that cares for the planet and that lives up to the standards that it sets for others.
What We Owe Egypt
CAMBRIDGE – The question that still underlies much thinking about economic development is this: What can we do to kick-start economic growth and reduce poverty around the world?
The “we” is sometimes the World Bank, sometimes the United States and other rich countries, and sometimes professors of development economics and their students huddled in a seminar room.
It is on this question that the entire development-aid complex is based.
But what has transformed Tunisia, Egypt, and Libya over the last two years has not been efforts by the outside world to improve these societies or their economies, but grassroots social movements intent on changing their countries’ political systems.
It started in Tunisia, where the revolution swept President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali’s repressive regime out of power. It then spread to Egypt and Libya, ending Hosni Mubarak’s and Muammar el-Qaddafi’s even more repressive and corrupt regimes.
The people who poured into the streets and risked their lives were fed up with the repression and the poverty that these regimes caused.
The average Egyptian’s income level, for example, is just 12% of the average American’s, and Egyptians can expect to die 10 years sooner.
Fully 20% of the population lives in dire poverty.
The protesters in Tahrir Square perceived the cause of Egypt’s poverty in its non-responsive, repressive political system, its corrupt government, and the general lack of equality of opportunity in every sphere of their lives.
They saw their current leaders as part of the problem, not part of the solution.
By contrast, most outsiders, asking “What can we do?”, emphasized geographic or cultural factors, or some purely economic “poverty trap,” whose effects should be countered by foreign aid and advice.
There should be no illusion that the transformation that the protesters started will be smooth.
Many previous revolutions have deposed one set of corrupt rulers only to bring in a new bunch who are equally corrupt, vicious, and repressive.
There is also no guarantee that the previous elites will not be able to re-constitute similar regimes.
Indeed, the military, the bulwark of Mubarak’s regime, is now in charge in Egypt, and has been repressing, jailing, and killing protesters who dare to stand up.
Most recently, it has unveiled plans to write a new constitution before the presidential election, and its electoral commission has disqualified 10 of the 23 presidential candidates on flimsy grounds.
And, if the military loosens the reins, the Muslim Brotherhood could take over and form its own authoritarian, non-representative regime.
But there are also grounds to be optimistic.
The genie is out of the bottle, and people know that they have the power to topple governments, and, more generally, that their political activism has consequences.
That is why people have continued to fill Tahrir Square whenever the military has tried to consolidate its power and suppress dissent.
Though it is ultimately the Egyptian people who will decide the country’s fate, and whether it can finally take decisive steps towards more inclusive political institutions, this does not mean that outsiders can do nothing.
In fact, there is much that “we” can do – even if none of it will be central to the outcome.
For example, the US will again give more than $1.5 billion of aid to Egypt this year.
But who is receiving that aid?
Unfortunately, it is not the people who are trying to change their country’s future, but the Egyptian military and the same politicians who ruled Egypt under the previous regime.
The least we owe to the Egyptian people is to stop supporting their repression.
That does not mean cutting foreign aid.
On the contrary, though foreign aid will not by itself transform Egypt’s society or economy, and though some of it will inevitably be wasted and fall into the wrong hands, it can still do some good.
More important, the US and the international community can work to ensure that the bulk of the funds go not to the military and to business-as-usual politicians, but to grassroots causes and groups.
In fact, foreign aid can also be used as a small inducement for national dialogue in Egypt.
For example, foreign aid could be placed under the stewardship of a committee of representatives from different social factions, including the civil-society groups at the center of the uprising and the Muslim Brotherhood, with the clear understanding that if the committee fails to agree, the aid will not be disbursed.
This would force the military and the elites to work together with opposition groups that they often attempt to sideline.
Beyond bringing important but politically marginalized groups to the table, such a committee might also produce a demonstration effect, with successful power-sharing in a small setting possibly encouraging power-sharing writ large.
That may not be the sort of outside intervention that could cure the ills of centuries of repression and underdevelopment overnight, but “we” need to stop searching for a non-existent panacea, and instead do something better than feeding the Egyptian military.
When Democracies Collide
BERLIN – The multipolar nature of today’s international system will again be on display at the upcoming G-20 summit in Los Cabos, Mexico.
Global problems are no longer solved, crises managed, or global rules defined, let alone implemented, the old-fashioned way, by a few, mostly Western, powers.
Incipient great and middle powers, such as India, Brazil, Indonesia, South Korea, Turkey, and South Africa, also demand their say.
Some of these powers are still emerging economies.
Politically, however, most of them have crossed the threshold that has long limited their access to the kitchen of international decision-making.
The five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council (the “P-5”) still defend their right to veto resolutions, and their military power is unmatched.
But they can no longer dispose of sufficient resources, competence, and legitimacy to cope with global challenges or crises on their own.
Bipolarity is a thing of the past, and it is unlikely to re-emerge in a new Sino-American “G-2.”
It is equally unlikely for the foreseeable future that any one club of countries, such as the G-7 or G-8, will again assume a quasi-hegemonic position.
Even the G-20 in its current composition may not really represent the forces that can and will shape the twenty-first century.
For the Unites States, the European Union, Japan, and other members of the “Old West,” the good news is that most of the emerging powers that are positioning themselves for a more active global role are also democracies.
Within the G-20, only two states – China and Saudi Arabia – explicitly do not want to be liberal democracies, while a third, Russia, has developed into an autocracy with a democratic façade.
The not-so-good news is that these new democratic powers do not necessarily share the Old West’s political agenda.
For example, they differ about climate policies, seeing a threat to development.
Similarly, while new middle and great powers do not always agree, they are generally more skeptical of both international sanctions and military interventions.
Moreover, some of the most important of these states differ substantially with the US, and often also with the EU, about the right approach toward regional conflicts, especially in the Middle East.
Thus, in 2010, the US found itself in a serious diplomatic dispute with Turkey and Brazil about how to resolve the conflict with Iran over its nuclear program.
Without actually admitting it, the US was clearly unhappy that these two states tried to play a diplomatic role of their own in the dispute.
Differences are also apparent where new democratic middle or great powers have formed new groups or clubs, such as the BRICS, together with non-democratic powers.
India, Brazil, and South Africa are using such formats in a pragmatic way to pursue their interests, or simply to demonstrate their increased international weight.
There is little agreement between them and Russia or China – both P-5 members – with regard to political values or to fundamental questions of international order.
Along with many other states in the global South, however, Russia and China tend to defend the principle of non-interference, and they are generally reluctant to support any US or European attempts to project democracy or defend human rights in other countries.
Not a few policymakers in the US and in Europe have reacted with astonishment, or even annoyance, to these emerging democratic powers’ attempts to pursue their own agendas on the world stage.
Such reactions partly reflect old thinking rooted in the Cold War, when democratic countries might differ over details, but would agree about the main questions of international politics.
Those who pursued a different agenda on substantial matters were either not part of the “democratic camp” or were not important international players.
By contrast, a central feature of today’s globalized, multipolar world is that shared democratic values do not guarantee agreement about substantial questions of international politics.
The more democracies there are, the more conflicts of interests and differences are likely to emerge between democratic countries.
There is little reason to react with anger when states like Turkey, Brazil, and South Africa set priorities different from those of Europe or the US, or have different views about how to deal with the Arab-Israeli conflict, Iran, development aid, democracy promotion, or environmental protection.
The US example shows clearly that democratic great powers often pursue their interests with little regard for a global common good that others have defined.
In other words, the international order is becoming more pluralistic.
The task for established Western democracies is to accept and cope with such “democratic differences” on the international level, and to seek multilateral coalitions to manage or solve problems.
In principle, the EU is better positioned than the US (and certainly than China) to take on this task.
Europeans are well practiced in dealing with differences and shaping consensus among principally like-minded states.
That said, Europe needs to learn to be clearer and more transparent about the interests underlying its own policies, rather than suggesting that its positions on a specific subject represent the only rational implementation of democratic values and norms.
When France Says No
Not long ago, an American political analyst compared France’s loss of influence in Europe following its “No” vote in the 2005 referendum on the EU constitutional treaty with France’s surrender in 1940.
A provocative analogy, but is it apt?
The collapse in 1940 revealed the fragility of France’s democracy and its loss of confidence in the country’s capacity to face outside threats.
In rejecting the European constitution, France expressed its fear of, among other things, globalization.
A better analogy for the No vote was the rejection in 1954 of the treaty to establish a European Defense Community (EDC).
In both cases, a major historical mistake was made.
France had to a large extent initiated both treaties, had managed to get them accepted by its European partners, but in the end vetoed its own undertakings.
Why, in both 1954 and 2005, did the French – in one case the National Assembly, in the other the electorate – reject proposals that France itself had conceived?
Both projects sought to construct a genuinely supranational Europe.
The EDC would have created a European army, in which even German troops would have been included.
The proposed defense treaty was also to be buttressed by plans for a European political community whose main features were to be defined by a constitutional commission made up of members of national parliaments.
In effect, this commission would have been the precursor to the 2003-2004 Convention for the Future of Europe, which, presided over by former French President Valéry Giscard d’Estaing drafted the constitutional treaty.
The political community of the 1950’s that France had persuaded its five European partners to accept was supposed to absorb both the European Coal and Steel Community and the EDC.
It was to have both diplomatic and military powers, as well as a legislative assembly much like today’s European Parliament – just as the 2005 EU constitutional plan would have extended the European Parliament’s powers and created a European minister of foreign affairs.
But now, as back then, fear and doubt won the day.
Political parties and others who mobilized opposition to the EDC feared a remilitarized Germany and a threat to France’s sovereignty.
Today, those in France who opposed the EU constitution succeeded in stigmatizing “Europe” as the threat.
They trumpeted France’s invasion by “Polish plumbers,” calling into question Europe’s two principal achievements: the introduction of a single market, which has undeniably boosted the French economy, and EU enlargement, which has done so much to foster democratic transition in new member states.
But the failure of the referendum in France carries more serious consequences than the EDC’s rejection.
Back in the 1950’s, the founding nations’ foreign ministers promptly turned to their Belgian colleague, Paul-Henri Spaak, for fresh proposals.
After intensive discussion among the six, and especially between France and Germany, the Treaty of Rome was drawn up and signed within two years of the EDC debacle.
By contrast, two years after the French and Dutch No votes, there is no sign of a Plan B, despite the claims of the French politicians who helped mobilize the No vote.
Europe’s Franco-German locomotive has broken down and ratification has stopped, even though member states that had yet to ratify the treaty could have completed the process of ratification.
France’s loss of influence in Europe is no longer at stake today, because the notion of influence presupposes that the overriding preoccupation of EU member states is to advance their own national interests.
If Europe were only about gaining the upper hand, it would generate perpetual conflict.
The reality is that Europe does manage to move ahead, but step by step through mutual compromise.
The real question has more to do with France’s credibility and its capacity to remain a driving force in Europe.
A journalist recently expressed the view that France’s special role in Europe was due to its “centrality,” meaning that the French are, in equal measure, both open to the world and attached to their nation.
They also participate successfully in a market economy while seeking to preserve an egalitarian social model.
The No vote sullied this image of a balanced France.
Indeed, the French themselves are among the first to lament their bleak situation, inventing a new concept – “la déclinologie” – to describe this loss of self–confidence.
Moreover, the No vote has given a new legitimacy to euro-skepticism in other member states.
To be sure, the rise of populism in Europe was not caused by the French; nationalism is deeply rooted in Europe’s history and has many causes.
But France’s referendum result fueled other European governments’ fears that any new proposal they might put forward to re-launch the EU constitution would fail in the face of domestic and Europe-wide opposition.
But reducing European aspirations to the goals of Realpolitik is no answer to today’s crisis.
Europeans need to recognize that strength lies in unity, and that Europe’s integration cannot be guaranteed without a common constitutional framework that promotes a common identity.
Until we think in terms of European sovereignty, rather than fret over risks to national sovereignty, the present crisis cannot be overcome.
When India Votes
KERALA, INDIA – Beginning this month, the largest exercise of the democratic franchise in history will take place, as India n voters head to the polls to elect a new national parliament.
They have done this 14 times since India gained its independence.
Each time India has voted has been the world’s largest exercise in electoral democracy.
India’s growing population keeps breaking its own record.
This time, the electorate includes 714 million voters, an increase of 43 million over the previous general election in 2004.
Votes will be cast in 828,804 polling stations scattered throughout the country for over 5000 candidates from seven national political parties and several state and other parties.
The process involves four million electoral officials and 6.1 million police and civilian personnel.
The numbers involved are so huge that the elections will be staggered over five phases, ending only on May 13, with electoral and security personnel being moved from state to state as polling is concluded in each place.
Despite the phased voting, the counting takes place nationwide immediately after the last phase, and the results of the elections everywhere will be announced on May 16.
A new parliament will be convened on June 2 to elect a national government to succeed the outgoing administration of Prime Minister Manmohan Singh.
India’s elections, conducted by the autonomous (and all-powerful) Election Commission of India , are an extraordinary event, and not just because of their sheer scale.
It takes the felling of a sizeable forest to furnish enough paper for 714 million ballots, and every election has at least one story of officers battling through snow or jungle, or traveling by elephant and camel, to ensure that the democratic wishes of remote constituents are duly recorded.
(There is even one polling booth for a single voter, who lives too far from civilization to travel to another polling station.)
Nor is any Indian election complete without the media publishing at least one picture of a female voter whose enthusiasm for the suffrage is undimmed by the fact that she is old, blind, crippled, toothless, purdah-clad, or any combination of the above.
The exotica do not end there.
Because so many voters are illiterate, India invented the party symbol, so that voters who cannot read the name of their candidate can vote for him or her anyway by recognizing the symbol under which they campaigned.
Symbols range from the open palm of the ruling Indian National Congress to the lotus of the Bharatiya Janata Party and variants of the hammer and sickle for India’s profusion of Communist parties.
Independent candidates can choose from an assortment of alternatives, ranging from a cricket bat to images of various large animals.
(Small ones were removed from the list when one candidate, running against another whose symbol was a parrot, wrung the neck of a live parrot at a public meeting to signify what he would do to his rival.)
India was also the first country to use an indelible stain on the voter’s fingernail to signify that he has already cast his ballot.
At every election, someone “discovers” a new chemical that will remove the stain and permit one to vote twice, though this is unlikely to make a great difference in constituencies the size of India’s, where each MP represents more than two million people.
Likewise, some distinguished voter invariably claims that his name is missing from the rolls, or that someone has already cast his vote (but usually not both).
In any case, India’s elections have a reputation for honesty.
In this election, as in previous ones, votes will be cast on electronic voting machines invented in India, which combine the virtues of simplicity, reliability, and ruggedness.
The electoral rolls carry photographs of every individual voter, as does each voter’s identity card.
The elections have also been increasingly free of violence.
There was a time when, in certain parts of India, workers could stuff ballot boxes for a candidate and political parties could “capture” polling booths. Electronic voting machines and strict security arrangements have largely eliminated that possibility.
It has been some time since there were reports of the occasional election worker, candidate, or voter being assaulted, kidnapped, or shot.
Nothing (short of the death of a major contender) interrupts the franchise.
Elections are an enduring spectacle of free India, and give foreign journalists the opportunity to remind the world that India is the world’s largest democracy.
Indeed, Indians now take for granted that elections will take place, that they will be free and fair, and that they will result in actual transfers of power.
There are few developing countries in the world where this is true, and fewer still where poverty and illiteracy are both rife.
That may be the real miracle of what will occur in India over the next few weeks.
The Myth of Khaki Democracy
NEW YORK – Egypt and Thailand have little in common, except for one thing.
In both countries, at different times, educated people who pride themselves on being democrats have ended up applauding military coups against elected governments.
They had resisted oppressive military regimes for many years.
But, in Thailand in 2006, as in Egypt last month, they were happy to see their political leaders ousted by force.
This perversity is not without reason.
The elected leaders in both countries, Thaksin Shinawatra in Thailand and Mohamed Morsi in Egypt, were good examples of illiberal democrats: they tended to view their electoral success as a mandate to manipulate constitutional norms and behave like autocrats.
They are not alone in this respect.
In fact, they are probably typical of leaders in countries with little or no history of democratic government.
Turkey’s prime minister, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, is in the same camp.
And if the leaders of Algeria’s Islamic Salvation Front (FIS) had been allowed to take power in 1991, after their early success in a democratic election, they would almost certainly have been illiberal rulers.
(Instead, they were crushed by a military coup, before a second round of elections could take place, triggering a brutal eight-year civil war in which an estimated 200,000 people died.)
The aftermath of the 2006 coup in Thailand was not nearly so bloody.
But the bitterness lingers among Shinawatra’s supporters – even now, when his sister, Yingluck, is Prime Minister.
Street violence is a constant threat.
Only the frail and ailing 85-year-old King Bhumibol Adulyadej still functions as a symbol of national cohesion.
Without him, fighting between the rural poor and the urban elites could quickly erupt again.
This does not bode well for Thai democracy.
Another military intervention is the last thing the country needs.
In Egypt, things look far worse at the moment.
The leader of the military coup, General Abdul-Fattah al-Sisi, has promised to confront Morsi’s Muslim Brotherhood with maximum force.
In two separate incidents in July, security forces opened fire on supporters of the Brotherhood as they peacefully protested against Morsi’s ouster and arrest, killing almost 200 people.
Secret-police units that were active under former President Hosni Mubarak (and known for their frequent use of torture) are being reconstituted for the first time since the 2011 revolution.
None of this is either democratic or liberal.
And yet many Egyptians, including some human-rights activists, have endorsed it.
One man, who was savagely stomped by a member of the armed forces in Tahrir Square in 2011, now claims that the Egyptian people should “stand together” with the military, and that all Muslim Brotherhood leaders should be arrested.
A prominent democracy activist, Esraa Abdel Fattah, has denounced Morsi’s party as a gang of foreign-backed terrorists.
The army leadership is saying the same thing: Special measures, maximum force, and revived security units are all necessary to “fight terrorism.”
Some foreign commentators have been as deluded as Egyptians who back the coup.
A well-known Dutch novelist voiced a rather typical response, saying that he didn’t care much what happened to Morsi’s supporters, for they were all “Islamo-fascists” anyway.
And foreign governments, including that of the United States, are averting their eyes.
President Barack Obama’s administration refuses to describe what happened as a “coup.” US Secretary of State John Kerry even claimed that the military was “restoring democracy.”
There is no doubt that Morsi’s government was inexperienced, often incompetent, and showed little interest in listening to views other than those of its supporters, which were often far from liberal.
But Morsi’s people are not foreign-backed terrorists.
Nor was Morsi an Egyptian version of Iran’s Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.
The election that brought Morsi to power gave a political voice for the first time to millions of people, many of them poor, uneducated, and religious.
They may not have been very good democrats, or even particularly tolerant of different views.
Many of them had opinions – for example, on the role of women, on sex, and on the place of Islam in public life – that secular liberals find abhorrent.
But silencing these people by force, and calling them foreign-backed terrorists, can have only one result: more violence.
If the outcomes of democratic elections are not respected, people will seek other means to make themselves heard.
Morsi’s autocratic inclinations may have damaged democracy; taking him out in a coup deals it a mortal blow.
How to bridge the gap in developing countries between secular, more or less Westernized urban elites and the rural poor is an old question.
One solution is to enforce secular modernization by oppressing the poor and their religious organizations.
Egypt has already endured the harsh rule of secular police states, of both the right and the left.
The other solution is to give democracy a chance.
This is not possible without allowing some form of religious expression in public life.
No democracy in the Middle East that fails to take account of Islam will work.
But, without the freedom to express other views and beliefs, democracy will remain illiberal.
This is hard for Islamist parties to accept.
Many Islamists may in fact prefer an illiberal to a liberal democracy.
But liberals who truly favor democracy must accept that Islamists are entitled to play a political role, too.
The alternative is to revert to illiberal autocracy.
Applauding the military coup against Morsi makes this the more likely outcome.
When Marijuana is Legal
BRISBANE – What will happen if Californians votes this November to legalize marijuana use by any adult over the age of 21 years?
Let’s ignore for the moment the vexed constitutional issues that will be raised if a US state enacts legislation that conflicts with federal law. Let’s focus instead on what may happen if the law changes as the referendum proposes.
If we are to believe the referendum’s supporters, all Californians will be winners.
The change will legitimize marijuana’s de facto legal status since passage of Proposition 215 in 1996.
It will thus reduce state expenditure on enforcing a widely violated law; remove marijuana growing and selling from the black market; enable any adult who wishes to use marijuana to do so; and introduce a tax on legal marijuana sales that will fill state coffers with revenue that formerly went to illegal growers (so long as there is no large-scale tax evasion).
By contrast, opponents predict that the change will increase rates of marijuana use, and thus magnify the harm arising from that use.
The adverse consequences of greatest concern include more marijuana-related road traffic accidents and deaths; more psychoses and other serious mental health problems among heavy users; and heavier marijuana use by young people, negatively affecting their life chances.
These effects, they argue, will more than offset any gains from tax revenue and savings from law enforcement.
It is difficult to know who is right, because no other country has adopted this policy.
The Netherlands, which is popularly believed to have legalized cannabis use along these lines, has in fact tolerated only small-scale retail sales of marijuana in a limited number of coffee shops in its larger cities.
Marijuana cultivation remains illegal and coffee shop sales are regulated – more strictly in recent years in response to complaints from neighboring countries about “drug tourism.”
Nevertheless, some broad predictions can be made.
First, openly tolerating a market in a previously illegal commodity will expand the number of users, especially if the retail price is lower than the black-market price (as is proposed in the Ammiano Bill currently before the California legislature). Use may not increase immediately, but it will over time, because marijuana will become more freely available, much cheaper (in order to discourage the persistence of a black market), and its use will be implicitly condoned.
Experience with alcohol suggests that marijuana will be available to underage users (as it is now), whatever the minimum legal age.
Thus, legally available cheaper marijuana will probably mean more use by more young people, and probably more daily use later into adulthood.
In general, the more people who use a drug, the larger the number of problem users there will be (on the reasonable assumption that problem users comprise a fixed proportion of all users).
If current estimates are correct, around 10% of users (and one in six who start in adolescence) may become dependent on marijuana – that is, find it difficult to control or discontinue their use.
Indeed, the scale of any increase in marijuana use will critically depend on how tightly regulated marijuana sales are – how many licensed growers there are, the number of sales outlets, their locations and trading hours, eligibility requirements for use, content of THC (marijuana’s psychoactive ingredient), and how much promotion and advertising is allowed.
If marijuana were allowed to be marketed much like alcohol is now, we could expect more problem users than if it were regulated more like pharmaceutical drugs (say, by requiring users to be licensed; restricting the number of sales locations, hours of sale, and licensed growers; and imposing high rates of taxation on higher-THC marijuana).
It will be a major policy challenge to get this balance right.
Greater restrictions would provide incentives for illegal operators to remain, while less restrictive regulation would discourage black marketeers, but at the price of increasing the number of users and problem users.&#160;
Marijuana policy involves a choice between the evils of current repressive policies and the evils of increased use under a legal market.
Californians will have to decide how much weight to give to respect for adult liberty, protection of minors, avoidance of a large-scale black market, fiscal considerations, and protection of marijuana users’ health.
If they vote for legalization, it will probably be 20 years or more before anyone can say whether, on balance, they decided wisely.
When Prevention is Better than Relief
PRINCETON – When the earthquake and tsunami hit Japan in March, Brian Tucker was in Padang, Indonesia.
Tucker was working with a colleague to design a refuge that could save thousands of lives if – or rather, when – a tsunami like the one in 1797 that came out of the Indian Ocean, some 600 miles southeast of where the 2004 Asian tsunami originated, strikes again.
Tucker is the founder and president of GeoHazards International, a nonprofit organization whose mission is to reduce death and suffering due to earthquakes in the world’s most vulnerable communities.
Padang is one of those communities.
Just to its northwest, in Banda Aceh, 160,000 lives were lost in the 2004 tsunami.
Now, geologists say, the fault that triggered that tsunami is most likely to rupture farther south, putting low-lying coastal towns like Padang, with a population of 900,000, at high risk of a major earthquake and tsunami within the next 30 years.
In Banda Aceh, the tsunami killed more than half the city’s population.
In Padang, according to an estimate by the director of the city’s disaster management office, a similar tsunami could kill more than 400,000 people.
Tucker says that he has stood on the beach in Padang, looking out at the ocean and trying to imagine what it would be like to see a five-meter-high wall of water stretching across the horizon, bearing down on the city.
Now that we have seen the footage of the tsunami that hit Japan, the demands on our imagination have been lessened – except that we have to imagine away the sea walls that Japan had built to reduce the impact of the tsunami.
True, those walls did not work as well as had been hoped, but Japan was nonetheless much better prepared for a tsunami than Padang is.
In Padang, even with advance warning of a tsunami, higher ground is too far away, and the narrow streets too choked with traffic, for many people to get to safety in time.
GeoHazards International is therefore working on a more practical idea, which it calls a Tsunami Evacuation Raised Earth Park (TEREP).
The idea is to build small hills in low-lying parts of the city, with level tops that could be used as parks or sports fields.
With the few minutes’ warning that an earthquake’s strong shaking would automatically provide, people could walk to a TEREP and be safe above the highest level a tsunami could reach.
Such raised earth parks are a low-cost solution to the tsunami danger in low-lying coastal areas.
They use only local materials, provide a valuable community resource in normal times, and have the potential to save hundreds of thousands of lives when a tsunami strikes.
Nevertheless, GeoHazards International lacks the resources to build anything like enough TEREPs to meet the need.
After 20 years of operation, the organization remains tiny, especially when compared to organizations like the Red Cross, which primarily do disaster relief work.
People are willing to donate hundreds of millions of dollars to help people after a disaster – even after a disaster in a wealthy country like Japan – but are unwilling to invest anything like the same amount to save lives before a predictable disaster strikes.
One reason for this is that preventing a disaster does not make good television.
People give to identifiable victims.
If we build raised earth parks, we will never see the people who, but for our aid, would have died; no orphans in desperate need will appear on the nightly news.
But isn’t it much better to keep parents safe than to help orphans after their parents have been killed?
This is a situation in which we must stretch our imagination, to understand and be motivated by the good that we are doing.
Unfortunately, not everyone can do that.
Another reason why we do not give to prevent disasters should be familiar to anyone who has ever delayed going to the dentist because the prospect of serious pain in the coming weeks or months just wasn’t as motivating as the reluctance to face some more immediate slight discomfort.
We tell ourselves that maybe we won’t get a toothache after all, even though we know that the odds are that we will.
Most of us are not very good at giving proper weight to future events, especially if they are uncertain.
So we may tell ourselves that the geologists could be wrong, and perhaps no tsunami will hit Padang in the next 30 years, and by then perhaps we will have new and better technologies for predicting them, giving people more time to get to higher ground.
Instead, we should be guided by the best estimates of the chances that an intervention will save lives, as well as by the number of lives that would be saved, and the cost of saving those lives.
The evidence suggests that building raised earth parks in places like Padang is very good value indeed.
When Technophobia Becomes Toxic
STANFORD – During the late 1990’s, a singular phenomenon appeared in countries around the world.
One after another, food and beverage companies capitulated to activists opposed to a promising new technology: the genetic engineering of plants to produce ingredients.
They are still capitulating to this day.
The Japanese brewer Kirin and the Danish brewer Carlsberg eliminated genetically engineered ingredients from their beers.
In the United States, the fast-food giant McDonald's banned them from its menu; food manufacturers Heinz and Gerber (then a division of Switzerland-based Novartis) dropped them from their baby-food lines; and Frito-Lay demanded that its growers stop planting corn engineered to contain a bacterial protein that confers resistance to insect predation.
These measures were rationalized in various ways, but the reality is that by yielding to the demands of a minuscule number of disingenuous activists, the companies opted to offer less safe products to consumers, thereby exposing themselves to legal jeopardy.
Every year, innumerable packaged-food products worldwide are withheld or recalled from the market due to the presence of “all natural” contaminants like insect parts, toxic molds, bacteria, and viruses.
Because farming takes place outdoors and in dirt, such contamination is a fact of life.
Over the centuries, the main culprit in mass food poisoning often has been contamination of unprocessed crops by fungal toxins – a risk that is exacerbated when insects attack food crops, opening wounds that allow fungi (molds) to get a foothold.
For example, fumonisin and some other fungal toxins are highly toxic, causing esophageal cancer in humans and fatal diseases in livestock that eat infected corn.
Fumonisin also interferes with the cellular uptake of folic acid, a vitamin that reduces the risk of neural tube defects in developing fetuses, and thus can cause folic acid deficiency – and defects such as spina bifida – even when one’s diet contains what otherwise would be sufficient amounts of the vitamin.
Many regulatory agencies have therefore established recommended maximum fumonisin levels permitted in food and feed products made from corn.
The conventional way to meet those standards and prevent the consumption of fungal toxins is simply to test unprocessed and processed grains and discard those found to be contaminated – an approach that is both wasteful and failure-prone.
But modern technology – specifically, the genetic engineering of plants using recombinant DNA technology (also known as food biotechnology or genetic modification) – offers a way to prevent the problem.
Contrary to the claims of food-biotech critics, who insist that genetically modified crops pose risks (none of which has actually occurred) of new allergens or toxins in the food supply, such products offer the food industry a proven and practical means of tackling the fungal contamination at its source.