Through a series of symbolic gestures and speeches (in Prague, Cairo, Accra, the United Nations, and elsewhere), Obama helped to restore American soft power.
As a recent Pew poll reported, “in many countries opinions of the United States are now as positive as they were at the beginning of the decade before George W. Bush took office.”
It is a mistake to discount the role that transformative leaders can play in changing the context of difficult issues.
Power involves setting agendas and creating others’ preferences as well as pushing and shoving.
That is why Obama’s administration speaks of “smart power” that successfully combines hard and soft power resources in different contexts.
But soft power can create an enabling rather than a disabling environment for policy.
Critics contend that Obama has been all words and no deeds.
They portray him as a rock star who won a Nobel prize on the basis of promise rather than performance.
They scoff at his popularity, and note that the Middle East remains intractable, North Korea nuclear, Iraq and Afghanistan unsettled, and Iran difficult.
But no serious analyst would expect otherwise in the short term.
Bush and Cheney’s hard-power approach certainly did not solve these problems.
Moreover, in addition to words, there have been some important deeds.
First and foremost was Obama’s handling of the economic crisis.
When he came into office, his economic advisors told him that there was a one-in-three chance of a 1930’s-style depression.
If Obama had not avoided that disaster, all else would have paled in comparison.
Success required not only an economic stimulus package at home, but international coordination.
Despite US measures against imports of Chinese tires, the level of protectionism has been much lower than in the 1930’s and than many observers predicted.
Moreover, Obama used the crisis to accomplish what many had suggested for years: transform the G-8 into a broader institutional framework of a G-20 that includes the major emerging economies.
Closely related to the economic crisis has been Obama’s handling of relations with China.
How America responds to the rise of Chinese power is one of the most important foreign-policy challenges of the twenty-first century.
Obama broadened the Treasury-led economic meetings to a strategic dialogue co-chaired by the State Department with an agenda that includes climate change as well as multilateral issues.
Contrary to some skeptical press reports, Obama’s summit meeting with Chinese President Hu Jintao in November was a quiet success.
At the same time, he has recognized that maintaining close alliances with Japan and Australia – and good relations with India – helps to maintain the hard-power capabilities that shape the environment for a rising China.
A third significant accomplishment of Obama’s first year has been to reframe the issue of nuclear non-proliferation, which many experts regarded as being in crisis at the end of the Bush era.
By embracing the long-term goal of a non-nuclear world (though perhaps not in his lifetime), Obama reiterated America’s long-standing commitment, written into Article 6 of the Non-Proliferation Treaty, to reduce the role of nuclear weapons.
Moreover, he followed up by negotiating with Russia a successor to the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty by the end of this year, and has moved the non-proliferation issue to the top of the agenda at the UN and the G-20.
Critics charge that these accomplishments, as well as efforts to unblock the stalemates in Sudan and Burma, have been achieved at the price of giving up moral clarity on human rights.
But public proclamations are often less effective than long-term strategies in promoting human rights.
Obama’s speech in Ghana, carefully located in an African country that recently had a successful democratic change of government, illustrated such an approach.
Other critics on the left have complained that he has not been able to get Congress to pass a tough energy bill before the Copenhagen conference on climate change.
But Obama has helped to persuade China and India to announce useful efforts, and he will set an American target of reducing greenhouse emissions that should prevent the conference from being a failure.
Of course, the big test lies ahead in Afghanistan.
Can Obama combine hard and soft power into a smart-power strategy that works?
Will the increase in American and allied troops, and the increases in development aid produce enough stability for his planned withdrawal to begin in 2011?
Can the Afghan government begin to provide the security that will protect its citizens against Taliban violence?
Or will Afghanistan prove to be a quagmire that defines Obama’s presidency?
As Obama approaches the end of his first year in office, he must know that Afghanistan will be the major test according to which future historians will grade his foreign policy.
Testing Putin in Syria
NEW YORK – There has been no shortage of scrutiny of what Russian President Vladimir Putin is up to in Syria and why.
Much of the analysis, though, has been narrowly focused on the short term and may be too negative in assessing his actions’ likely long-term consequences.
What we know is that Putin has decided to come to the aid of Bashar al-Assad’s embattled regime.
Russian bombs and missiles are now raining down on an array of armed groups that have been fighting Syrian government forces, which has given the regime the breathing space that Russia’s intervention was intended to provide.
As bad as the Assad government is, and as much as it has to answer for, this outcome is arguably preferable in the short run to the regime’s collapse.
The painful truth in Syria today is that a government implosion would most likely lead to genocide, millions more displaced people, and the establishment of the Islamic State’s so-called caliphate in Damascus.
Putin’s motives are a matter of speculation, but it would appear that he did not want to see Russia’s long-term ally in the Middle East fall.
Moreover, he never misses an opportunity to remind the world that Russia remains a major power, able and willing to act on behalf of its perceived interests.
It is also possible that he sought to distract domestic attention from a shrinking economy and the rising cost of intervention in Ukraine.
Putin’s high approval ratings suggest he may well be succeeding.
Many fear that Russia’s latest activism will not only prolong Syria’s brutal civil war, but also strengthen the Islamic State.
This could well turn out to be the case, as hatred of the Assad regime is a major recruiting tool.
And, thus far at least, the Islamic State seems to be a low priority for the Russian military, which appears to be attacking mainly other anti-Assad groups.
Indeed, there have been reports of the Islamic State moving into areas that others have abandoned following Russian attacks.
Russia seems to be playing the same cynical game as Assad: framing the war as a binary choice between the Islamic State and a regime that, however flawed, still deserves the world’s support.
Some also fear that this demonstration of Russian assertiveness presages a new wave of such interventions, even a new Cold War.
But this is unlikely, if for no other reason than that Russia lacks the economic and military means to sustain such efforts on multiple fronts.
It is also not clear that the Russian people are prepared to pay a high price for such a foreign policy.
So it all comes down to Putin, who enjoys a degree of autonomy in Kremlin decision-making not seen since the Stalin era.
Putin is widely known to be a martial-arts enthusiast, and his action in Syria is entirely consistent with many of the discipline’s principles, including the importance of the decisive thrust that neutralizes the opponent’s strengths and exploits his weaknesses.
But force has its limits.
Russia’s intervention in Syria cannot succeed if success is defined as enabling the Assad government to regain control over the bulk of the country’s territory.
Putin’s policy can, at most, establish a relatively secure enclave.
Even this modest aim will prove costly, because the Islamic State is also becoming stronger.
And it could prove expensive to Russia itself: it is only a matter of time before suicide bombings (such as the recent attack in Ankara) occur in Moscow.
The real question, then, is whether Putin sees bolstering the Assad government as an end in itself or as a means to an end.
If it is the latter – if Putin is thinking in terms of chess, the preferred game of many Russians, and planning several moves ahead – a diplomatic process, in which Assad is removed at some point, is conceivable.
Russia might support such a process; after all, Putin is not known for his sentimentality.
Indeed, he might embrace a political process that enabled him to demonstrate Russia’s central role in shaping the future of the Middle East.
In the meantime, the United States and others should pursue a two-track policy.
One track would channel steps to improve the balance of power on the ground in Syria.
This means doing more to help the Kurds and select Sunni tribes, as well as continuing to attack the Islamic State from the air.
Relatively safe enclaves should emerge from this effort.
A Syria of enclaves or cantons may be the best possible outcome for now and the foreseeable future.
Neither the US nor anyone else has a vital national interest in restoring a Syrian government that controls all of the country’s territory; what is essential is to roll back the Islamic State and similar groups.
The second track is a political process in which the US and other governments remain open to Russian (and even Iranian) participation.
The goal would be to ease Assad out of power and establish a successor government that, at a minimum, enjoyed the support of his Alawite base and, ideally, some Sunnis.
Such a process might well confer prestige on Putin.
That would be a price worth paying if it contributed to a dynamic that over time reduced both the suffering of the Syrian people and the danger posed by the Islamic State.
Testing the Limits of Fossil Fuels
MILAN – Most people recognize that human activity, primarily the use of fossil fuels, is contributing mightily to an increasing level of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.
These gases, particularly CO2, increase the risk of damage to the world’s climate.
This means that limits on our consumption of fossil fuels cannot be measured only by the availability of supplies, but must also take account of the environmental costs.
Yet considerable uncertainty remains about the magnitude of the impact of rising levels of atmospheric greenhouse gases on temperatures and climate.
This uncertainty must be taken seriously when formulating strategies to combat climate change.
The high-growth developing countries – Brazil, Russia, India, China, and others in the G-20 – now include more than half the world’s population.
If they continue their current strong growth trajectories, as seems likely, they will approach advanced-country levels of income by mid-century or shortly thereafter.
At that point, the part of the world’s population with advanced-country income levels ($20,000 dollars or above in today’s dollars) would increase from 16% to 66%.
And, if the newly affluent follow the patterns of consumption, energy use, and carbon emissions that accompany high income levels now, the climate change battle will have been lost.
Emissions and natural processes that increase atmospheric carbon are known as “flows.”
On our current course, without a significant mitigation effort, by mid-century we would be at around four times the safe level.
Advanced countries have been the biggest sources of carbon emissions until relatively recently.
But energy consumption – and thus carbon emissions – rise with per capita income.
China and India, which account for 40% of the world’s population, were recording 9-10% annual GDP growth before the financial crisis hit in 2008 and are likely to resume rapid growth in the post-crisis period, meaning that their economies will double in size every 7-10 years.
Their contribution to total emissions will rise accordingly.
Other economies are growing at relatively high rates, too.
As a result, while many advanced and developing countries are pursuing far-reaching measures to increase energy efficiency and adopt clean-energy technologies, their existing technologies, incentives, regulations, and commitments imply a sharp rise in total carbon emissions in the coming decades.
Despite the IPCC’s target for annual per capita CO2 emissions, we still do not know how much warming various levels of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere will cause.
The estimated ranges vary widely, even after a quarter-century of scientific effort, owing to the complexity of the environment itself.
This is one reason why successful mitigation at the global level faces stiff headwinds.
Indeed, it is not reasonable to expect that any country, rich or poor, should set or agree to 50-year targets.
Given the structure of the problem – sequential decision-making with uncertainty about all the relevant parameters (including costs, the efficient pattern of mitigation, and technology) – it would be wiser to adopt a more flexible strategy that provides incentives and regulations to achieve measurable intermediate progress, while generating a lot of useful information along the way.
In other words, we should focus our efforts on a shorter time frame, say, the next 15 years.
In the long run, success will require major technological advances and their broad adoption.
As these are still unknown today, the initial challenge will be to jump-start the mitigation and learning processes, and create powerful incentives for technology that will increase energy efficiency and reduce CO2 emissions in the long run.
Acting now can be thought of as buying what financiers call “tail insurance” – some protection against the most adverse among all the possible outcomes.
The question is what
This is why delaying the adoption of long-term targets is not a recipe for business as usual.
On the contrary, as the possible outcomes become clearer, we will almost certainly face the need for serious and costly reductions in energy use, at least among the advanced countries, as well as costly technological advances designed to make energy use more efficient in both the advanced and developing world.
This will surely involve sharp cuts in the consumption of fossil fuels, bolstered by taxes and other restrictions.
No one should expect that the costs of combating climate change will be low.
But those costs will have a significantly higher expected value if we do not adopt sensible global strategies that include adjusting our mitigation efforts in response to new information.
Figure 1. CO2 Emissions per Capita
Source: IPCC and Human development report 2007/2008 (UNDP)
Figure 2. Total Global Emissions (Gigatons)
Source: Author’s calculations
Better THAAD than Dead
WASHINGTON, DC – South Korea is moving forward with plans to host an advanced missile-defense system – known as Terminal High Altitude Area Defense, or THAAD – in partnership with the United States Army.
The decision by South Korean President Park Geun-hye has sparked controversy, with China and Russia objecting, and some commentators predicting the start of a “new Cold War.”
But China and Russia should welcome THAAD, because it alleviates the need for South Korea or Japan to pursue other defense options, which could include the development of nuclear weapons.
South Korea and Japan have good reason to shore up their defenses.
The threat of North Korean aggression is real and will not be eliminated anytime soon.
North Korea is escalating its bellicose rhetoric and behavior as it strengthens its military capabilities, which include weapons of mass destruction, long-range ballistic missiles, and cyber and special forces.
The US has repeatedly warned North Korea not to pursue nuclear weapons or ballistic missiles, to no avail.
And diplomacy – both sanctions and inducements – has failed to stop the North.
Many people in South Korea and Japan now worry about the strength of America’s commitment to defend them from external attack.
Recent developments have undermined US credibility, from President Barack Obama’s failure to enforce his “red line” warning against the use of chemical weapons in Syria, to the Republican Party’s nomination of Donald Trump as its presidential candidate.
In fact, Trump has only made nuclear-weapons proliferation in Asia more likely.
He recently complained to the New York Times that the US spends too much money on missile defenses and troops stationed in South Korea and Japan, and promised that, if elected, he would require both countries to contribute more to their own defense.
If they do not do so willingly, Trump says, he is “absolutely prepared to tell those countries, ‘Congratulations, you will be defending yourself.’”
Some members of South Korea’s governing conservative Saenuri Party now openly call for the acquistion of nuclear weapons, believing that this will deter a North Korean attack and prompt China to increase pressure on its client to roll back its weapons programs.
If South Korea develops a nuclear arsenal, Japan is likely to do the same, especially given China’s aggressive pursuit of its claim to the Japanese-occupied Senkaku Islands (which the Chinese claim as the Diaoyu Islands).
Japan has an enormous stockpile of separated plutonium and the technical wherewithal to be a “virtual nuclear power”: without having any nuclear weapons on hand, it could quickly develop them if necessary.
By developing nuclear weapons, South Korea and Japan would each be risking its relationship with the US and exposing itself to economic and energy sanctions.
Such a move by South Korea, in particular, really would be the start of a new Cold War, or worse.
A nuclear standoff on the Korean Peninsula would be characterized by both sides’ incentive to strike first to wipe out the other’s ability to counterattack.
Short of that doomsday scenario, nuclear weapons are of limited use in deterring small-scale provocations.
The possibility of a US nuclear strike did not stop North Korea from sinking a South Korean warship in 2010.
Moreover, if South Korea and Japan develop nuclear weapons, a regional – or even global – arms race could result; and not every country seeking to develop its own nuclear arsenal would be favorably disposed to the West.
This would be an extremely dangerous scenario: All things being equal, more nuclear-weapon states implies a higher risk of nuclear war, nuclear terrorism, and nuclear accidents.
Against this backdrop, the case for THAAD is clear.
The US, South Korea, and Japan should cooperate on missile defense as the first line of regional deterrence, while also fortifying and dispersing vulnerable targets, deepening trilateral intelligence sharing on North Korean threats, and working with the international community to disrupt the North’s weapons programs.
The effectiveness of deterrence is difficult to prove: by definition, nothing happens when it works; if a country is deterred from attacking, it is a non-event.
Skeptics can plausibly argue that the presumed aggressor never planned to attack, or canceled an assault for other reasons.
Nonetheless, the historical record speaks for itself: since 1953, North Korea has not launched a large-scale military assault on South Korea, and has limited its threats against Japan to belligerent rhetoric.
This most likely reflects the consistent and credible threat of US retaliation.
South Korea and Japan should not alienate the US by setting out on their own – no matter what Trump tells them.
Thailand’s Stunted Transition
BANGKOK – One year after Thailand’s 12th military coup in its 83 years under constitutional rule, and as the controversial trial for criminal negligence of former Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra gets under way, the country’s future is perilously uncertain.
In the months ahead, the military-enforced calm will coexist with growing anxiety about what will follow King Bhumibol Adulyadej’s nearly seven-decade-long reign.
Will compromise and mutual accommodation – extremely rare in recent years, enable Thailand to reshape its contested political order – currently underpinned by an elite-driven, monarchy-centered hierarchy – to reflect better the principles of electoral democracy?
Three key factors have defined Thai politics over the past year.
First, unlike tried and tested post-coup arrangements from the past, the junta that seized power last May, the National Council for Peace and Order, chose to rule directly, with the coup’s leader, General Prayut Chan-ocha, assuming the premiership, rather than appointing a recognized and capable figure to the position.
Four-star generals also fill top ministerial positions, from commerce and transport to labor and education.
Even the foreign minister is a general, rather than a career diplomat.
The government’s few technocrats, including the deputy prime minister and the finance minister, are holdovers from the previous coup government of 2006-2007, and they complain that they lack authority.
This approach has produced an incoherent economic strategy and vague, sluggishly implemented policy targets.
But it is unlikely to change.
Thailand’s new military leaders view themselves as a kind of cleanup crew, tasked with eradicating corruption, keeping politicians in line, and restoring the old order, underpinned by a symbiotic relationship between the military and the monarchy, with the bureaucracy handling day-to-day governance.
To be sure, Thailand’s military rulers do not reject responsiveness to public demands or deny the imperatives of adapting to globalization.
Rather, they hope to establish a form of electoral rule that can function within a political order based on traditional Thai institutions and customs.
Their goal is to take the country a few steps back and sideways, with the goal of moving forward in a completely different direction.
For now, this means promoting conventional conservative values like discipline, deference, duty, and sacrifice.
Civil servants have been prodded to wear customary khaki uniforms, and women encouraged to don traditional dresses.
Even the fabled floating markets in Bangkok’s canals are back, on Prayut’s orders.
At the same time, the junta’s agenda entails measures to control the direction of Thai politics – in particular, by marginalizing opponents, especially politicians tied to the influential Shinawatra family.
Indeed, the second major factor shaping the post-coup interregnum was the impeachment of Yingluck Shinawatra, the sister of former Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra, who was deposed by the military in 2006 and remains abroad in self-imposed exile.
Yingluck has been banned from politics for five years.
The dilemma for the junta is that Thaksin’s supporters – who are plentiful enough to have enabled his parties to win every election since 2001 – have been marginalized as well, with little say in the face of martial law and Prayut’s absolute rule.
Though they have remained quiet since the coup, they will undoubtedly maneuver to re-enter the fray as new political opportunities emerge.
In any case, they will have to be reckoned with down the road, when a new political order is brokered.
Of course, the junta hopes to lay the groundwork for the future political order now, on its own terms, by adopting a new constitution.
This effort – which has so far entailed the creation of the 36-member Constitution Drafting Committee (CDC) and the 250-member National Reform Council to help write the new constitution – marks the third key factor influencing domestic politics over the past year.
The draft constitution completed last month has raised serious concerns, as it places excessive checks on political parties and politicians, while giving appointed bureaucrats and judges the power to overrule policy decisions by elected officials.
Elections conducted according to such a constitution are unlikely to produce legitimate results.
The good news is that the junta has agreed to put the draft to a popular referendum early next year, although that probably means that the promised elections will not be held until August, at the earliest.
Military rule has cleared the streets, locked down the political system, and ushered in a long transition to some new, as-yet-undefined arrangement.
While the anti-coup forces support a return to electoral democracy, the pro-coup coalition, led by the Democrat Party, is increasingly realigning itself against the military, in the hope of securing power in whatever post-coup system emerges.
For now, Thailand is trapped between authoritarianism and democracy, between the past and the future – and will likely remain there, until the long royal twilight has passed.
At that point, the Thai people, buffeted by domestic polarization and regional challenges, will have to muster their once-famous negotiation skills to achieve a workable compromise based on their shared interests.
Thailand Turns Banana Republic
BANGKOK – “Thailand’s future is up for grabs,” proclaimed the eminent Thai scholar Thitinan Pongsudhirak just before the country’s Constitutional Court ruled, in effect, that the ruling People Power Party (PPP) and its two smaller coalition partners are “illegal,” and hence must disband due to “election frauds” committed by party executives a year ago. Party leaders, including Prime Minister Somchai Wongsawat, are barred from politics for five years.
With that one stroke, Thailand’s popularly elected government fell.
Parliament must now reconstitute itself without the three parties loyal to Somchai.
In Thailand’s current crisis, history is repeating itself, for the PPP under Somchai was the same Thai Rak Thai (Thais Love Thais) Party formed by the ousted Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra, a figure much-hated by the country’s Bangkok-based elite.
The PPP was created because TRT had been outlawed at the time of Thaksin’s removal.
What is perverse about this is that every recent poll in Thailand shows that Thaksin remains wildly popular with the vast majority of Thais, most of whom live outside Bangkok.
So, despite the ousting of two Thaksin proxies in a row by the court and the elite, Thais are likely to return yet another Thaksin loyalist if they are allowed to vote in an unrigged election.
The current crisis has been brewing for some time, but the breaking point came when anti-government protestors occupied Bangkok’s main airport.
The protestors march under the banner of the “People’s Alliance for Democracy,” but the truth is that they have resorted to undemocratic means to topple a democratically elected government.
This parade of toppled and ousted governments has led Pavin Chchavalpongpun, another eminent Thai scholar, to call his country a “failed state.”
That description may not yet be true, but the shadow of state failure is certainly growing.
Thaksin’s unforgivable sin was his violation of Thailand’s unwritten rules about how the country’s ruling elites are to behave.
The key rule here is that the winner in any power play must not shut out his opponents.
In a land of “smiles” and plenty, the winner must not take all.
But Thaksin, a self-made billionaire, allowed his greed and huge electoral successes to get the better of him.
After his two landslide victories, he thought he could have it all.
The traditional Bangkok elites had always thought of him as an uncouth upstart.
Once in power, he essentially shut them out of the “grabbing” game, preserving it for himself and his cronies.
Thaksin’s supposedly legal “tax planning,” which allowed him to pay zero capital gains tax on the billion dollar sale of his flagship telecom company, Shin Corporation, in 2006, offended the rising urban professional classes.
But Thaksin had by then won over Thailand’s rural population through popular policies including handouts.
Some of these projects were the proverbial bridges to nowhere.
But others did meet real rural needs: cutting medical costs, providing subsidized agricultural loans, and maintaining price supports.
Thaksin’s rural base rewarded him by returning him to power, ignoring his personal corruption.
Thaksin’s detractors call his rural strategy (which his proxy successors have followed) cynical vote buying.
But Thaksin’s rural base wonders why the anti-Thaksin groups and his predecessors in power never tried to do much for them.
Such vote buying to win hearts and minds is, after all, a fair game for any party to indulge in.
Nevertheless it is widely believed that Thaksin committed “lèse majesté” by attempting to undermine the moral authority of the crown, a cornerstone of the kingdom, perhaps replacing it with a republic that he would control.   Lèse majesté is a grave crime in Thailand.
It is true that Thailand’s queen herself recently presided over the funeral of a protestor killed in a clash with the police.
From that point on, policing of the protests became utterly passive.
The queen is rumored to have said she would pay the medical expenses of any injured demonstrators.
The anti-Thaksin factions have failed to produce a knockout in any recent general election.
Street protests to paralyze the government remain their sole weapon.   But until and unless the anti-Thaksin civilian elite can convince the rest of the country that they are serious about winning the hearts and minds of the poor, Thailand will remain on a knife edge between banana republic and failed state.
Thaksin Returns
Former Thai Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra has returned to Bangkok 17 months after being deposed in a military coup.
Thaksin has repeatedly denied that he intends to reenter politics, from which he has been barred for five years.
But how realistic is it to expect so driven and flamboyant a man to stay away from the limelight?
Thaksin already is believed by many to be providing advice to the government of Prime Minister Samak Sundaravej.
Indeed, Samak’s People Power Party (PPP) is widely considered a proxy for Thaksin.
It was, after all, formed from the remains of Thaksin’s Thai Rak Thai party, which was disbanded after the coup.
Of course Thaksin’s political revival can’t get underway unless and until he has been acquitted of corruption charges.
But he is likely to have made all the calculations related to the charges and other allegations before leaving London, and to have concluded that his chances of remaining free are high.
After all, Thaksin is too serious a man to risk freedom for the sake of sentimentality.
Moreover, he remains very popular in Thailand, if not in Bangkok.
His presence in the country might well spark a clamor for his “reluctant” return to politics.
Now, add to all this a soccer team.
Thaksin’s ownership of the Manchester City football club might not seem of great importance to observers outside Thailand and Asia.
But Thais are soccer enthusiasts and even bigger fans of the English Premier League.
Thaksin’s ownership is a source of considerable pride, especially outside elite circles in Bangkok.
His proprietorship provides Thais with a direct connection to an elite team in the world’s most popular sport.
This, in turn, gives him a substantial popularity dividend to add to his store.
It was not for nothing that he had two Man City players accompany him on his return to Thailand.
The PPP’s victory in the December polls has also been seen as vindication of sorts for Thaksin.
Given the opportunity to vote, voters turned to a party not unlike Thaksin’s pre-coup Thai Rak Thai.
So why not complete the picture?
Obviously, none of this will please Thaksin’s opponents.
So the possibility of demonstrations, stalemate, and a new crisis cannot be discounted.
The situation is all the more uncertain in view of a problem facing the PPP.
Just hours before Thaksin returned to Bangkok, Thailand’s Election Commission convicted the speaker of the parliament’s lower house of fraud after he paid civil servants to campaign on behalf of the party.
The Supreme Court must uphold the ruling, but if it does, the speaker will lose his parliamentary seat.
And more ominously, the case could easily snowball, leading to the dissolution of the PPP and an end to Thaksin’s nascent political recovery.
This would throw the party, government, and country into fresh turmoil.
Thus, under almost any scenario, Thaksin’s return could well mark a return to those fraught days of 2006 just before the last coup.
Thatcher and the Big Bang
LONDON – In the United States, for people of a certain age, Margaret Thatcher was a superstar, and Americans have been surprised at the sharply divided views on display in the Britain that she governed for 11 years.
But Britons were not astonished. Like Tony Blair, Thatcher has long been a British product with more appeal in export markets than at home.
All aspects of her legacy are earnestly disputed.
Was she prescient about the problems of European monetary union, or did she leave Britain isolated on the fringes of the continent?
Did she create a new economic dynamism, or did she leave the United Kingdom bitterly divided, more unequal, and less cohesive than before?
Did she destroy the power of vested interests and create a genuine meritocracy, or did she entrench bankers and financiers as the new elite, with disastrous consequences?
Indeed, one issue that has come under the microscope is Thatcher’s reforms of the City of London in the late 1980’s.
In 1986, her government was instrumental in what is known colloquially as the “Big Bang.”
Technically, the main change was to end “single capacity,” whereby a stock trader could be a principal or an agent, but not both.
Before 1986, there were brokers, acting for clients, and jobbers, making a market, and never the twain could meet.
This system had been abandoned elsewhere, and the reform opened London to new types of institutions, especially the major US investment banks.
The first and most visible consequence was the demise of the long lunch.
Beginning with a gin and tonic just after noon, and ending with a Napoleon brandy at three o’clock, lunch prior to the Big Bang was often the most arduous part of a stockbroker’s day.
That cozy culture ended soon after the thrusting, brash Americans, who worked even over breakfast, hit town.
But some believe that there were downsides, too.
Philip Augar, the author of The Death of Gentlemanly Capitalism, argues that “Good characteristics of the City were thrown out along with the bad,” and that Thatcher’s reforms “put us on a helter-skelter course towards the financial crisis.”
How justified is this charge?
Can we really trace the roots of today’s malaise back to the 1980’s?
Was the Iron Lady an author of the world’s current misfortunes?
Nigel Lawson, Thatcher’s Chancellor of the Exchequer at the time, denies it.
(Full disclosure: I was an adviser to Lawson in the 1980’s).
He points out that the reforms were accompanied by new regulation.
The Financial Services Act of 1986 put an end to the pure self-regulation regime.
Financial interests opposed it vigorously at the time, viewing it as the thin end of a dangerous wedge, though they could not have guessed just how thick that wedge would eventually become.
It is also difficult to trace back to the 1980’s the origins of the credit explosion and the proliferation of exotic and poorly understood financial instruments that lay at the heart of the 2007-2008 crisis.
The most dangerous trends, including the upsurge of global imbalances and the dramatic financialization of the economy, accelerated dangerously from about 2004 onwards.
Thatcher herself was not an enthusiast for credit, once famously saying, “I don’t believe in credit cards.”
Indeed, she espoused a rigorous philosophy about borrowing: “The secret of happiness is to live within your income and pay your bills on time.”
But perhaps there is a deeper level on which we can see some connections between Thatcherism and the crisis.
Her mantra, “You can’t buck the market,” did contribute to a mindset that led governments and central banks to be reluctant to question unsustainable market trends.
Thatcher was referring specifically to the dangers of fixed exchange rates, and can certainly not be counted as one of the principal architects of the so-called “efficient markets hypothesis.”
But she was a strong believer in the expansion of private markets, and was instinctively suspicious of government intervention.
As the late economist and European central banker Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa once put it, Thatcher “shifted the line dividing markets from government, enlarging the territory of the former at the expense of the latter.”
Padoa-Schioppa regarded this as a factor contributing to the US and UK authorities’ reluctance to step in at the right time before the 2007-2008 crisis.
Thatcher was certainly no friend of central bankers.
She remained, to the end, hostile to central-bank independence, regularly rejecting the advice of her chancellors to allow the Bank of England to control interest rates.
She feared that independent central banks would serve the interests of their banking “clients,” rather than those of the economy as a whole.
She was especially hostile to what she saw as the excessive independence of the European Central Bank.
In her last speech in Parliament as Prime Minister, she attacked the ECB as an institution “accountable to no one,” and drew attention to the political implications of centralizing monetary policy, accurately forecasting the dangers of a “democratic deficit,” which now worries many in Europe, and not just in Cyprus or Portugal.
So, in the financial arena, as elsewhere, there is light and shade in the Thatcher inheritance.
Her Alan Greenspan-like belief in the self-correcting features of financial markets, and her reverence for the integrity of the price mechanism, do not look as well-founded today as they did in the 1980’s.
So, in that sense, she can be seen as an enabler of the market hubris that prevailed until 2007.
On the other hand, it is difficult to imagine that a Thatcher government would have run a loose fiscal policy in the 2000’s.
And it is equally unlikely that, had she had her way, the eurozone would be the camel – a horse designed by committee – that it is today.
That Old Tax Magic
WASHINGTON, DC – Tax time in the United States – the dreaded mid-April deadline for filing annual income-tax forms – has come and gone.
The system, Americans have been reminded, has become painfully complex, with many a loophole through which one might try to squeeze.
The fear of an audit by the Internal Revenue Service lurks in homes across the country.
At such a sensitive time, it is no surprise to hear politicians pitching the idea of “tax reform” – suggesting that they can simplify the system, close loopholes, and use the proceeds to reduce tax rates.
The allure of such appeals is that a crackdown on others’ tax avoidance will mean that you personally will pay less in taxes.
In the policy jargon increasingly heard in today’s political discourse, tax reform will be “revenue neutral” – meaning that it will not worsen the budget deficit or drive up the national debt.
The broader subliminal message is that you can have whatever you currently expect in terms of government services for less than it costs you now.
The problem with this vision of tax reform is that it is magical – an attractive illusion with no basis in reality.
Consider the recent pronouncements of Mitt Romney – now the presumptive Republican candidate to challenge President Barack Obama in November.
Romney wants to cut tax rates, mainly benefiting those at the upper end of the income distribution.
He also wants to close loopholes, but none of the details that he has offered add up to much.
His boldest proposal – eliminating deductions for interest paid on mortgages on second homes – is trivial in terms of generating revenue.
Obama is only slightly better.
While he talks less about “tax reform,” he is currently communicating the message that merely raising taxes on rich people – the infamous 1% – will bring the budget and national debt under control.
That, too, is a pipedream.
Americans – and taxpayers in many other countries – need a more transparent approach to assessing candidates’ budget proposals.
In the US, there are groups that offer their own assessments.
For example, the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget performed an admirable service in “scoring” the fiscal plans of rival candidates for the Republican nomination.
The problem is that in an election with high stakes and deep polarization, who, exactly, can voters trust?
Everyone has an agenda, perceived or real.
The veracity of any organization that is funded by particular individuals, or through less transparent corporate channels, will be called into question.
What the US and many other countries need is an independent, competent, and experienced body that leans neither right nor left.
Fortunately, the US has the Congressional Budget Office, which scores legislation in terms of its budgetary impact, assesses official budget proposals, and formulates its own economic projections.
(I serve on the CBO’s Panel of Economic Advisers, which comments on the draft forecast twice a year, but does not assess budget proposals or anything else.)
Because the CBO reports to the relevant congressional committees – those dealing with tax and budgets – both Republicans and Democrats watch its every move.
But the CBO, created in the 1970’s precisely to bring greater transparency and accountability to the rather byzantine congressional budget process, really is independent and run by professionals.
The CBO does not, however, score proposals by political candidates, and that is part of the problem.
In the run-up to the pre-election debates between Obama and Romney, both sides should agree to submit detailed budget proposals in the correct format for CBO assessment.
The relevant congressional committees also should agree to this exercise.
If one presidential candidate refuses to cooperate in this manner, that should confer an advantage on the candidate who is willing to disclose more fully the specifics of his plan.
And, to make this pressure to disclose meaningful, part of one debate should focus on budget proposals, with the questions being structured around how the CBO has reacted to specifics.
If either candidate does not want to bring the national debt under control, he should be pressed to explain why.
This is not a matter only for the world’s largest economies.
Candidates to lead their countries should not be allowed to get away with speaking in generalities or engaging in vague rhetorical flourishes.
Democracy can and should be better than that.
That Stalling Feeling
NEW YORK – Despite the series of low-probability, high-impact events that have hit the global economy in 2011, financial markets continued to rise happily until a month or so ago.
The year began with rising food, oil, and commodity prices, giving rise to the specter of high inflation.
Then massive turmoil erupted in the Middle East, further ratcheting up oil prices.
Then came Japan’s terrible earthquake, which severely damaged both its economy and global supply chains.
And then Greece, Ireland, and Portugal lost access to credit markets, requiring bailout packages from the International Monetary Fund and the European Union.
But that was not the end of it.
Although Greece was bailed out a year ago, Plan A has now clearly failed.
Greece will require another official bailout – or a bail-in of private creditors, an option that is fueling heated disagreement among European policymakers.
Lately, concerns about America’s unsustainable fiscal deficits have, likewise, resulted in ugly political infighting, almost leading to a government shutdown.
A similar battle is now brewing about America’s “debt ceiling,” which, if unresolved, introduces the risk of a “technical” default on US public debt.
Until recently, markets seemed to discount these shocks; apart from a few days when panic about Japan or the Middle East caused a correction, they continued their upward march.
But, since the end of April, a more persistent correction in global equity markets has set in, driven by worries that economic growth in the United States and worldwide may be slowing sharply.
Data from the US, the United Kingdom, the periphery of the eurozone, Japan, and even emerging-market economies is signaling that part of the global economy – especially advanced economies – may be stalling, if not dropping into a double-dip recession.
Global risk-aversion has also increased, as the option of further “extend and pretend” or “delay and pray” on Greece is becoming less desirable, and the specter of a disorderly workout is becoming more likely.
Optimists argue that the global economy has merely hit a “soft patch.”
Firms and consumers reacted to this year’s shocks by “temporarily” slowing consumption, capital spending, and job creation.
As long as the shocks don’t worsen (and as some become less acute), confidence and growth will recover in the second half of the year, and stock markets will rally again.
But there are good reasons to believe that we are experiencing a more persistent slump.
First, the problems of the eurozone periphery are in some cases problems of actual insolvency, not illiquidity: large and rising public and private deficits and debt; damaged financial systems that need to be cleaned up and recapitalized; massive loss of competitiveness; lack of economic growth; and rising unemployment.
It is no longer possible to deny that public and/or private debts in Greece, Ireland, and Portugal will need to be restructured.
Second, the factors slowing US growth are chronic. These include slow but persistent private and public-sector deleveraging; rising oil prices; weak job creation; another downturn in the housing market; severe fiscal problems at the state and local level; and an unsustainable deficit and debt burden at the federal level.
Third, economic growth has been flat on average in the UK over the last couple of quarters, with front-loaded fiscal austerity coming at a time when rising inflation is preventing the Bank of England from easing monetary policy.
Indeed, inflation may even force the Bank to raise interest rates by the fall.
And Japan is already slipping back into recession because of the earthquake.
All of these economies were already growing anemically and below trend, as the ongoing process of deleveraging required a slowdown of public and private spending in order to increase saving rates and reduce debts.
And now, in addition to the string of “black swan” events that advanced economies have faced this year, monetary and fiscal stimulus has been removed in most of them, or soon will be.
If what is happening now turns out to be something worse than a temporary soft patch, the market correction will continue further, thus weakening growth as the negative wealth effects of falling equity markets reduce private spending.
And, unlike in 2007-2010, when every negative shock and market downturn was countered by more policy action by governments, this time around policymakers are running out of ammunition, and thus may be unable to trigger more asset reflation and jump-start the real economy.
This lack of policy bullets is reflected in most advanced economies’ embrace of some form of austerity, in order to avoid a fiscal train wreck down the line.
Public debt is already high, and many sovereigns are near distress, so governments’ ability to backstop their banks via more bailouts, guarantees, and ring-fencing of questionable assets is severely constrained.
Another round of so-called “quantitative easing” by monetary authorities may not occur as inflation is rising – albeit slowly – in most advanced economies.
If the latest global economic data reflect something more serious than a hiccup, and markets and economies continue to slow, policymakers could well find themselves empty-handed.
If that happens, the risk of stall speed or an outright double-dip recession would rise sharply in many advanced economies.
The $200 Trillion Question
Perhaps the most remarkable trend in global macroeconomics over the past two decades has been the stunning drop in the volatility of economic growth.
In the United States, for example, quarterly output volatility has fallen by more than half since the mid-1980’s.
Obviously, moderation in output movements did not occur everywhere simultaneously.
Volatility in Asia began to fall only after the financial crisis of the late 1990’s.
In Japan and Latin America, volatility dropped in a meaningful way only in the current decade.
But by now, the decline has become nearly universal, with huge implications for global asset markets.
Indeed, the main question for 2007 is whether macroeconomic volatility will continue to decline, fueling another spectacular year for markets and housing, or start to rise again, perhaps due to growing geopolitical tensions.
I lean slightly toward the optimistic scenario, but investors and policymakers alike need to understand the ramifications of a return to more normal volatility levels.
Investors, especially, need to recognize that even if broader positive trends in globalization and technological progress continue, a rise in macroeconomic volatility could still produce a massive fall in asset prices.
Indeed, the massive equity and housing price increases of the past dozen or so years probably owe as much to greater macroeconomic stability as to any other factor.
As output and consumption become more stable, investors do not demand as large a risk premium.
The lower the price of risk, the higher the price of risky assets.
Consider this.
If you agree with the many pundits who say stock prices have gone too high, and are much more likely to fall than to rise further, you may be right—but not if macroeconomic risk continues to drain from the system.
At the end of 2000, at the height of the Internet stock boom and just before the 2001 crash, the economists James Glassman and Kevin Hassett published Dow 36,000 .
At the time, the Dow Jones industrial average of US stocks was trading at around 11,000, so the book’s premise seemed outrageous.
Certainly the timing was bad: global stock prices began to collapse a few months later, and it took years for them to fully recover.
But Glassman and Hassett did have a point.
Their admittedly crude analysis shows why, if volatility continues to fall in 2007, prices of stocks and other assets can still go a lot higher.
They asked how investors would price stocks if they expected historical average returns to continue, while also deciding that the risk was essentially zero.
That may sound extreme, but some scholars, such as the 2004 Nobel Prize winner Ed Prescott, have shown that, historically, holding a large diversified portfolio of stocks long enough is generally a far better investment than ultra-safe US Treasury bonds.
A back-of-the-envelope calculation shows that with the risk premium removed, stocks prices could easily triple from existing levels, with price/dividend ratios soaring to over 200, compared to historical averages of 40 to 50.
Of course, there is a big hole in the Dow 36,000 logic.
Stocks are risky, depressions can happen, and it is dangerous to extrapolate the past to the future.
If prices rise simply because investors decide that there is no longer any risk, then prices will collapse all the more precipitously if investors collectively change their minds.
This brings us to the $200 trillion question (roughly the value of global money and asset markets, including housing): What could cause macroeconomic volatility to start rising?
Don’t look to central banks; most are likely to manage the near-term risks to inflation and growth reasonably well.
Hedge funds could throw a scare.
The Germans tried to use their leadership in the G8 to achieve greater transparency in hedge funds, but they were beaten back by the US and Great Britain.
To my mind, though, the greatest risk is geopolitical instability.
By and large, China has been a far more constructive counterpart to the US than the former Soviet Union ever was.
But, given huge income disparities. China’s leaders still face enormous challenges in maintaining domestic stability, and continuing quiescence cannot be taken for granted.
At the same time, there are at least a half-dozen other global hot spots – some might be tempted to include the US Senate – that could trigger a major breakdown in world trade.
In short, if the macroeconomic moderation that dominated 2006 continues into 2007, look for further asset price inflation (but don’t hold your breath for the Dow to hit 36,000).
But if a major flare-up causes investors to lose confidence in low volatility, the bottom could fall out from under equity and housing prices.
In that case, do investors and policymakers have a plan B?
Indeed, some saw the creation of the ICTY as a poor substitute for the military intervention that was needed to halt the slaughter.
For a long time, that cynical response seemed to be justified.
The ICTY was slow in getting off the ground.
It took the UN 14 months to appoint a chief prosecutor.
Another year passed before his office issued indictments against high-ranking figures responsible for major crimes.
By then, the massacre of about 8,000 Muslim men and boys at Srebrenica, the largest mass killing in Europe since World War II, had already taken place.
But, though some aspects of the ICTY’s performance merit criticism, its overall performance and achievements over the last two decades have made it a great success.
That success is twofold: the tribunal’s achievements with respect to the former Yugoslavia, and its impact worldwide on ending impunity for war crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide.
As for the former Yugoslavia, the ICTY eventually obtained custody of all whom it indicted, except those who died in the interim.
It has conducted fair trials and has provided a meaningful appellate process that has led to significant convictions and equally significant acquittals.
Its work has paved the way for the establishment of local courts in Serbia, Croatia, and Bosnia that have supplemented its work.
By now, hundreds of those responsible for atrocities in the former Yugoslavia in the wars of the 1990’s have been held accountable and have served – or are still serving – judicially ordered prison sentences.
The impact of the ICTY worldwide has been multifaceted.
It has fostered the establishment of additional ad hoc international criminal courts with jurisdiction over such countries as Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Cambodia, and Lebanon.
It also provided impetus to the establishment of the International Criminal Court, while encouraging prosecutors in many countries to charge senior officials and guerrilla leaders for war crimes and bring them to trial in national courts.
The recent trial and conviction, in a national court, of former Guatemalan President General Efraín Ríos Montt on charges of genocide and crimes against humanity is only the latest blow against the impunity that previously protected high officials responsible for atrocities.
Though the conviction has since been overturned by Guatemala’s Constitutional Court, Ríos Montt joins dozens of former heads of state and government leaders who have been prosecuted for gross abuses of human rights since the ICTY was established.
But, despite the achievements of the past 20 years, the movement for international justice is still in its infancy.
Inevitably, mistakes have been made.
Even so, the 20th anniversary of the establishment of the ICTY is worth celebrating, because the movement it has led has forced military commanders, guerrilla leaders, and heads of state around the world to take into account the possibility that they will face justice if crimes against humanity are committed on their watch.
To that extent, the ICTY has done more than bring a measure of justice to victims and survivors in the former Yugoslavia.
It has also contributed to the prevention of injustice in contexts far removed from the Balkans.
The 70% Solution
BERKELEY – Via a circuitous Internet chain – Paul Krugman of Princeton University quoting Mark Thoma of the University of Oregon reading the Journal of Economic Perspectives – I got a copy of an article written by Emmanuel Saez, whose office is 50 feet from mine, on the same corridor, and the Nobel laureate economist Peter Diamond.
Saez and Diamond argue that the right marginal tax rate for North Atlantic societies to impose on their richest citizens is 70%.
It is an arresting assertion, given the tax-cut mania that has prevailed in these societies for the past 30 years, but Diamond and Saez’s logic is clear.
The superrich command and control so many resources that they are effectively satiated: increasing or decreasing how much wealth they have has no effect on their happiness.
So, no matter how large a weight we place on their happiness relative to the happiness of others – whether we regard them as praiseworthy captains of industry who merit their high positions, or as parasitic thieves – we simply cannot do anything to affect it by raising or lowering their tax rates.
The unavoidable implication of this argument is that when we calculate what the tax rate for the superrich will be, we should not consider the effect of changing their tax rate on their happiness, for we know that it is zero.
Rather, the key question must be the effect of changing their tax rate on the well-being of the rest of us.
From this simple chain of logic follows the conclusion that we have a moral obligation to tax our superrich at the peak of the Laffer Curve: to tax them so heavily that we raise the most possible money from them – to the point beyond which their diversion of energy and enterprise into tax avoidance and sheltering would mean that any extra taxes would not raise but reduce revenue.
The utilitarian economic logic is clear.
Yet more than half of us are likely to reject the conclusion reached by Diamond and Saez.
We feel that there is something wrong with taxing our superrich until the pips squeak so much that further taxation reduces the number of pips.
And we feel this for two reasons, both of them set out more than two centuries ago by Adam Smith – not in his most famous work, The Wealth of Nations, but in his far less discussed book The Theory of Moral Sentiments.
The first reason applies to the idle rich.
According to Smith,
“A stranger to human nature, who saw the indifference of men about the misery of their inferiors, and the regret and indignation which they feel for the misfortunes and sufferings of those above them, would be apt to imagine, that pain must be more agonizing, and the convulsions of death more terrible to persons of higher rank, than to those of meaner stations...”
We feel this, Smith believes, because we naturally sympathize with others (if he were writing today, he would surely invoke “mirror neurons”).
And the more pleasant our thoughts about individuals or groups are, the more we tend to sympathize with them.
The fact that the lifestyles of the rich and famous “seem almost the abstract idea of a perfect and happy state” leads us to “pity…that anything should spoil and corrupt so agreeable a situation!
In short, on the one hand, we don’t wish to disrupt the perfect felicity of the lifestyles of the rich and famous; on the other hand, we don’t wish to add to the burdens of those who have spent their most precious possession – their time and energy – pursuing baubles.
These two arguments are not consistent, but that does not matter.
They both have a purchase on our thinking.
Unlike today’s public-finance economists, Smith understood that we are not rational utilitarian calculators.
Indeed, that is why we have collectively done a very bad job so far in dealing with the enormous rise in inequality between the industrial middle class and the plutocratic superrich that we have witnessed in the last generation.
Ms. Watanabe’s Profession
TOKYO – Ms. Watanabe, age 40, is hesitant.
Her mother, Mrs. Watanabe, is known for moving the world’s markets with the financial trading that occupies her breaks from housework.
Mrs. Watanabe is the generic name for Japan’s housewife speculators, who have wielded significant influence on foreign exchange and other markets through their trading.
After graduating from university, Mrs. Watanabe quit her job when she married Mr. Watanabe (who worked in the same office), became a housewife, and raised one daughter.
She did this because, in Mrs. Watanabe’s day, marriage was the final workplace.
Times are different for her daughter, Ms. Watanabe, who majored in economics at a famous university and was hired by a well-known trading firm.
But, though she outperformed the men in her recruitment class academically, she was unable to compete for promotion.
She could not even have an official business card (which is more important than a passport in Japan); she had no choice but to make one on her computer.
She resolved to hone her skills by following her mother’s example.
After work, she would attend night school to become an international accountant.
She didn’t like going out drinking with colleagues to complain about their boss; communication through drinking neither improved one’s skills nor helped one to rise through the ranks.
Ms. Watanabe’s story helps to illustrate a remarkable disparity.
While productivity in Japanese factories is the highest in the world, owing to robots and other types of automation, the productivity of Japan’s white-collar workers is the lowest among OECD countries.
In 1999, Japan’s Equal Employment Opportunity Act was amended to provide equal employment opportunities for men and women by prohibiting discriminatory labor practices.
But the legislation has had little impact on the workplace atmosphere for women.
The other women who joined the company at the same time as Ms. Watanabe married colleagues and quit to devote their time to raising children.
The only difference from her mother’s era was that today’s generation quit, married, and gave birth later.
Women account for more than 80% of those who use childcare leave in Japan; in reality, more than 60% of Japanese women leave the workplace and don’t come back when they have children.
Before she knew it, Ms. Watanabe was in her thirties.
Her mother, Mrs. Watanabe, used the money she had made through financial trading to fund her daughter’s study abroad.
Companies pay for men to study abroad, but will not invest in female employees.
Without other options, Ms. Watanabe took a long-term unpaid leave of absence (which her company typically does not grant to women) to study for an MBA in America.
Although she returned with excellent grades, her position within the company worsened, because she did not have a boss who could use her skills.
One day, Ms. Watanabe received a call from a headhunting firm.
She was recruited to work in the accounting department of a Japanese import-export company.
Encouraged by her mother, Ms. Watanabe set her sights on new shores.
It was a completely new working environment, but her English skills and MBA proved to be invaluable.
Her work was interesting, and she played an important role.
At times, though, she thought about marriage and children when planning for the future.
Last year, Japan’s government changed, with the Liberal Democratic Party’s return to power.
Previously, the LDP had given barely a second thought to women’s issues, focusing only on the needs of business and dealing with an aging society.
Now, to Ms. Watanabe’s surprise, it has made women’s policy one of the key aspects of its long-term strategy.
To top it off, exchange-listed companies must now appoint at least one female officer.
Ms. Watanabe had heard that companies in Norway or France face delisting if their ratio of female officers falls below 40%, and she joked with her friends that Keidanren (the Japan Business Federation) would vanish under such a law.
Nonetheless, with each public company in Japan to appoint at least one female officer, it might be her turn someday.
But she already is 40, and is thinking of marriage.
Would maternity leave be possible if she were appointed as an officer?
Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s government says that it will establish daycare centers, but is this really true?
Ms. Watanabe is hesitant.
Should she take up an important role at this stage?
Or should she pursue happiness as a woman?
Mrs. Watanabe gives her daughter the nudge she needs.
Mrs. Watanabe has a talent for seeing how the tide turns.
Her advice is to grab the opportunity at work, and also find happiness in marriage and children.
According to an estimate by Kathy Matsui, Chief Japan Equity Strategist at Goldman Sachs, the country’s GDP could rise by 15%, and 8.2 million new jobs could be created, if Japanese women gain equality of opportunity at work.
Abe has said that “womanomics” is the most important pillar of “Abenomics,” his government’s growth strategy.
Mrs. Watanabe and her daughter have much at stake in its realization.
Emerging Markets’ Nirvana Lost
SANTIAGO – In the 1970’s, the great Yale University economist Carlos Díaz-Alejandro used to say that the combination of high commodity prices, low world interest rates, and abundant international liquidity would amount to economic nirvana for developing countries.
Back then, no sensible economist believed that such a state of grace could ever arrive.
Yet arrive it did, and over the last decade commodity-rich countries like Brazil, Indonesia, Russia, and South Africa enjoyed its abundant benefits with abandon.
But now nirvana seems to be ending: commodity prices are down, and the mere possibility that the US Federal Reserve may end its policy of quantitative easing has raised market interest rates in the rich countries and sent funds fleeing from once-fashionable emerging markets back to safe havens in the North.
Stock markets and currencies are plunging, and not just in commodity-rich emerging countries, but also in others, like India and Turkey, that had sucked in huge flows of foreign capital.
Pessimists are already seeing a replay of the late-1990’s Asian crisis or, worse, an emerging-market echo of the 2008-2009 crisis in the advanced countries.
What the hardest-hit economies have in common are large external deficits.
Abundant capital inflows caused their exchange rates to appreciate, making imports cheap and unleashing consumption (and sometimes investment) booms that eroded their trade balances, even as rising commodity prices boosted the value of their exports.
Now the cycle is being reversed and exchange rates must depreciate to facilitate external adjustment.
Anticipating that change – and the prospect of higher interest rates closer to home – foreign investors are taking flight, hastening and sharpening the exchange-rate plunge.
That is the bad news.
The good news (fingers crossed) is that a full-fledged emerging-market financial crisis is unlikely.