The red of the Revolution, of course, and the black of the oppressed race.
Cliché was the common currency of all Communist dictatorships, but they had the opposite effect to what the regime intended, for they cast an aura of forbidden fruit around the slandered New World metropolis, making it seem a glowing Olympus of modernity, an urban Everest of adventure.
The few trips I was allowed to take as a citizen of Socialist Romania did, of course, have moments of rapture for me, novice that I was.
Yet New York remained a dream, so foreign and distant that I never imagined I would have the chance to compare illusion with reality.
My eventual escape to New York had nothing to do with tourism.
Sudden terror before this omnipresent, all-devouring monster was soon overtaken by fascination.
The critic Irving Howe, a New Yorker of long standing, tried to temper my enthusiasm.
“To enjoy this city you need a good apartment and a certain salary.”
I was living in a miserable hotel in a rundown neighborhood, consumed with a newcomer’s neurotic insecurity.
Yet I found everything irresistible, the city’s rhythms and colors, its contrasts and surprises.
That Walt Whitman and Mark Twain, Herman Melville, Henry James, and John Dos Passos had lived here, that Enescu, Brancusi, or Eugen Ionesco had been successful here in no way raised my hopes.
Life in and with this city was as hypnotic as a drug.
Over the last seventeen years this addiction was established through daily negotiations with life’s routine.
New York’s metabolism filled me with its energy and its toxins.
Although I felt that I, an exile in the land of exiles, belonged ever more to a world to which no one can really be said to belong, on September 11, 2001, I was finally able to proclaim, “I am a New Yorker,” just as President Kennedy had declared himself a Berliner when that former National Socialist capital was in danger of becoming a Communist capital.
The Old Testament tells how work on the tower in Shinar, in ancient Babylon, was disrupted because man aspired to reach the heavens and divinity.
Suddenly the builders could no longer understand each other. Different languages divided them.
In present-day Babylon in Chinatown, in Little Italy, in Russian Brighton Beach, and in the alleys and byways of New York, all the world’s languages are spoken.
The builders of the twin towers, whatever their native tongues, wanted to be Americans, citizens of the New World, the towers they built symbolizing the stature of freedom.
The attack on the towers of Babel was unexpected but not unpredictable in so far as it represented the hatred of Allah’s fanatical followers for the symbols of modernity.
In the World Trade Center, human creativity and collaboration were universally codified.
Of course, the building lacked poetry.
Yet, the towers could have been a symbol of worldwide poetry, not commerce.
As the Surrealist poet André Breton said, “It is above all our differences that unite us.”
Surprisingly, for such an extensive, cynically efficient cluster of humanity, the city displayed surprising civility and solidarity during and after the attacks.
It immediately regained its strength, its sense of humor, and its industriousness.
After September 11, 2001, skyscrapers, clubs, and restaurants of all kinds sprang up like mushrooms, with almost more vitality than before.
Moreover, the city refused to give its votes to a president who exploited its disaster for political gain.
Romania is often called the Land of Dada, not because one of its sons, Tristan Tzara, was a founder of Surrealism, but because of the absurdity and paradoxes of its daily life, particularly in its politics.
In exile, I immediately identified with another capital of Dada, the “cosmic republic, that speaks all languages in a universal dialect,” as Johannes Baader put it.
Here, the old and the new are accomplices in celebrating life “in all its incomprehensibility” – exactly the subversiveness that the Dadaists loved.
A famous map painted by my friend and compatriot Saul Steinberg depicts the global village as seen from Manhattan: the distance from the Hudson River to the Pacific Ocean is the same as the distance from Ninth to Tenth Avenue on the Upper West Side, and somewhere beyond the calm ocean float Russia, China, and Japan.
Saul’s other maps evoke his past: Milan, the city of his youth, Zurich, where Dada got its explosive start, and the Romanian city Buzau, where he was born.
A map of my own fate would encompass Bukovina as my native land, the Transdnistrian concentration camp of my childhood, the Communist labor camp Periprava where my father’s identity was altered, the Bucharest of my student years and my adulthood, Berlin, my exile’s starting point, and finally New York, where my exile found its residence.
This fate is its own “Babel,” a confused mixture of memories and places.
Here on the Upper West Side, in the middle of a triangle formed by Central Park, Lincoln Center, and the Hudson River, I was once in the habit of beginning each day with an exotic act of devotion, a ritual of humility.
I now had a good apartment and a certain salary, so Irving Howe’s conditions for life in the city were fulfilled.
From my window, I watched the Rubbish Gangster: shaven head, bull neck, and swollen nose, from which dangled mucus-incrusted strands of hair, his short arms bursting with criminal power.
Every day, at the same hour, he appeared with his metal trunk stuffed with all that he had collected from street corner garbage cans; it was as if he wanted to ensnare me with his street sorcery so that I could see the city’s unfathomable contrasts.   
The writer, caught up in the shelter of solitude, does not have much time to wander about.
His neighborhood is his world, the geography of his calendar.
Luckily, the streets of New York offer extraordinary spectacles wherever one is.
In the Bronx or in Soho, in Washington Square or Times Square, in front of the New York Public Library or near a hot dog stand, across all the planets’ races, the banal vies with the exceptional for one’s attention.
All faces, ages, and events, sooner or later, can be found here.
Routine increases banality and thoughtlessness; the personal disappears.
You pursue your business here as only New Yorkers can, but every once in a while you look up and wonder, “How did I get here?”
Or, rather, “How on earth did mankind come so far?”
I often look at New York’s architecture as if looking at an art book.
On my way home from Bard College, where I teach, I am greeted by the George Washington Bridge majestically suspended over the Hudson River.
It is a glorious welcome, even in fog.
The same is true of the skyline.
Approach the city and you see the urban center of the world – a hard and harried place, marked by social contrasts as dizzying as its skyscrapers and with a sense of transience as elevated as its buildings.
Its workforce labors round the clock and its inventiveness, energy, and diversity counter provincialism with scorn.
Like America itself, although so utterly different, New York can only be comprehended “synthetically.”
This festively incoherent capital of Dada is a spectacular fusion of freedom and pragmatism. Misery and magnificence, seduction and neurosis create and recreate the dynamic, unmistakable spectrum of New York life.
In this city you learn to limit yourself.
It is impossible to take in at once all of the innumerable symphonic or jazz concerts, or parades celebrating ethnic or sexual minorities.
You can’t attend all the lectures, panel discussions, and auctions where everyday dramas and dreams are bartered.
You can’t sit in all the taxis driven by those loquacious ambassadors from India and Russia and Haiti, from Pakistan and Ghana and Guatemala.
At best you can grab a mere crumb of this frenetic global kaleidoscope.
In the end, in New York you own nothing more than the instant, the now, the right now.
Like any market, however, the marketplace of ideas needs regulation: in particular, its participants should be bound by norms of honesty, humility, and civility.
Moreover, every idea-trader should adhere to these principles.
Of course, politicians through the ages have polluted the marketplace of ideas with invective.
But in American politics, surprisingly, there has been progress.
According to a study by the Annenberg Public Policy Center, there has been less incivility in Congress in recent years than in the 1990’s or the 1940’s.
Republican Senator Ted Cruz was widely condemned for his aggressive questioning of incoming Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel back in January.
But casting aspersions on a nominee’s patriotism was the norm in the McCarthy era; it is less common today.
Academia, by contrast, appears to be moving in the opposite direction.
A “social science” like economics is supposed to be free of partisan vitriol.
Yet economists now routinely stoop to ad hominem attacks and inflammatory polemics.
As economists go, they do not come much mightier or more influential than Paul Krugman.
A Nobel laureate who teaches at Princeton University, Krugman is also a columnist for the New York Times, whose commentaries and blog, “The Conscience of a Liberal,” are read with an almost religious fervor by liberal (in the American sense) economists and journalists around the world.
He is a Twitter superstar, with more than a million followers.
A dozen ardent epigones blog in sync with him, re-posting the wisdom of the master.
Many people today naively believe that the Internet is an unmitigated boon for free speech.
They underestimate the extent to which such a concentration of online power corrupts, just as surely as all forms of power corrupt.
Since Krugman and I began debating fiscal and monetary policy back in 2009, I have become increasingly alarmed by the way he abuses his power.
Last week, I resolved to speak out in a three-article series, published squarely in the heart of the liberal blogosphere, the Huffington Post.
As historians are trained to do, I based my argument on the archives.
By quoting his past writings, I showed, first, that Krugman’s repeated claims to have been “right about everything” in his economic commentary are false.
Although (like many others) he identified a housing bubble in 2006, he did not foresee the financial chain reaction that would fuel a global crisis.
Having failed to predict the US crisis, he then incorrectly predicted the imminent disintegration of Europe’s monetary union, publishing more than 20 statements on that subject in 2011 and 2012.
He has never admitted these errors; on the contrary, he has retrospectively exaggerated his own prescience.
Second, Krugman’s claim that a vastly larger fiscal stimulus would have generated a more rapid economic recovery in the US depends entirely on conjecture.
But the macroeconomic model on which he bases his claim can hardly be called reliable, given its manifest failures to predict either the crisis or the euro’s survival.
Moreover, at least one of his pre-crisis columns flatly contradicts his view today that current – or even higher – levels of federal debt carry no risk whatsoever.
So he has no right to claim, as he has, “a stunning victory” in “an epic intellectual debate.”
Finally – and most important – even if Krugman had been “right about everything,” there would still be no justification for the numerous crude and often personal attacks he has made on those who disagree with him.
Words like “cockroach,” “delusional,” “derp,” “dope,” “fool,” “knave,” “mendacious idiot,” and “zombie” have no place in civilized debate.
I consider myself lucky that he has called me only a “poseur,” a “whiner,” “inane” – and, last week, a “troll.”
Far from engaging in Holmes’s free trade in ideas, Krugman has been the intellectual equivalent of a robber baron, exploiting his power to the point of driving decent people away from the public sphere – particularly younger scholars, who understandably dread a “takedown” by the “Invincible Krugtron.”
My preferred solution would be accountability.
But I have given up hope that the New York Times will perform its proper editorial function.
So, instead, I would suggest the intellectual equivalent of an antitrust law.
For every word that Krugman publishes, he must henceforth commit to having first read at least a hundred words by other writers.
I cannot guarantee that reading more widely will teach him honesty, humility, and civility.
But it will at least reduce his unjustifiably large share of the marketplace of economic ideas.
As a Supreme Court justice, of course, Holmes opposed antitrust regulations.
But his arguments in this area failed his own “test of truth,” for they lacked “the power…to get…accepted in the competition of the market.”
Holmes accepted defeat with his customary grace.
It is high time that Krugman – right or wrong – learned to behave that way, too.
Education’s Buy-Down Option
WASHINGTON, DC – Last year was an important one for developing countries, if only because the world was reminded of the true value of education there.
Indeed, Malala Yousafzai, the young Pakistani girl who spoke up for children’s right to go to school – even after surviving an assassination attempt by the Taliban – served poignant notice that not educating a child in the developing world is significantly more costly than doing so.
With education squarely in the spotlight, new trends are gaining momentum, many of them merging with “innovative finance” – a concept much beloved by development policymakers and practitioners in difficult economic times.
In particular, the emergence of so-called loan buy-downs could encourage financing for education from reluctant donor countries.
A loan buy-down is a transaction in which a third party pays down part of a loan by softening its terms or reducing the principal outstanding, thereby releasing the borrowing country from all or some of its future repayment obligations.
Because the buy-down is triggered by achievement of a pre-defined target, such transactions promote results-based financing, bringing about quantifiable reforms that otherwise might not have been realized.
Appropriately defined triggers thus address one of the main criticisms of international aid.
They also encourage borrowers to invest in projects with long-run returns that may not be politically attractive, such as teacher training.
Unfortunately, the education sector still lags behind others in harnessing the potential of innovative development finance – and loan buy-downs are no exception.
As a result, the few examples of buy-downs so far have mainly been for health initiatives.
The Partnership for Polio Eradication Project in Nigeria and Pakistan – launched in 2003 by the World Bank, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Rotary International, and the United Nations Foundation – is a prime example of how a buy-down program can concentrate global efforts on a single issue and yield benefits for all parties.
The Bank provided upfront long-term zero-interest loans for the purchase of oral polio vaccines in Nigeria and Pakistan, while the other three organizations covered all service and commitment charges associated with the loans.
At the end of the project – that is, when an independent performance audit determines that the vaccines arrived on time for the campaign, and immunization coverage has reached at least 80% – the partnership will buy down the Bank’s loans.
The World Bank will then cancel the credit and release the recipients from any future liability.
Loan buy-downs could mitigate dwindling flows of official development assistance (ODA) for education in low-income countries, which declined by 10% from 2010 to 2011 – and by 5% for basic education.
This reflects lower spending by seven of the 11 major bilateral donors.
The Netherlands led the way, slashing its aid to basic education by 36%, outpacing even the 31% cut by crisis-ridden Spain.
Japan, too, reduced its aid by 30%, while France and Canada cut their assistance by 25% and 21%, respectively.
Elsewhere, the United States lowered its budget by 13%, and Norway by 4%.
Given that the Netherlands has long been a key supporter of basic education, its decision to phase out its education programs was particularly notable.
But, beyond aid reductions, donors may also make it more difficult for borrowing countries to repay the aid funds they owe (this is not limited to loans for education).
And some donors – such as France, Germany, and the European Investment Bank – are lobbying the OECD Development Assistance Committee to count unsubsidized loans as official development assistance to enable them to meet their ODA targets.
This reverses the trend over the last few decades toward grant-based financing, especially for basic education.
But education, a crucial public good, should not be left behind in the pursuit of non-grant-based aid.
Loan buy-downs can help keep the education sector “competitive,” and could prove to be a mechanism to leverage extra resources for education, for which capital-strapped countries may not be willing to borrow otherwise.
Despite the potential benefits, the many unanswered questions about buy-downs limit their application.
Which countries would be willing to participate, either as borrowers or lenders?
What kinds of triggers should be specified for mobilizing buy-down funds?
How would it be decided whether these targets had been met?
With such questions in mind, Results for Development Institute has prepared a study for the Global Partnership for Education (GPE), analyzing the buy-down model’s use in other sectors and considering ways to apply it to education.
The report focuses on which countries have the right combination of basic education needs and borrowing potential.
Moreover, it examines how the buy-down triggers could catalyze results, as well as the operational issues that might arise.
As a next step, the report proposes a pilot program and consultations with borrowers, lenders, and funders to resolve enduring questions about their application.
That is a sensible approach.
Buy-downs may prove to be the solution needed to ensure adequate and stable assistance to education in developing countries.
It is time to find out.
Populism Without the People
PRINCETON – Nicolás Maduro’s narrow victory in Venezuela’s presidential election raises an important question (quite apart from the opposition’s question as to whether Maduro really won): Can populism thrive without a genuinely popular, charismatic leader, or are movements like Chávismo doomed to fade into insignificance once they have lost their quasi-deities?
For many observers, populism is unthinkable without a strong, direct bond between an anti-establishment leader and citizens who feel neglected by mainstream political parties.
Yet the role of leadership in populism is vastly overestimated.
Indeed, given populism’s importance as a political phenomenon, that view, along with two others – that populism is somehow a call for direct democracy, and that populists can only protest, but never govern –&#160;needs to be challenged.
Populism, unlike, say, liberalism or Marxism, is not a coherent body of distinct political ideas.
But it also cannot be defined simply as any political movement that panders to the masses by promoting simplistic policy proposals.
While populists might be particularly prone to advocating facile solutions, they hardly have a monopoly on that tactic.
Moreover, impugning populists’ intelligence and seriousness only plays into their hands: See how the arrogant, entrenched elites, they will counter, dismiss the common sense of the people.
Populism cannot be understood at the level of policies; rather, it is a particular way of imagining politics.
It pits the innocent, always hard-working people against both a corrupt elite (who do not really work, other than to further their own interests) and those on the very bottom of society (who also do not work and live off others).
In the populist imagination, both the very top and the very bottom of society are not really a part of it: they are directly or indirectly supported by outside powers (think of pro-European liberal elites in Central and Eastern Europe); more obviously, they are immigrants or minorities, like the Roma.
Typically, in the populist political imagination, elites disproportionately care for &#160;those who, like themselves, do not really belong.
Europe’s elites are regularly accused of lavishing benefits on ethnic minorities in the name of protecting their rights.
America’s Tea Party populists often imagine an unholy alliance of left-liberal, bi-coastal elites and the African-American underclass (an alliance that in their eyes is embodied in President Barack Obama).
A leader who can represent this purely moral – as opposed to political – image helps to provide a focus for voters.
But it is not crucial.
Thus, calls for more popular participation are not essential to populism; rather, they are a symptom of perceived exclusion (which might well be a reality, especially in Latin America).
But cries for political inclusion are different from demands for direct democracy.
Where direct democracy is very much a part of normal politics – in Switzerland, for example – populist parties have been doing better, not worse, than elsewhere.
It is similarly misguided to think that populist politicians, once in power, will not be able to govern effectively, because they have emerged from protest parties whose agendas are defined entirely by what they oppose.
Rather, what is distinctive about populists in power is that they attend only to their clientele (the rest of the population is utterly undeserving) and ride roughshod over checks and balances.
From a populist perspective, this makes perfect sense: Why should they accept checks on their power if they represent the authentic will of the people?
Populists can live with representative democracy; what they cannot accept is political pluralism and the notion of legitimate opposition.
It was this tendency to demonize opponents, not particular policies favoring the poor, that made Chávez a populist.
In Finland, to take another example, it is the claim of uniquely authentic representation, not criticism of the European Union, that makes the revealingly named True Finns a populist party.
Likewise, the Italian populist Beppe Grillo’s attempt to empower ordinary citizens is not a cause for concern; but his claim that his Five Star Movement deserves nothing less than 100% of seats in parliament, because all other contenders are corrupt and immoral, certainly is.
It is this feature of populism – the idea that the people want only one thing, and that only true representatives can give it to them – that explains a symmetry (often evoked, but seldom spelled out) between populism and technocratic government.
Just as technocrats assume that there is only one right solution to every policy challenge – hence political debate is not necessary – so, for populists, the people have one, and only one, uncorrupted will.
Liberal democracy assumes just the opposite: space for different perspectives – and for political alternatives.
Big Data, Big New Businesses
LONDON – Many people have long believed that if government and the private sector agreed to share their data more freely, and allow it to be processed using the right analytics, previously unimaginable solutions to countless social, economic, and commercial problems would emerge.
They may have no idea how right they are.
Even the most vocal proponents of open data appear to have underestimated how many profitable ideas and businesses stand to be created.
More than 40 governments worldwide have committed to opening up their electronic data – including weather records, crime statistics, transport information, and much more – to businesses, consumers, and the general public.
The McKinsey Global Institute estimates that the annual value of open data in education, transportation, consumer products, electricity, oil and gas, health care, and consumer finance could reach $3 trillion.
These benefits come in the form of new and better goods and services, as well as efficiency savings for businesses, consumers, and citizens.
The range is vast.
For example, drawing on data from various government agencies, the Climate Corporation (recently bought for $1 billion) has taken 30 years of weather data, 60 years of data on crop yields, and 14 terabytes of information on soil types to create customized insurance products.
Similarly, real-time traffic and transit information can be accessed on smartphone apps to inform users when the next bus is coming or how to avoid traffic congestion.
And, by analyzing online comments about their products, manufacturers can identify which features consumers are most willing to pay for, and develop their business and investment strategies accordingly.
Opportunities are everywhere.
A raft of open-data start-ups are now being incubated at the London-based Open Data Institute (ODI), which focuses on improving our understanding of corporate ownership, health-care delivery, energy, finance, transport, and many other areas of public interest.
Consumers are the main beneficiaries, especially in the household-goods market.
It is estimated that consumers making better-informed buying decisions across sectors could capture an estimated $1.1 trillion in value annually.
Third-party data aggregators are already allowing customers to compare prices across online and brick-and-mortar shops.
Many also permit customers to compare quality ratings, safety data (drawn, for example, from official injury reports), information about the provenance of food, and producers’ environmental and labor practices.
Consider the book industry.
Bookstores once regarded their inventory as a trade secret.
Customers, competitors, and even suppliers seldom knew what stock bookstores held.
Nowadays, by contrast, bookstores not only report what stock they carry but also when customers’ orders will arrive.
If they did not, they would be excluded from the product-aggregation sites that have come to determine so many buying decisions.
The health-care sector is a prime target for achieving new efficiencies.
By sharing the treatment data of a large patient population, for example, care providers can better identify practices that could save $180 billion annually.
The Open Data Institute-backed start-up Mastodon C uses open data on doctors’ prescriptions to differentiate among expensive patent medicines and cheaper “off-patent” varieties; when applied to just one class of drug, that could save around $400 million in one year for the British National Health Service.
Meanwhile, open data on acquired infections in British hospitals has led to the publication of hospital-performance tables, a major factor in the 85% drop in reported infections.
There are also opportunities to prevent lifestyle-related diseases and improve treatment by enabling patients to compare their own data with aggregated data on similar patients.
This has been shown to motivate patients to improve their diet, exercise more often, and take their medicines regularly.
Similarly, letting people compare their energy use with that of their peers could prompt them to save hundreds of billions of dollars in electricity costs each year, to say nothing of reducing carbon emissions.
Such benchmarking is even more valuable for businesses seeking to improve their operational efficiency.
The oil and gas industry, for example, could save $450 billion annually by sharing anonymized and aggregated data on the management of upstream and downstream facilities.
Finally, the move toward open data serves a variety of socially desirable ends, ranging from the reuse of publicly funded research to support work on poverty, inclusion, or discrimination, to the disclosure by corporations such as Nike of their supply-chain data and environmental impact.
There are, of course, challenges arising from the proliferation and systematic use of open data.
Companies fear for their intellectual property; ordinary citizens worry about how their private information might be used and abused.
Last year, Telefónica, the world’s fifth-largest mobile-network provider, tried to allay such fears by launching a digital confidence program to reassure customers that innovations in transparency would be implemented responsibly and without compromising users’ personal information.
The sensitive handling of these issues will be essential if we are to reap the potential $3 trillion in value that usage of open data could deliver each year.
Consumers, policymakers, and companies must work together, not just to agree on common standards of analysis, but also to set the ground rules for the protection of privacy and property.
Polio’s Last Stand
GENEVA – It has been a tough year for Nigeria.
In the last 12 months, the country has suffered attacks by child suicide bombers and brutal massacres by Boko Haram.
The vast majority of the 276 schoolgirls abducted in Chibok last year are still missing.
And yet, during this time, despite such horrors, Nigeria has quietly managed to achieve something truly remarkable: an entire year without a single new case of wild polio.
This is a great achievement for Nigeria and all of its partners in the effort to eradicate the disease.
Less than 30 years ago, polio plagued 125 countries, paralyzing 1,000 children a day.
Until now, there were only three countries where the virus was still considered endemic: Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Nigeria.
Health officials wait three years before declaring a country polio-free, but the one-year milestone in Nigeria raises hopes that we may have already seen the last case of wild polio in the country – and the whole of Africa.
In addition to the logistical challenge of reaching every child in Africa’s most populated country, the Nigerian polio-eradication campaign has had to overcome security issues, opposition by religious fundamentalists, and rampant corruption.
The fact that a country as troubled as Nigeria could pull off such an important feat is cause for celebration and provides grounds for optimism, not only in the fight against polio, but for global health efforts in general.
Nigeria’s success shows that it is possible to bring the miracles of modern medicine to the world’s most marginalized and hard-to-reach children.
This has huge implications for the reduction of childhood mortality.
The children that had previously not been reached with polio vaccines live in communities with little or no access to routine immunization, maternal healthcare, nutritional supplements, deworming, or malaria prevention.
They are the children who are most at risk of dying before they reach their fifth birthday.
Nigeria’s success in reaching these children is the result of the efforts of thousands of dedicated local volunteers, some of whom lost their lives in the process.
Since 2012, there has been nearly a fivefold increase in the number of volunteers involved in mobilizing communities during immunization campaigns.
Meanwhile, government, global health organizations like the World Health Organization and UNICEF, civil-society organizations, and community leaders, all working together, managed to identify and bridge the gaps that have historically impaired access to polio vaccines.
In early 2012, for example, Nigeria’s government established dedicated emergency operations centers to coordinate data flow, facilitate decision-making, and improve accountability within the program.
With support from Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, Nigeria also installed more than 1,600 solar-powered refrigerators, which are critical to ensuring that vaccines remain safe and effective during their long journey through the distribution chain.
These investments in physical and social infrastructure provide a means of protecting children from a range of diseases.
Already, polio workers in Nigeria are spending more than half their time providing unrelated but vital health services.
The infrastructure has helped introduce new vaccines – such as pneumococcal conjugate vaccines, which protect against pneumonia, the biggest killer of children under the age of five – and increased coverage of routine immunization against measles and rubella.
Thanks to the emergency operations centers, this infrastructure even helped to stop the Ebola outbreak in Nigeria in 2014, by enabling contact tracing and surveillance.
These efforts have the additional benefit of ensuring that Nigeria cements its polio-free status.
The health infrastructure put in place during the eradication campaign has enabled the deployment of injectable polio vaccines, which will complement the oral vaccines in ensuring that the virus does not return.
This was also the pattern in India, the most recent country to be declared officially free of polio, with no cases since 2010.
The infrastructure put in place to deliver polio vaccines there is now being used to increase coverage of routine immunization, like the 5-in-1 pentavalent vaccine.
India can now wind down its polio-eradication campaigns, but still maintain its polio-free status.
So far, in 2015, only 34 cases of polio have been documented worldwide – the majority of them in Pakistan.
There is now a very real prospect that we could see the last ever case of wild polio – a disease that once threatened millions of people – before the end of 2016.
To eradicate the disease, however, we will have to build on successes like Nigeria’s and strengthen routine immunization efforts.
The end of polio should mark not just the defeat of a terrible disease, but also the beginning of a new phase in the effort to reduce childhood suffering and death, the benefits of which will be felt for generations to come.
Nigeria’s Resurgent Oil Diplomacy
Russia is not alone in seeing oil as a means to transform its global standing.
Nowadays, the mantra of President Umar Yar’Adua, who took power in June 2007, following controversial elections, is to transform the country into one of the world’s 20 largest economies by 2020.
Yar’Adua and his Peoples Democratic Party (PDP) are struggling to stamp their authority on an unwieldy and restive country of 140 million people, and the government views rapid growth as a means to achieving that aim.
Nigerians can use a dose of hope.
Olusegun Obasanjo, who became Nigeria’s first elected president in 1999 after nearly two decades of military dictatorship, left vast swathes of the country trapped in poverty when he handed power to Yar’Adua last year.
With oil reaching $100 dollars per barrel, and energy-hungry giants like the United States and China beating a path to Nigeria’s door, Africa’s leading oil producer wants to use petrodollars to cure the country’s economic ills and flex its muscles in the international arena.
While riding the crest of the last oil boom in the late 1970’s, Nigeria’s military leaders nationalized the assets of British Petroleum and became champions of pan-African co-operation, financing several African liberation movements.
The interests of the West and Nigeria repeatedly clashed, but Nigeria always stood its ground.
Inept government and economic decline in the 1980’s and 1990’s obliged Nigeria’s leaders to focus on problems closer to home, like the civil wars in Liberia and Sierra Leone.
But old habits die hard.
Nigeria has always sought a leadership role in Africa and its diaspora.
Even in the turbulent 1990’s, when Nigeria was temporarily suspended from the British Commonwealth following the execution of minority rights campaigner Ken Saro-Wiwa by General Sani Abacha’s regime, the governing elite sought to achieve Nigeria’s “rightful” place in global affairs.
There are now signs of a resurgent oil-driven foreign policy.
Last October, Yar’Adua joined South Africa and Libya in opposing US plans to deploy AFRICOM, its new African regional military command, on the continent.
He then asked Nigeria’s National Assembly to write off $13 million of Liberia’s $43 million bilateral debt after Liberian President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf withdrew her offer to host the new command.
Nigerian officials are careful to disavow any link between this financial gift and Johnson’s turn away from AFRICOM.
Nor do they voice their concern that AFRICOM could be part of an American effort to exert control on West Africa’s oil-producing countries.
But, in confidential briefings, Nigeria has strongly hinted that it will not tolerate any foreign incursions on a vital and strategic resource in its own backyard.
Domestically, the renewed flexing of Nigeria’s foreign policy muscles is being played out in the ongoing face-off between the new National Energy Council, which reports to the President, and Western oil companies, led by Shell’s Nigerian subsidiary, over when to end production-related gas flaring.
The government insists on a January 2008 deadline, but the companies complain that the government’s reluctance to fund its share of operating costs fully and rising political violence in the Niger Delta make this deadline unrealistic, and want it extended three years.
The Department of Petroleum Resources (DPR), the regulatory agency for the oil industry, has dismissed these claims, vowing to impose hefty fines on companies that flout the deadline.
In the early 1990’s, desperately short of hard currency, Nigeria negotiated contracts permitting the oil companies to develop new fields and recoup their investment before sharing profits.
Now, following the companies’ discovery of massive reserves, technocrats appointed by Yar’Adua to take charge of oil policy want Nigeria to get a larger slice of the pie.
That also means ending government co-financing of operating costs and demanding that the oil companies tap capital markets to bridge the shortfall.
Moreover, Tony Chukwueke, the DPR’s head, has announced plans to create an African version of Petronas, Malaysia’s state-run oil company, and transform the sclerotic Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation into a powerful oil-producing firm that can dominate the market in the Gulf of Guinea and other emerging regions.
Intense Western pressure has been brought to bear on Yar’Adua to re-consider the January deadline.
His election is being challenged in court by other candidates, and Western backing could play a role in stabilizing his government.
But his advisers, some of whom played a key role in shaping Nigeria’s foreign policy in the 1970’s, are keen to use the gas-flaring issue to demonstrate Yar’Adua’s resolve and standing as a pan-African leader.
But, as in the 1970’s, the success of Nigerian diplomacy will depend on the government’s ability to win legitimacy at home.
That will require repairing and improving damaged infrastructure, generating economic prosperity, running efficient social services, and taming the unrest in the delta region.
It is not yet clear whether Yar’Adua’s government can meet these challenges.
Nigeria’s Sick Man Democracy
How sick is Nigerian president Umaru Yar’Adua?
In May, he admitted during a live television broadcast that he suffers from a kidney ailment, but sought to quell rumors that he was terminally ill by insisting that fears for his health are greatly exaggerated and politically motivated.
There are plenty of world leaders in less-than-perfect health.
But the stakes are especially high in Nigeria, where Yar’Adua embodies the country’s delicate political balance.
With the fall of Nigeria’s dictatorship and the introduction of democracy in 1999, governors in the mainly Muslim northern provinces believed they had struck a deal with their southern counterparts on a regional rotation of the country’s presidency.
In 2007, arguing that it was their turn to choose a chief executive, they bitterly opposed a bid by then-President Olusegun Obasanjo, a southerner and a Christian, to rewrite Nigeria’s constitution in hopes of winning a third term.
Southern governors countered that the north had controlled the country through more than three decades of authoritarian rule and that a southerner should hold the presidency for years to come.
Tensions mounted.
Once it became clear that his gambit would fail, Obasanjo found a compromise: he named a man he trusted, Yar’Adua, a little-known northern governor and devout Muslim, as his preferred successor.
In April 2007, Yar’Adua won a disputed landslide presidential victory.
Western and African observers charged that widespread vote-rigging had tainted the official result, and Nigeria’s Supreme Court has yet to rule on challenges to the election’s legality.
But Yar’Adua shrugged off charges of electoral fraud, and in the first days of his presidency, he drew praise, both at home and abroad, for promises to tackle corruption and pursue an agreement with militia groups in the oil-rich, violence-plagued Niger Delta region.
In reaching out to armed groups like the Movement for Emancipation of the Niger Delta (MEND), one of his primary assets has been his vice president, Goodluck Jonathan, a native of the area.
Pacifying the Delta is vitally important, because Nigeria, the world’s eighth-largest oil producer, earns 86% of its export revenue from oil.
Attacks on pipelines have recently intensified ahead of a planned summit meeting between the government and various militia leaders, as small groups of militants stage attacks on oil infrastructure in the Delta to establish their relevance and win a potentially lucrative seat at the negotiating table.
The summit is likely to generate an agreement and positive media coverage, but northern Muslim members of parliament could complicate efforts to implement the deal.
The Nigerian government could use some good news.
Electricity shortages have intensified on Yar’Adua’s watch, producing blackouts in many areas of the country and darkening the foreign investment climate.
Rising food and energy prices pushed inflation up to 9.7% in May, from 8.2% in April.
Corruption investigations launched by Yar’Adua’s government have uncovered broader and deeper problems than many knew existed.
A battle between the president and legislature over control of federal spending has not been fully resolved.
For foreign investors, the greatest near-term concern may be a broad range of attacks from parliament and some of Yar’Adua’s economic advisors on Charles Soludo, the central bank governor, who is widely credited for Nigeria’s improved economic performance in the past several years.
Under Obasanjo, Soludo initiated much needed banking reforms and argued strenuously that Nigeria should pay its foreign debt.
But Soludo’s recent decision to create a sovereign wealth fund has ignited a firestorm.
Lawmakers complain they weren’t consulted.
Northern Muslims wonder why Soludo, a southern Christian, believes the government should horde excess cash that could be spent to relieve poverty among their constituents.
A favorite of the West, Soludo may not survive the year.
With so many challenges ahead, Nigeria can ill afford an ailing president.
Yar’Adua insists that he’s fine and that his trips to Germany for medical treatment, during the election campaign last year and again this April, have been unfairly politicized.
But there are plenty of unanswered questions about his kidney condition and rumors that he may even have Churg-Strauss Syndrome, a life-threatening autoimmune disease.
The true state of his health may matter less than public fears that he’s hiding something.
Yar’Adua’s health worries are creating risks to Nigeria’s stability that run far beyond questions about the Niger Delta or any single political issue.
If Yar’Adua were to die in office, his vice president would succeed him – returning the presidency to a southern Christian.
Nigeria’s northern Muslims are highly unlikely to accept that result without protest.
There is no reason to believe that Goodluck Jonathan will preemptively resign, and removing him from office if he assumes the presidency might well stoke unprecedented violence in the Delta.
Given the political friction and violence generated by last year’s election campaign, new balloting would prove a less-than-appealing prospect.
Only Umaru Yar’Adua’s doctors know for sure how sick he is.
But as answers begin to emerge, we will learn much more about the health of Nigeria’s fragile democracy.
The Silver Fox of Dictatorship and Democracy
MOSCOW – Throughout his years in power, Eduard Shevardnadze was known as the “silver fox,” a man who seemed to glide effortlessly from leader of Soviet Georgia and Kremlin Politburo member to Mikhail Gorbachev’s reform-minded foreign minister, before reemerging as post-Soviet Georgia’s pro-Western president, ironically opposing Gorbachev.
He regarded himself as a hero who liberated Georgia from Russia’s tight embrace.
He was also one of the most corrupt politicians his country ever saw.
By the end of his life, Shevardnadze had become a political pariah in Georgia, the West, and Russia, where he was viewed as an architect of the Soviet Union’s dissolution.
Yet, even if he was largely forgotten after the Rose Revolution of 2003, when he was ousted by his one-time protégé, Mikheil Saakashvili, his cunning and skill at manipulating political forces still enabled him to manage his legacy to his advantage.
The staunchly pro-American Saakashvili launched successful economic reforms and an all-out assault on police corruption, though he, too, eventually was accused of taking bribes and indulging autocratic impulses.
Having come to power in the revolt that overthrew the corrupt Shevardnadze, he resorted to the same Soviet-style techniques – intimidating and discrediting opponents, dispersing dissenters by force – to keep his opponents at bay.
The question Georgians have been asking ever since is whether Shevardnadze was really overthrown at all.
Knowing the extent of his unpopularity in 2003, many believe that he was ready to leave power but needed a successor who would ensure that his legacy (and his wealth) survived.
To be sure, Saakashvili became famous as Georgia’s justice minister for submitting corruption charges against the Shevardnadze family, and early in his presidency was able to reclaim for the state $15 million dollars of the Shevardnadze fortune. But Saakashvili’s government never touched Shevardnadze and his family.
Regardless of whether this theory is true, its persistence lies at the core of Shevardnadze’s legacy.
Throughout his career, he was known to play all sides, at times threatening his resignation, only to stay on – or accusing enemies of assassination plots, only to stay alive.
In the 1970s, he would flatter Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev with spectacular displays of fealty to the Kremlin, only to meet with protesting Georgian students in support of their right, in opposition to the Kremlin’s wishes, to speak Georgian, not Russian, as a state language.
Everything at which Georgians excelled under Shevardnadze in the Soviet era – entrepreneurship, education, and culture – was greatly neglected by him in the 1990s.
Similarly, whereas tens of thousands of functionaries were indicted for corruption or lost their jobs under his leadership in the 1970s, the post-Soviet Shevardnadze of the 1990s reportedly joked that he should have arrested himself, but that he deserved his wealth for his priceless political contribution.
In 1999, during the New York celebrations marking the tenth anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall, I myself heard Shevardnadze assert that Georgia had given the twentieth century two historic figures: “One who erected the Iron Curtain [Joseph Stalin], and one who tore it down” – meaning himself.
Surely, Shevardnadze’s political skills were worthy of another great Soviet politician from the Caucasus, the Armenian Anastas Mikoyan, once Stalin’s trusted trade minister and later Nikita Khrushchev’s fellow anti-Stalinist and deputy prime minister.
Mikoyan, as one joke had it, left the Kremlin one day in heavy rain and refused to share a colleague’s umbrella.
“It’s ok,” he said, “I will walk between the raindrops.”
Likewise, Shevardnadze resigned as General Secretary of the Communist Party of Georgia in the 1980s, ostensibly in protest against Soviet rule, only to be appointed Soviet Foreign Minister by Gorbachev.
Having gained the trust of Western leaders and overseen the dismantling of the Soviet empire in Eastern Europe, he then resigned in 1990, declaring that Russia – under Gorbachev – was returning to dictatorship.
That pose as democracy’s guardian earned Shevardnadze independent Georgia’s presidency at a time when the country was vulnerable to civil war.
He held the post for 11 years.
Was Shevardnadze ever honest?
Was he a democrat or a despot?
The reality of the times was that he was both.
His death brings closer the end of the Gorbachev generation of reform communists, those who – like Shevardnadze and the late Boris Yeltsin – presented a stark contrast in the late 1980s to the dour Brezhnev-era hard-liners, spurring (mostly inadvertently) the collapse of the Soviet empire and the long transition to democracy.
As Russian President Vladimir Putin’s corrupt and authoritarian rule demonstrates every day, that transition is far from finished.
Yet there is some good news.
Last year, Georgia elected its new president, Giorgi Margvelashvili, through a peaceful and legitimate process; earlier this summer, the country signed a European Union Association Agreement, implying closer connections to the West.
None of this would have been possible without Shevardnadze’s decades-long career of cunning, yet brave, political triangulation.
Putin’s Tipping Point?
NEW YORK – When incompetence in the Kremlin turns murderous, its incumbents can begin to tremble.
As news of the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 over Ukraine trickled into Russia, people with a long memory recalled the Soviet Union’s attack, 31 years ago this September, on Korean Air Lines Flight 007, and its political consequences.
Back then, the Kremlin first lied to the world by saying that it had nothing to do with the missing KAL plane.
Later it claimed that the South Korean jet was on an American spy mission.
But, within the Soviet leadership, the incident was a tipping point.
It ended the career of Marshal Nikolai Ogarkov, Chief of the General Staff and a hardliner of the hardest sort, whose inconsistent and unconvincing efforts to justify the downing of the plane proved deeply embarrassing to the Kremlin.
Ogarkov’s ineptness (and inept mendacity), together with the mounting failure since 1979 of the Soviet Union’s war in Afghanistan, exposed the system’s advanced decrepitude.
The stagnation that had begun during Leonid Brezhnev’s rule deepened after his death in 1982.
His successors, first the KGB’s Yuri Andropov and then the Communist Party Central Committee’s Konstantin Chernenko, not only had one foot in the grave when they came to power, but were also completely unequipped to reform the Soviet Union.
The huge loss of life in Afghanistan (equal to the United States’ losses in Vietnam, but in a far shorter period of time) already suggested to many that the Kremlin was becoming a danger to itself; the attack on a civilian airliner seemed to confirm that emerging view.
It was this realization that spurred Mikhail Gorbachev’s rise to power, as well as support among the leadership for Gorbachev’s reformist policies of perestroika and glasnost.
Of course, history is not destiny, but one can be sure that at least some in Russian President Vladimir Putin’s entourage, if not Putin himself, have been thinking about Ogarkov’s failure and its impact on the Soviet elite.
After all, Kremlin leaders, Putin included, define themselves through what was, not what could be.
Indeed, Putin’s rationale for annexing Crimea closely resembles Brezhnev’s reasoning for invading Afghanistan: to confound enemies seeking to surround the country.
In 2004, speaking to Russian veterans about the Afghan invasion, Putin explained that there were legitimate geopolitical reasons to protect the Soviet Central Asian border, just as in March he cited security concerns to justify his Ukrainian land grab.
In the Brezhnev era, expansionist policies reflected the country’s new energy-derived wealth.
Putin’s military build-up and modernization of the past decade was also fueled by energy exports.
But Russia’s latest energy windfall has masked Putin’s incompetent economic management, with growth and government revenues now entirely reliant on the hydrocarbons sector.
Moreover, Putin’s incompetence extends far beyond the economy.
His security forces remain brutal and unaccountable; in some parts of the country, they have merged with criminal gangs.
His managed judiciary provides no comfort to ordinary people; and the country’s military installations, submarines, oilrigs, mining shafts, hospitals, and retirement homes regularly blow up, collapse, or sink, owing to neglect and zero liability.
When public support for Putin’s annexation of Crimea wanes – as it will – his failings will shine more starkly in the light of the MH17 catastrophe.
If the Russian state functioned well, Putin could continue to withstand pressure from opposition leaders.
But the opposition’s charge that Putin’s regime is composed of “swindlers and thieves” will resonate more strongly, because Russians can now see the results all around them.
By making himself, in effect, the state, Putin, like the gerontocracy that collapsed with Gorbachev’s rise, is increasingly viewed as responsible for all state failures.
And though thoughtful Russians may be hostages to Putin’s arrogance and blunders, the rest of the world is not.
Indeed, his partners – particularly the other BRICS countries (Brazil, India, China, and South Africa) – are now unlikely to be able to turn a blind eye to his contempt for international law and for his neighbors’ national sovereignty, as they did during their recent Brazilian summit.
And Europe’s last blinders about Putin seem to have fallen, with the result that serious sanctions are almost certain to be imposed.
Putin is only 61, a decade younger than the leaders who led the Soviet Union to the precipice, and the constitution permits him to remain in power for at least another ten years.
But with GDP up by just 1.3% in 2013 – and with sanctions likely to hasten the economy’s decline – patriotic pride will not be able to shield him much longer.
By overplaying its hand in Afghanistan and lying to the world about the downing of KAL 007, the Soviet regime exposed and accelerated the rot that made its collapse inevitable.
There is no reason to believe in a different fate for Putin’s effort to re-establish Russia as an imperial power.
Nixon Then, China Now
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA – When US President Richard Nixon embarked on his historic trip to China 40 years ago, he could not have imagined what his gamble would unleash.
The immediate diplomatic impact, of course, was to reshape Eurasia’s geopolitical balance and put the Soviet Union on the defensive.
But the long-term outcome of America’s rapprochement with China became visible only recently, with the economic integration of the People’s Republic into the world economy.
Had Nixon not acted in 1972, China’s self-imposed isolation would have continued.
Deng Xiaoping’s reform and opening of China to the world would have been far more difficult. amp#160;
Four decades after the “Nixon shock,” no one disputes that China has benefited enormously Today, the impoverished and autarkic country that Nixon visited is history.
Global reintegration has turned China into an economic powerhouse.
It is the world’s largest exporter in volume terms, and is the world’s second-largest economy.
China’s presence is felt around the world, from mines in Africa to Apple stores in the United States.
As we reflect on China’s remarkable progress since 1972, it is also an opportune time to consider how China continues to fall short in overcoming systemic obstacles to long-term success.
Because China is widely regarded as a winner of globalization, it is natural to assume that the country has developed the means to meet its challenges.
But, while China has implemented policies to maximize the benefits of free trade (undervaluing its currency, investing in infrastructure, and luring foreign manufacturing to increase competitiveness), the country remains unprepared for deeper integration with the world.
One sign of this is China’s lack of the necessary institutions and rules.
For example, China has become a significant player in providing economic development assistance (often tied to its strategy for acquiring natural resources).
Its loans and grants to Africa have now surpassed those made by the World Bank.
But China has no specialized agency in charge of international development assistance.
As a result, its foreign-aid programs are poorly coordinated and often seem counterproductive.
Instead of earning goodwill, they are viewed as part of a sinister neocolonial plot to grab natural resources in poverty-stricken nations.amp#160;
Another example is China’s lack of an immigration policy.
Even though China is beginning to attract labor from around the world, it has yet to promulgate a comprehensive legal framework that would allow the country to compete for the most talented people or to deal with the complexities of international migration.
A third example is the absence of independent policy-research organizations.
Owing to political control and inadequate professional development, government-run research institutions can seldom provide the high-quality, unbiased analysis of global issues on which sound policymaking depends.
Perhaps most importantly, two decades of rapid GDP growth have masked serious weaknesses on the economic front.
Because China continues to favor state capitalism and discriminates against the private sector, it lacks strong private firms that can take on Western multinational giants.
Except for Huawei, Lenovo, and perhaps Haier (which is nominally collectively owned), there are no private Chinese firms with a global footprint.
Until now, China has not paid dearly for this.
Its role in the global economy is confined to low-to-medium-end processing and assembly functions.
The most critical, sophisticated, and profitable parts of the value chain – research and development, product design, branding, marketing, service, and distribution – are occupied by American, European, Japanese, South Korean, and Taiwanese companies.
China simply “outsources” these high value-added functions to the likes of Apple and Walmart.
Of course, China does have huge firms, but they are inefficient state-owned behemoths that owe their size and profitability to their legal monopolies and government subsidies.
They may have the heft needed for global operations, but they lack the motivation to compete with world-class Western firms and are greeted with suspicion and fear around the world.
A China deeply embedded in globalization also needs a large pool of talented people, comparable to the best that the West can produce.
Today’s China lacks that pool.
While tens of millions of Chinese young people display impressive innate abilities, the country’s system of higher education does an abysmal job cultivating their talents.
For most, the curriculum is largely obsolete, and skewed toward rote learning of theory at the expense of basic analytical and critical-thinking skills.
Education in social sciences and humanities is particularly deficient, owing to lack of investment in these disciplines and excessive political control of curricula.
As a result, Chinese graduate from colleges and universities having learned relatively little about the outside world in fields such as anthropology, sociology, international relations, comparative literature, and history.
Unless China reforms its ossified system, the country will not be able to produce enough highly trained talent to compete with the world’s best and brightest.
None of these shortcomings – the lack of globalization-friendly institutions, rules, corporations, and talent – is an insurmountable obstacle.
The real question is whether China can remove them under a one-party regime that is hostile to the liberal values that inspire and underpin globalization.
Nixon himself was probably not bothered by the nature of the Chinese regime four decades ago.
The fact that the question must be addressed now attests to China’s astonishing progress since then.
But it also shows that China’s long march toward global integration remains unfinished.
The Assad Dead End
PARIS – Forget principles and morality.
Forget, or try to forget, the quarter-million deaths for which Bashar al-Assad is responsible, directly or indirectly, since choosing to respond with violence to a peaceful uprising of the Syrian people.
Set aside the fact that Assad’s forces have caused 10-15 times more civilian deaths thus far than the Islamic State, whose horrific execution videos have overshadowed the Syrian dictator’s invisible massacres.
But even if you can purge all of this from your thoughts, a policy for Syria that posits Assad as an “alternative” to the Islamic State is simply not viable.
Assad, after all, literally unleashed the Islamic State’s current savagery: in May 2011, he released hundreds of Islamic radicals from prison, quickly supplying the infant group with fighters and leaders.
He then methodically shelled positions held by moderate rebels, while no less methodically sparing the Islamic State’s stronghold in Raqqa.
And then, in mid-2014, he allowed Iraqi elements of the Islamic State to find sanctuary in eastern Syria.
In other words, Assad created the monster that he is now pretending to fight.
Is all that not a little much for a potential ally?
Can working with Assad possibly provide a sound basis for what is supposed to be a common effort?
The bottom line is that Assad has no interest in winning.
The man who now holds himself up as civilization’s last bulwark against the Islamic State is also the last man who wants to see it eliminated.
After all, does a chess player, even a bad one, intentionally sacrifice his most powerful piece?
Do any of us ever tear up our insurance policies?
Do we really believe that Assad and his cronies are too stupid to have realized that their political survival depends on that of the Islamic State and on maintaining themselves as the keepers of the gate through which the rest of us must pass to wage war against it?
“Of course not,” the advocates of working with him concede.
“But let’s take a two-step approach.
Let’s defeat the Islamic State and then worry about Assad.”
But this, too, assumes that dictators are more stupid than they really are.
Worse, it ignores that politics follows its own logic, or at least its own dynamics.
What the sorcerer’s apprentices who want to work with Assad ignore is that they would most likely have a great deal of trouble, when the time comes, distancing themselves from an ally who would not be shy about claiming his share of the victory.
As a result, jihadism would rush back in, though perhaps in a different guise.
“Bashar al-Assad is the Syrian state,” the same people say.
“And we must not commit the fatal error of destroying the state.”
But this argument is not valid, either.
The state has already failed: Assad's regime controls only a fifth of Syria’s territory, and the remaining four-fifths will never willingly resubmit to its terrifying control.
If the regime prevails, Syria’s citizens will continue to flee in droves to Turkey, Lebanon, and Europe.
In fact, Assad’s regime cares so little for its pseudo-state that it abandons its own soldiers caught beyond the territory it controls, as occurred in Tabqa, near Raqqa.
Baathist Syria, whatever its friends in the Kremlin and elsewhere say, is dead and buried.
And no military trompe l’œil can revive it.
But the supposed realists refuse to accept reality.
Just as it was necessary to ally with Stalin to defeat Hitler, they claim, we should not be afraid to play the Assad card to rid ourselves of the Islamic State.
Yes, jihadism is the fascism of our day, infected with plans, ideas, and a will to purity comparable to those of the Nazis.
I was one of the first to suggest the comparison some 20 years ago.
And yet it is absurd to compare the power of the two phenomena, or to suggest that in the confrontation with the butchers of Mosul and Palmyra, the democracies face a strategic challenge analogous to that of the Nazi Wehrmacht.
This historical leap is possible only for people whose political irresponsibility is matched by their proclivity for lazy analogy.
Make no mistake: the Islamic State is strong.
But it is not so strong as to leave those who would fight it with only the politics of the lesser of two evils.
The West must decide what to do.
In the aftermath of last week’s peace talks in Vienna – which convened the United States, Russia, Iran, China, Egypt, Turkey, Saudi Arabia and other Gulf states, Jordan, Lebanon, and key European Union members – that question becomes increasingly difficult.
Should we equip what remains of the Free Syrian Army?
Should we deal with the few remaining Alawite leaders whose hands are not stained with blood, or those members of Assad’s clan who chose exile early and thus were not involved in the massacres?
Perhaps there is still time to bring together, on neutral ground, some of the elements that comprised the old Syria.
Or perhaps more radical solutions – of the type implemented in Germany and Japan after World War II – are now required.
All of these paths remain open, but they are narrowing.
And none of them depends on the political survival of Bashar al-Assad.
Nobel Injustice
SINGAPORE – Martti Ahtisaari is a great man.
He deserves the Nobel Peace Prize for his life work.
But it was a mistake for the Norwegian Nobel Committee to cite his work in Aceh as a reason for giving him the prize.
As a recent story by Agence France Presse put it, Ahtisaari’s “most notable achievement was overseeing the 2005 reconciliation of the Indonesian government and the Free Aceh Movement rebels, bringing an end to a three-decade-old conflict that killed some 15,000 people.”
But it was Indonesia’s people and leaders who should have received the Nobel Peace Prize for the Aceh political miracle.
More fundamentally, the mentioning of Aceh in this Nobel citation raises serious questions about the mental maps used by the Nobel Prize Committee in making these awards.
The committee members increasingly seem to be prisoners of the past.
They continue to assume that we live in an era of Western domination of world history.
But that era is over.
Increasingly, the rest of the world has gone from being objects of world history to becoming its subjects.
By giving the Nobel Peace Prize to the Indonesians instead of a European mediator for Aceh, the Nobel Prize Committee would have recognized that the world has changed.
Three other big benefits would also have resulted from giving the award to an Indonesian.
First, the West associates the Islamic world with violence and instability.
Few believe that Muslims are capable of solving their political problems by themselves.
But this is precisely what the Aceh story was all about.
Two key Indonesian leaders, President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono and Vice President Jusuf Kalla, showed remarkable political skill and courage in working out the peace deal for Aceh.
A Nobel Peace Prize for them would have shown the West that Muslims can be good peacemakers and, equally important, it would have sent a message of hope to the Islamic populations of the world that have seen their self-esteem eroded by stories of failure.
Aceh was essentially a spectacular Muslim success story.
Hence, the Nobel Peace Prize Committee has squandered a valuable opportunity to send out a message of hope to the world’s 1.2 billion Muslims, one that would have rid the world of the grand global illusion that peacemaking is a “white man’s burden.”
No Brexit
LONDON – Among the multiple existential challenges facing the European Union this year – refugees, populist politics, German-inspired austerity, government bankruptcy in Greece and perhaps Portugal – one crisis is well on its way to resolution.
Britain will not vote to leave the EU.
This confident prediction may seem to be contradicted by polls showing roughly 50% support for “Brexit” in the June referendum.
And British public opinion may move even further in the “Out” direction for a while longer, as euroskeptics ridicule the “new deal” for Britain agreed at the EU summit on February 19.
Nonetheless, it is probably time for the world to stop worrying.
The politics and economics of the question virtually guarantee that British voters will back EU membership, even though this may not become apparent in public opinion polls until a few weeks, or even days, before the vote.
To understand the dynamics that strongly favor an “In” vote, start with the politics.
Until this month’s deal, Britain’s leaders were not seriously making the case against Brexit.
After all, Prime Minister David Cameron and his government had to pretend that they would contemplate a breakup if the EU rejected their demands.
Under these circumstances, it was impossible for either Labour politicians or business leaders to advocate an EU deal that Cameron himself was not yet ready to promote.
The Out lobby therefore enjoyed a virtual monopoly of public attention.
This situation may briefly persist, even though the EU deal has now been agreed, because Cameron has no wish to antagonize his party’s implacable euroskeptics until it is absolutely necessary; but as the referendum approaches, this political imbalance will abruptly reverse.
One reason is Cameron’s decision to release his ministers from party discipline during the referendum campaign.