This new reality also demands a different type of diplomacy – one that recognizes the diverse interests of the continent.
For example, an emerging power such as Brazil wants more respect on the world stage.
Obama blundered when he dismissed a 2010 deal on Iran’s nuclear program mediated by Brazil and Turkey (despite having earlier endorsed the talks).
Other countries might benefit from US efforts to promote democracy and socioeconomic ties, as Obama’s recent trips to Mexico and Costa Rica show.
Trade relations provide another all-important lever.
President Sebastian Piñera of Chile visited the White House earlier this week to discuss, among other things, the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), an ambitious trade agreement that might encompass New Zealand, Singapore, Australia, Mexico, Canada, and Japan.
President Ollanta Humala of Peru is expected in the White House next week, while Vice President Joe Biden is scheduled to visit Latin America soon after.
Language and culture matter, too.
Given the extraordinary growth of Latinos’ influence in the US, it is almost inconceivable that America could lose its unique status in the region to China or Russia, let alone Iran.
Gone are the days when military muscle and the politics of subversion could secure US influence – in Latin America or anywhere else.
A world power today is one that can combine economic vigor and a popular culture with global outreach on the basis of shared interests.
The US is better positioned than any other power in this respect, particularly when it comes to applying these advantages in its immediate vicinity.
The “New Normal” for Growth
Cambridge – Markets are bubbling over signs of “green shoots” in the global economy.
An increasing number of investors see a strong rebound coming, first in China, then in the United States, and then in Europe and the rest of the world.
Even the horrible growth numbers of the last couple quarters don’t seem to discourage this optimistic thinking.
The deeper the plunge, the stronger the rebound, some analysts say.
Perhaps these optimists are right.
But how strong an expansion can one reasonably expect when the worst is finally over?
Is the “new normal” going to be the same as the “old normal” of the boom years from 2002 to 2007?
I have trouble seeing how the US and China, the main engines of global growth for two decades, can avoid settling on a notably lower average growth rate than they enjoyed before the crisis.
Let’s start with the US, the epicenter of the financial crisis, and still the most important economy in the world.
In the best of worlds, the US financial sector will emerge from the crisis smaller and more heavily regulated.
Not to worry, some economists, say. The US grew rapidly in the 1950’s and 1960’s with a relatively heavily regulated banking system.
Why not again?
Sure, but the early post-war financial sector wasn’t called upon in those days to support nearly as diverse and sophisticated an economy as it is today.
If authorities set the clock back several decades on banking regulation, can we be so sure they will not also set the clock back on income?
US consumption, the single biggest driver of global growth, is surely headed to a lower level, on the back of weak housing prices, rising unemployment, and falling pension wealth.
During the boom, US consumption rose to more than 70% of GDP.
In the wake of the crisis, it could fall down towards 60%.
And what about the major political shift the US has experienced?
Tired of go-go growth, voters now look for more attention to addressing environmental concerns, health-care issues, and income inequality.
But achieving these laudable goals will be expensive, coming on top of the giant budget deficits the US is running to counter the financial crisis.
Higher taxes and greater regulation cannot be good for growth.
True, there is room to run the government more efficiently, especially in the areas of education and health care.
But will these savings be enough to offset the burden of a significantly larger overall government?
I hope so, and certainly the Obama administration is a breath of fresh air after the stunning ineptness of the Bush-Cheney years.
But governments all over the world are always convinced that their expansions can be substantially financed by efficiency gains, and that dream usually proves chimerical.
Chinese growth is set to slow over the longer run, as well.
Even before the financial crisis, it was clear that China could not continue indefinitely on its growth trajectory of 10% or more.
Environmental and water problems were mounting.
It was becoming increasingly clear that as China continued to grow faster than almost anyone else, the rest of the world’s import capacity (and tolerance) could not keep up with China’s export machine.
China was becoming too big.
With the financial crisis, the Chinese economy’s necessary adjustment towards more domestic consumption has become far more urgent.
True, even as exports have collapsed, the government has managed to prop up growth with a huge spending and credit expansion.
But, while necessary, this strategy threatens to upset the delicate balance between private- and public-sector expansion that has underpinned China’s expansion so far.
The growing role of the government, and the shrinking role of the private sector, almost surely portends slower growth later this decade.
Europe, too, faces challenges, and not just from the fact that it now has the worst downturn of the world’s major economic regions, with Germany’s government warning of a surreal 6% decline in GDP for 2009.
The ongoing financial crisis will almost surely slow the integration of the accession countries in Central and Eastern Europe, whose young populations are the single most dynamic source of growth in Europe today.
Not all regions will necessarily have slower economic expansion in the decade ahead.
Assuming continuing reforms in countries such as Brazil, India, South Africa, and Russia, emerging markets could well fill some of the growth gap left by the largest economies.
But, in all likelihood, after years of steadily revising up its estimates of trend global growth, the International Monetary Fund will start revising them down.  
Even after the crisis, global growth is almost certain to remain lower than the pre-crisis boom years for some time to come.
This change may be good for the environment, for income equality, and for stability.
Governments are right to worry about the quality of growth, not just its speed.
In no small part, as the French are fond of saying, plus ça change, plus c’est la même chose.
Thus, we can safely predict ongoing difficulty throughout Europe, as the countries of the south, in particular, struggle to reduce public spending in order to align their fiscal policies with actual economic capacity.
What might be different this year is that France, rather than Greece and Spain, could well be at the center of the storm.
This would pose fundamental, even existential questions for Germany, the other half of a tandem that has been at the heart of the European project since World War II.
The likelihood that Europe as a whole will experience little, if any, economic growth will make matters all the more difficult for officials in governments, banks, and regional institutions.
Likewise, the Middle East remains in the early phase of a revolutionary transition.
In a year, Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi will almost certainly still be in power, but it is not so clear how he will use that power – and what Egypt will look like politically and economically as a result.
Recent disagreements over the drafting of a new constitution reveal a deeply divided society and a government that appears to equate (and confuse) majority rule with democracy.
By contrast, Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s regime is likely to have been ousted before the year’s end.
But, as we have seen elsewhere in the region, it will prove far more difficult to put something benign and effective in its place.
Civil war along sectarian lines could well predominate, or fighting between the various anti-Assad opposition groups could erupt.
There is also a real possibility of major upheavals in both Bahrain and Jordan.
Finally, the friction in the Asia-Pacific region is unlikely to diminish; in fact, it is far more likely to intensify.
The chance of a military incident involving China and one of its neighbors – be it Japan, the Philippines, or Vietnam – cannot be ignored, and it remains to be seen whether the region’s diplomatic circuits can carry the load.
New leadership in many of the region’s countries, including China, Japan, and South Korea, make the future even more uncertain.
What else can we expect in the 2013?
One disappointing probability is that global efforts to fashion new arrangements to promote trade, slow the pace of climate change, or regulate cyberspace are likely to come to naught.
Large-scale multilateralism, in which most of the world’s 193 United Nations-recognized countries meet to negotiate accords, has become too unwieldy.
Instead, the most we can hope for are small accords among select governments or accords that tackle only a part of much larger problems.
The biggest challenge for the world may well be what to do about Iran’s nuclear program.
Iran has put into place much of what is needed to produce nuclear weapons.
At the same time, sanctions that have been imposed by a substantial set of countries are taking a significant toll on the Iranian economy.
There are signs of a growing debate inside the country about whether to press ahead with nuclear weapons – and thus risk not only economic ruin, but also military attack – rather than to accept a diplomatic compromise.
Such a pact would place limits on Iran’s nuclear activities and require that it open itself up to more international inspection than it has ever permitted.
The main question this year is thus likely to be whether an outcome can be negotiated that is enough for Iran but not too much for the United States, Israel, and others.
What is certain, however, is that 2013 will be defined in a fundamental way by whether military action against Iran occurs or is averted.
One more country needs to be added to the list of “unpredictables”: the US.
The question here is whether the American political system can meet the challenges that it faces, many of which it has aggravated.
The US remains the greatest economic and military power in the world, but questions about its solvency have in turn cast doubt on its ability to act and lead in the world.
Recent events in Washington have been less than reassuring.
Global developments not just in the year ahead, but also during the next decade and beyond, will depend in large part on whether the US can better manage its domestic challenges and divisions.
The New Revolt of the Masses
PARIS – Is the current economic crisis uniting the democratic world in anger as much as in fear?
In France, with many factories closing, a wave of executive hostage-taking – “bossnapping,” as this newfangled crime is called – is agitating board rooms and police across the country.
In the United States, big bonuses given to executives from firms receiving billions of dollars in taxpayer bailouts – the insurance giant AIG, in particular – has infuriated public opinion, with a populist press and Congress fueling popular rage.
Similarly, in Great Britain, an increasingly inquisitive and critical public is now lumping together bankers and members of Parliament in a common climate of suspicion.
Is the current crisis creating or revealing a growing split between rulers and ruled?
Populist anger is one of the most predictable, and certainly inevitable, consequences of today’s financial and economic crisis.
The unifying factor behind this rising “anger” is rejection of both real and perceived inequality – inequality in both treatment and economic conditions.
In terms of the French Republic’s credo, “Liberty, Equality, Fraternity,” the first principle, liberty, became the motto of our age after the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989; the second is gaining greater precedence today as the economy falters.
Can a renewed quest for equality close the traditional gap that has existed between America and Europe?
Will the “American dream” be Europeanized?
And, with their country’s economy humbled, will countless Americans’ secret hope that they, too, might one day be rich now give way to European-style envy?
It would be dangerous for America if things went that far.
America is not France – at least not yet.
But it seems obvious that increasing economic inequality in the US and, indeed, throughout the OECD, has stoked a perception of injustice and growing anger.
In the US, as the financial sector soared, the manufacturing base contracted sharply.
It is clear that all over the western world, particularly in the last 20 years, those at the top of the income ladder have done much better than those in the middle or at the bottom.
While the rich got richer, the poor did not get poorer, but the gap between rich and poor expanded significantly.
The current crisis may have seriously eroded the wealth of many of the very rich, destroying their assets in an unprecedented way.
But the fear, if not despair, of the poor and not-so-poor has increased tremendously.
Of course, inequalities between countries are one thing, and inequalities within countries are quite another.
But today the two processes are taking place simultaneously and at an accelerating pace.
Anger is no longer restricted to extreme anti-capitalist, anti-globalization forces.
A deep feeling of injustice is spreading across large swaths of society.
This sense of injustice is only partly contained by political considerations in the US, thanks to the “Obama factor,” a rare phenomenon that can be described as the restoration of trust in one’s political leaders.
But the more you distrust politics and your politicians, the more anger will manifest itself in uncontrollable ways, especially if your country is imbued with a romantic “revolutionary” tradition and culture.
This is obviously the case in France, where, contrary to what the French historian François Furet thought in the immediate aftermath of communism’s collapse 20 years ago, the French Revolution is neither over nor a closed chapter in history.
In France the decreasing popularity of President Nicolas Sarkozy and of his main “classical” opponent, the Socialist party (still deeply divided and in search of a leader), favors the rise of the extreme left behind the energy and charisma of its young leader, Olivier Besancenot.
In the US, the reverse is true.
President Barack Obama’s popularity remains largely intact and acts as a kind of buffer against an uncontrolled explosion of anger.
It is possible, but far from certain, that what Obama describes as a “glimmer” of hope in the US could be sufficient to keep popular anger at bay and bring about a recovery in trust in politics and politicians.
And European discontent will probably continue to grow, whatever happens in the US.
Economic recovery, when it comes, will probably start in America, but it is likely that the public’s sharpened sense of injustice, and the resulting resentments, will linger, poisoning politics in the Western world long after the crisis has passed.
The New Transatlantic Stalemate
WASHINGTON, DC – Senator Barack Obama’s recent European tour hints that the Illinois senator is Europe’s choice to be America’s next president.
But Europeans should not expect too much.
While Obama would likely restore civility and politeness to transatlantic discourse, the sources of friction are more profound.
The geo-political interests of Europe and America have been drawing apart, and may well continue to do so, no matter who is president.
Halting this progressive alienation will require major changes in outlook and policy on both sides of the Atlantic.
The United States will have to stop defining its transatlantic interests in terms of its hegemonic mindset, and Europe will have to take fuller charge of its own region.
To call interests “geopolitical” underscores the influence of geography in shaping those interests.
As Charles de Gaulle and Winston Churchill once famously agreed: “When all is said and done, Great Britain is an island, France the cape of a continent; America another world.”
Both understood that for centuries the English Channel has been a formidable geopolitical barrier to a durable sharing of interests between Britain and France.
If the Channel has been such a barrier, durable bonds across the Atlantic seem implausible.
In other words, from this perspective, the world’s two richest and most powerful economic spaces, the European Union and the US, are bound to be rivals, even when they are allies.
A shared enemy did underpin America’s alliance with parts of Europe over much of the twentieth century.
That enemy, however, was also European – first Germany, then Russia.
In effect, the shared transatlantic geopolitical interest was between the US and one part of Europe against another.
With the Soviet Union’s collapse in 1991, the transatlantic alliance confronted new realities.
The interests of both the EU and the US were expansively redefined.
With no massive Soviet army in the middle of Germany, Europe was no longer firmly divided into Western and Eastern hemispheres. Mitteleuropa revived and Germany reunified.
Western Europe evolved from a “Community” to a “Union,” and its states became less firmly bound to American protection.
The Soviet demise encouraged US political elites to construct a “unipolar” view of America’s global position and interest.
This trend accelerated as the current Bush administration attempted to construct unilateral global hegemony out of the “War on Terror,” which provoked growing disquiet in “Old Europe.”
While America’s invasion of Afghanistan was widely seen as justified, the Anglo-American invasion of Iraq produced an open break between the US and its two major continental allies, France and Germany, which were supported by Russia and China.
A great Eurasian bloc suddenly appeared in opposition to America’s hegemonic global pretensions, prefiguring a new fluidity in geopolitical relationships, if not a tectonic shift in alignments.
The effectiveness of Franco-German resistance to American hegemony was qualified, though, by the reactions of other European states.
The United Kingdom’s Prime Minister Tony Blair did his best to resurrect Churchill’s special relationship, and Britain was joined by Italy and Spain, together with nearly all the states of New Europe.
The Franco-German couple could no longer claim to speak for the EU as a whole.
European plans for a Common Foreign and Security Policy and for closer defense cooperation seemed brutally discredited.
Slowly, however, Europe has seemed to grow more cohesive in its opposition to American unipolar policies and pretensions.
And, after his re-election in 2004, Bush grew more conciliatory.
Blair’s departure left Bush increasingly isolated diplomatically, with changes of government in Berlin and Paris bringing only superficial improvements.
Deteriorating economic conditions at home implied stricter limits on American intervention abroad.
It is difficult to know where this uneasy transatlantic détente of 2008 will lead.
It is now clear that European and American geopolitical interests are not automatically in harmony.
Europeans do not accept the Bush administration’s strategic vision, and the US is unable to pursue that vision without European support.
The reasons for Europe’s defection are eminently geopolitical.
To Europe’s east lies Russia, to its south the Muslim world.
Europe needs good relations with both in order to penetrate growing markets, tap sources for raw materials and energy, and ensure its own domestic stability, whereas many Europeans believe that US policies alienate these regions.
In these circumstances, the transatlantic alliance survives less from genuinely shared interests than from inertia.
Can anything restore the old transatlantic harmony?
A forceful revival of Russian imperialism, or a war of civilizations with the Muslim world, might provide a threat so overbearing that a frightened Europe would resume its Cold War dependency on America.
But Europe will not be eager to embrace such a future.
It may be careful not to alienate America, but it will struggle to build a collaborative relationship with its regional neighbors.
Of course, America’s definitions of its role in the world may change.
America’s unipolar expectations have not been ratified by events.
Indeed, there is now considerable opposition to that vision in the US itself.
Yet today too much power is agglomerated in Washington to be contained successfully within a purely national constitutional structure.
Checks and balances at home require a correlative balance of power abroad.
Constructing such a balanced state system for itself on a regional scale has been postwar Europe’s great achievement.
Implementing that system has depended heavily on a supportive America.
Perhaps it is time for Europe to return the favor.
Balancing, it seems, is always necessary, even among friends.
And among friends balancing is also more likely to be successful.
That Europe can find the will, the means, and the confidence to play that role cannot be taken for granted.
What does seem clear is that a cohesive and strong Europe on good terms with its neighbors will not fit easily into a close transatlantic alliance with an America actively pursuing global hegemony.
America by Proxy?
PARIS – The demise of the Roman Empire resulted from a combination of strategic overreach and excessive delegation of security responsibilities to newcomers.
Without making undue comparisons, the question for the United States today is whether it can remain the world’s leading power while delegating to others or to technological tools the task of protecting its global influence.
Drones and allies – non-human weapons and non-American soldiers – have become central to America’s military doctrine.
Leading the world in technological prowess while leading it from behind in terms of combat forces on the ground, if not in the air, America’s shift of emphasis is impossible to ignore.
First there was the combined French and British action in Libya that led to the overthrow of Colonel Muammar el-Qaddafi’s regime; then came French intervention in Mali, and now Israeli airstrikes in Syria.
Each case is, of course, utterly different, but all have something in common: America has not been on the front line of intervention.
Yet, without direct US military support or indirect (and in some cases implicit) political support, it is difficult to imagine that such risky operations would have been launched.
Have the British, French, and even Israelis become armed extensions of the US in their respective spheres of influence?
If so, the contrast with the recent past could hardly be starker.
In the aftermath of the terror attacks of September 11, 2001, Americans simply could not envisage sharing their security responsibilities with others.
At best, Europeans could be America’s “cleaning ladies,” to use the indelicate analogy coined at the time by some neo-conservative thinkers during George W. Bush’s first term in office.
But, even before September 2001, some US conservatives had expressed disdain toward their European allies.
I still remember the warning uttered by a top US diplomat in Strasbourg in the early 1990’s, on the eve of the Balkan wars. “If we leave Europeans in charge of themselves, they will prove irresponsible, divisive, and suicidal, and then we will have to rescue them from themselves.”
Today, Americans are only too happy to rely on the military competence and interventionist inclinations of some (in fact, very few) of their European friends.
It would be easy to interpret this shift as a response to the human and economic cost of America’s interventions in Afghanistan and Iraq.
The reality is more complex.
America’s newfound taste for delegating military responsibilities to others is not the result of a series of events, but the product of a long-term process driven by America’s simultaneous ambivalence toward the world and active engagement with it.
Is it worth fighting for a world that cannot be saved, and that only invites murky, inconclusive entanglements?
From this perspective, America’s involvement in World War I and, even more so, in World War II, are exceptions to the rule.
The US troops that landed on Normandy beaches in June 1944 were animated by a strong sense of mission.
They knew that they were fighting evil in an environment that was historically and culturally familiar.
In Vietnam, US soldiers, many of them black, often did not understand why they were fighting.
In Iraq, their equivalents were very often Latinos for whom integration into American society – including, for many, the promise of permanent residence or citizenship – was at least as important as toppling Saddam Hussein.
When a country engages in the world, its authority stems from its willingness and ability to take “personal” risks.
Its authority is diminished when the perceived gap between the value of its population’s lives and the lives of its enemies is too wide.
In this respect, drone warfare reinforces the perverse nature of “asymmetrical wars.”
In her recent book Drone Warfare: Killing by Remote Control, Medea Benjamin, a peace activist and shrewd observer of international relations, makes a crucial point: “While drones make it easier to kill some bad guys, they also make it easier to go to war.”
Likewise, delegating security to allies can have perverse psychological effects.
This is particularly true in the Middle East.
How can the US exert pressure on Israel to engage in serious negotiations with the Palestinians, or to refrain from attacking Iran, when it offers encouragement – if only through public silence – to Israeli military intervention in Syria?
If America’s purpose is to deliver a message to Iran – “Beware, you could be the next target” – many will question its sincerity about restraining Israel.
For some, the US has moved from too much engagement under Bush to doing too little under Barack Obama.
For others, Obama is merely pursuing Bush’s foreign policy through other means – drones instead of soldiers.
The reality is probably somewhere in between.
But it is clearly not beneficial to the US, its allies, or global stability.
Precisely because America remains indispensable to international security, one wishes that its leaders would act in a more discerning way.
In international politics, as in education, there is no such thing as care by proxy.
If responsibility is to be exercised effectively, it cannot be delegated to machines or other countries.
The Measurement of Hope
SEATTLE – The lives of the world’s poorest people have improved more rapidly in the last 15 years than ever before, yet I am optimistic that we will do even better in the next 15 years.
After all, human knowledge is increasing.
We can see this concretely in the development and declining costs of new medicines like HIV drugs, and in the creation of new seeds that allow poor farmers to be more productive.
Once such tools are invented, they are never un-invented – they just improve.
Skeptics point out that we have a hard time delivering new tools to the people who need them.
This is where innovation in the measurement of governmental and philanthropic performance is making a big difference.
That process – setting clear goals, picking the right approach, and then measuring results to get feedback and refine the approach continually –helps us to deliver tools and services to everybody who will benefit.
Innovation to reduce the delivery bottleneck is critical.
Following the path of the steam engine long ago, progress is not “doomed to be rare and erratic.”
We can, in fact, make it commonplace.
Though I am an optimist, I am not blind to the problems that we face, or to the challenges that we must overcome to accelerate progress in the next 15 years.
The two that worry me the most are the possibility that we will be unable to raise the funds needed to pay for health and development projects, and that we will fail to align around clear goals to help the poorest.
The good news is that many developing countries have growing economies that allow them to devote more resources to helping their poorest people.
India, for example, is becoming less dependent on aid, and eventually will not need it.
Some countries, like the United Kingdom, Norway, Sweden, South Korea, and Australia, are increasing their foreign-aid budgets; others, even traditionally generous donors like Japan and the Netherlands, have reduced theirs.
The direction of many countries, including the United States, France, Germany, and Canada, is unclear.
Still, aid is critical.
It helps people in the poorest countries to meet their basic needs.
It funds innovation in the creation of new tools and services, and in their delivery.
Unfortunately, aid budgets are threatened by fiscal weakness in almost all of the advanced countries.
Unless voters hear about the positive impact that their generosity is having, they will inevitably focus on issues closer to home.
A single story, true or not, about a small amount of aid being misused can often cloud the entire field.
Imagine how you would feel about investing if every article you read were only about stocks that did poorly, with no reporting on the big successes.
Historically, aid was discussed largely in terms of the total amount of money invested.
But now that we are measuring indicators like child mortality more precisely, people are able to see the impact that aid has in stark terms – that it means the difference between, say, giving people access to HIV treatment and letting them die. When framed this way, aid has a better chance of becoming a priority.
But will the world align around a clear set of goals in the next 15 years?
The United Nations is starting to map out new goals for the years following the 2015 expiration of the current Millennium Development Goals.
As with the MDGs, the next set of goals could help to align groups doing the work, remind voters what their generosity supports, and allow us to see where we are making progress in delivering solutions to the poor.
The MDGs’ success means that there is a lot of interest in expanding them to include a broader set of issues.
But many of the potential new goals lack unanimous support, and adding a lot of new goals – or goals that are not easily measurable – may sap momentum.
The MDGs were coherent because they focused on helping the poorest people in the world.
The groups that needed to work together to attain them were easy to identify, and they could be held accountable for cooperation and progress.
When the UN reaches agreement on other important goals like mitigating climate change, it should consider whether a different set of actors and a separate process might be best for those efforts.
The progress that the world has made in helping the poorest in the last 15 years is the kind of good-news story that happens one life at a time, so it often does not have the same visibility as a big setback, such as the outbreak of a new epidemic.
From time to time, we should step back and celebrate the achievements that come with having the right goals, the necessary political will, generous aid, and innovation in tools and their delivery.
Doing so has certainly deepened my commitment to this work.
The Next Gas Crisis Awaits
Europe’s sigh of relief at the supposed end of the dispute between Russia and Ukraine over gas pricing was audible here in Kyiv.
But the settlement raises more questions than it answers.
By placing Ukraine’s energy needs in the hands of a shadowy company linked to international criminals, the agreement has planted the seeds of new and perhaps more dangerous crises.
As a result, I am challenging this deal in court and asked the members of my party to vote no confidence in the government.
Let a public hearing before a judge reveal exactly who will benefit from this deal, and let parliament examine all of the agreement’s terms and secret protocols.
The settlement between Ukraine and Russia’s state-owned gas monopoly, Gazprom, is intolerable because Ukraine’s energy future has been placed in the hands of RosUkrEnergo, a criminal canker on the body of our state gas corporation.
RosUkrEnergo was established in the last months of the regime of our former ruler, Leonid Kuchma. Yet it miraculously gained control of all of Ukraine’s gas imports from Central Asia.
Under the deal agreed this week, it retains that control.
As one who worked in the gas industry before entering politics, I know that the gas trade in the countries of the former Soviet Union is riddled with corruption.
During my premiership, my government sought to investigate RosUkrEnergo – to discover who precisely its owners are, how it gained a virtual monopoly on the import of Central Asian gas, and where its profits go.
Now that I am not in government, that investigation has been shelved.
Ukraine’s energy needs, and thus the certainty of energy supplies across Europe, will never be secure as long as gas transit is in the hands of secretive companies with unknown owners.
But the issues raised by the gas dispute between Ukraine and Russia go beyond energy security, reviving questions about Ukraine’s place in Europe and the world.
As this struggle shows, Ukraine has been obliged to assume a higher-profile role in European affairs. It must consider where and in what sort of Europe it fits, what balance it should strike between Russia and the European Union, and how it should find the self-assurance needed to play its full part in world affairs.
It would be sheer folly to suggest that Ukrainians start with a blank slate.
Centuries of being part of the Russian and Soviet empires have, in different ways, shaped how Ukrainians view their country and its interests.
One consequence of this is that Ukrainians are often shy about asserting Ukraine’s independent interests plainly – exemplified by Ukraine’s acceptance of a deal that leaves its energy future so insecure.
Like any country, Ukraine’s relations with the world are determined by four interlocking factors: history, patriotism, national interests, and geography.
Each factor has special resonance here.
True, Ukrainians rightly feel like citizens of a normal, independent country, and want to be treated that way.
But this does not mean we want to bury history and our historic ties.
We are a normal country with an abnormal history.
Indeed, Ukraine’s interests form a comfortingly familiar triangle of economic, political, and strategic priorities: free trade and open markets across the globe; prosperous and democratic neighbors; and not being on the front-line of a conflict, still less a potential battleground, between Russia and the West.
Our goal is thus a democratic Ukraine located between prosperous like-minded neighbors to east and west.
Of course, the risk of tyranny, turmoil, and war within the so-called “post-Soviet space” is large, leaving Ukraine keen to limit its vulnerability.
Ukrainian enthusiasm about the EU is based on the idea that European security is indivisible.
We recognize, of course, that few of even the most fervent supporters of European integration want to help Ukraine quickly become a member.
But the risk to EU gas supplies shows that our fates are linked.
Europe must play its part as Ukraine redefines its historic ties to Russia, and its actions must do nothing to undermine Ukraine’s national independence – or, indeed, that of any of the countries that emerged from the Soviet Union’s breakup.
The proposed Baltic Sea pipeline, which would bring gas to Germany directly from Russia, bypassing Poland, Ukraine, the Baltic states, and the rest of Central Europe, is dangerous in this regard, because it may allow Gazprom the freedom to cut gas supplies to customers without endangering supplies to its favored western markets.
That is a recipe for renewed threats, not only to Ukraine, but to EU members like Poland, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Slovakia, Slovenia, and the three Baltic states.
In broad terms, Ukraine seeks security and stability, and it should be remembered that our record here is strong.
Our decision more than a decade ago to surrender Ukraine’s status as a nuclear nation is the clearest sign of our good neighborly intentions and political maturity.
Today’s crisis over gas supplies must not be overblown.
Objectively speaking, Ukraine today is more secure as a nation than at any time in its history.
But Ukrainians do not feel as secure as they should.
The way to deal with uncertainty and complex situations is to think clearly and act decisively, not cut deals that place Ukraine’s future in the hands of shadowy businesses.
Only by clearly articulating and defending Ukraine’s national interests can today’s dispute over gas supplies establish our role in a transformed Europe.
The Next IMF
The international monetary and financial system has witnessed tremendous change over the recent decades.
Rapid expansion in cross-border capital flows, continued financial innovation, and deepening financial markets pose increasing challenges not only for national policy makers, but also for international financial institutions.
This has been particularly true of the IMF as it seeks to serve its global membership, and it has triggered a critically important discussion of the Fund’s strategic direction.
The IMF’s current strategic review does not start from scratch.
The reform process was launched at the end of the 1990’s and was continued by former Managing Director Horst Köhler with important initiatives.
These initiatives – particularly efforts to strengthen the IMF’s surveillance function and the so-called “exceptional access framework” – must now be locked in and implemented consistently.
For example, the introduction of standards and codes, reports on their observation (ROSC’s), Financial Sector Assessment Programs (FSAP’s), and the resulting increase in the Fund’s transparency might contribute to an improvement of bilateral, regional, and multilateral surveillance.
The exceptional access policy, which seeks to both enhance the predictability of the Fund’s lending policy and to safeguard its financial position, is still waiting for its first real test.
But the world needs to look beyond even these issues.
The IMF’s management shares many strategic considerations repeatedly raised by the Bundesbank, which has argued that the Fund should limit its activities to its core mandate: promoting monetary and financial stability.
Thus, the IMF’s role in the international monetary system should not go beyond applying its key instruments for promoting macroeconomic stability: surveillance and economic policy advice.
In fact, these two instruments should go hand in hand as the IMF’s internal reforms continue.
Increasing analytical focus and improving transparency by providing comprehensive advice and timely information would serve to strengthen surveillance further.
By contrast, an IMF that attempted to act, say, as an international umpire of national exchange-rate policies would face insurmountable implementation and acceptance problems.
Similarly, positioning the IMF as a general risk insurer by introducing precautionary credit lines above normal access limits would be compatible neither with its mission to provide financial assistance on deliberately non-risk-adjusted terms nor with the current system of refinancing short-term Fund credit through risk-free official reserves.
Only in true balance-of-payments crises should the IMF stand ready to provide limited temporary financial assistance to member countries, thereby encouraging their own policy adjustments and signaling this commitment to the markets.
Nor is becoming a development institution consistent with the Fund’s mission.
Development financing should be left to the World Bank.
By concentrating on their specific comparative advantages in line with clearly defined mandates, both institutions will fulfill their tasks more efficiently.
Indeed, the implementation of the Multilateral Debt Relief initiated by the G-8 already provides an unprecedented opportunity to complete the process of debt relief for a large number of low-income countries.
This also opens the way for the IMF to dispose of its current diffusion of activity in low-income countries and intensify its agenda in the areas of its core expertise.
Finally, adequate representation and the right of each member to have a say in the Fund is a prerequisite of the legitimacy that the IMF needs to fulfill its global role.
The quota distribution should be guided by members’ economic weight and degree of integration into the global economy, and any quota adjustments must be undertaken in a coherent manner that applies the same standard for all countries.
But, in order to maintain the creditor countries’ willingness to contribute to the Fund’s finances, a strong link must be maintained between quotas, on the one hand, and voting rights, access to IMF resources, and financial contributions on the other hand.
The issue of representation is an important component of the IMF’s strategic review.
However, that review, and the reforms that follow from it, must be much more comprehensive in order to benefit the Fund and all of its members.
The Next Liberation of France
Ségolène Royal has turned the tables on the Socialist Party to become its standard bearer in next year’s election.
But her triumph is only part of an intense political debate of the sort France has not seen for decades.
With parliamentary and presidential elections next year, the stakes are as high as at any previous turning point in modern French history.
A unique feature of today’s debate is its cohort of public intellectuals like Jacques Marseille, Nicolas Baverez, Elie Cohen, and Stephane Rozes, none of whom subscribe to the hoary notion of French uniqueness (the so-called 
 exception française
 ).
Their thinking is at the forefront of a widening recognition that France must face the world’s challenges as they really are, not as the French want them to be.
That means accepting and dealing with globalization.
France certainly has the tools to cope.
With only 1% of the world’s population, France is the sixth largest economy, ranking fourth in international trade and third in exports of goods and services.
More than 40% of the largest companies quoted on the Paris stock exchange are in foreign hands.
Indeed, one in seven workers is employed by a foreign company, compared to one in ten in the UK and one in 20 in the United States.
The section “Starting a business,” which identifies the bureaucratic and legal hurdles to incorporating and registering a new firm, ranks France in 35th place, whereas the UK ranks sixth and the US ranks third.
But the worst damage done by state policies is unemployment.
If there is an 
 exception française
 , it is that for the past 30 years, the unemployment rate has never fallen below 8.5%.
If you exclude the cosseted army of public-sector workers, the rate approaches 15%.
Youth unemployment, including the female population, averages 23%, while in deprived suburbs with concentrated immigrant populations, the rate hits 70%. 
Much of the political class and public opinion blames globalization – outsourcing and company relocations to cheaper labor markets – for unemployment.
But the chief culprit is France’s own labor code – a forest of regulations that offers the strongest employment protection anywhere in the world.
In the section “Employing workers” of 
 Doing Business
 , France ranks 134th, compared to 17th for the UK and first for the US.
With employers unwilling to hire workers that they cannot easily fire, French young people are right to feel uncertain about their future.
Despite comical episodes such as classifying the dairy company Danone as a national security asset to head off a possible bid from Coca Cola, France’s foreign investment regime is no less restrictive than other developed countries, including the US. 
This scapegoating of globalization reflects another key problem.
Successive governments, not companies, are responsible for the most damaging outsourcing in France – that of responsibility.
Instead of proposing reforms to the electorate and then implementing them on the strength of a clear democratic mandate, the few serious reforms in the past 20 years have been presented as being externally imposed – mainly to comply with European Union requirements.
As a result, reform has come to seem illegitimate, which has strengthened resistance to it.
Breaking the impasse requires restoring political legitimacy by electing a president who, having promised reform, gains a mandate to deliver it.
Both leading contenders in the 2007 presidential election, Ségolène Royal and Nicolas Sarkozy, share relative youth (compared to the geriatrics of recent decades) and have their fingers on the pulse of public opinion.
Their common approach is to enter into a real dialogue with the French people based on an understanding that the only viable basis for reform is a strong political contract between government and citizens.
This stands in sharp contrast to the reigns of François Mitterrand and Jacques Chirac, with their elitism, arrogance, paternalism, and stagnation.
Whatever the election’s outcome, the return of political will and legitimacy to France will come not a moment too soon.
The Nixon Option for Iran?
WASHINGTON, DC – Rearranging the deck chairs would not have saved the Titanic.
Nor did the endless debates on the shape of the table in the Vietnam negotiations advance the effort to end that malign conflict.
Nevertheless, many American presidents have successfully redesigned talks with adversaries in bold new ways to strengthen national security without war.
Such boldness is now needed in the negotiations over Iran’s nuclear program.
In 1933, Franklin D. Roosevelt negotiated personally with Soviet Foreign Minister Maxim Litvinov to open diplomatic relations between the two countries.
Dwight D. Eisenhower invited Nikita Khrushchev to the United States in 1959 to open the eyes of the first Soviet leader ever to visit America.
The bilateral US-China talks in Warsaw in the 1960’s were fruitless until Richard M. Nixon and National Security Adviser Henry Kissinger opened a different, more direct discussion through the auspices of Pakistan. &nbsp;
International negotiations with Iran over its nuclear program also need a new concept and broader agenda.
The Istanbul meeting last month concluded on a positive note.
Both sides decided to find a way to avoid the pattern of mutual recrimination and sterile exchanges.
The door is now open to an initial agreement with modest goals.
But don’t count on a new era without some form of direct US-Iran discussions.
The talks with the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council plus Germany (P5+1) are formulaic, stagnant, and not likely to achieve any breakthrough on their own.
The Iranians feel out-numbered by diverse participants with varying agendas.
The US needs to reshape the environment to make it easier for Iran to compromise.
The US should press for bilateral talks.
One lesson provided by former American presidents is the value of direct, high-level contacts with key adversaries.
Of course, a face-to-face meeting between President Barack Obama and Ayatollah Ali Khamenei seems absurd to imagine – now.
But could any meeting have seemed more absurd in 1969 than the 1972 meeting between Nixon and Mao Zedong?
The US and Iran need to set a path toward broad bilateral discussions on worldviews, regional security, and plans to improve mutual understanding&nbsp;in order to minimize differences.
Even without direct US-Iran talks now, the current negotiations need reshaping.
The P5+1 should continue to negotiate with Iran on its uranium-enrichment program, while the International Atomic Energy Agency should negotiate with Iran on strengthening the transparency of its nuclear program.
The Iranians want to resolve their problems directly with the IAEA, and to avoid negotiating under the cloud of UN Security Council resolutions, which impose sanctions on Iran to force suspension of enrichment.
This situation suggests a phased approach.
First, during the talks in Baghdad, the P5+1 might seek an early confidence-building agreement by which Iran voluntarily ceases enriching the U-235 fissile isotope&nbsp;to 20% content and blends down or ships out its stockpile of such uranium, which is closer to weapons grade.
They might also seek a standstill on the deep underground enrichment facility at Fordow, near Qom, in exchange for provision of fuel rods for Iran’s research reactor and a freeze on some sanctions.
Second, the P5+1 could then agree to agree to some Iranian enrichment as an incentive for Iran to conclude a parallel agreement with the IAEA on greater transparency.
These parallel steps would reshape the process to achieve a key US objective: ensuring that Iran abides by Khamenei’s own fatwa (religious decree) against nuclear weapons.
Third, both sides will need to outline the long-term objectives of the negotiations.
As the IAEA presses Iran for agreements on greater transparency, Iran wants to know where such agreements might lead, particularly regarding sanctions.
Iranians claim that each time they move toward cooperation with the US, a new problem emerges to block improved relations.
Iran wants to know which sanctions might be delayed, frozen, or lifted in exchange for current and future concessions, fearing that the US will continue to impose sanctions on human-rights, security, or other grounds.
The US, for its part, views Iran as a duplicitous and unreliable negotiator that is committed to nuclear weapons and unserious about talks.
The time has come to test Iran’s intentions by reaching something like the two-phased agreements outlined here – a longer-term, step-by-step process with reciprocal actions, in which each side must give something to get what it needs.
Finally, even with step-by-step progress on Iran’s nuclear program, broader discussions are needed to address the many non-nuclear issues that threaten regional stability.
There is currently no forum to discuss Afghanistan, Iraq, drug trafficking, Persian Gulf security, emergency communications to avoid accidental conflict, and the sources of deep distrust and misunderstanding.
Some of these discussions might involve representatives of states that are not part of the P5+1, including governments that have closer relations with Iran.
To organize discussion of these broader issues, the US and others should explore the possibility of appointing a special envoy – perhaps a former Chief of State under UN auspices – to engage Iran in new ways.
If Obama were to take the lead in reshaping the setting and the process by which the US and others talk with Iran, progress could become easier.
The Istanbul talks opened the door to an initial – if incremental – breakthrough agreement.
The US now has an opportunity to establish new ways to explore common ground and reach a more durable political solution.
The Nixon Shock Doctrine Revisited
FLORENCE – Richard Nixon has been dead for 15 years, but he is making another comeback in America.
The 37th President of the United States believed that international monetary relations are unlikely to be transformed by talking.
Instead, he thought that radical unilateral action was required.
Today, pressure is increasing for the US Treasury to follow Nixon’s misguided example and issue a finding (due by April 15th) that China is manipulating its exchange rate.
Some 130 members of Congress have signed a letter demanding action on China’s currency.
The campaign is enthusiastically endorsed by a leading US economist and trade specialist, the Nobel laureate Paul Krugman.
From today’s perspective, the problems of the Nixon era look relatively manageable, even trivial.
The world’s currency reserves were held in a slightly lop-sided way: at the end of 1971, Germany had reserves worth $17.2 billion, and Japan’s were worth $14.1 billion – 14% and 11.5% of the world’s total, respectively.
In 2008, the last year for which figures are available, Japan held 23.4 % of the world’s reserves and China held 44.8%.
These figures are even higher today.
Then, as now, there were differing perspectives on the cause of the global imbalances.
Europeans and Asians saw excessively loose US fiscal and monetary policy as the major culprit.
Americans, by contrast, thought that Japan and Germany were artificially holding down their currencies’ value in order to get an unfair advantage for their politically powerful export industries.
Germany was more obliging in the face of US pressure, mainly because its security relied on America’s military presence.
It undertook a small revaluation in 1969 and then let its currency float in May 1971.
But Japan’s government was intransigent.
Talking about the charms of market opening or about fairness did not help.
Treasury Secretary John Connolly attacked Japan’s “controlled economy.”
There were two American strategies to prize open Japan’s supposedly closed economy.
One strategy, termed “benign neglect,” was to let the surplus countries pile up reserves until they realized that they had a very big problem.
But there seemed to be no end to the piling up of reserves, so the only remaining choice was confrontation.
Nixon intrinsically distrusted multilateralism.
The conventional view, then as now, was that unilateral action risked unleashing a wave of protectionism.
When Federal Reserve Chairman Arthur Burns objected on the grounds that other countries might retaliate, Connolly replied, “Let ‘em.
What can they do?”
The point was clear: “So the other countries don’t like it.
So what?”
On August 15, 1971, Nixon imposed a temporary surcharge of 10% on imports “to ensure that American products will not be at a disadvantage because of unfair exchange rates.”
At the same time, there was a wage and price freeze, an end to the Federal Reserve’s swap network of support for other central banks, and a limitation of gold transactions, implying a reduction in the value of the American currency.
None of these measures served to restore US economic growth rates or correct the surpluses of America’s competitors.
To be sure, the Japanese and German external balances were subject to heavy swings in the course of the turbulent 1970’s.
Large surpluses turned into deficits for Japan in 1973 and 1979, and for Germany in 1974, 1975, 1979, and 1980.
But this was due not to bilateral corrections in these countries’ trade relationships with the US, but mostly to their energy dependence and the decade’s energy price shocks.
Between these deficits, large surpluses for Germany and Japan reappeared – as they have in the 2000’s.
Some of the late 1970’s correction did follow from renewed intense US pressure for fiscal and monetary expansion, but that expansion caused inflationary pressure, which the Japanese and Germans then predictably blamed on the US.
After an initial inflationary surge, American economic growth fell off sharply in the 1970’s.
The world became much more inflationary, and quite a bit more protectionist.
This did not, however, imply a return to the 1930’s, in large part because energy dependence forced industrial countries to maintain an open trade regime so that they could earn the money to pay for oil and gasoline.
America’s currency unilateralism pushed everyone else to organize against the chaos emanating from Washington.
The Europeans advanced their plans for regional monetary and economic integration.
The dollar confusion encouraged the oil producers to form their (briefly) highly effective cartel, OPEC.
Only the most obvious of the targets of August 1971, Japan, was badly hit by what the Japanese called the second “Nixon shokku” (the first being Nixon’s announcement the previous month that he would visit mainland China in 1972).
That was because, unlike Germany, Japan was standing on its own.
China today is not isolated in the way that Japan was in 1971.
On the contrary, it will find an easy way to turn its resentment of American pressure into an issue of regional solidarity – exactly as the Germans did in the 1970’s.
Instead of leading to an American renaissance, the “Nixon shock” produced theories about American imperial overstretch and decline.
Today, the fastest way to really make this “the Asian century” is to give Asian exporters a similarly unpleasant shock, thereby spurring the creation of an Asian community of surplus countries.
Can Barack Obama, fresh from his major domestic victory on health care, really afford to turn himself into Richard Nixon?
The Non-Communicable Disease Paradox
WELLINGTON – Albert Einstein is reputed to have said that “everything should be made as simple as possible, but not simpler.”
Yet the current debate about the global epidemic of non-communicable diseases (NCDs) – chronic diseases such as heart disease, stroke, diabetes, and cancer – has ignored this advice.
Policymakers have oversimplified the challenge by focusing on the growing prevalence of NCDs – the sheer number of people with these diseases –&#160;which, I argue, is not really the problem.
True, almost all regions of the world are currently experiencing an increase in the prevalence of NCDs – in part because, as deaths from acute infectious diseases and injuries decline, people live long enough to develop these diseases.
But NCDs are increasing for many other demographic and epidemiological reasons as well – and understanding these has implications for health policy, and even for economic development.
In much of the world, populations are growing and aging simultaneously.
Most NCDs increase in prevalence with age – a consequence of the cumulative exposure to risk factors (including unhealthy behaviors such as tobacco use and biological risk factors such as high blood pressure) over a lifetime.
All else being equal, larger and older populations mean more people with NCDs.
This “population aging” effect is well understood.
Far less well understood are the epidemiological forces that drive NCD dynamics.
From an epidemiological perspective, NCD prevalence is determined by the difference between the rate at which previously healthy people become ill (incidence) and the rate at which ill people either recover or die (from any cause). If inflow exceeds outflow, prevalence rises.
Over the past several decades, standards of living, lifestyles, and biological risk factors have generally improved worldwide (obesity is an exception).
So, contrary to popular belief, the incidence of most NCDs other than diabetes has actually been falling.
Nevertheless, NCD prevalence has increased, because improvements in survival have outpaced reductions in incidence.
Inflow and outflow have both fallen, but outflow has fallen further and faster.
Several factors underpin the recent dramatic gains in survival at older ages.
People living with a chronic disease may die not only from that disease, but also from other causes – including other NCDs, acute infections, and injuries.
In particular, more accessible and higher-quality health care has significantly improved survival rates for people living with NCDs, including diabetes.
Yet health care is not solely responsible for the observed improvement in survival rates.
Improvements in lifestyle and related risk factors have contributed as well.
A decline in the proportion of people who use tobacco, consume unhealthy diets, are physically inactive, and/or have elevated blood pressure and cholesterol does more than just prevent disease.
Not only do fewer cases occur, but the NCD cases that do tend to be less severe, and to progress more slowly than was previously the case.
As a result, the increase in prevalence that has been seen in recent decades for many NCDs largely reflects an increase in the prevalence of early stages of the disease only.
Increasing overall disease prevalence has hidden decreasing prevalence of late-stage or complicated disease.
I have called this shift towards the milder end of the NCD spectrum the “severity effect.”
Most health problems linked to NCDs – problems such as chronic pain, disordered sleep, depression, disability, and premature death – are associated with late-stage or complicated disease, rather than with early-stage or uncomplicated disease.
Whenever the “severity effect” outweighs the “prevalence effect,” the increasing overall prevalence of the NCD will be accompanied by a decreasing health impact, not an increasing disease “footprint,” as is widely assumed.
This is the paradox of NCDs: objective measures of poor health (severe symptoms, disability, premature death) are declining, even as the prevalence of these diseases is increasing.
And, while this paradox is no excuse for complacency in responding to what the United Nations has rightly called a global NCD crisis, it does have practical implications for that response.
First, the primary concern should not be with reducing disease prevalence, but rather disease burden – the health impact as measured by disability and premature mortality.
That means channeling resources according to burden rather than according to prevalence, particularly as co-morbidity (two or more diseases in the same patient) increases.
Second, we should concentrate less on improving health care and more on strengthening disease prevention, for example by driving down tobacco use, expanding opportunities for physical activity, and increasing the availability and affordability of a healthy diet.
A greater focus on prevention can both reduce the incidence of NCDs and ensure that those cases that continue to occur will tend to be less severe and will progress more slowly, allowing scope for inexpensive but effective treatment in primary-care settings.
Both mechanisms – lower incidence and lesser severity – will contribute to a smaller disease “footprint,” even as NCD prevalence continues to rise.
The Non-Crisis of the Euro
BERKELEY – The global financial crisis has breathed new life into hoary arguments about the euro’s imminent demise.
Such arguments often invoke Milton Friedman, who warned in 1998 that Europe’s commitment to the euro would be tested by the first serious economic downturn.
That downturn is now upon us, but the results have been precisely the opposite of what Friedman predicted.
Unemployment is rising – and with it populist posturing.
In countries like Italy, already suffering from Chinese competition, and Spain, which is experiencing a massive housing bust, the pain will be excruciating.
Yet neither country shows any inclination to abandon the euro.amp#160; 
They understand that even whispering about that possibility would panic investors.
They see how countries like Denmark that maintained their own currencies have been forced to raise interest rates to defend their exchange rates when the United States Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank are cutting interest rates.
They see how, if there was still a lira or a peseta, they would be experiencing capital flight.
They understand that they would have to fend off an old-fashioned currency crisis at the worst possible time.
They appreciate that there is stability and security in numbers.
But, given recent events, it is now they who bear the burden of proof. 
What neither Friedman nor anyone else anticipated in 1998 was that the first serious downturn following the advent of the euro would coincide with the mother of all financial crises.
Runs by panicked investors have required central banks to undertake unprecedented lender-of-last-resort operations.
Extensive loan losses have required expensive bank recapitalization operations.amp#160; 
There have been predictions that governments stretched to the limit by the financial crisis might respond by abandoning the euro.
They might resort to the inflation tax and inject the national currency to restore liquidity to their banking systems and financial markets.
In fact, the response has been the opposite.
The ECB has provided essentially unlimited amounts of liquidity to euro-area financial systems.
The Stability and Growth Pact has been relaxed in order to increase governments’ capacity to borrow to recapitalize their banks.
It is European countries outside the euro area, still with their own currencies, that have suffered the gravest difficulties.
Because their currencies are not widely used internationally, many of their bank liabilities are in euros.