To top it off, throughout the Middle East (as well as Sub-Saharan Africa and most of South Asia), rapid population growth is fueling enormous demographic pressures.
Egypt’s population, for example, more than doubled over the course of Hosni Mubarak’s rule, from 42 million in 1980 to 85 million in 2010.
This surge is all the more remarkable given that Egypt is a desert country, its inhabitants packed along the Nile.
With no room to spread out, population densities are rising to the breaking point.
Cairo has become a sprawling region of some 20 million people living cheek-by-jowl with inadequate infrastructure.
Rapid population growth means a bulging youth population.
Indeed, half of Egypt’s population is under age 25. Egypt, like dozens of countries around the world, is facing the extreme – and largely unmet – challenge of ensuring productive and gainful employment for its young people.
Employment growth is simply not keeping up with this population surge, at least not in the sense of decent jobs with decent wages.
The unemployment rate for young people (15-24 years old) in North Africa and the Middle East is 30% or more.
The frustration of unemployed and under-employed youth is now spilling over into the streets.
The problem of high youth unemployment is certainly not confined to the developing world, however.
In the United States, the overall unemployment rate is around 9%, but among 18-25 year olds, it is a staggering 19%.
And this includes only young people actually at work or looking for work. Many more have simply become discouraged and dropped out of the labor force entirely: not at school, not at work, and not looking for work.
They don’t protest much, but many end up in prison.
The world’s labor markets are now interconnected.
Young people in countries as diverse as Egypt and the US are in effect competing with young Chinese and Indians for jobs.
China’s low-paid, reasonably productive manufacturing workers and high-quality infrastructure (roads, power, ports, and communications) has set the standard for competitiveness globally.
As a result, low-skilled workers in Egypt, the US, and other countries must either raise their productivity enough to compete at a decent wage, or accept extremely low pay or outright unemployment.
So creating decent jobs at decent wages is at the heart of being internationally competitive.
That requires equipping workers with a good education, strong on-the-job training, and supportive infrastructure.
While the private sector must create most of the jobs, the public sector must create the underlying conditions for high productivity. That is a tall order.
Only one high-income region has done a reasonably good job of preparing its youth, and its overall economy, for tough global competition: Northern Europe, including Germany and Scandinavia (Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden).
In these countries, public education is excellent, and the transition from school to work often involves programs like the apprenticeships for which Germany is especially famous.
In developing countries, the main advances are found in countries that emphasize excellence in education, public investment in infrastructure, and serious on-the-job training. South Korea is probably the leading success story, with superb educational attainment and strong employment of young people having taken it from developing-country to high-income status within one generation.
And South Korea has accomplished this feat in China’s intensely competitive immediate neighborhood.
The US, by contrast, is a case of failure, except for youth from high-income households. American children raised in affluence succeed in obtaining an excellent education and have good job prospects after a bachelor’s degree.
But, as the rich have successfully pressed for tax cuts and reductions in government spending, children from poor and working-class households are far less likely to receive a high-quality education, and the US government has failed to provide for training or adequate infrastructure.
The result is a growing youth unemployment crisis among poor and working-class youth.
The countries of North Africa and the Middle East should learn from East Asia and Northern Europe, and take pains to avoid the failures of the US. If democracy is to take hold and flourish in Egypt, Tunisia, and elsewhere in the Arab world, the new reform-minded governments must make the youth unemployment crisis their highest priority.
Middle Eastern countries should elaborate strategies to improve the quality and increase the length of schooling, invest in job training, establish private-sector apprenticeships, and develop small and medium-sized businesses.
They should identify key infrastructure projects needed to ensure private-sector productivity.
And they must work together to deepen regional trade integration, thereby creating a much larger market.
The deposed authoritarian rulers – Tunisia’s Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, Mubarak, and soon Libya’s Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi – stashed away billions of dollars stolen from the public treasury.
This ill-gotten money should be recovered and put into a special fund for youth employment.
Moreover, with oil prices back above $100 per barrel, the Gulf states are enjoying a bonanza.
They, too, should create a special fund for youth employment in the region through the Islamic Development Bank.
There can be no better way to use the region’s resources than to ensure that its young people’s lives are enriched by education, skills, and high-quality jobs.
The Arafat Succession Scramble
To understand what the Palestinian cause will look like without Yasir Arafat, consider the various titles that he currently holds.
Arafat is Chairman of the PLO executive Committee, President of the Palestinian National Authority, Commander-in-chief of the Palestinian forces, and head of the Fatah movement.
The PLO embodies Palestinian national aspirations for independence and statehood. It is the highest political body for all Palestinians, both those living in Palestine and the refugees and other Palestinians in the diaspora.
Arafat’s successor will need to juggle between negotiations with Israel, which will require concession on refugees’ “right of return” to Palestine, and the aspirations of more than three million Palestinians who wish to come back to the homes from which they were expelled in the wars of 1948 and 1967.
Arafat’s successor as President of the Palestinian National Authority will be bound by the Oslo Accords, which created an interim government, now headed by Prime Minister Ahmad Qurei, that is responsible for the day-to-day lives of Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza.
Palestinians will have to decide whether to make the position of PNA president a powerful one or merely symbolic, as it now is. The latter option would make Qurei an empowered prime minister, which is what many Palestinians and others want.
The position of the commander of the Palestinian forces supposedly puts the various Palestinian military, security, and intelligence units under one leader, who is expected to ensure the rule of law.
But these forces are now in disarray, with most uniformed Palestinian security agencies needing to be reorganized after four years of intensive effort by Israel to crush them.
The key factor in internal security is local paramilitary units.
These units, most of which are not controlled by the PNA’s central leadership, are more loyal to grassroots figures than to uniformed PNA officers.
Local Fatah leaders like Marwan Barghouti have tremendous power over the nationalist armed units that are loosely organized under the title of the Al Aqsa Martyrs’ Brigades.
Barghouti advocated and was trying to implement internal Fatah elections when the Israelis arrested him.
As a street leader who was elected as the head of the Bir Zeit University student council, he gained legitimacy by being chosen by his peers.
When the Oslo process began, he refused to accept any official position within the Palestinian Authority, choosing instead to remain close to the local Fatah cadres.
Whoever fills Arafat’s shoes will need to make sure that these brigades are satisfied that their status, demands, and leaders are respected.
Indeed, the power struggle that will ensue in the post-Arafat era will ultimately center on Al Fatah, the backbone of the PLO.
A worldwide assembly chooses Fatah’s 100-member revolutionary council, which in turn elects a 20-member central committee, where most of the power struggle will take place.
Many young street leaders will insist on an emergency meeting of the revolutionary council, or even holding the sixth general assembly (which would be the first since 1988).
Events in recent months show that the Al Asqa Martyrs’ Brigades have forced even Arafat to take their demands into consideration.
While much of the power struggle will take place within the nationalist camp, one must not overlook the Islamist camp led by Hamas and Islamic Jihad.
Although the Islamists are unlikely to interfere in the post-Arafat power struggle, they will not sit idly by if the new leadership moves in what they consider the wrong direction.
Of course, the new leadership will have to reach some agreement with the Islamists regarding the rules of the game, both domestically and vis-à-vis Israel.
Without such an agreement, and if the new leadership cracks down hard on the Islamists, a violent civil war could erupt.
Most importantly, in order to consolidate his leadership, the next Palestinian leader must make some hard decisions and show some tangible results quickly.
The experience of the first Palestinian prime minister, who resigned largely because of his inability to deliver any improvements to his people – particularly personal and collective security, the rule of law, and an end to chaos in Palestinian areas – remains fresh in the public’s memory.
At the same time, a freeze on settlement activities, release of Palestinian political prisoners – including Marwan Barghouti – and the removal of the hundreds of checkpoints between Palestinian cities would revive a feeling of hope, without which no Palestinian leader can negotiate what the world wants: a peace settlement.
The problem is that no Palestinian leader, no matter who he is, can deliver these changes.
They represent a direct challenge to the Israeli occupiers, neighboring Arab countries, and the international community, led by the United States.
The Misplaced War Against Fire
TEMPE, ARIZONA – The simplest way to describe fire worldwide is that there is too much of the wrong kind, too little of the right kind, and too much overall.
The wrong kinds are those such as the blaze that just killed 19 firefighters here in Arizona, or those that have put southeast Asia under a pall, that incinerate communities, befoul ecosystems with effluents, and trash biotas by burning at the wrong times and intensities.
The right kinds are those that perform an ecological service by burning landscapes properly – and that stay in their place.
Paradoxically, it is likely that there is not enough fire on the planet; but, thanks to fossil fuels, there is certainly too much combustion.
Overall, the developed world has too few good fires, and the developing world has too many bad ones.
Nearly every observer forecasts that this will continue over the coming years.
What to do about it depends on how we characterize the problem.
The paradox of fire stems from its role as the great shape-shifter of natural processes.
The reason is simple: fire is not a creature nor a substance nor a geophysical event like a hurricane or an earthquake.
It is a biochemical reaction.
It synthesizes its surroundings.
It takes its character from its context.
Fire integrates everything around it – sun, wind, rain, plants, terrain, roofing, fields, and everything people do, and don’t do.
In this way, it indexes the state of an ecosystem.
It is also our signature act as a species, the one thing we do that no other creature does.
While we did not invent fire (it has been integral to Earth for more than 400 million years), we exercise a monopoly over its controlled use.
All of this makes fire universal, difficult to grasp, and tricky to wrestle into manageable shape.
There is no solution to fire, because there are many kinds of fires, and they change with their context.
Some fire problems do have technical fixes.
We can build machines that reduce combustion to its essence and contain it.
We can erect houses that resist burning.
We can design cities that prevent fires from spreading from building to building.
But these fires are fixable only because we construct their settings.
We cannot survive without fire; we just need it in the right ways.
It is certainly a problem when it burns freely through cities.
But it is also a problem when it is removed from wildlands that have adapted to it, because its absence can be as ecologically significant as its presence.
The point is, urban fire is not a model for wildland fire.
Our prevailing templates for describing fire are similarly misdirected.
They portray the burn as a disaster and the fight against it as a war story.
The battlefield allusion leads observers to reason that there must be more sophisticated technologies than shovels and rakes with which to suppress the flames.
We must meet force with greater force.
Such metaphors matter, because they mis-define the problem.
Over the past decade, the world has experienced a pattern of untrammeled burning – what some observers have termed “megafires.”
Explanations vary.
Some point to climate change, with global warming producing deeper droughts and more extreme weather.
Some of these fires have raged under abnormal conditions; some have not.
Others emphasize a buildup of combustible materials.
The nature of such fuel accumulations runs the gamut, including swamp drainage in Indonesia, rainforest destruction in Amazonia, self-thickening woods in American wildlands as a result of fire exclusion, and everywhere the intrusion of urban sprawl and fire-prone houses.
Still others blame changes in policy and practice.
Lands legally recorded as wilderness will encourage more fire; and a reluctance to put firefighters at risk in remote settings – as well as cost concerns – argues for backing off and letting the next ridge burn while offering point protection for threatened communities.
Of course, we need the ability to control bad fires.
But an emphasis on suppression alone leads to the fire equivalent of a police state, not to a livable landscape.
Rather, the great diversity of fires points to the need for an equal diversity of means to cope with them or convert them to beneficial outcomes.
Matching problems with solutions requires us to characterize the issue properly.
A fire that burns into a community is a disaster, but if we see fire only as a disaster, then we will follow the example of many wildland fire agencies that are adopting urban, all-hazard models in place of traditional land management.
This leaves them fighting the fires that break out, rather than managing the settings that sustain those fires.
Likewise, if we define the fight against fire as a battlefield, we will build up our forces, search for more powerful technologies like air tankers, and accept firefighters’ deaths as inevitable.
We will win battles but kill crews in a war that does not exist.
Even if we accept the war metaphor, we are engaged less in set-piece conflicts than in an ecological insurgency that we cannot bomb or bulldoze into submission.
In many settings, the best solution is to use good fires to contain bad ones.
A generalized war on fire is as ill-conceived as, say, a global war on terror.
Fire is what its setting makes it.
It is also a relationship.
Fire and humanity long ago began shaping each other’s realm.
Today, as always, we remain the best of friends and the worst of enemies.
The Art of Finance
PRINCETON – In the middle of September’s financial meltdown, a remarkable event occurred in London. While the City of London was shaken by the collapse of Lehman Brothers and the run on HBOS, Sotheby’s staged a record-breaking auction for the works of the artist Damien Hirst, which produced a gross take of around $200 million.
Compared to the values that were being destroyed on Wall Street, this was small change; but it was a remarkable vote of confidence in the work of one artist.
Financial bubbles, like the one that has just definitively burst, are intimately related to the world of art.
Renaissance Florence depended on the patronage of the Medici. Sixteenth-century Venice turned the wealth of the spice trade into the canvases of Titian and Tintoretto. 
The world’s next great commercial center was Amsterdam, where again the successful burghers pushed for a new style of art and produced the age of Rembrandt.
The great nineteenth- and early twentieth-century financiers, men like J.P. Morgan, Henry Frick, and Andrew Mellon, spent a large part of their fortunes on art.
From their viewpoint, collecting art was not simply a matter of benevolence or public spiritedness.
Nor was it simply a very expensive hobby. Their galleries showed in a visible and very public way the discernment and judgment that their financial business depended on.
Financial judgment, by contrast, is not by its nature open to inspection. It depends on inside deals, on moving ahead of the market.
It is impossible to tell who is making good bets and who is gambling recklessly.
Consequently, it is helpful to have a proxy activity that enables outsiders to see that the process of discernment and valuation really occurs.
The recent era of global finance – maybe we can already possibly speak of it as being past – differed from the financial surge of a century ago. Its cultural manifestations also appeared to be novel. 
To some of its participants, collecting contemporary art showed how finance had become much more of a creative process than it was the world of the older financiers.
Morgan or Mellon collected largely old masters from the cinquecento, whose reputation was clearly and solidly established.
The new art collectors, however, were more like the Medici: they were really stimulating new cultural creation.
As with their investments, the habitués of contemporary art markets relied not purely on their own judgment, but on teams of sophisticated advisers and dealers who could give opinions on what trends best caught the spirit of the age.
Naïve outsiders found the world of contemporary art bewildering.
Why was a cow preserved in formaldehyde a great cultural achievement?
What did the sheets of cloth covered by regularly interspersed colored dots – the products of Hirst’s large and mechanized workshops – have to do with artistic innovation or originality?
But was not the same incomprehension on the part of the broad public characteristic of the increasingly sophisticated financial products that were being traded?
Indeed, the nature of the risks involved was not clear, it seems, even to regulators or the senior management of the firms that were building the business.
Some modern artists and their patrons explicitly point to the parallel between contemporary art and new financial products.
Deutsche Bank, Europe’s most prominent art-collecting bank, published the view of academic experts to the effect that customers, the broad public, were “extremely conservative, boring, lack imagination, and don’t know their own minds.” 
After financial implosions, such as the collapse of the dot-com bubble in 2000 or the sub-prime meltdown of 2007-8, such views appear arrogant.
The parallel between bewildering and apparently meaningless art and unintelligible financial products is damning rather than reassuring.
So why was the Hirst auction such a success?
In part, because the art involved was far from being unintelligible.
The most eagerly anticipated item, a bull with golden horns and hooves, was entitled, with obvious intent, “The Golden Calf.”
But there was also another motive driving the bidders.
One hint was that Russian buyers paid the big money, at the very moment that Russia’s banking system was melting down.
At the same time, there was a surge in demand for gold jewelry.
The search for non-financial assets looks like characteristic behavior in any financial crisis – what was known during the great drama of hyperinflation in Weimar Germany as “die Flucht in die Sachwerte,” the flight to material assets.
Art also functions as a store of value.
But in order to be sure of the reliability of this function, the purchaser must be convinced of the long-term valuation of the object of desire.
The bankers of the Italian Renaissance also bought works of art because they reminded them of timeless values that transcended quotidian transactions.
They saw their acquisitions of paintings and sculptures as a connection to eternity.
Who can say the same for the products of Damien Hirst?
The ASEAN Heart of Asia
JAKARTA – The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) stands at a defining moment.
Its member states are constantly being evaluated for their economic potential and desirability as a market for investments, goods, and services.
At the same time, their effort to forge a community free from external intervention is shaping a new regional order based on common security and shared prosperity.
In geopolitical terms, ASEAN is well-placed to be an acceptable and equal partner to many larger, more powerful economies, such as China, India, Japan, Australia, and South Korea – a part of the world that, for the first time, is leading a global recovery.
ASEAN has also contributed to building one of the most dynamic economic-integration platforms in the world, and now acts as a de facto regional hub of wider economic cooperation and integration.
Indeed, the importance of regional economic integration for global stability and security cannot be understated.
East Asia needs to maintain a fine balance of political-security requirements in much the same way.
Continual restructuring and consolidation will be needed to create a balanced regional geopolitical architecture, which must broaden beyond ASEAN members to meet the needs of Japan, the US, Australia, India, China, and Russia – all of which have vital interests in the region.
ASEAN pursues an inclusive growth strategy.
With the participation of the US and Russia in the expanded East Asia Summit, the regional architecture is, indeed, becoming more dynamic.
Given this, it is imperative that ASEAN becomes pro-active and remains focused on relevant strategic issues.
In engaging the major powers, ASEAN will not shun traditional security issues, such as maritime cooperation, as well as humanitarian assistance and disaster relief.
Japan has been the biggest provider of development assistance and technological know-how to ASEAN for the past four decades. Indeed, Japan’s investment and aid to Southeast Asia have fueled ASEAN’s economic progress.
I believe that Japan’s strategic role in the region will only increase, because its economy and industrial production chains have been regionally integrated.
Both sides have pledged to forge closer cooperation and initiate new programs to consolidate their relationship.
Nevertheless, unresolved and overlapping maritime and territorial claims remain ASEAN’s biggest challenge.
We believe that maritime cooperation between ASEAN and major powers including China would benefit all countries.
ASEAN will continue to address this issue strategically.
And, as to Myanmar, ASEAN has deferred the decision on its prospective chairmanship in 2014.
At its recent summit, ASEAN leaders asked Myanmar for more clarification about the country’s internal situation.
In doing so, ASEAN showed its continued influence on Myanmar’s progress towards democratic reforms.
Not all challenges, however, are external.
The critical issue concerns ASEAN’s engagement with civil society.
Indonesia’s government has expressed support for more proactive engagement with the region’s civil-society organizations, pledging to organize “community conferences or forums” to engage with stakeholders in efforts to strengthen the security, economic, and socio-cultural pillars that support ASEAN as a group.
Indonesia hopes that these community conferences will gradually gain acceptance at the ASEAN level.
Through these efforts, ASEAN is emerging as the fulcrum of geopolitical stability in Asia.
What could have otherwise been a liability – ASEAN's diversity – was transformed into an asset that has set the benchmark for regional integration in a troubled and complex world.
Yes, we have our share of challenges.
Nevertheless, ASEAN is constantly demonstrating its determination to create a region where no member is left behind, even as we collectively pursue prosperity and an equitable distribution of our burgeoning wealth.
Moreover, ASEAN is seeking to forge a clearer position on key international issues to heighten its standing on world affairs.
Disaster management, peace-keeping operations, and, again, maritime-security cooperation are some of the areas in which ASEAN members can work together to formulate common policy approaches and action plans.
In the years to come, ASEAN will make further progress on unified responses to climate change, human trafficking, and food and energy security.
Of course, as it moves forward, ASEAN will have to make structural and policy adjustments to strengthen its voice.
And the ability to deter and resolve conflicts among its members must remain one of its priorities.
At its recent summit, ASEAN agreed to establish an ASEAN Institute for Peace and Reconciliation that will deal with issues of peace and reconciliation – a milestone achievement for ASEAN.
There will be many more innovative breakthroughs as ASEAN develops into an integrated, open, peaceful, and outward-looking region.
That outcome will benefit ASEAN’s members – and the world.
The “Asset Crisis” of Emerging Economies
BEIJING – In theory, the difference between capital inflows and outflows in developing countries should be positive – they should be net capital importers, with the magnitude of the balance equivalent to the current-account deficit.
Since the 1997-1998 Asian financial crisis, however, many East Asian countries have been running current-account surpluses – and hence have become net capital exporters.
Even odder is the fact that while they are net capital exporters, they run financial (capital) account surpluses.
In other words, these countries lend not only the money they earned through current-account surpluses, but also the money they borrowed through capital-account surpluses – mainly to the United States.
As a result, East Asian countries are now sitting on a huge pile of foreign-exchange reserves in the form of US government securities.
While China has attracted a large amount of foreign direct investment, it has bought an even larger amount of US government securities.
Whereas the average return on FDI in China was 33% for American firms in 2008, the average return on China’s investment in US government securities was a mere 3-4%.
So, why does China invest its savings so heavily in low-return US government securities, rather than in high-return domestic projects?
One answer lies in the fact that China’s FDI policy over the past 30 years has crowded out Chinese investors from high-return projects, forcing them to settle for less lucrative projects.
But there are still potential investors who cannot find any suitable investment opportunities in China, generating excess resources, which in turn are invested in US government securities.
But, while China’s foreign assets are denominated in US dollars, its liabilities, such as FDI, are mostly denominated in renminbi.
As a result, when the dollar depreciates against the renminbi, the value of China’s foreign liabilities increases in dollar terms, while that of its foreign assets remains unchanged.
As a result, China’s net international investment position (NIIP), which is the difference between China’s gross assets and its gross liabilities, automatically worsens.
The deterioration of China’s NIIP is a reflection of the transfer of wealth from China to the US.&#160;
Since the 2000’s, China’s gross assets and gross liabilities have increased dramatically, owing to the success of China’s trade-promotion and FDI policies.
As a result, China’s net international investment position has become very vulnerable to the devaluation of the dollar.
Meanwhile, capital inflows into developing countries have surged since the 2007-2009 global financial crisis.
In 2010, China’s capital-account surplus stood at $230 billion, and capital inflows remain large this year.
With ever-increasing gross dollar assets and gross renminbi liabilities, a stronger renminbi means that China will suffer additional welfare losses from the valuation effect of exchange-rate movements.
(It is worth noting that this is not solely a Chinese phenomenon; all major emerging-market economies are faced with the same fate.)
During the 1997-1998 Asian financial crisis, East Asia’s economies paid heavily for excessive accumulation of dollar-denominated debts.
Because governments failed to defend their currencies, they lost hundreds of billions of dollars in foreign-exchange reserves to international speculators.
Whether for self-insurance or to maintain a competitive exchange rate, East Asia has since then accumulated a huge volume of dollar-denominated assets.
This time around, thanks to the deterioration of the US fiscal position and the Federal Reserve’s expansionary monetary policy, “the long-term risk [for] emerging markets’ external balance sheets is shifting,” as Eswar Prasad of the Brookings Institution has pointed out, “to the asset side.”
Rather than confronting a debt crisis, as in 1997-98, emerging-market economies now face an “asset crisis,” but they will suffer the same result: great capital losses on their foreign-exchange reserves.
Indeed, the magnitude of the losses will be on par with that of Asian financial crisis, if not higher.
While China’s government should make greater efforts to rebalance the economy by conventional measures, it also should focus more attention on adjusting the currency structure of the country’s gross assets and gross liabilities.
In particular, China should try to replace its dollar-denominated assets with renminbi-denominated assets, and its renminbi-denominated liabilities with dollar-denominated liabilities.
If China cannot do very much about existing gross assets and gross liabilities, it should address new assets and liabilities in order to&#160;minimize future capital losses.
In short, China must take into consideration the ongoing asset crisis facing emerging economies, especially when considering highly consequential questions such as full renminbi convertibility and the currency’s internationalization.
The Autumn of the Commandante
The death watch for Fidel Castro is something that only Gabriel Garcia Marquez could get right.
His novel Autumn of the Patriarch captures perfectly the moral squalor, political paralysis, and savage ennui that enshrouds a society awaiting the death of a long-term dictator.
Commandante Fidel’s departure from power, of course, will be solely a matter of biology, and the few pictures of him that have emerged since he took ill last year clearly show biology at work.
When the end comes, change in Cuba could be as vast as any that greeted the end of the last century’s great dictators.
Stalin, Franco, Tito, Mao: all were mostly alike in their means and methods.
How they passed from the scene, however, was often very different, and these differences can shape societies for years and decades to come.
Consider the Soviet Union.
On March 9, 1953, from the Gulf of Finland to the Bering Sea, everything stood still; likewise in Warsaw, Budapest, Prague, and East Berlin.
In Beijing, Mao Zedong himself bowed low before an immense effigy of Joseph Stalin.
Huge mourning crowds, crying, nearly hysterical, could be seen all over the vast empire Stalin had ruled.
Yet, within days, the word Stalinism was being expunged from a new Soviet dictionary, and three years later my grandfather, Nikita Khrushchev, denounced Stalin’s “cult of personality” in his famous “Secret Speech” to the Communist Party’s XXth Congress.
The Khrushchev thaw that followed may have been short-lived, but for the first time in Soviet history the possibility of change was opened – a possibility that Mikhail Gorbachev seized upon in 1985.
The death of Marshal Josip Broz Tito brought forth an outpouring of another sort.
For decades, his personal rule imposed a false unity on Yugoslavia.
Following his death in 1980, that artificial state began to unravel, culminating in the genocidal wars in Bosnia, Croatia, and Kosovo of the 1990’s.
Not all long-term dictatorships, however, end in disintegration and mayhem.
Mao’s death allowed for Deng Xiaoping’s return from disgrace and internal exile.
Deng quickly routed Mao’s “Gang of Four” heirs, and in only a few years opened China’s economy, fueling a capitalist revolution that has transformed China far more completely – and successfully – than Mao’s socialist revolution ever did.
The Communist Party, of course, remains in power, and Mao’s portrait still looms over Tiananmen Square.
But both are mere relics of ideas and ideals that in reality have been consigned to the dustbin of history.
Spain, too, escaped violent dissolution when Generalissimo Francisco Franco’s fascist dictatorship collapsed at his death.
Here the old dictator can take some credit, for by re-establishing the monarchy under King Juan Carlos just before he died, Franco provided Spain with a foundation on which to build anew.
Little did Franco realize that what Juan Carlos would build, with the help of a clever young Franco-era bureaucrat named Adolfo Suarez, was the modern, democratic Spain of today.
It was no accident that communist countries were (and are) usually run by geriatric leaders, and democracies by younger men and women.
That difference matters.
Old leaders can preside successfully over smoothly running countries that need no radical re-examination of their policies and purposes.
There are exceptions to this rule, of course – Churchill, Adenauer, Deng, Reagan – but states cannot count on fortune bringing an exceptional ruler their way.
Younger leaders are more likely to be able to cope with the chop and change of difficult times.
Political competition makes it necessary for all politicians, whatever their age, to stay on their toes, anticipate new problems, and remain open to new ideas aimed at addressing them.
No one can keep himself ensconced in high office subject only to death or his own boredom.
One-party systems, one-man charismatic dictatorships, or a mixture of the two, as in Tito’s Yugoslavia, are a guarantee of sclerotic minds and inert governments.
So what will become of Cuba after Fidel departs?
Many observers portray Raúl Castro, Fidel’s younger brother and designated heir, as a pragmatist – the “practical Castro.”
When Cuba’s lavish Soviet subsidies vanished in the early 1990’s, it was Raúl who recognized that the regime’s survival required economic reforms, pressing to allow private agricultural markets to reopen in order to boost food production and stave off possible starvation.
However, this is the same man who, as the head of Cuba’s internal security apparatus, for many years represented the knuckles of an iron-fisted regime, directly responsible for imprisoning – and often torturing – thousands of dissidents.
So perhaps the best that could be hoped for is a Russian-style experiment with liberalization that is quickly called off by the regime’s nervous Old Guard.
Moreover, with the support of oil-rich allies like Venezuela’s President Hugo Chávez – and with the recent discovery of significant crude reserves off Cuba’s own coast – introducing reforms could well become less urgent.
In that case, Raúl may seek to cling grimly to the fossilized system that he helped build and maintain with such brutality.
But Raúl Castro is an old man himself, so we can hope for the prospect that some Deng or, better yet, a Suarez will ultimately emerge from the wreckage of Fidelism.
But for now, younger communist officials, like Foreign Minister Felipe Perez Roque, remain ideological hardliners whom many Cubans refer to as “los Taliban.”
If they take control and stick to their guns, Cuba could face another long biology lesson.
The Ayatollah Contemplates Compromise
WASHINGTON, DC – The recent nuclear talks in Istanbul between the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council, plus Germany, and Iran have shifted the world’s focus to the possible terms of a deal when the sides meet again, probably in Baghdad on May 23.
So, what accounts for the new seeming willingness of Iran’s leaders to reach an agreement?
Economic sanctions and political isolation have, of course, deeply hurt the regime, especially the Revolutionary Guards, whose leaders and industries have been directly targeted by the international community.
But these are not the only factors.
The regime’s propaganda machine is already portraying the Istanbul talks as a triumph for the Islamic Republic and a setback for the West.
Indeed, it is setting the stage for a significant compromise by preparing both the Iranian public and the global community.
Iran, it must be remembered, cares as much about its image as it does about its nuclear achievements.
A successful strategy must allow Iran to come out of talks with a smile on its face, even if it gives up the most sensitive parts of its nuclear program.
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Iran’s Supreme Leader, has made an uncompromising nuclear policy central to his domestic authority.
For years, he sabotaged the efforts of Iranian officials who might have cut a deal with the West because he doubted their loyalty to him.
Those whom Khamenei did trust were not skillful enough to craft a policy of compromise that would preserve his ability to portray himself as a tough anti-American leader.
As the talks move ahead, the United States and its allies must stick to a dual-track policy: intensifying political pressure and economic sanctions, while negotiating seriously.
They should insist on transparency in Iran’s nuclear program, while offering a gradual easing of sanctions in exchange for verifiable guarantees that the regime is not pursuing nuclear weapons.
If things break down, the possibility of a pre-emptive military strike, whether by Israel or the US, remains an option.
Regardless of their outcome, the new negotiations have put Khamenei in a perilous position.
As the person in charge of Iran’s nuclear policy, compromising is as dangerous for him as digging in his heels.
This might be the last chance for Iran to change its nuclear policy, prevent military confrontation, and save the economy.
But, for Khamenei, nuclear concessions might also undermine his monopoly over domestic politics.
Khamenei is not a suicidal jihadist.
In 23 years of leadership, he has avoided risky domestic and foreign policies.
But he is not immune to miscalculation.
In 2005, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad relied on Khamenei’s financial and political support to win the presidency.
Today, however, Khamenei is profoundly regretful about that choice.
Ahmadinejad disobeys his orders, tries to discredit him with the public by challenging his authority, and undermines key institutions, including the judiciary and the parliament.
It is an open secret in Iranian political circles that Khamenei also regrets permitting volunteers of the Basij militia to attack the British embassy last November.
The troubling conclusion to be drawn from these episodes is that even if Khamenei is not looking for a military confrontation, he may very well be susceptible to misjudgments about how to avoid one.
Khamenei faces a deeper problem: he is not Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, his predecessor and the Islamic Republic’s founding Supreme Leader, who shaped the system’s identity.
Khomeini was so self-confident, and his authority was so well consolidated, that he was not afraid to make concessions if he thought it necessary for the regime’s well-being.
Khamenei’s political standing is closely associated with the current nuclear policy, and he lacks the charisma and authority necessary to move the political and religious elite toward compromise.
For Khamenei, nuclear capability is not a goal but rather a means to force the West and its regional allies to recognize the regime’s strategic interests.
Moreover, he is convinced that the West is seeking to undermine the Islamic Republic through a “soft” assault of culture and politics, and that compromise on the nuclear program would lead inevitably to concessions on human rights and democracy, and eventually to regime change.
Given this, a guarantee that the West, especially the US, is not seeking the overthrow of Iran’s leaders would have to be a key component of a nuclear compromise.
Indeed, Khamenei might well demand that this guarantee cover Farsi broadcasts, financial and political support to opposition groups, and censorship of the Internet.
The nuclear crisis should be resolved through negotiations, before, in US President Barack Obama’s phrase, the window closes.
The problem for Khamenei – and thus for those negotiating with Iran – is that there is scant benefit for him in success.
The biggest obstacle to a successful outcome is the contradiction of his situation: to compromise, he must save face; but, to save face, he must not compromise.
The Ayatollahs’ Tipping Point
SOUTHAMPTON, ENGLAND – Once the crowds were in the streets in Tehran, one could, if one knew the script, begin the countdown: if today there are mass protests, tomorrow there will be threats of retaliation in the name of “national security.” By day three, we will see journalists imprisoned and media shut down; day four, bloody reprisals against protesters by secret police; day five, arrests of key opposition figures.
Sure enough, right on schedule, each of those steps was set in motion in Iran, within the space of a week.
These same ten steps occurred in Thailand in 2006 – in ten days, and in seven days in Myanmar a year later.
The script is so well known by now among the world’s would-be dictators that it can take less than a week to lock down a country.
None of this should surprise anyone anymore.
We should understand that this time-tested script for establishing or enforcing a dictatorship exists – but so does a counter-strategy for opening up a closed society.
When a would-be dictator – anywhere, any time, on the right or the left – wants to close an open society or initiate a crackdown against a democracy movement, he follows ten classic steps: invoke a threat, create secret prisons, develop a paramilitary force, establish a surveillance apparatus, arbitrarily detain citizens, infiltrate citizen groups, target key individuals, go after journalists, call criticism “treason,” and subvert the rule of law.
Time and again, when mass street protest has been sustained for more than a week or two, a regime – even one that has begun beating and arresting protesters –eventually finds it practically and psychologically difficult to sustain its hold.
Street protest, if it can sustain itself for more than that crucial first week, has an effect that is both tactical and emotional; mass protest during the French Revolution made it clear to the courtiers that this rebellion would be too profound to quell in the usual manner; street protests in the American colonies, in the face of arrest or worse, made the colonies ungovernable even before George III waged a costly, unpopular war.
In Estonia in the 1980’s, the small, illegal protests that surrounded the public singing of the banned national anthem grew, and Estonians were emboldened as their numbers swelled by the thousands daily.
In the United States, street protests helped bring the Vietnam war to an end, and the mass protests of the civil rights movement showed that, as Martin Luther King, Jr. put it,  “business as usual” could no longer continue.
According to King, disruptive mass protest exposes the tension that has been hidden or ignored, so that it can be addressed.
Iran’s citizens – and all people longing to resist a tyrannical government or to protest in an established democracy – should bear that lesson in mind.
Protest that works must disrupt business as usual and, ideally, stop traffic.
Iranian citizens have shown great courage, and they would do well to continue pouring into the street and sitting down, lying down, or standing still.
Unless a regime is willing to start machine-gunning its citizens, peaceful, steady, long-term disruption of “business as usual” always works.
What the West can do is apply pressure on Iran – and on other governments in the future – to assure and account for the safety of protesters.
Natan Sharansky said that this tactic – the West tracking and demanding accountability for the treatment of individual internal dissenters – helped break up the Soviet Union.
In this crisis, the US president should form a united front with human rights groups, which can advise him exactly how to follow, sustain, and support those Iranians who have been or may yet be arrested, or worse.
Barack Obama says that America “stands with” those who support free assembly.
That will be welcome news to people living under dictatorial regimes installed and propped up by the US, and to the opposition leaders and journalists languishing in US-supported prisons in those countries for having engaged in just such protest. But it is a start.
What a real revolution it would be if the Western democracies did indeed begin to frame their foreign policies with human rights and democratic processes as their benchmark.
The Bad Society
LONDON – How much inequality is acceptable?
Judging by pre-recession standards, a great deal of it, especially in the United States and Britain.
New Labour's Peter Mandelson voiced the spirit of the past 30 years when he remarked that he felt intensely “relaxed” about people getting “filthy” rich.
Getting rich was what the “new economy” was all about.
And the newly rich kept an increasing part of what they got, as taxes were slashed to encourage them to get still richer, and efforts to divide up the pie more fairly were abandoned.
The results were predictable.
In 1970, the pre-tax pay of a top American CEO was about 30 times higher than that of the average worker; today it is 263 times higher.
In Britain, the basic pay (without bonuses) of a top CEO was 47 times the average worker’s in 1970; in 2010, it was 81 times more.
Since the late 1970s, the post-tax income of the richest fifth has increased five times as fast as the poorest fifth in the US, and four times as fast in the UK.
Even more important has been the growing gap between average (mean) and median income: that is, the proportion of the population living on half or less of the average income in the US and Britain has been growing.
Although some countries have resisted the trend, inequality has been increasing over the last 30-40 years in the world as a whole.
Inequality within countries has increased, and inequality between countries increased sharply after 1980, before leveling off in the late 1990’s and finally falling back after 2000, as catch-up growth in developing countries accelerated.
The growth of inequality leaves ideological defenders of capitalism unfazed.
In a competitive market system,&#160;people are said to be paid what they are worth: so&#160;top CEOs add 263 times more value to the American economy than the workers they employ.
But the poor, it is claimed, are still better off than they would have been had the gap been artificially narrowed by trade unions or governments.&#160;The only secure way to get “trickle-down” wealth to trickle faster is by cutting marginal tax rates still further, or, alternatively, by improving the “human capital” of the poor, so that they become worth more to their employers.
This is a method of economic reasoning that is calculated to appeal&#160;to those at the top of the income pyramid.
After all, there is no way whatsoever to calculate the marginal products of different&#160;individuals in cooperative productive activities.
Top pay rates are simply fixed by comparing them to other top pay rates in similar jobs.
In the past,&#160;pay differentials were settled by reference to what seemed fair and reasonable.
The greater the knowledge, skill, and responsibility attached to a job, the higher the acceptable and accepted reward for doing it.
But all of this occurred within bounds that maintained some connection between the top and the bottom.
Top business salaries were rarely more than 20 or 30 times higher&#160;than average wages, and for most people differentials were far less.
Thus, the income of doctors and lawyers used to be about five times higher than that of manual workers, not ten times or more, as they are today.
It is the breakdown of non-economistic, common-sense ways of valuing human activities –framing them in larger social contexts –&#160;that has led to today’s spurious methods of calculating pay.
There is a strange, though little-noticed, consequence of the failure to distinguish value from price: the only way offered to most people to boost their incomes is through economic growth.
In poor countries, this is reasonable; there is not enough wealth to spread round.
But, in developed countries, concentration on economic growth is an extraordinarily inefficient way to increase general prosperity, because it means that an economy must grow by, say, 3% to raise the earnings of the majority by, say, 1%.
Nor is it by any means certain that the human capital of the majority can be increased faster than that of the minority, who capture all of the educational advantages flowing from superior wealth, family conditions, and connections.
Redistribution in these circumstances is a more secure way to achieve a broad base of consumption, which is itself a guarantee of economic stability.
The attitude of indifference to income distribution is in fact a recipe for economic growth without end, with the rich, very rich, and super-rich drawing ever further ahead of the rest.
This must be wrong for moral and even practical reasons.
In moral terms, it puts the prospect of the good life perpetually beyond reach for most people.
And, in practical terms, it is bound to destroy the social cohesion on which democracy – or, indeed, any type of peaceful, contented society – ultimately rests.
The Bailout Bias
WARSAW – The seemingly never-ending debate over the eurozone’s fiscal problems has focused excessively on official bailouts, in particular the proposed purchase of government bonds on a massive scale by the European Central Bank.
Indeed, we are warned almost daily – by the International Monetary Fund and others – that if bailout efforts are not greatly expanded, the euro will perish.
For some, this stance reflects the benefits that they would gain from such purchases; for others, it reflects mistaken beliefs.
Creditors obviously support bailing out debtor countries to protect themselves.
Many political leaders also welcome official crisis lending, which can ease market pressure on them.
The media, meanwhile, always thrives on being the bearers of bad news.
Mistaken beliefs, on the other hand, are reflected in metaphors like “contagion” and “domino effect,” which imply that financial markets become blind, virulent, and indiscriminate when they are disturbed.
Such terms provoke fear that, once confidence in any one country is lost, all others are in danger.
According to this logic, it follows that only a formidable countervailing power – such as massive official intervention – can halt the ravenous dynamics of financial markets.
Widespread use of expressions like “aim a bazooka at the eurozone,” and “it’s them or us,” demonstrates a pervasive Manichean view of financial-market behavior vis-à-vis governments.
But financial markets, even when agitated, are not blind.
They are capable of distinguishing, however imperfectly and belatedly, between macroeconomic conditions in various countries.
This is why interest-rate spreads within the eurozone have been widening, with Germany and the Nordic countries benefiting from lower borrowing costs and the “problem” countries being punished by a high-risk premium.
Another, related, fallacy is the assumption that reforms can reap benefits only in the long run.
This misconception reduces the short-term solution to affected governments’ sharply higher borrowing costs to bailouts.
In fact, properly structured reforms have both short- and long-term effects.
For example, one does not need to wait for the completion of a pension reform to see reduced yields on government bonds.
Markets react to credible announcements of reforms, as well as to their implementation.
The countries that have been severely affected by the financial crisis illustrate the impact of reform.
One group – Bulgaria, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania (BELL) – experienced a surge in yields on their government bonds in 2009, followed by a sharp decline.
Another group – Portugal, Ireland, Italy, Greece, and Spain (PIIGS) – has had more mixed outcomes: yields have soared on Greek and Portuguese bonds, while Ireland’s were falling until recently.
These differences can be explained largely by the variations in the extent and structure of these countries’ reforms.
Proper reforms can produce confidence and growth.
Official crisis lending can buy time to prepare, and it can help to stop a banking-sector crisis, but it cannot substitute for reform.
All bailouts can create moral hazard, because they weaken the incentive to implement reforms that will avoid bad outcomes in the future.
To some extent, official crisis lending replaces the pressure from financial markets with pressure from experts and creditor countries’ politicians.
Among the proposed eurozone bailouts, none has come under the spotlight as much as the idea that the ECB should purchase massive quantities of the problem countries’ bonds.
Advocates of this approach stretch the concept of “lender of last resort” to suggest that providing liquidity to commercial banks is the same as funding governments.
They also present the alternative to a bailout as a “catastrophe.”
Finally, they cite similar policies implemented by the United States Federal Reserve, the Bank of England, and the Bank of Japan – as though merely mentioning past examples is evidence that ECB lending will work.
These rhetorical devices must not overshadow careful analysis of the various options.
There has been surprisingly little comparative analysis of the effects of quantitative easing (QE) in Japan, the US, and Britain.
Yet the evidence indicates that QE is no free lunch. Although it may offer potential benefits in the short run, costs and risks invariably emerge later.
In Japan, QE may have contributed to delays in economic reform and restructuring, thereby weakening longer-term economic growth and exacerbating fiscal distress.
In the US, it failed to avert the slowdown during 2008-2011, while America’s 2011 inflation figures may turn out to be higher than they were in 2007.
In Britain, economic growth is even slower, while inflation is much higher.
And these countries’ QE has also fueled asset bubbles in the world economy.
Massive purchases of government bonds by the ECB would be the worst type of bailout.
The fact that such purchases are potentially unlimited would exacerbate the problem of moral hazard. It would also increase the risk of inflation, along with other negative economic consequences.
Moreover, such a bailout could undermine the ECB’s trustworthiness as guardian of the euro’s stability, particularly in light of the new political power that it would obtain.
And it would further undermine the rule of law in the EU at a time when confidence in the Union’s governing treaties is already fragile.
The key to resolving the eurozone crisis lies in properly structured reforms in the ailing countries.
Indeed, experience shows that there is no substitute.
The Balkan Endgame
ROME – Twenty years after the collapse of Yugoslavia and the communist regime in Albania, the western Balkans region is at a turning point once again.
Slovenia is in the European Union, Croatia is very close to membership, and all of the region’s other countries have started along the EU path.
Yet there remains a danger that this positive progress can still be undermined.
Indeed, although EU integration is already bringing democracy and stability to the countries of the Balkans, it is an unfinished job, and completing that task is both vital and uncertain.
The current economic crisis is leading public opinion in the western Balkans to lose confidence that peace and economic growth are still within reach, creating the risk of a possible slowdown in the integration process.
As a whole, the region has made notable progress. Pro-European governments are now in place across the Balkans.
The recent elections in Bosnia show that the electorate is still ethnically oriented.
It is our task – with the support of the new Bosnian leadership – to redirect this approach to a genuine European mindset.
Democratic reforms are proving to be an increasingly effective cure for the instability created in the past by nationalism and ethnic strains. The key issue is to ensure that the western Balkans keeps its focus on the European agenda, which means that the EU must provide guidance and encouragement through tangible initiatives.
That is why, at the EU-United States summit held in Prague last year, I proposed an eight-pronged initiative, elements of which have now been fully or partially taken up, including the Conference held in Sarajevo last June where the EU reiterated its commitment to the integration process of the Balkans region as whole.
New EU membership applications confirm the desire of Balkan governments to engage seriously in internal reforms.
But the road to EU membership involves painful sacrifice, so each country should be judged on its own merits.
From its part, Europe is delivering as soon as the counties are adopting the necessary reforms.
The EU needs to give clear signals to public opinion across the region that meeting EU benchmarks has tangible effects on their lives.
Serbia is emblematic of the importance of doing so, as public support there for the EU integration process has risen sharply in a only months, from 40% to 60%, thanks in large part to the EU’s decision of earlier this year to liberalize the visa regime.
The EU integration process is also proving a powerful driver for much-needed reform in Bosnia.
Despite the country’s worrisome political stalemate, and the seeming entrenchment, at least for the moment, of ethnic politics, the chance to grab the “low-hanging fruit” of visa liberalization did encourage the Bosnian leadership to make a serious effort at reform in a relatively short period of time.
Over the last 20 years, the goal of EU membership has proved an invaluable asset for stabilizing, democratizing, and modernizing the western Balkans.
Now it is up to leaders in the region to overcome the remaining obstacles, starting with an understanding between the governments of Belgrade and Pristina.
The EU has offered to play a facilitating role: we urge both leaderships to promptly seize this opportunity, with a view to their states’ further steps along the path towards the European family to which all Balkan countries naturally belong.
The EU’s ability to overcome “enlargement fatigue” and maintain its commitments to the region are also dependent on public support, so we must not stint in our efforts to convey to our citizens the political and economic advantages of accession of the countries of the western Balkans to the EU.
The Balkans on Trial
Serbia’s long tragedy looks like it is coming to an end.
The death of Slobodan Milosevic has just been followed by Montenegro’s referendum on independence.
Independence for Kosovo, too, is inching closer.
The wars of the Yugoslav succession have not only been a trial for the peoples of that disintegrated country; they also raised huge questions about the exercise of international justice.
Do international tribunals of the sort Milosevic faced before his death promote or postpone serious self-reflection and reconciliation in damaged societies?
Do they strengthen or undermine the political stability needed to rebuild wrecked communities and shattered economies?
The evidence on these questions is mixed.
Indeed, the record of the International War Crimes Tribunal for Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), based in The Hague, may be instructive in judging the credibility of the strategy of using such trials as part of the effort to end civil and other wars.
In 13 years, the ICTY, with 1,200 employees, spent roughly $1.25 billion to convict only a few dozen war criminals.
Moreover, whereas members of all ethnic groups committed crimes, in its first years, the ICTY indicted and prosecuted far more Serbs than others, fueling a perception, even among opponents of Milosevic’s regime, that the tribunal was political and anti-Serbian.
We may regret that Milosevic’s own trial ended without a conclusion.
But a conviction only of Milosevic, however justified, without parallel penalties for his Croat, Bosniak, and Kosovo-Albanian counterparts would hardly have contributed to serious self-reflection within the post-Yugoslav nations.
To be sure, the arrest of General Ante Gotovina, adored by many Croats as a hero, but responsible for the brutal expulsion of a quarter-million Serbs from Croatia and north-west Bosnia – the biggest ethnic cleansing in Europe since WWII – improves the ICTY’s standing.
But Milosevic’s Croatian and Bosniak counterparts, Franjo Tudjman and Alija Izetbegovic, respectively, remained unindicted when they died.
So, too, the main commanders of the Kosovo Liberation Army (UCK).
Ramush Haradinaj, the prime minister of Kosovo, was accused but later released from detention.
I have always been convinced that Milosevic should have been put on trial in Belgrade.
After all, Milosevic’s critics and political rivals such as the journalist Slavko Curuvija and Milosevic’s former mentor, Ivan Stambolic, were assasinated by Serb police agents, who also tried three times to murder the opposition leader Vuk Draskovic.
There was, moreover, ample evidence of corruption among Milosevic’s inner circle, including members of his immediate family.
Holding the trial in Belgrade might have served better to catalyze a sober examination of the past.
The atmosphere was certainly favorable.
The majority of Serbs hold Milosevic responsible for the decline of their society.
Even before his fall, the opposition controlled most big Serbian cities, and in 2000 he lost the election that he called to shore up his authority.
The relatively small turnout at his funeral confirmed that only a minority of Serbs considers him a national hero.
Meanwhile, with the exception of Slovenia, the democratic transformation in the post-Yugoslav region remains uneasy.
Wars, ethnic cleansing, embargoes, and sanctions created not only psychological traumas, but also black markets, smuggling, large-scale corruption, and de facto rule by mafias.
The bombing of Serbia by NATO in 1999 heavily damaged its economy, with serious consequences for neighboring countries.
The definitive end of what remains of Yugoslavia may – at least today – pose no danger of war, but the Muslim Sandjak region will now be divided by state boundaries, and Albanian extremists, with their dreams of a Greater Albania, believe their influence in a separate Montenegro will be reinforced with a yes vote on independence.
Most Serbs and Croats in Bosnia believe that the best solution to the problems of that sad country would be to join the territories that they inhabit with their “mother” countries.
Then there is the unresolved status of Kosovo, where the Albanian majority demands independence, and extremists threaten to fight for it.
As one Kosovo Liberation Army commander warned, “If we kill one KFOR soldier a day, these cowards will leave.”
With independence, the extremists would gain a territorial base from which to undermine Macedonia, southern Montenegro, and southern Serbia, jeopardizing stability in the entire region.
Serbia is offering Kosovo the formula “less than independence, more than autonomy.”
It demands security guarantees for the Serbian minority and cultural monuments, as well as control of the borders with Albania and Macedonia to stop traffic in arms, drugs, and women, and to prevent the use of Kosovo by Albanian extremists.
Any resolution of Kosovo’s status is problematic, but the international community should not repeat old mistakes.
In 1991, the principle that only a politically negotiated division of Yugoslavia would be recognized was abandoned.
Now, as then, a change of boundaries without the consent of all concerned parties would not only violate international law, but could also lead to violence.
The international community must not be gulled into thinking that war-crimes trials marginalize, rather than mobilize, extremists and nationalists.
Pressure on Croatia and Serbia to arrest and hand over suspects – a condition of EU accession negotiations – has yielded several extraditions and may result in more.
But further trials alone are unlikely to bring about the long-term settlements that the region’s fragile states need in order to ensure stability and democratic development.
The people of the Balkans should feel that the EU offers them political and economic support.
They deserve it.
The Banality of Abu Ghraib
As more images of debased Iraqi detainees ricochet around the world, many viewers are as bewildered as they are outraged.
How could ordinary American soldiers, whether they were following orders or acting on their own, appear so untroubled, even exhilarated by their brutish conduct?
To be sure, over-eager military-intelligence interrogators, as well as the Bush Administration's high-handed attitude toward international law, helped precipitate the crisis.
But few commentators have focused enough attention on the site of this macabre theatre - not a battlefield, but a prison.
Prison experts are the least surprised by the grotesque reports filtering out of Abu Ghraib.
They recognize that prisons, as uniquely divisive and authoritarian institutions, regularly give rise to behaviors that appear depraved to the wider world but come to seem acceptable - even normal - behind bars.
Indeed, some of the most publicized prison scandals have erupted in the United States, which incarcerates more people in absolute and per capita terms than any other country.
Compared to Saddam Hussein's murderous old regime at Abu Ghraib, of course, American prisons are relatively well managed.
But as mandatory sentencing rules have landed more and more Americans behind bars, incidents that bear a disquieting resemblance to the degenerate cruelties photographed in Iraq have come increasingly to light.
The connection is no accident.
Some of the US scandals tie American prison personnel directly to Abu Ghraib.
In Virginia, for instance, human rights advocates report that inmates at two "supermax" prisons have been hooded and subjected to "excessive and malicious use of force by prison staff," often involving electric shock devices and rubber bullets.
John J. Armstrong, now the assistant director of operations for US prisons in Iraq, resigned from his previous post when he was named in two wrongful death lawsuits at one of those prisons.
Sergeant Ivan Frederick, the man directly in charge of the infamous Abu Ghraib "hard site," previously worked as a Virginia corrections officer.
In Pennsylvania, a 1998 inquiry into a supermax prison notorious for racist guards revealed videotapes of routine beatings and elaborate rituals of humiliation.
Specialist Charles A. Graner, identified as a ringleader in the Abu Ghraib depravity, has worked at that prison since 1996.
Some of the worst abuses have surfaced in Texas, America's death penalty capital and home to more prisoners than Germany, France, Belgium, and the Netherlands combined.
When George W. Bush was governor, a federal judge ruled that the state's entire penal system was pervaded by a "culture of sadistic and malicious violence."
Texas prison guards regularly rely on excessive force, the judge concluded, officials ignore sexual enslavement, and the state's isolation units function as "virtual incubators of psychoses."
Despite this appalling record, the US occupation authorities in Iraq appointed a former director of the Texas prison system, Lane McCotter, to help set up operations at Abu Ghraib in May 2003.
Two months earlier, McCotter's private prison company was cited by the US Justice Department for lax supervision and mistreatment of inmates at a New Mexico jail.
Before that, McCotter led Utah's corrections department, but was forced to resign after the death of a schizophrenic inmate who had been stripped naked and strapped to a restraining chair for 16 hours.
Of course, malicious imprisonment is by no means uniquely American.
Even in Western Europe, which boasts the most rehabilitation-oriented penal systems, ghastly scandals periodically erupt.
In 2000, the chief physician at Paris's crumbling La Santé penitentiary, Veronique Vasseur, wrote a scathing exposé of "virtually medieval" conditions, complete with rat infestations, rotten food, extreme temperature variations, desperate self-mutilations, bullying, drug-dealing guards, and widespread sexual assault, often perpetrated by staff.