If we model smell on local terms, we can trace how nasal neurons interact with scent particles, sending signals through a network of other neurons to the brain.
We have good abstractions in structural biology to describe this.
But these neurons are also part of an adaptive, regenerative system.
Sensory neurons die a programmed death; you literally have a new sense of smell every month.
Modeling it requires the consideration of more than just local signaling.
Neurons operate as a cooperative group: more arrive at the location than are needed for a simple replacement.
In order to facilitate the replacement, the extras become part of a dialog with surrounding cells, and others deep in the brain, then sacrifice themselves.
To explain why they voluntarily die, we would need a new system-level vocabulary.
It does not stop there.
When your neurons are replaced, they change.
If you are newly in love (or experience a trauma) and a scent is associated with it, you may develop a heightened sensitivity to that scent.
Your physio-cognitive apparatus evolves.
This process interests researchers enormously, because it is one of only two contexts in which neural regeneration occurs.
If it were understood, it could lead to cures for many crippling diseases, both neurological (like Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s) and degenerative (including those, like cancer, associated with aging).
One way to understand how this higher-level coherence emerges is to study it in a more accessible form.
As it happens, there is a naturally occurring information structure in which the needed behaviors are easier to observe and explain.
That structure can be found in stories.
Stories are remarkable for the way that they allow us to comprehend new concepts, and continue to make sense of them, even when they involve numerous contexts and unexpected associations.
We take the resulting narrative effects for granted: surprise endings, intriguing situations, and a compulsion to read or watch until the finish.
If models of biology and AI included these dynamics, they would demonstrate how unexpected elements can emerge from an evolving coherence.
Indeed, incorporating this principle into both fields could result in new diagnostic capabilities and new forms of individualized treatment, with a different therapy designed for each person.
An infection such as the coronavirus is currently countered with a vaccine tailored to block it.
But what if there was a way to “tune” bodies to reject all infections?
For example, there are a few cases of natural immunity to HIV, but we are unable to understand why.
The challenge in biomedical and computational research is to model the dynamics between diverse processes at the level of whole systems.
Once we can do this, we are much more likely to develop AI tools that are capable of unexpected breakthroughs in understanding how the body supports and resists illness.
East Asia’s Turning Point
NEW DELHI – Political transitions in East Asia promise to mark a defining moment in the region’s jittery geopolitics.
After the ascension in China of Xi Jinping, regarded by the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) as its own man, Japan seems set to swing to the right in its impending election – an outcome likely to fuel nationalist passion on both sides of the Sino-Japanese rivalry.
Japan’s expected rightward turn comes more than three years after voters put the left-leaning Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ) in power.
By contrast, South Korea’s election – scheduled for December 19, just three days after the Japanese go to the polls – could take that country to the left, after the nearly five-year rule of rightist President Lee Myung-bak, who proved to be a polarizing leader.
These political transitions could compound East Asia’s challenges, which include the need to institute a regional balance of power and dispense with historical baggage that weighs down interstate relationships, particularly among China, Japan, and South Korea.
Booming trade in the region has failed to mute or moderate territorial and other disputes; on the contrary, it has only sharpened regional geopolitics and unleashed high-stakes brinkmanship.
Economic interdependence cannot deliver regional stability unless rival states undertake genuine efforts to mend their political relations.
The scandals surrounding the top aides to Lee – nicknamed “the Bulldozer” from his career as a construction industry executive – have complicated matters for the ruling Saenuri Party’s candidate, Park Geun-hye, and buoyed the hopes of her leftist rival, Moon Jae-in of the Democratic United Party.
Park is the daughter of former president, General Park Chung-hee, who seized power in a military coup in 1961.
Reining in South Korea’s powerful chaebol (family-run conglomerates) has become a key issue in the presidential election, with even Park favoring tighter control over them, although it was her father’s regime that helped build them with generous government support.&#160;Her populist stance on the chaebol suggests that, if elected, she might similarly pander to nationalist sentiment by taking a tough stance against Japan, especially to play down her father’s service in Japan’s military while Korea was under Japanese colonial rule.
But, even if Moon becomes president, the new strains in South Korea’s relationship with Japan, owing to the revival of historical issues, may not be easy to mend.
Earlier this year, Lee, at the last minute, canceled the scheduled signing of the “General Security of Military Information Agreement” with Japan, which would have established military intelligence-sharing between the two countries, both US allies, for the first time.
Lee also scrapped a bilateral plan to finalize a military-related Acquisition and Cross-Servicing Agreement.
Weeks later, he provocatively visited the contested islets known as the Dokdo Islands in South Korea (which controls them) and the Takeshima Islands in Japan.
China, meanwhile, has cast a long shadow over the Japanese parliamentary elections.
In recent months, China has launched a new war of attrition by sending patrol ships frequently to the waters around the Japanese-controlled Senkaku islands, which China calls Diaoyu.
This physical assertiveness followed often-violent anti-Japanese protests in China in September, while a continuing informal boycott of Japanese goods has led to a sharp fall in Japan’s exports to China, raising the risk of another Japanese recession.
The DPJ’s 2009 election victory had been expected to lead to a noticeable warming of Japan’s ties with China.
After all, the DPJ came to power on a promise to balance Japan’s dependence on the US with closer ties with the People’s Republic.
But its bridge-building agenda foundered on growing Chinese assertiveness, leading successive DPJ governments to bolster Japan’s security ties with the US.
China’s behavior has fueled a nationalist backlash in Japan, helping to turn hawkish, marginal politicians like Shintaro Ishihara into important mainstream figures.
Japan may be in economic decline, but it is rising politically.
Indeed, Albert del Rosario, the foreign minister of the Philippines, which was under Japanese occupation during WWII, now strongly supports a re-armed Japan as a counterweight to China.
But the resurgence of nationalism in Japan is only fanning Chinese nationalism, creating a vicious circle from which the two countries are finding it difficult to escape.
Shinzo Abe of the Liberal Democratic Party, who is likely to become Japan’s next prime minister, has vowed to take a tougher line on Senkaku and other disputes with China.
More important, the LDP has called for revising Article 9 of Japan’s US-imposed post-1945 constitution, which renounces war.
The risks posed by increasing nationalism and militarism to regional peace have already been highlighted by the rise of a new Chinese dynasty of “princelings,” or sons of revolutionary heroes who have widespread contacts in the military.
The real winner from the recent appointment of the conservative-dominated, seven-member Politburo Standing Committee is the PLA, whose rising clout has underpinned China’s increasingly assertive foreign policy.
In fact, what distinguishes Xi from China’s other civilian leaders is his strong relationship with the PLA.
As Xi rose through the Communist Party ranks, he forged close military ties as a reservist, assuming leadership of a provincial garrison and serving as a key aide to a defense minister.
His wife, Peng Liyuan, is also linked to the military, having served as a civilian member of the army’s musical troupe, and carries an honorary rank of general.
Against this background, the central challenge for East Asia’s major economies – particularly Japan and South Korea – is to resolve the historical issues that are preventing them from charting a more stable and prosperous future.
As a Russian proverb warns, “Forget the past and lose an eye; dwell on the past and lose both eyes.”
New Policy Paradigms for a New World
WASHINGTON, DC – Over the last quarter-century, the global economy enjoyed a remarkable stretch of stable growth and low inflation.
The so-called “Great Moderation” lulled many policymakers into a false sense of security about their ability to manage the economy and deal with financial crises.
But, as the Great Moderation metastasized into the Great Recession, fatal flaws in conventional thinking came to light.
One of the most notable was just how poorly we grasped the linkages between the financial system and the broader economy – as well as the linkages between countries.
Today, as policymakers seek new paradigms for managing the economy in 2011 and beyond, a better understanding of these linkages will be essential to promoting economic growth and reducing the risk of crises. Equally important is the realization that by working together, we can build a more successful and more stable global economy, for the benefit of all countries.
Let me spell out what this means for three policy objectives: building a stronger and safer financial sector, achieving more balanced and more stable growth, and managing large and volatile capital flows.
A stronger and safer financial system is the bedrock of a successful economy.
This requires strong regulation, with a sensible rulebook for financial markets and institutions.
And, to ensure that everyone plays by the rules, financial institutions must be supervised intensively.
Now, even with the best rules and supervision, crises will still occur – which is why we need effective resolution mechanisms to deal with institutions that get into trouble.
And, finally, given powerful interactions within the financial sector and across the broader economy, we need an overarching framework to manage risks in the financial system as a whole. 
Much has already been done to advance regulatory reform, notably the recent agreement to strengthen bank capital (Basel III).
Yet we are far from having the supervision needed for proper implementation of the rules.
Effective resolution mechanisms and systemic frameworks remain even more elusive.
Moving to the broader economy, we have learned that growth must be balanced in order to be healthy.
At the national level, this requires tools to prevent excesses in one sector from bringing down the entire economy.
At the global level, it requires a better distribution of growth across countries, in order to prevent destabilizing imbalances.
What are the implications for macroeconomic policy?
Monetary policy needs to look beyond its core focus on low and stable inflation and pay much greater attention to financial stability.
The debate now is how, exactly, to factor this imperative into monetary policy, and how to coordinate the work of monetary and regulatory authorities.
For fiscal policy, the crisis showed the value of maintaining low public debt and deficits during good times: countries with healthier public finances have more space to cushion the economic impact of crises.
But the Great Recession has caused public debt and deficits in many advanced economies to soar.
How quickly fiscal retrenchment should be launched – and the right balance between higher taxes and lower spending – will vary by country, reflecting factors like the strength of the economic recovery, the market’s appetite for debt, and initial spending and revenue ratios.
But the common objective for fiscal policy must be to support durable medium-term growth and job creation.
The distribution of income is another important issue.
In the years leading up to the crisis, inequality rose in many countries, with worrisome consequences for social cohesion.
Rising inequality may also have increased vulnerability to crisis: with fewer people able to dip into savings during bad times, the impact on growth is even larger.
Turning to the international dimension, understanding better how policies adopted in one country spill over onto other economies is key.
This approach lies at the heart of the G-20’s efforts to achieve strong, stable, and balanced global growth.
The International Monetary Fund is also stepping up its work in this area, through “spillover reports” on China, the euro zone, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
Gaining a better appreciation of the financial linkages between countries is also important.
During the crisis, we saw how quickly capital fled from countries previously considered safe bets.
Today, many of these countries are reeling from a veritable tsunami of returning money.
Policymakers in many emerging-market countries worry that surging capital inflows will drive up the value of the local currency, destabilize financial markets, and fuel economic overheating.
Their reactions range from buying up the foreign money to prevent currency appreciation to adopting capital controls, and, in extreme cases, to keeping the money out altogether.
The situation has become quite tense, with talk of “currency wars” and a real risk of financial protectionism.
Clearly, we need to get a better handle on what is driving these capital inflows.
We also need to identify the best policies for dealing with them – keeping in mind the impact of these policies on the global economy as a whole.
And we should explore whether a system of global rules aimed at reducing the volatility of capital flows would be useful.
Global financial insurance is an important related issue.
Just as a family backstops its savings with insurance, countries should be able to tap into a global financial safety net.
Much has already been achieved since the crisis, through more resources for the IMF and new financing instruments.
But more is needed, and the Fund is exploring cooperation with regional financing mechanisms, as well as new ways to use its instruments in a systemic crisis.
Let me tie all of this together.
One principal policy failure in the run-up to the crisis was a lack of imagination: we failed to appreciate just how intricate the global economic and financial web had become.
Let our next failing not be the result of a lack of cooperation.
We must reach across old dividing lines – both within economies and between them – and work together to build a stronger, more resilient global economy.
Unconventional Monetary Policy on Stilts
NEW YORK – With most advanced economies experiencing anemic recoveries from the 2008 financial crisis, their central banks have been forced to move from conventional monetary policy – reducing policy rates via open-market purchases of short-term government bonds – to a range of unconventional policies.
Although the zero nominal bound on interest rates – previously only a theoretical possibility – had been reached and zero-interest-rate policy (ZIRP) had been implemented, growth remained anemic.
So central banks embraced measures that didn’t even exist in their policy toolkit a decade ago.
And now they are poised to do so again.
The list of unconventional measures has been extensive.
There was quantitative easing (QE), or purchases of long-term government bonds, once short-term rates were already zero.
This was accompanied by credit easing (CE), which took the form of central-bank purchases of private or semi-private assets – such as mortgage- and other asset-backed securities, covered bonds, corporate bonds, real-estate trust funds, and even equities via exchange-traded funds.
The aim was to reduce private credit spreads (the difference between yields on private assets and those on government bonds of similar maturity) and to boost, directly and indirectly, the price of other risky assets such as equities and real estate.
Then there was “forward guidance” (FG), the commitment to keep policy rates at zero for longer than economic fundamentals justified, thereby further reducing shorter-term interest rates.
For example, committing to maintain zero policy rates for, say, three years implies that interest rates on securities with up to a three-year maturity should also fall to zero, given that medium-term interest rates are based on expectations concerning short-term rates over the next three years.
Capping things off, there was unsterilized currency-market intervention to boost exports via a weaker currency.
These policies did indeed reduce long- and medium-term interest rates on government securities and mortgage bonds.
They also narrowed credit spreads on private assets, boosted the stock market, weakened the currency, and reduced real interest rates by increasing inflation expectations.
So they were partly effective.
Still, in most advanced economies, growth (and inflation) remained stubbornly low.
There was no shortage of reasons for this.
Given deleveraging from high private and public debts, unconventional monetary policies could prevent severe recessions and outright deflation; but they could not bring about robust growth and 2% inflation.
Moreover, the policy mix was suboptimal.
While monetary policy can play an important role in boosting growth and inflation, structural policies are needed to increase potential growth and keep firms, households, banks, and government from turning into zombies, chronically unable to spend because of too much debt.
And fiscal policies were also necessary to support aggregate demand.
Unfortunately, the political economy of most structural reforms – with their front-loaded costs and back-loaded benefits – implies that they occur only slowly.
At the same time, fiscal policy has been constrained in some countries by high deficits and debts (which jeopardize market access), and in others (the eurozone, the United Kingdom, and the United States, for example) by a political backlash against further fiscal stimulus, leading to austerity measures that undermine short-term growth.
So, like it or not, central banks became and still are the only game in town when it comes to supporting aggregate demand, lifting employment, and preventing deflation.
As a result, unconventional monetary policies – entrenched now for almost a decade – have themselves become conventional.
And, in view of persistent lackluster growth and deflation risk in most advanced economies, monetary policymakers will have to continue their lonely fight with a new set of “unconventional unconventional” monetary policies.
Some have already been implemented.
For example, negative interest policy rates (NIRPs) are now standard in Switzerland, Sweden, Denmark, the eurozone, and Japan, where the excess reserves that banks hold with central banks as a result of QE are taxed with a negative rate.
Policymakers have shifted from working on the quantity of money (QE, CE, and foreign-exchange intervention) to working on the price of money (first ZIRP, then FG, and now NIRP).
Nominal interest rates are now negative not only for overnight debt, but also for ten-year government bonds.
Indeed, about $6 trillion worth of government bonds around the world today have negative nominal yields.
The next stage of unconventional unconventional monetary policy – if the risks of recession, deflation and financial crisis sharply increase – could have three components.
First, central banks could tax cash to prevent banks from attempting to avoid the negative-rate tax on excess reserves.
With banks unable to switch into cash (thereby earning zero rates), central banks could go even more negative with policy rates.
Second, QE could evolve into a “helicopter drop” of money or direct monetary financing by central banks of larger fiscal deficits.
Indeed, the recent market buzz has been about the benefits of permanent monetization of public deficits and debt.
Moreover, while QE has benefited holders of financial assets by boosting the prices of stocks, bonds, and real estate, it has also fueled rising inequality.
A helicopter drop (through tax cuts or transfers financed by newly printed money) would put money directly into the hands of households, boosting consumption.
Third, credit easing by central banks, or purchases of private assets, could broaden significantly.
Think of direct purchases of stocks, high-risk corporate bonds, and banks’ bad loans.
If unconventional unconventional monetary policies sound a little crazy, it’s worth remembering that the same was said about “conventional unconventional” policies just a few years ago.
And if current conditions in the advanced economies remain entrenched a decade from now, helicopter drops, debt monetization, and taxation of cash may turn out to be the new QE, CE, FG, ZIRP, and NIRP.
Desperate times call for desperate measures.
New Refugee Homelands
WASHINGTON, DC – Countries across Europe and states across the United States are debating the danger of admitting more refugees from Syria or, indeed, any majority Muslim country where Al Qaeda or Islamic State (ISIS) members or sympathizers could slip in with their families.
This debate misses the point in two important ways.
First, no evidence yet exists that any of the Paris attackers actually came from Syria as refugees.
The Syrian passport found near the body of one attacker appears to have been stolen.
The attackers that the police have identified grew up in Belgium or France.
They are radicalized citizens, not fleeing foreigners.
Second, the world now has 60 million refugees.
That is a number roughly the size of six Belgiums, Hungarys, or Swedens.
If they were to create their own country, it would be the size of France.
In the face of such staggering numbers, commitments to take thousands or even tens of thousands of people will do almost nothing to alleviate the misery of millions.
Rather than conflating the issues of refugees and terrorism, politicians and policymakers should be addressing each separately.
On the question of refugees, Western countries should take in as many as their populations can assimilate, demonstrating a willingness to make good on the universal values they profess for both moral and political reasons.
But the world also needs far bolder solutions than twentieth-century approaches like limited asylum quotas and “temporary” refugee camps.
In particular, it is time to embrace the prospect not of camps but of cities – places where up to a million refugees of any particular nationality can live safely and learn how to build a better future.
The National Democratic Institute has begun to reimagine refugee camps and camps for internally displaced persons as places where citizens can “find their voice” as voters and participants in democratic processes.
Rather than remaining concentrations of desperate, dispossessed, and vulnerable people waiting for a day of return that may never come, refugee settlements should be fundamentally reconceived – as hubs of education, enterprise, and equal rights that can anchor networks of relatives and friends that extend back home and around the world.
Individuals seeking refuge from a toxic and deadly environment could be welcomed not into camps, but rather proto-cities where the “global community,” represented by international institutions, NGOs, governments, and citizens, can encourage hope of a different, more secure life by nurturing positive seeds of knowledge, capital, and liberal self-government.
Impossible?
The Egyptian billionaire Naguib Sawaris is currently negotiating with the owners of two Greek islands a plan to resettle hundreds of thousands of refugees and put them to work building homes and infrastructure.
If multi-millionaires already can buy an island as a vacation destination – through, for example, the website Private Islands Online – why not buy them as a destination for hundreds of thousands of displaced people who could then build the infrastructure necessary for a new life?
And why shouldn’t international organizations do the same?
Alternatively, neighboring countries could take the opportunity, with enough international assistance, to build cities that would be valuable centers of commerce and education for their own people.
After all, China is pursuing precisely this strategy, building cities for millions of people to create nodes of economic and social activity across the countryside.
This approach would enable all countries to be better prepared for and resilient to the continuing flows of millions of miserable and ultimately angry people.
Today’s refugee camps are often breeding grounds for terrorism, revenge fantasies, and armed insurgency.
By contrast, cities of stateless people under the protection of international organizations could provide their citizens with the tools for a better life.
At the same time, we know far more about the radicalized Western citizens fighting for ISIS than most media reports suggest.
New America, the think tank I head, has compiled a database on 466 individuals from 25 Western countries who have left their homes to go to Syria.
Last week, researchers Peter Bergen, Courtney Schuster, and David Sterman released ISIS In The West: The New Faces of Extremism, in which a distinct profile of many of these individuals emerges.
Perhaps most important, the majority are linked by family ties to other jihadists.
Recent reports on Brussels’ Molenbeek municipality as a major incubator of ISIS and Al Qaeda supporters suggest that family and community ties are both important.
“Hotspot mosques” have long been in the sights of counter-terrorist researchers and police task forces.
Charting these families, mosques, and suburbs reveals networks that look just like disease maps, tracking the spread of a microbe as it travels along routes where it can infect others.
Applying epidemiological techniques to finding, isolating, and disrupting the transmission of violence and the radical ideologies that breed it has already proved successful in the US context.
For example, the organization Cure Violence works with urban gangs and treats violence “like an epidemic,” preventing it by “stopping it at its source.”
The ideological source of jihadist terrorism may ultimately be in Syria, Iraq, Afghanistan, or Mali, but the source of foot soldiers in the West is communities containing radically alienated youth.
Frightened populations can all too easily summon images of radical refugees slipping across borders intent on wreaking mayhem.
The realities for both refugees and terrorists are considerably more complicated.
Fortunately, taking the time to study the facts in both cases can yield promising new paths to longer-term solutions that balance security and humanity.
New Rules for Finance At Last
PARIS – The World Monetary and Economic Conference took place in London 76 years ago, in June 1933, with 66 countries meeting to put an end to the unfolding monetary disorder and trade wars while trying to draw the lessons of the Great Depression.
When it was over, the negotiators admitted failure.
On April 2, 2009, world leaders will head to London again to find a solution to a financial and economic crisis as dire as that of 1929.
We cannot let history repeat itself.
If collective inaction prevails, we risk a return to the political and economic woes of the 1930’s, which paved the way to a devastating world conflict.
Of course, we must respond to both the weakening economy and financial instability in a virtual state of emergency.
This is why stimulus packages and financial rescue plans were for the first time adopted concomitantly in Europe, the United States, and some large Asian countries.
At the G-20 finance ministers meeting on March 14, all of our countries did their best and made massive efforts to repair their economic machinery as fast as possible.
The policies chosen are different, but all states favor solutions that seem most appropriate to them.
All are daring and realistic regarding the tasks that await us.
Like its partners, France has launched significant stimulus measures, with a plan announced by President Nicolas Sarkozy last December, as well as public investments and early repayment of government debt.
If we also take into account the strengthening of social services and legal policies launched last month, France’s stimulus in 2009 totals more than 2% of its GDP, with committed future outflows equaling the US.
Moreover, the impact of automatic stabilizers – which enable the government to mobilize more or less fiscal resources, depending on economic conditions – is more powerful in Western Europe than in most of the Anglo-Saxon countries.
Yet America’s macroeconomic situation seems worse than Europe’s in terms of consumption, banking, or employment and housing markets.
But, as both Sarkozy and US President Barack Obama have insisted, we must go further.
Economic stimulus will work efficiently only if confidence is restored.
And confidence can be restored only if the financial system is fully overhauled.
We obviously need to strike at the root of the problem, which requires us to redefine the basic principles of the system.
It would be counterproductive to focus on treating the symptoms, only to realize later that the unprecedented budgets for structural policies are neither economically efficient nor politically acceptable.
At the Washington Summit last November, the EU suggested a basic principle: all markets, all territories, and all actors putting the global financial system at risk should be monitored.
This principle, to which all agreed, must be enforced even if it upsets old habits and comfortable incomes.
I am especially convinced that we must closely monitor actors in financial markets such as hedge funds.
Although hedge funds sometimes account for 50% of market transactions, they are not registered or subject to rules on transparency.
This is not sustainable.
Fighting for transparency also implies confronting states that refuse to collaborate on financial issues at a global level or to combat money laundering or prevent financial risks.
We cannot build a safer system if we do not raise global requirements and if we tolerate non-compliance with the rules.
Together with Germany, France intends to draw up a list of uncooperative countries and to design a tool kit of appropriate sanctions.
New auditing standards must reflect an overhauled financial architecture that focuses on transparency.
The aim of such standards must be to attenuate the impact of financial failure, not amplify it, as has occurred in the crisis.
Indeed, the rating agencies, whose malfunctions contributed to the crisis, must be regulated.
We demand an easy policy: stricter rules (especially when fighting conflicts of interest), a specific rating scale for complex products, and regular publication of their returns.
Europe followed this path when preparing, under the recent French presidency, a European regulation that will soon be adopted.
We expect all of our partners to do the same.
Responsibility must be put back at the heart of a system that has sunk into excess.
The methods used to pay market operators reflected our collective mistakes.
We yielded to short-term incentives, and everything seemed to conspire to push us to accepting excessive risks.
We must revise compensation schemes and delay bonus payments until the long-term profitability of a firm’s investments is known.
Finally, we must express our solidarity for emerging and poor countries.
Weakened by this crisis, they are the first to suffer from the cuts in financial flows.
The international financial institutions must support them massively, and also have the resources needed to foresee global unbalances and prevent crises, rather than respond only when events become urgent.
France and its European partners, in particular Germany, with which we worked in tight collaboration, will suggest all these points to the G-20.
Indeed, just as a national fiscal stimulus is less efficient than a coordinated effort, strengthening financial regulations without combating the laxity that prevails elsewhere makes no sense in a globalized world.
We should not delude ourselves; we cannot solve all the problems of this crisis in the coming days.
We must, however, reach several objectives and give clear signs of a true collective ambition.
History has shown how risky it is to miss some opportunities.
On April 2, France and Europe will be present.
New Rules for Hot Money
NEW YORK – Capital flows to emerging-market economies have been on a boom-bust merry-go-round for decades.
In the past year, the world has seen another boom, with a tsunami of capital, portfolio equity, and fixed-income investments surging into emerging-market countries perceived as having strong macroeconomic, policy, and financial fundamentals.
Such inflows are driven in part by short-term cyclical factors (interest-rate differentials and a wall of liquidity chasing higher-yielding assets as zero policy rates and more quantitative easing reduce opportunities in the sluggish advanced economies). But longer-term secular factors also play a role.
These include emerging markets’ long-term growth differentials relative to advanced economies; investors’ greater willingness to diversify beyond their home markets; and the expectation of long-term nominal and real appreciation of emerging-market currencies.
Given all this, the most critical policy question in emerging markets today is how to respond to inflows that will inevitably drive up their exchange rates and threaten export-led growth.
The first option is to do nothing and allow the currency to appreciate.
This may be the right response if the inflows and upward pressure on the exchange rate are driven by fundamental factors (a current-account surplus, an undervalued currency, a large and persistent growth differential).
But, in many cases, inflows are driven by short-term factors, fads, and irrational exuberance, which can lead to an overvalued currency, the crowding out of non-traditional export sectors or import-competing sectors, a loss of competitiveness, and eventually a large current-account deficit and thus tighter external constraints on growth.
This problem is exacerbated by the fact that the world’s biggest exporter, China, is aggressively intervening to minimize any appreciation of the renminbi.
If China doesn’t allow the renminbi to strengthen, other emerging markets will remain wary of letting their currencies appreciate too much and lose competitiveness.
If allowing a currency to appreciate freely is costly, the second option is unsterilized foreign-exchange intervention.
This is effective in stemming upward exchange-rate pressure, but it feeds the beast: it exacerbates overheating in already fast-growing emerging markets, causing inflation and leading to excessive credit growth, which can fuel dangerous asset bubbles.
The third option is sterilized intervention.
This prevents monetary and credit growth, but, by keeping interest-rate differentials high, sterilized intervention feeds carry-trade inflows, thus contributing to the problem that it was supposed to solve.
The fourth option is to impose capital controls on inflows (or liberalize controls on outflows).  Leaving aside the issue of whether or not such controls are “leaky,” evidence suggests that controls on inflows of short-term “hot money” do not affect the overall amount of capital inflows.
Thus, such controls are ineffective in reducing short-term cyclical pressure on the currency to appreciate.
The fifth option is to tighten fiscal policy and reduce budget deficits with the aim of lowering the high interest rates that drive the inflows.
But sounder fiscal policy might lead to even higher inflows as the country’s external balance and sovereign-risk outlook improve.
A sixth option – especially where a country has carried out partially sterilized intervention to prevent excessive currency appreciation – is to reduce the risk of credit and asset bubbles by imposing prudential supervision of the financial system.
This should be aimed at restraining excessive credit growth, which the monetary growth that follows currency intervention would otherwise cause.
However, direct controls on credit growth, while necessary, are often leaky and not very binding in practice.
The final option is massive, large-scale, and permanent sterilized intervention – or, equivalently, the use of sovereign wealth funds or other fiscal-stabilization mechanisms – to accumulate the foreign assets needed to compensate for the effects on the currency’s value brought about by long-term inflows.
The argument for this option is that long-term secular factors are important drivers of capital inflows, as advanced-economy investors discover that they are underweight in emerging-market assets and reduce their portfolios’ “home bias.”
Sterilized intervention usually doesn’t work: if assets in advanced economies and emerging markets remain perfectly substitutable, inflows will continue as long as interest-rate differentials persist.
But the demand for emerging-market assets is neither infinite nor perfectly substitutable for the assets of advanced economies – even for given interest-rate differentials – because these assets have very different liquidity and credit risks.
This means that at some point large-scale, persistent sterilized foreign-exchange intervention – amounting to several percentage points of GDP – would satisfy the additional demand for emerging-market assets and stop the inflows, even if interest-rate differentials remain.
As sterilization induces issuance of domestic assets, global investors’ desire for diversification would be met without causing excessive currency appreciation, with all its collateral damage, in emerging markets.
Of course, currency appreciation should not be prevented altogether.
When justified by economic fundamentals, the exchange rate should be allowed to rise gradually.
But when a currency’s appreciation is triggered by capital inflows that represent the asset-diversification preferences of advanced-economy investors, it can and should be resisted.
New Rules for the Global Economy
CAMBRIDGE – Suppose that the world’s leading policymakers were to meet again in Bretton Woods, New Hamp­shire, to design a new global economic order.
They would natu­rally be preoccupied with today’s problems: the eurozone crisis, global recovery, financial regulation, international macroeconomic imbal­ances, and so on.
But addressing these issues would require the assembled leaders to rise above them and consider the soundness of global economic arrangements overall.
Here are seven commonsense principles of global economic governance that they might agree on.
(I discuss them in more detail in my new book, The Globalization Paradox.)
1.
Markets must be deeply embedded in systems of governance.
The idea that markets are self-regulating received a mortal blow in the recent financial crisis and should be buried once and for all.
Markets require other social institutions to support them. They rely on courts, legal frameworks, and regulators to set and enforce rules.
They depend on the stabilizing functions that central banks and countercyclical fiscal policy provide. They need the political buy-in that redistributive taxation, safety nets, and social insurance help generate.
And all of this is true of global markets as well.
2.
For the foreseeable future, democratic governance is likely to be organized largely within national political communities.
The nation state lives, if not entirely well, and remains essen­tially the only game in town.
The quest for global governance is a fool’s errand.
National governments are unlikely to cede significant control to transnational institutions, and harmonizing rules would not benefit societies with diverse needs and preferences.
The European Union may be the sole excep­tion to this axiom, though its current crisis tends to prove the point.
Too often we waste international cooperation on overly ambitious goals, ultimately producing weak results that are the lowest common denominator among major states.
When international cooperation does “succeed,” it spawns rules that are either toothless or reflect the preferences of only the more powerful states.
The Basle rules on capital requirements and the World Trade Organization’s rules on subsidies, intellectual property, and investment measures typify this kind of overreaching.
We can enhance the efficiency and legitimacy of globalization by supporting rather than crippling democratic procedures at home.
3.
Pluralist prosperity.
Acknowledging that the core institutional infrastructure of the global economy must be built at the national level frees countries to develop the institutions that suit them best.
The United States, Europe, and Japan have produced comparable amounts of wealth over the long term. Yet their labor markets, cor­porate governance, antitrust rules, social protection, and financial systems differ considerably, with a succession of these “models” – a different one each decade – anointed the great success to be emulated.
The most successful societies of the future will leave room for experimentation and allow for further evolution of institutions.
A global economy that recognizes the need for and value of institutional diversity would foster rather than stifle such experimentation and evolution.
4.
Countries have the right to protect their own regulations and institutions.
The previous principles may seem innocuous.
But they carry powerful implications that clash with the received wisdom of globalization’s advocates. One such impli­cation is the right of individual countries to safeguard their domestic institutional choices.
Recognition of institutional diversity would be meaningless if countries did not have the instru­ments available to shape and maintain – in a word, “protect” – their own institutions.
We should therefore accept that countries may uphold national rules – tax policies, financial regulations, labor standards, or consumer health and safety rules – and may do so by raising barriers at the border if necessary, when trade demonstrably threat­ens domestic practices enjoying broad popular support.
If globalization’s boosters are right, the clamor for protection will fail for lack of evidence or support.
If wrong, there will be a safety valve in place to ensure that contending values – the benefits of open economies versus the gains from upholding domestic regulations – both receive a proper hearing in public debates.
5.
Countries have no right to impose their institutions on others.
Using restrictions on cross-border trade or finance to uphold values and regulations at home must be distinguished from using them to impose these values and regulations on other countries.
Globalization’s rules should not force Americans or Europeans to consume goods that are produced in ways that most citizens in those countries find unacceptable. But nor should they allow the US or the EU to use trade sanctions or other pressure to alter foreign countries’ labor-market rules, environmen­tal policies, or financial regulations.
Countries have a right to difference, not to imposed convergence.
6.
International economic arrangements must establish rules for managing interaction among national institutions.
Relying on nation states to provide the essential governance functions of the world economy does not mean that we should aban­don international rules.
The Bretton Woods regime, after all, had clear rules, though they were limited in scope and depth.
A completely decentralized free-for-all would benefit no one.
What we need are traffic rules for the global economy that help vehicles of varying size, shape, and speed navigate around each other, rather than imposing an identical car or a uniform speed limit.
We should strive to attain maximum globalization consistent with the maintenance of space for diversity in national institu­tional arrangements.
7.
Non-democratic countries cannot count on the same rights and privileges in the international economic order as democracies.
What gives the previous principles their appeal and legitimacy is that they are based on democratic deliberation – where it really occurs, within national states.
When states are not democratic, this scaffolding col­lapses.
We can no longer presume that its institutional arrangements reflect its citizens’ preferences.
So non-democracies need to play by different, less permissive rules.
These are the principles that the architects of the next global economic order must accept.
Most importantly, they must comprehend the ultimate paradox that each of these principles highlights: globalization works best when it is not pushed too far.
Taking the Offensive Against Tuberculosis
SOLNA, SWEDEN – Tuberculosis is one of the world’s deadliest diseases.
In 2013 alone, it accounted for 1.5 million deaths, including one-fifth of adult deaths in low-income countries.
Although the estimated number of people contracting TB annually is decreasing, the decline has been very slow.
And, given the increasing prevalence of multidrug-resistant TB, the trend could be reversed.
Nonetheless, the world now has a narrow window of opportunity to eradicate TB.
Taking advantage of it will require the rapid development and dissemination of effective diagnostic tools, novel drug treatments, and innovative vaccines, in conjunction with efforts to ensure that health-care systems are equipped to deliver the right care.
This will be no easy feat.
The good news is that the international community seems eager to act.
The World Health Organization’s post-2015 Global TB Strategy, which was endorsed by the World Health Assembly in May 2014, aims to eradicate TB by 2035.
The Sustainable Development Goals, which will be formally adopted in September by the United Nations’ 193 member states, foresee achieving that objective five years sooner.
To stem the development and spread of drug-resistant TB requires a two-pronged global effort: ensuring early detection and adequate treatment of patients with drug-sensitive TB, and finding new ways to treat patients infected with drug-resistant strains.
The problem is that existing tools for TB diagnosis, treatment, and prevention have severe limitations.
For starters, there is no fast point-of-care diagnostic test for TB.
In low-income countries, the dominant diagnostic method is sputum microscopy, an outdated approach that fails to detect TB in about half of all infected patients, with an even lower success rate for young children and patients co-infected with HIV.
Indeed, no more than one in ten children with TB is diagnosed by sputum microscopy.
Moreover, for patients infected with multi-drug-resistant TB, treatment with the currently available drugs is successful only half the time, even under the best conditions.
And the therapeutic process is tough, lasting at least two years and involving up to 14,600 pills and hundreds of injections – with severe side effects.
New TB drugs with novel mechanisms of action are badly needed, not only to treat multi-drug resistant TB, but also to shorten the treatment time for drug-sensitive TB.
Here, there is some promising news: Bedaquiline recently became the first new TB drug to be approved by the US Food and Drug Administration in 40 years.
But Bedaquiline has yet to prove its capacity to treat drug-resistant TB effectively, and there are very few other candidates in the pipeline.
Similar problems arise in prevention.
The Bacille de Calmette et Guérin (BCG) vaccine – the only one available for the disease, and the main pillar of TB prevention – is only partly effective.
Indeed, while it protects children from the worst forms of the disease, it does not protect anyone against the most common variant, pulmonary TB.
As a result, it has done little to reduce the number of TB cases.
And, although several new vaccine candidates have passed preliminary clinical tests, BCG will remain the only available vaccine for years to come.
The challenges are clearly formidable.
But, with millions of lives at stake, backing down is not an option.
It comes down to research – a fact that the WHO global strategy recognizes.
But scaling up investment in diagnostic tools and treatments for TB costs more money than has been allocated.
Of the estimated €1.73 billion ($2 billion) that is needed annually for research and development, only €589 million was invested in 2013.
Making matters worse, critical donor funding – provided by a very limited number of actors, mostly government agencies and philanthropic groups in OECD countries – fell by nearly 10% last year.
At present, a single philanthropic donor, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, supports more than 25% of research on new tools to fight TB.
As for the private sector, pharmaceutical companies have been withdrawing from TB research, as part of a general trend away from anti-infective drugs toward the development of new drugs for chronic illnesses.
Pfizer exited TB research in 2012, followed by AstraZeneca in 2013 and Novartis last year.
Closing the funding gap and ending the scourge of TB will require the involvement of more – and more diverse – donors.
If the private sector is unwilling to do its part, it is up to governments to step in with a sustained commitment – manifested in direct contributions, as well as efforts to create the right incentives – to achieving the SDG target to which they have agreed.
In short, eradicating the TB epidemic presupposes efforts to ensure that health-care systems are capable of delivering the right care.
And the right care requires rapid development and dissemination of new tools, including quick point-of-care diagnostic tests, safe and fast-acting drugs, and an effective TB vaccine.
Suffer the Children, Suffer the Country
NEW YORK – Children are every country’s most vital resource.
This is true not just morally, but also economically.
Investing in the health, education, and skills of children offers the highest economic returns to a country.
A new study by the UN Children’s Fund (UNICEF) shows which high-income countries are doing well when it comes to making these investments – and which are doing poorly.
The report, Child Well-Being in Rich Countries, takes a holistic view of the conditions of children in the United States, Canada, and Europe – 29 countries in all.
The top-ranked countries, where children are best off, are the social democracies of Western Europe.
The Netherlands heads the list, followed by Norway, Iceland, Finland, Sweden, and Germany.
At the bottom one finds a major surprise: the US, the richest large economy in the world, is in 26th place, followed by three much poorer countries: Lithuania, Latvia, and Romania.
The gaps between the northern European countries and the US are the most telling.
Northern European countries generally provide cash support to families to ensure that all children are raised in decent conditions, and they undertake ambitious social programs to provide high-quality day care, pre-school, and primary and secondary education.
Moreover, all children are well covered by effective health-care systems.
The US, with its individualist, free-market ideology, is very different.
There is little cash support for families.
Government programs supposedly provide a social safety net, but politicians are, in fact, largely indifferent to the well-being of the poor, because poor voters turn out in lower numbers and do not finance America’s expensive election campaigns.
Indeed, the evidence strongly suggests that US politicians tend to listen and respond only to their richer constituents.
The so-called safety net has suffered accordingly, as have America’s poor.
The differences between the social democracies and the US show up strongly in category after category.
In the social democracies, less than 10% of children grow up in relative poverty (meaning households with less than half of the country’s median income).
In the US, the rate of relative poverty exceeds 20%.
American children suffer far more from low birth weight (a major danger signal for later life); being overweight at ages 11, 13, and 15; and very high rates of teenage fertility.
There are around 35 births for every 1,000 girls aged 15-19, compared to fewer than ten per thousand in the northern European countries.
Likewise, US children face considerably more violence in society than children in other high-income countries do.
That may not be surprising, but it is deeply troubling, because children’s exposure to violence is a major threat to their physical, emotional, and cognitive development.
Homicide rates in the US are roughly five times higher than in northern Europe.
One fascinating aspect of the UNICEF study is its use of what is now called “subjective well-being.”
This means asking a person directly about his or her life satisfaction.
There have been many recent studies of the subjective well-being of adults around the world.&nbsp; But I know of no comparable research in which children were asked directly about their sense of well-being – a very smart question indeed.
Here, the evidence suggests that northern Europe’s children generally appreciate their remarkable advantages.
The children were asked to rate their “life satisfaction” on an 11-step ladder. In the Netherlands, a remarkable 95% of children set their rating at six or higher.
In the US, the proportion is much lower, at around 84%.
These subjective rankings also correlate highly with the children’s reported quality of interactions with their peers and parents.
Some 80% of Dutch children report their classmates to be “kind and helpful,” compared to just 56% of American children.
The costs to the US of allowing so many of its children to grow up in poverty, poor health, poor schools, and poor housing are staggering.
A shocking proportion ends up serving time in prison – especially in the case of non-white poor children.
Even those fortunate not to fall into the trap of America’s vast prison system often end up unemployed and even unemployable, without the skills needed to obtain and keep a decent job.
Americans have been blinded to these calamitous mistakes partly by a long history of racism, as well as by a misplaced faith in “rugged individualism.”
For example, some white families have opposed public financing for education, because they believe that their tax money goes disproportionately to help poorer non-white students.
The result, however, is that everybody loses.
Schools underperform; poverty remains high; and the resulting high rates of unemployment and crime impose huge financial and social costs on US society.
The UNICEF findings are powerful.
High national incomes are not enough to ensure children’s well-being.
Societies that have a strong commitment to equal opportunity for all of their children – and that are prepared to invest public funds on their behalf – end up with much better outcomes.
Every country should compare the conditions of its young people with those reported by UNICEF, and use the results to help guide expanded investment in their children’s well-being.
Nothing could be more important for any society’s future health and prosperity.
New World, Less Order
Looking back to the revolutions that shook Europe and the world 15 years ago this month, we should rejoice in what has been gained - freedom, democracy, and transcendence of Europe's 40-year division.
But we should also take stock of missed opportunities in the wake of the Cold War's peaceful end.
Ultimately, the end of the Cold War came because of the revolution underway in the Soviet Union.
But the pro-democratic policies of glasnost and perestroika that I unveiled in the mid-1980's did not appear out of thin air. They arose from Nikita Khrushchev's reforms of the 1950's and 1960's, and from Alexei Kosygin's reforms later on.
Many people now view such efforts to "renew" the socialist system - to make it actually work for the people - as having been doomed from the start.
But these earlier reforms were in fact more difficult to undertake than the ones that I launched in the 1980's and 1990's.
During my presidency, we had to nurture a democratic atmosphere, but this was possible only because fear was no longer overpowering.
We also tried to curtail the arms race and address other areas of conflict between East and West.
But the Berlin Wall remained, standing in the heart of Europe as a symbol of division.
When Chancellor Helmut Kohl and I talked about this in July 1989, we thought that the time had not come to end the division of Germany.
Dismantling the Wall, we agreed, would likely be an issue for the twenty-first century.
Of course, the German people decided otherwise; they took history into their own hands by insisting that the Wall come down.
The rest of Eastern and Central Europe quickly followed, knocking down their own barriers to freedom.
My conception of my role as Soviet president compelled me not to intervene.
I believed that I could not open our country while dictating to others.
Indeed, from my first appearance as General Secretary of the USSR, at the funeral of my predecessor, Constantine Chernyenko, I said that every country should be responsible for its own politics.
So the fall of the Berlin Wall less than half a decade later was a consequence of these thoughts.
(But, even here, my ideas and policies were not novel: in 1955 Khrushchev talked - albeit in a very different context - about uniting two Germanys.)
My task, as I saw it, was to ensure Central and Eastern Europe's peaceful return to full sovereignty with a minimum of Soviet interference. To the surprise and delight of the world, the changes did take place peacefully almost everywhere.
But did the Cold War's end merely make the world a more dangerous place - one of terrorism, insecurity, uncertainty, and growing disparities of wealth?
My response is to remind people what terrors the Cold War held.
The threat of nuclear Armageddon was real, with three trillion dollars spent on the arms race that could have been used to help the world's poor.
On the other hand, an opportunity to create a safer, more secure post-Cold War world was lost.
In the 1980's, when the communist-capitalist confrontation ended, there was a chance to create a "new world order."
But the collapse of the Soviet Union meant that there was no negotiated settlement of this new order.
As a result, the subsequent spurt of globalization has proceeded with no one steering the wheel - and thus with no means to implement new thinking for a better world.
We Russians obviously bear the most responsibility for the USSR's collapse, but America should also be called to account.
When change came, instead of following a slow democratic process, Russia replaced its discredited communist model overnight with a Harvard-designed blueprint that was also unfit for the country.
Eventually, the plan threw the country on its back.
This was no US-led conspiracy, but the collapse of the Soviet Union was convenient for America.
The US conceived of itself as the Cold War's winner, and winners, it seems, make the rules.
The Iraq war proves this: a new American empire is asserting itself.
The victor of the Cold War now expects other nations to indulge its philosophy of self-righteousness.
Unfortunately, this type of old thinking breeds more crises than it can ever resolve.
Indeed, unilateral policies can never succeed in a global world defined more and more by shared concerns rather than national interests.
So, fifteen years after the fall of the Berlin Wall, the world remains more in need of new thinking than ever.
We need a new world order that benefits all, a global civil society that will help fight terrorism.
We know that bombs and special operations alone won't make us safer, for we must fight the poverty that breeds terrorism.
That is no easy task.
On the contrary, as in 1989, we are faced with the urgent need for change and responsible leadership.
New Year, Same Crisis
DAVOS – The measures introduced by the European Central Bank last December, especially the Long Term Refinancing Operation (LTRO), have relieved the liquidity problems of European banks, but have not cured the financing disadvantage of the highly indebted member states.
Since high-risk premiums on government bonds endanger the capital adequacy of banks, half a solution is not enough.
Indeed, that supposed solution leaves half the eurozone relegated to the status of Third World countries that have become highly indebted in a foreign currency.
Instead of the International Monetary Fund, it is Germany that is acting as the taskmaster imposing tough fiscal discipline on them.
This will generate both economic and political tensions that could destroy the European Union.
I have proposed a plan that would allow Italy and Spain to refinance their debt by issuing treasury bills at around 1%.
I named it in memory of my friend Tomasso Padoa-Schioppa, who, as Italy’s central banker in the 1990’s, helped to stabilize that country’s finances.
The plan is rather complicated, but it is legally and technically sound.
I describe it in detail in my new book Financial Turmoil in Europe and the United States.
European authorities rejected my plan in favor of the LTRO.
The difference between the two schemes is that mine would provide instant relief to Italy and Spain.
By contrast, the LTRO allows Italian and Spanish banks to engage in a very profitable and practically riskless arbitrage, but has kept government bonds hovering on the edge of a precipice – although the last few days brought some relief.
My proposal is to use the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) and the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) to insure the European Central Bank against the solvency risk on any newly issued Italian or Spanish treasury bills that it may buy from commercial banks.
This would allow the European Banking Authority to treat these various T-bills as the equivalent of cash, because they could be sold to the ECB at any time.
Banks would then find it advantageous to hold their surplus liquidity in the form of T-bills as long as these bills yielded more than bank deposits held at the ECB.
Italy and Spain would then be able to refinance their debt at close to the ECB’s deposit rate, which is currently 1% on mandatory reserves and 25 basis points on excess-reserve accounts.
This would greatly improve the sustainability of these countries’ debt.
Italy, for instance, would see its average borrowing cost decline from the current 4.3%.
Confidence would gradually return, yields on outstanding bonds would decline, banks would no longer be penalized for owning Italian government bonds, and Italy would gradually regain access to the market at more reasonable interest rates.
One obvious objection to this strategy is that it would reduce the average maturity of Italian and Spanish debt.
I believe that, on the contrary, this would be an advantage in the current exceptional circumstances, because it would keep the Italian and Spanish governments on a short leash; no country concerned could afford to lose the ECB facility.
In the case of Italy, the short leash would dissuade former Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi from seeking to topple Mario Monti’s new government (which has only a fragile majority), because if Berlusconi precipitated an election, the electorate would punish him.
This would help to reestablish political stability and accelerate Italy’s return to the market.
My proposal fulfills both the letter and the spirit of Article 123 of the Lisbon Treaty.
The ECB’s task is to provide liquidity to banks, while the EFSF and ESM are designed to absorb solvency risk.
The ECB would not be facilitating additional borrowing by member countries; it would merely allow them to refinance their debt at a lower cost.
Together, the ECB and the EFSF could do what the ECB cannot do on its own.
This would provide temporary relief from a fatal flaw in the euro design’s until the member countries devise a more permanent solution.
The EFSF would have practically unlimited capacity to insure eurozone T-bills in this way, because no country could default as long as the scheme was in operation.
Nor could a country abuse the privilege, lest it be automatically withdrawn, causing the country’s cost of borrowing to rise immediately.
For the first time in this crisis, the European authorities would undertake an operation for which they have more than sufficient resources.
Coming as a positive surprise to the markets, it would reverse their mood.
After all, markets do have moods; indeed, that is what the authorities have to learn in order to deal with financial crises.
Contrary to the current discourse, the long-term solution must provide a stimulus to get Europe out of a deflationary vicious circle – structural reform alone will not do it.
The stimulus must come from the EU, because individual countries will be under strict fiscal discipline.
It will have to be guaranteed jointly and severally – and that means eurobonds in one guise or another.
New York, the Dada Capital
I am looking down on Central Park and recall from half-a-century ago in a small town in Northern Romania a tall, white-haired man proclaiming his poem, “The Colors Red and Black.”  Gazing over the park, I remember those Stalinist era verses:
                                    In New York, everything is beautiful.
                                    Heroes come, heroes go.
                                    Children, born for Sing-Sing,
                                    cover the streets like pellagra
                                    Yellow karate-blood
                                    pulses through each building.
                                    In the harbor the Statue of Liberty!
                                    Behind her elevated falsehood
                                    Yankee ghosts howl at the moon
                                    tormented as if from pellagra
                                    by the colors red and black.