But time to secure a new deal is running out.
When Santos made his peace overture, the FARC was still a cohesive organization with a unified leadership.
Since the plebiscite, confusion has crept into its ranks, possibly presaging a breakup into uncontrollable rural militias and criminal gangs.
To pull Colombia’s peace prospects out of limbo, the government should engage in intense negotiations with the FARC on points raised by the opposition.
The result would, no doubt, fall short of the Uribistas’ demands, but there are plenty of No voters who would be convinced.
Indeed, the revised text might be enough to win approval – either in a new plebiscite or, preferably, in Congress.
Such an approach could deliver peace, though it would not quell the opposition’s obsessive challenge to Santos’ legacy on the subject.
The peace deal negotiated by Santos would not have been possible without Uribe’s record as president.
By vigorously prosecuting the war against the FARC, he changed its course.
The question he must now ask himself is whether he wants to go down in history for denying Colombia the peace it deserves.
The Foundations of Pacific Stability
WASHINGTON, DC – This month, I completed a two-week, six-stop tour of the Pacific, beginning with a visit to the United States Army’s 25th Infantry Division in Hawaii.
It was a fitting way to start the trip, a reminder that the US Army is critical to forming the foundation for security in the Pacific.
The 25th Infantry Division, which in its early years earned the nickname “Tropic Lightning,” marks its 75th anniversary this autumn.
The men and women stationed there – and, indeed, all US soldiers in the Asia-Pacific region – have been working to secure regional stability for much of the last century.
Since US President Barack Obama’s strategic rebalance to Asia, they have been doing even more.
Today, the US Army has a lot on its plate outside the region.
It is at the forefront of the US-led coalition’s campaign against the so-called Islamic State, as well as efforts to support the people of Afghanistan.
Yet we also continue to play a critical role in maintaining peace and security in the Asia-Pacific region.
Though security in the Pacific is often associated with the efforts of the US Air Force and Navy, the Army is assuming an increasingly important role in strengthening regional partnerships.
At a time when six of the world’s ten largest armies are located in the Pacific theater of operations, and 22 of the region’s 27 countries have army officers as their defense chiefs, the need to invest in the US Army’s mission in the region is clear.
A key component of that mission is the Pacific Pathways program, which involves “joining multinational partners to conduct a series of military exercises intended to increase Army readiness through additional training and strengthened partner-force relationships.”
Engaging with US soldiers participating in Pacific Pathways exercises in Hawaii, Malaysia, and Alaska, I saw firsthand how these efforts advance regional security.
In Hawaii, American and Singaporean soldiers participated in their 36th year of joint exercises.
From the newest privates to the most experienced generals, US soldiers have developed strong ties with their counterparts and deep pride in their shared security mission.
In this sense, these soldiers are also serving as important ambassadors in the region.
The US Army’s partnership with Malaysia is more recent.
But during an annual joint exercise, I witnessed our forces improving familiarity and interoperability, and noted growing satisfaction with the strengthening of ties.
In the event of, say, a natural disaster in the Pacific, the bonds that the US and Malaysia have fostered could help save thousands of lives during a combined crisis response.
We know that we must continue working to sustain and strengthen our engagement in the Pacific, even as US soldiers continue to carry out diverse and demanding missions in other parts of the world.
One way we can help to meet this need is through the use of rotational brigades.
At Camp Casey in South Korea, I had lunch with soldiers from the 1st Cavalry Division, who had trained for nine months at Fort Hood, Texas, before embarking on a nine-month rotation to the peninsula.
Over the course of the deployment, the readiness of these forces actually increases, because of the quality and rigor of the training they undertake with partners from the Republic of Korea’s Army.
Another way the US Army is maintaining flexibility, resiliency, and depth in the Asia-Pacific region is by placing pre-positioned stocks – strategic stockpiles of critical combat equipment – on allies’ territory.
In Japan, for example, the US Army stores more than 100 watercraft that can be used to deliver supplies quickly in the event of a natural disaster or other contingency.
Beyond storing the equipment, we train with our partners to use it, and we develop our logistical capabilities to distribute it effectively.
In effect, the US Army provides rapid response capabilities to the US Joint Force (the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marines acting in tandem) and our allies and partners.
The US Army is also pursuing tactical innovation in the Pacific.
While our budget for modernization is below that of the other US armed services, we must continue to develop capabilities rapidly and equip our people with the latest technology.
That is why, for example, soldiers have been learning to fight in formation with robots in Hawaii, and we have engaged in bilateral training with unmanned aerial systems in Malaysia.
A final element of our involvement in the Asia-Pacific region is the effort to improve our capabilities in difficult tactical environments.
We engage in exercises in Alaska that develop our capabilities in extreme climates – capabilities that will help us to ensure that the Arctic does not become a contested region.
And, through our training in Hawaii and Malaysia, we have strengthened our capacity to fight in a jungle environment.
The US Army has a broad array of missions and responsibilities.
From Hawaii through Guam, to Northeast Asia and the Alaskan frontier, it is pursuing a crucial one: providing a foundation for security in a dynamic region – and for America’s future there.
The Old New Financial Risk
WASHINGTON, DC – The main financial risk facing the United States today looks very similar to what caused so much trouble in 2007-2008: big banks with too much debt and too little equity capital on their balance sheets.
Uneven global regulations, not to mention regulators who fall asleep at the wheel, compound this structural vulnerability.
We already saw this movie, and it ended badly.
Next time could be an even worse horror show.
All booms are different, but every major financial crisis has at its heart the same issue: major banks get into trouble and teeter on the brink of collapse.
Disruption at the core of any banking system leads to tight credit, with major negative effects on the real economy.
In our modern world, in which finance is interwoven throughout the economy, the consequences can be particularly severe – as we saw in 2008 and 2009.
The most important question to ask of any financial system is how much loss-absorbing equity major banks have on their balance sheets.
When a company suffers losses, its shareholder equity falls in value, and less equity means that the company is more likely to default on its debts.
The capital ratios most frequently highlighted by banks and officials are misleading, because they include items – such as goodwill and deferred tax assets – that are incapable of absorbing losses.
We need to look instead at tangible equity relative to tangible assets.
And we should also be very careful about the accounting used for derivatives.
On this technical but crucial point, US generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) are considerably more generous (because they understate potential losses) than International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS).
Thomas Hoenig, vice chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, publishes his own calculation of capital levels at the world’s largest banks, and these data are now available through the end of 2014.
The most leveraged big US bank, Morgan Stanley, has less than 4% equity, meaning that 96% of its balance sheet is some form of debt.
The average for big US banks is just under 5% equity.
This is more – but not much more – capital than some troubled banks had in the run-up to the financial crisis in 2008.
Citigroup, for example, had no more than 4.3% equity, according to Hoenig’s calculation, in November 2008.
At the end of 2012, when Hoenig started to publish his US GAAP-IFRS adjustment, the average for the largest US banks was roughly 4% equity.
It is possible to argue that this key measure is moving in the right direction, but the pace of improvement is glacial at best.
More important, 5% equity is unlikely to be enough to absorb the kinds of losses that a highly volatile world will throw up.
Some major shocks could come from unexpected quarters.
For example, assets may prove less liquid than investors suppose, as happened with money market funds in 2008; today, skeptics worry about exchange-traded funds (ETFs).
Or overly complex securities could become hard to price.
It is a red flag when people selling collateralized loan obligations today cannot fully explain the risks involved.
Or perhaps the shock will affect sovereign-debt values in faraway places, as happened in 1982.
It is striking that no experts – public or private – really have a firm grip on what could happen if there is another round of difficulties with Greek government debt.
But the most dangerous shocks may be those that originate with the big banks themselves.
The latest significant development to surface is what Better Markets, a pro-reform group that has put out a helpful fact sheet, calls “de facto guaranteed foreign subsidiaries” that trade derivatives – a murky phenomenon that likely involves all the big players.
The trick here is that a de jure guaranteed foreign subsidiary of a US bank would have to comply with many US rules, including those governing conduct, transparency, and clearing (how the derivatives are actually traded).
A foreign subsidiary that is supposedly independent is exempt from those rules.
But, as Dennis Kelleher of Better Markets points out, when pressure mounts and a crisis seems around the corner, banks will face great pressure to bring such subsidiaries back onto their balance sheet.
This is exactly what happened in the last crisis, with Citigroup being a leading example.
The main reason why such loopholes are left open is that regulators choose not to close them.
Sometimes this may be due to lack of information or awareness.
But, in many cases, the regulators actually believe that there is nothing wrong with the behavior in question – either because they have been persuaded by lobbyists or because they themselves used to work in the industry (or could go work there soon.)
Sound familiar?
America’s Looming Debt Decision
BOGOTÁ – Should the US government lock in today’s ultra-low borrowing costs by issuing longer-term debt?
It’s a tough call, but with overall debt levels already high (not to mention unfunded pension and medical insurance liabilities, which are both likely to rise), perhaps the time has come.
Until now, the US Treasury and the Federal Reserve Board, acting in combination, have worked to keep down long-term government debt, in order to reduce interest rates for the private sector.
Indeed, at this point, the average duration of US debt (integrating the Fed’s balance sheet) is now under three years, well below that of most European countries, even taking into account their own central banks’ massive quantitative-easing (QE) programs.
The tilt toward short-term borrowing as a way to try to stimulate the economy has made sense until now.
Given that the interest rate on 30-year US debt is roughly 200 basis points higher than on one-year debt, short-term borrowing has saved the government money as well.
But the government should not operate like a bank or a hedge fund, loading up on short-term debt to fund long-term projects.
It is too risky. With net US government debt already running at 82% of national income, the potential fiscal costs of a fast upward shift in interest rates could be massive.
No one is saying that such a shift is likely or imminent, but the odds aren’t as trivial as some might like to believe.
For starters, interest rates could spike in the event of a war or some other catastrophic event.
Less dramatic but more likely is that the Fed will someday find a way to push up inflation expectations, which, as in most advanced economies, have been drifting inexorably downward.
If inflation expectations do start rising, this will push up rates.
A rise in borrowing rates could also come from self-inflicted damage.
Suppose, for example, that US voters elect as their president an unpredictable and incompetent businessman, who views bankruptcy as just business as usual.
Alternatively, it is not difficult to imagine a sequence of highly populist leaders who embrace the quack idea that the level of government debt is basically irrelevant and should never be an obstacle to maximizing public spending.
Unfortunately, if the US ever did face an abrupt normalization of interest rates, it could require significant tax and spending adjustments.
And the overall burden, including unemployment, would almost surely fall disproportionately on the poor, a fact that populists who believe that debt is a free lunch conveniently ignore.
Mind you, lengthening borrowing maturities does not have to imply borrowing less.
Most economists agree that larger deficits make sense if used to pay for necessary infrastructure and education improvements, not to mention enhancing domestic physical and cyber security.
There is a significant backlog of worthy projects, and real (inflation-adjusted) interest rates are low (though, properly measured, real rates may be significantly higher than official measures suggest, mainly because the government’s inability to account properly for the benefits of new goods causes it to overstate inflation).
One hopes that the next president will create an infrastructure task force with substantial independence and technocratic expertise to help curate project proposals, as the United Kingdom’s pre-Brexit government did.
With control of the global reserve currency, the US has room to borrow; nonetheless, it should structure its borrowing wisely.
Several years ago, it still made sense for the Fed to do cartwheels to bring down long-term borrowing costs.
Today, with the economy normalizing, the case for creative policies like QE, which effectively shortens government debt by sucking long-term bonds out of the market, seems much weaker.
That is why the time has come for the US Treasury to consider borrowing at longer horizons than it has in recent years.
Today, the longest maturity debt issued by the US government is the 30-year bond.
Yet Spain has successfully issued 50-year debt at a very low rate, while Ireland, Belgium, and even Mexico have issued 100-year debt.
Sure, there is no guarantee that rates won’t drop even more in the future, but the point is to have a less risky stream of future interest obligations.
Many left-leaning polemicists point to Japan, where net debt is about 140% of GDP, as proof that much higher debt is a great idea, despite the country’s anemic growth record.
The implication is that there is little need to worry about debt at all, much less its maturity structure.
In fact, Japanese policymakers and economists are plenty worried and do not recommend that other countries emulate their country’s debt position.
Europe is admittedly in a very different place, with much higher unemployment, and a much stronger argument for continuing to pursue stimulus at the risk of higher debt-service costs in the future.
But with the US economy now enjoying a solid recovery, the best approach may be to move faster toward normalizing debt policy, and not to assume that foreign lenders will be patient, regardless of the direction of US politics.
America Adrift
TOKYO – US President Barack Obama’s hesitations, ambivalence, U-turns, and political gamesmanship with the US Congress over punishing Syria for its use of chemical weapons has achieved only two things with certainty: it has raised Russia’s diplomatic profile for the first time in many years, and it has spooked those of America’s allies – from Saudi Arabia and Israel to Japan and South Korea – that rely heavily on US promises.
To minimize the impact of both consequences, the United States now must enforce with utmost determination its agreement with Russia on eliminating Syria’s chemical weapons.
But will it do so?
US Secretary of State John Kerry’s heat-of-the-moment comment that a military strike on Syria could be avoided if all chemical weapons were turned over was a diplomatic gift to Russia, and it responded with alacrity.
Not usually noted for its diplomatic dexterity, the Kremlin quickly proposed compelling Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s regime to join the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), and to place its chemical-weapons stockpile under United Nations control.
Putin’s initiative turned out to be a diplomatic lifeline, as Obama’s gambit of seeking Congressional approval for an attack on Syria looked certain to fail, which would have dented his authority as America’s commander-in-chief.
Although the agreement may yet strip Assad’s regime of some of its most dangerous weapons, the process – if it can be called that – which brought it about has strengthened a global perception that US foreign policy in Obama’s second term is either adrift or drifting into isolationism.
The US response to the so-called “Arab Spring,” for example, has lacked political conviction, much less strategic direction.
Egypt’s old-new military rulers, for example, have concluded that American criticism can be ignored, because America cannot cut off its aid to Egypt for geopolitical reasons.
When I met with Egypt’s foreign minister, Nabil Fahmy, in August, he hinted at the new regime’s dissatisfaction with attempts by the European Union and the US to influence his country’s domestic affairs.
Egypt, he said, understood the importance of democracy and human rights, but avoiding turmoil must be the government’s highest priority.
Of course, appeals to “stability” are nothing new from authoritarian governments.
As Pakistan’s then-president, Pervez Musharraf, dismissively put it when I visited Islamabad as Japan’s defense minister, “Democracy?
I know all about that.”
The US, of course, claims that it, too, knows all about democracy.
But its diplomatic cognitive dissonance – criticizing the Egyptian regime while continuing to supply it with military hardware – can serve only to undermine bilateral relations, just as the same American approach to Musharraf’s regime thoroughly eroded US-Pakistani ties.
Moreover, the consequences of such foreign-policy waffling extend far beyond the Middle East.
In November 2009, when Obama visited Japan for the first time as President, he emphasized that he was from Hawaii and proud to be “Americans’ first Pacific president.”
Two years later, then-Secretary of State Hillary Clinton published “America’s Pacific Century,” indicating a shift in America’s global strategy.
This declaration of a “return to Asia” marked the start of the famous “pivot” to the Pacific in US foreign policy – a shift away from the Middle East that was intended to meet the challenges posed by China’s growing geopolitical ambitions.
All of Asia’s democracies (and a few of its autocracies, particularly Vietnam) welcomed it.
But, though rhetoric matters in diplomacy, the pivot will be fatally undermined if Asians perceive the same sort of gap between America’s words and its actions that has become apparent in its Middle East policy (despite Kerry’s determined efforts to revitalize peace talks between Israel and the Palestinian Authority).
In particular, there is a gnawing fear that the US may yet choose the “G-2” option: a grand bargain with China for the two countries to decide Asia’s fate by themselves and over our heads.
Given the size and clout of countries like India, Japan, Indonesia, and South Korea, such a condominium is, no doubt, doomed to failure.
So, as tempting as such a relationship may be, the US ought to resist it.
Meanwhile, in Japan, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has begun a national discussion concerning how the country can take greater responsibility for its own defense.
His government continues to place great faith in the Japan-US alliance as the bedrock of Japanese (and Asian) security.
But Abe’s government also recognizes that the world’s geopolitical tectonic plates are shifting, and that many in the US are tempted by the siren song of isolationism.
So Abe feels obliged to put Japan in a position to be able to help Asia’s democracies manage any crisis that may emerge in the event of a change in America’s regional presence.
In the coming days, Japan will welcome Caroline Kennedy, the daughter of President John F. Kennedy and the likely new US ambassador.
She will find a Japan renewing itself and its commitment to Asia’s freedoms.
May that example, similar to her father’s appeal 53 years ago for the defense of freedom, also call forth the best in the American spirit.
American-Made Financial Repression
HONG KONG – A generation of development economists owe Ronald McKinnon, who died earlier this month, a huge intellectual debt for his insight – introduced in his 1973 book Money and Capital in Economic Development – that governments that engage in financial repression (channeling funds toward themselves to reduce their debt) hamper financial development.
Indeed, McKinnon provided the key to understanding why emerging economies’ financial sectors were underdeveloped.
At the end of his life, McKinnon was working on a related – also potentially groundbreaking – concept: a dollar-renminbi standard.
In his view, such a system would alleviate the financial repression and fragmentation that is undermining global financial stability and growth.
The question is whether the powers that be – particularly in the United States, which has long benefited from the dollar’s global domination – would ever agree to such a cooperative system.
The notion that the dollar’s global dominance is contributing to financial repression represents a significant historical shift.
As McKinnon pointed out, the dollar became a dominant international currency after World War II because it helped to reduce financial repression and fragmentation in Europe and Asia, where high inflation, negative real interest rates, and excessive regulation prevailed.
By using the dollar to anchor prices and the Federal Reserve’s interest rate as the benchmark for the cost of capital, invoicing, payments, clearing, liquidity, and central-bank reserves all became more stable and reliable.
As long as the US remained competitive and productive, currencies that were pegged to the dollar benefited considerably.
For economies in transition – such as Western Europe in the 1950s-1960s, Asia during the growth miracle of the 1970s-1990s, and China in 1996-2005 – the dollar provided an anchor for the macroeconomic stabilization efforts and fiscal and monetary discipline that structural transformation demanded.
But two disruptions undermined these benefits.
First, in 1971, the US terminated the dollar’s convertibility to gold, opening the way for the emergence of a new exchange-rate regime, based on freely floating fiat currencies.
Then came the period of “Japan-bashing” in the 1980s-1990s, which culminated in threats from the US to impose trade sanctions if Japan’s competitive pressure on American industries did not ease.
With the subsequent sharp appreciation in the yen/dollar exchange rate, from ¥360:$1 to ¥80:1, the world’s second-largest economy has suffered through two decades of deflation and stagnation.
Throughout this period, McKinnon argued that, by forcing America’s trade partners to bear the burden of adjustment, the dollar’s predominance leads to “conflicted virtue”: surplus countries like Japan, Germany, and China faced pressure to strengthen their currencies, at the risk of triggering deflation.
If they failed to do so, their “undervalued” exchange rates were criticized as unfair.
But McKinnon disagreed with the conventional wisdom that the best way to resolve this conflict would be to shift to flexible exchange rates.
Instead, he recommended that Asian countries develop a regional currency that would provide macroeconomic stability in the face of dollar volatility.
Long before the Bretton Wood institutions conceded that capital controls could be useful, McKinnon was asserting that, under certain circumstances, such controls might be necessary to supplement prudential banking regulation.
McKinnon has a particularly strong following among Chinese economists.
China achieved its strongest growth when the renminbi was pegged to the dollar – a system that required steadfast reforms and strict fiscal discipline.
The renminbi’s steady appreciation against the dollar – at an annual rate of about 3%, on average, since 2005 – shrank China’s current-account surplus.
In a weak global economic environment, China’s progress in addressing macroeconomic imbalances, while maintaining an annual growth rate of about 7%, was no small feat.
But the renminbi’s appreciation also attracted carry-trade speculators, who purchased renminbi assets in order to benefit from high interest rates (particularly after 2008) and exchange-rate gains.
This is partly why China’s foreign-exchange reserves have swelled so rapidly, from $250 billion in 2000 to $4 trillion this year.
The problem, as McKinnon recognized, is that these speculative inflows of “hot” money have weakened China’s macroeconomic tools and fueled ever more financial repression.
For starters, China’s leaders, recognizing that higher interest rates would draw even greater inflows, are increasingly wary of interest-rate – and even capital-account – liberalization.
Making matters worse, the Chinese authorities are tightening credit and regulating the money supply through sterilization and high reserve requirements for bank deposits – an approach that undermines real economic growth considerably.
In order to stem this decline without raising interest rates too much, they have resorted to administratively targeted credit loosening.
More “China-bashing,” with the US demanding that the renminbi be allowed to appreciate further, is clearly not the answer.
Instead, the US should focus on reducing its own fiscal deficit, thereby facilitating Chinese efforts to boost domestic consumption.
If the Fed’s benchmark interest rate can be restored to historical trend levels, China would have more policy space to adjust interest rates in alignment with its growth pattern and pursue an orderly opening of its capital account.
Simply put, the world needs its two largest economies to work together to bolster global monetary stability.
Together, China and the US can alleviate financial repression, avert protectionist tendencies, and help maintain a strong foundation for global stability.
Unfortunately, McKinnon’s policy advice has not been popular among mainstream American economists and policymakers, who prefer the short-term political advantages afforded to them by free-market rhetoric.
It is time for US leaders to recognize that what former French Finance Minister Valéry Giscard d’Estaing called the “exorbitant privilege” that the dollar’s global dominance affords America also entails considerable responsibility.
Global monetary stability is, after all, a public good.
The Return of the Dollar
LAGUNA BEACH – The US dollar is on the move.
In the last four months alone, it has soared by more than 7% compared with a basket of more than a dozen global currencies, and by even more against the euro and the Japanese yen.
This dollar rally, the result of genuine economic progress and divergent policy developments, could contribute to the “rebalancing” that has long eluded the world economy.
But that outcome is far from guaranteed, especially given the related risks of financial instability.
Two major factors are currently working in the dollar’s favor, particularly compared to the euro and the yen.
First, the United States is consistently outperforming Europe and Japan in terms of economic growth and dynamism – and will likely continue to do so – owing not only to its economic flexibility and entrepreneurial energy, but also to its more decisive policy action since the start of the global financial crisis.
Second, after a period of alignment, the monetary policies of these three large and systemically important economies are diverging, taking the world economy from a multi-speed trajectory to a multi-track one.
Indeed, whereas the US Federal Reserve terminated its large-scale securities purchases, known as “quantitative easing” (QE), last month, the Bank of Japan and the European Central Bank recently announced the expansion of their monetary-stimulus programs.
In fact, ECB President Mario Draghi signaled a willingness to expand his institution’s balance sheet by a massive €1 trillion ($1.25 trillion).
With higher US market interest rates attracting additional capital inflows and pushing the dollar even higher, the currency’s revaluation would appear to be just what the doctor ordered when it comes to catalyzing a long-awaited global rebalancing – one that promotes stronger growth and mitigates deflation risk in Europe and Japan.
Specifically, an appreciating dollar improves the price competitiveness of European and Japanese companies in the US and other markets, while moderating some of the structural deflationary pressure in the lagging economies by causing import prices to rise.
Yet the benefits of the dollar’s rally are far from guaranteed, for both economic and financial reasons.
While the US economy is more resilient and agile than its developed counterparts, it is not yet robust enough to be able to adjust smoothly to a significant shift in external demand to other countries.
There is also the risk that, given the role of the ECB and the Bank of Japan in shaping their currencies’ performance, such a shift could be characterized as a “currency war” in the US Congress, prompting a retaliatory policy response.
Furthermore, sudden large currency moves tend to translate into financial-market instability.
To be sure, this risk was more acute when a larger number of emerging-economy currencies were pegged to the US dollar, which meant that a significant shift in the dollar’s value would weaken other countries’ balance-of-payments position and erode their international reserves, thereby undermining their creditworthiness.
Today, many of these countries have adopted more flexible exchange-rate regimes, and quite a few retain adequate reserve holdings.
But a new issue risks bringing about a similarly problematic outcome: By repeatedly repressing financial-market volatility over the last few years, central-bank policies have inadvertently encouraged excessive risk-taking, which has pushed many financial-asset prices higher than economic fundamentals warrant.
To the extent that continued currency-market volatility spills over into other markets – and it will – the imperative for stronger economic fundamentals to validate asset prices will intensify.
This is not to say that the currency re-alignment that is currently underway is necessarily a problematic development; on the contrary, it has the potential to boost the global economy by supporting the recovery of some of its most challenged components.
But the only way to take advantage of the re-alignment’s benefits, without experiencing serious economic disruptions and financial-market volatility, is to introduce complementary growth-enhancing policy adjustments, such as accelerating structural reforms, balancing aggregate demand, and reducing or eliminating debt overhangs.
After all, global growth, at its current level, is inadequate for mere redistribution among countries to work.
Overall global GDP needs to increase.
The US dollar’s resurgence, while promising, is only a first step.
It is up to governments to ensure that the ongoing currency re-alignment supports a balanced, stable, and sustainable economic recovery.
Otherwise, they may find themselves again in the unpleasant business of mitigating financial instability.
Western Politics’ Locust Years
NEW YORK – Since my teenage years, I have been fascinated by the permutations and machinations of national politics.
Today, I find myself focusing on broader political trends that also help to explain global economic issues.
One such trend is the political fragmentation and polarization evident in Western democracies.
Fringe movements, some operating within established political structures, and others seeking to create new ones, are placing pressure on traditional parties, making it difficult for them to mobilize their supporters, and, in some cases, causing them real damage.
Desperate not to appear weak, long-established parties have become wary of cooperating across the aisle.
The resulting refusal to work together on the major issues of the day has had a dramatic impact on economic policies.
Once formulated through negotiations conducted at the political center, where Western democracies have long been anchored, policymaking is increasingly shaped by stubborn forces on the extreme left and right.
This approach has, it must be said, yielded the occasional breakthrough – sometimes good, sometimes bad.
But the overall result has been policy paralysis, with even the most basic elements of economic governance (such as actively passing a budget in the United States) suffering as a result.
Needless to say, the greater the governance and policy challenges at home, the more difficult regional and global cooperation becomes.
The Tea Party in the US is a case in point.
After its success on the national stage in the 2010 midterm congressional election, many Republican lawmakers became so concerned about securing their party’s “base” for future re-election bids that they no longer felt comfortable pursuing the type of bipartisan cooperation that underpin effective economic policymaking.
But the Tea Party’s impact did not end there.
By contributing to a shutdown of federal-government operations and repeatedly raising the threat of a technical default, it risked undermining an already-fragile US economic recovery.
While the movement has evolved and no longer threatens to hold the economy hostage, it continues to contribute to overall policy paralysis.
Europe now seems to be headed down a similar path, as non-traditional parties – many of them driven by single issues – become increasingly influential.
Movements like France’s anti-immigration National Front are making leading mainstream parties more likely to pander to extremists in order to preserve their support.
Of course, their fear is not irrational, as Pasok, a long-established left-wing party in Greece, found out when the far-left, anti-austerity Syriza Party surged to victory in January.
But that does not change the fact that parties’ need to address their electoral fears is causing serious damage to national policymaking.
Indeed, most established parties are so busy playing defense that they have little inclination to engage in the type of forward-looking strategic thinking that is needed to re-energize exhausted growth models, anchor financial stability, and ensure that technological innovation enables broad-based prosperity.
As a result, Western economies are running chronically below their potential – and risk undermining their future potential.
That is why future generations will likely remember this as a time of lost economic opportunities.
Instead of bowing to polarization and paralysis, policymakers should be promoting growth- and productivity-enhancing infrastructure investments, funded at exceptionally low interest rates, scaling up labor-market reforms, and working to address the growing income and wealth inequality that is increasingly limiting access to economic opportunity.
Likewise, policymakers should be revamping incoherent and inconsistent tax structures that are riddled with unfair exemptions.
And they should be pursuing immigration reform to overhaul a system that penalizes talent, encourages malfeasance, and, as illustrated by the thousands of migrants who have drowned in the Mediterranean Sea in recent years while trying to reach Europe, often leads to human tragedy.
Despite widespread dissatisfaction with political institutions in many Western countries – the US Congress, for example, has very low approval ratings – it is difficult to see what will break the current logjam.
Within established parties, forces promoting rejuvenation are weak and uneven.
Add to that an increasingly polarized and quasi-tribal news media, which can amplify divisions in society, and the scope for collaborative transformation is extremely limited.
For their part, many of the fringe parties, despite their rising popularity, are struggling to achieve power, a challenge illustrated in the recent British election.
And those that succeed, such as Syriza, quickly become frustrated by the largely immovable systems in which they must operate – a situation that their lack of governing experience makes all the more difficult.
Over time, Western political systems will evolve to meet the needs of their economies.
But, in the interim, the vast majority of companies and households will have to cope with systems that do relatively less to help them reach their potential, placing them at a disadvantage vis-à-vis competitors operating in more supportive systems.
To some extent, technological innovation will pick up the slack, as it empowers individuals and companies to live more self-directed lives, creating pockets of excellence and wellbeing.
But, while this is good news for some, it is inadequate to arrest the rising inequality of income, wealth, and opportunity – or to unleash the inclusive prosperity that Western economies can and should be generating.
Fed Up with the Fed
NEW YORK – At the end of every August, central bankers and financiers from around the world meet in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, for the US Federal Reserve’s economic symposium.
This year, the participants were greeted by a large group of mostly young people, including many African- and Hispanic Americans.
The group was not there so much to protest as to inform.
They wanted the assembled policymakers to know that their decisions affect ordinary people, not just the financiers who are worried about what inflation does to the value of their bonds or what interest-rate hikes might do to their stock portfolios.
And their green tee shirts were emblazoned with the message that for these Americans, there has been no recovery.
Even now, seven years after the global financial crisis triggered the Great Recession, “official” unemployment among African-Americans is more than 9%.
According to a broader (and more appropriate) definition, which includes part-time employees seeking full-time jobs and marginally employed workers, the unemployment rate for the United States as a whole is 10.3%.
But, for African-Americans – especially the young – the rate is much higher.
For example, for African-Americans aged 17-20 who have graduated high school but not enrolled in college, the unemployment rate is over 50%.
The “jobs gap” – the difference between today’s employment and what it should be – is some three million.
With so many people out of work, downward pressure on wages is showing up in official statistics as well.
So far this year, real wages for non-supervisory workers fell by nearly 0.5%.
This is part of a long-term trend that explains why household incomes in the middle of the distribution are lower than they were a quarter-century ago.
Wage stagnation also helps to explain why statements from Fed officials that the economy has virtually returned to normal are met with derision.
Perhaps that is true in the neighborhoods where the officials live.
But, with the bulk of the increase in incomes since the US “recovery” began going to the top 1% of earners, it is not true for most communities.
The young people at Jackson Hole, representing a national movement called, naturally, “Fed Up,” could attest to that.
There is strong evidence that economies perform better with a tight labor market and, as the International Monetary Fund has shown, lower inequality (and the former typically leads to the latter).
Of course, the financiers and corporate executives who pay $1,000 to attend the Jackson Hole meeting see things differently: Low wages mean high profits, and low interest rates mean high stock prices.
The Fed has a dual mandate – to promote full employment and price stability.
It has been more than successful at the second, partly because it has been less than successful at the first.
So why will policymakers be considering an interest-rate hike at the Fed’s September meeting?
The usual argument for raising interest rates is to dampen an overheating economy in which inflationary pressures have become too high.
That is obviously not the case now.
Indeed, given wage stagnation and the strong dollar, inflation is well below the Fed’s own 2% target, not to mention the 4% rate for which many economists (including the International Monetary Fund’s former chief economist, Olivier Blanchard) have argued.
Inflation hawks argue that the inflation dragon must be slayed before one sees the whites of its eyes: Fail to act now and it will burn you in a year or two.
But, in the current circumstances, higher inflation would be good for the economy.
There is essentially no risk that the economy would overheat so quickly that the Fed could not intervene in time to prevent excessive inflation.
Whatever the unemployment rate at which inflationary pressures become significant – a key question for policymakers – we know that it is far lower than the rate today.
If the Fed focuses excessively on inflation, it worsens inequality, which in turn worsens overall economic performance.
Wages falter during recessions; if the Fed then raises interest rates every time there is a sign of wage growth, workers’ share will be ratcheted down – never recovering what was lost in the downturn.
The argument for raising interest rates focuses not on the wellbeing of workers, but that of the financiers.
The worry is that in a low-interest-rate environment, investors’ irrational “search for yield” fuels financial-sector distortions.
In a well-functioning economy, one would have expected the low cost of capital to be the basis of healthy growth.
In the US, workers are being asked to sacrifice their livelihoods and wellbeing to protect well-heeled financiers from the consequences of their own recklessness.
The Fed should simultaneously stimulate the economy and tame the financial markets.
Good regulation means more than just preventing the banking sector from harming the rest of us (though the Fed didn’t do a very good job of that before the crisis). It also means adopting and enforcing rules that restrict the flow of funds into speculation and encourage the financial sector to play the constructive role in our economy that it should, by providing capital to establish new firms and enable successful companies to expand.
I often feel a great deal of sympathy for Fed officials, because they must make close calls in an environment of considerable uncertainty.
But the call right now is not a close one.
On the contrary, it is as close to a no-brainer as such decisions can be: Now is not the time to tighten credit and slow down the economy.
Fiscal Challenges and Fiscal Follies
BERKELEY – Where is America’s economy headed in 2013?
Will the recovery continue at its frustratingly slow pace?
Or will it accelerate as the housing sector rebounds, bank lending expands, household balance sheets improve, and state and local government budgets strengthen?
With economic headwinds dissipating, the United States’ prospects for faster GDP growth appear promising.
But there is also a significant risk that a large and unnecessary dose of fiscal austerity will weaken demand, undermine confidence, and tip the economy back into recession.
Since 2010, annual GDP growth has averaged about 2.1%, less than half the average of recoveries from previous US recessions over the last 60 years.
Slow GDP growth has meant slow employment growth.
The unemployment rate remains about two percentage points higher than what most economists consider consistent with a full recovery, and the labor-force participation rate is hovering near historic lows.
The economy is still operating far below its potential: GDP is about 6% below what the economy is capable of producing at full capacity without higher inflation.
Tepid growth reflects weak demand.
Housing prices are rising, and, while residential investment is increasing, it remains depressed as a share of GDP.
Households have cut their debt and rebuilt their balance sheets, but the large loss in household wealth, weak growth in wages and income, the concentration of most income gains at the top, and a decline in labor’s share of national income to record lows continue to constrain consumption.
Under these circumstances, and with inflation subdued and interest rates on US Treasury securities far below their historical average in both nominal and real terms, the economic case for temporary fiscal measures to boost demand is compelling.
Yet the US Congress, spearheaded by Republicans in the House of Representatives, appears to be heading in the opposite direction, so far failing to agree on a deal to protect the economy from much, if not all, of the $600 billion in tax increases and spending cuts – the so-called fiscal cliff – scheduled to take effect in 2013.
Confusion, fear, ideology, and electoral self-interest all play a role in the readiness of many members of Congress – despite warnings from the Federal Reserve, the Congressional Budget Office, and most private forecasters – to make such an egregious mistake.
First, confusion.
The US faces two distinct fiscal challenges: the tax increases and spending cuts that threaten to derail the economy in 2013; and a long-term structural deficit that is likely to mean higher interest rates, less investment, and slower growth once the economy has recovered and the output gap has disappeared.
Unlike the fiscal cliff, the structural deficit problem is not imminent: contrary to deficit hawks’ dire warnings, the US does not face a time-sensitive debt crisis.
Although US federal debt is projected to rise at an unsustainable rate in the long term, the right solution is not fiscal belt-tightening now, but rather a credible plan to stabilize the debt/GDP ratio gradually as the economy recovers.
Indeed, as Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke recently observed, preventing a severe fiscal contraction in 2013 will boost growth, reduce the near-term deficit, and help to solve the long-term debt problem.
Second, fear.
The US government currently can borrow at historically low interest rates.
As a result of the financial crisis, more risk-averse investors at home and abroad have increased their demand &#160;for US Treasury securities.
But what if investors lose confidence in the US government’s ability or willingness to tackle its long-term debt problem and begin to fear a default (either explicit or through rapid inflation)?
The result could be a speculative attack by “bond-market vigilantes,” triggering a sharp rise in interest rates, a dramatic fall in the dollar, or a combination of the two.
For three years, repeated warnings that such an attack is imminent have flown in the face of the evidence: US Treasury securities remain a safe-haven asset for global investors, including risk-sensitive foreign central banks.
Indeed, global investors ignored Standard &amp; Poor’s 2011 decision to downgrade US government debt, driving down yields even further.
Of course, Congress could spook investors and increase the likelihood of a bond-market attack by failing to raise the debt ceiling in 2013.
But, absent that monumental folly, long-term interest rates are unlikely to rise significantly as long as the Fed keeps short-term interest rates low – which it recently committed to do until unemployment falls to 6.5%.
Congress thus has adequate time to develop a sensible long-term plan to stabilize the debt without endangering the recovery.
Third, ideology.
Some members of Congress are unwilling to vote for any tax increase, even as part of a compromise to avert the fiscal cliff or to stabilize the debt.
More than 90% of House Republicans have signed a “no-tax pledge.”
Other members champion the cause of a much smaller government and welcome the deep spending cuts that are scheduled to take effect in 2013, even if they trigger a recession.
For such members, ideological purity trumps economic logic.
Finally, electoral self-interest.
The primary motivation of most members of Congress has always been winning elections.
But how this motivation affects their willingness to compromise has changed as a result of redistricting and the growing polarization of voting districts along partisan lines.
According to a recent analysis by Nate Silver, most House members now come from “hyperpartisan” districts in which the risk of losing to candidates from the other party is small.
In such districts, members have little incentive to compromise on bipartisan deals to address the country’s fiscal challenges, because failure to do so poses no threat to their re-election.
On the contrary, especially for Republicans from districts with a strong, ideologically motivated base, voting for such deals could trigger a primary electoral challenge from within their own party.
It was such self-interested Republican members who rebuffed Speaker of the House John Boehner’s proposal to maintain current tax rates for all but those earning more than $1 million per year.
The outlook for the US economy over the next few years hinges on what a deeply divided Congress decides.
Right now, the prospect that they will make the right choices appears to be dim.
Let’s hope the odds improve in the New Year.
Exposing America
WASHINGTON, DC – If not for President Barack Obama’s bold, unexpected diplomatic breakthrough with Cuba, the last weeks of 2014 would have been relentlessly unkind to America.
The deep flaws in our country’s justice system, the continuing racism in our society, and our government’s recent record of torture and abuse have been on display for the entire world to see.
The video of five police officers subduing and then killing a man, despite his pleas that he could not breathe, could have come from many countries around the world.
But the killing of Eric Garner in New York City, like that of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Missouri, last summer and of 12-year-old Tamir Rice in Cleveland in November, reflect the heightened risk that young African-American men face at the hands of the police in many US cities.
Indeed, according to one recent analysis, young African-American males are 21 times more likely than young white males to be fatally shot by the police.
Then came the release by the US Senate Select Committee on Intelligence of 528 pages of its report on the CIA’s detention and interrogation program, established following the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on America.
What the committee described as an “executive summary” detailed horrific behavior by government officials acting on instructions from their superiors.
Worse, rather than seeking to make amends for the abuses, at least one group of former US officials sought to justify them.
When asked on US television about the estimated 25% of detainees who were innocent, former Vice President Dick Cheney responded: “I have no problem as long as we achieve our objective.
And our objective is to get the guys who did 9/11 and it is to avoid another attack against the United States.”
For their part, some current CIA officials continue to insist on the value of America’s “enhanced interrogation” program (which Obama halted), despite the Senate report’s conclusion that the techniques it employed yielded no valuable intelligence.
Indeed, other accounts of America’s “global war on terror” also make it clear that many of the people who were detained and tortured were not threats to America’s security – at least not until US actions made them so.
The week the Senate report came out, I was reading Anand Gopal’s new book No Good Men Among the Living,&nbsp;which tells contemporary Afghanistan’s story through the eyes of a supporter of former President Hamid Karzai, a Taliban commander, and a Kabul-born housewife who spent years in purdah in Taliban country.
Over and over again, the same story plays out: a local power-broker is willing, even eager, to support the new US-backed government, only to be denounced as a Taliban member by a fellow Afghan – typically for local political or personal reasons – to unwitting American troops.
Indeed, this pattern recurs in the accounts of anyone who has lived in Afghanistan, spoken the language, and understood the workings of patronage and power there.
It was often these denounced men who were detained – and tortured – for years.
From my vantage point as a US foreign-policy expert, the only bright spot in recent months has been Obama’s normalization of diplomatic relations with Cuba.
Finally, America has an opportunity to launch a new beginning, not only with Cuba but also with the Caribbean and Latin American countries that have pressed us hard and often to change our stance.
Indeed, the move will stand as one of Obama’s most substantial foreign-policy achievements, with implications that will reverberate for decades.
Yet a common theme runs through all of these recent events, good and bad alike.
In each case, US institutions and officials held other US institutions and officials to account.
Congress documented and publicized the actions of the executive branch in the torture report.
Senator Dianne Feinstein worked doggedly to ensure that the Senate intelligence committee could research and document US interrogation practices, even in the face of staunch opposition by the CIA (which even surreptitiously searched the committee’s computers).
“There are those who will seize upon the report and say ‘see what Americans did,’” Feinstein said, “and they will try to use it to justify evil actions or to incite more violence.
We cannot prevent that.
But history will judge us by our commitment to a just society governed by law and the willingness to face an ugly truth and say ‘never again.’”
Likewise, the press and many civil-society groups documented and publicized not only the killings of Brown, Garner, and others, but also how those cases reflected a pattern of racially disparate treatment by the police.
And when Obama announced the restoration of full diplomatic relations with Cuba, the White House described the last half-century of US policy as a “failed approach,” isolating the US, constraining its influence in hemispheric politics, and tying its hands in Cuba itself.
Americans are no better (and no worse) than anyone else.
We have no right to moralize, and we have much to learn from others.
Fortunately, our founding fathers gave us the exceptional gift of a political system that pushes us continually in the direction of self-correction.
The ability to correct wrongdoing can never justify doing wrong in the first place.
The point of exposure is not to celebrate our ability to expose.
We Americans must learn how to look at ourselves and our government the way others do.
We have much to answer for.
But at least we know that we have asked the right questions.
Obama 2.0
DENVER – It’s over.
After a year-long campaign costing $2.5-6 billion (estimates vary widely), President Barack Obama has won a second four-year term, with 49 states reporting their results on election night (Florida, for the second time in four presidential elections, did not).
Obama now has a chance to define the United States’ role in the international system for years to come.
Second terms can often be productive times for US foreign policy, largely because presidents cannot seek a third.
George W. Bush, for example, used his second four years in office to fix mistakes made during his first (his second-term team was busy).
Presidents in their second terms often apply old-fashioned American pragmatism to tough issues, which they often cannot do during their first terms, when reelection is their first priority.
Obama’s infamous open-mike remark to Russian Prime Minister Dimitri Medvedev that he would have more flexibility after the election may have shocked some, but, for most foreign-policy experts, he was stating the obvious.
The president’s challenge is to use his new freedom of action quickly, before the perception sets in (as it inevitably does) that he is a lame duck.
Obama’s first foreign excursion after the election will be to Laos to attend the East Asian summit, a trip that is perceived as part of his administration’s “pivot” to Asia.
He will also visit Myanmar (Burma) in an effort to lend support to that struggling country’s extraordinary changes and encourage further progress.
But the real challenge for Obama is to do more to explain what the “pivot” means, because already his bold side trip to the unfinished project in Myanmar is being perceived as yet another effort to contain or, worse, encircle China.
What began as a strategic shift to an area of the world replete with long-term US interests has become – even to many anxious Americans – an exercise in picking new fights with a country of 1.3 billion people undergoing painful internal transformations of its own.
US policy in Asia requires a steady hand, and, in Obama, the US has just that.
But it also needs effective communication that makes clear to the American people that the relationship with China truly is too big to fail and thus requires a long-term process of thoughtful engagement.
Such messages must be issued more often by the president himself, and not only by officials several bureaucratic layers below.
American policy in Asia in general, and toward China in particular, has enjoyed consistent bipartisan support.
When a US president has bipartisan support on any issue, he should flaunt it.
There is no question that dealing with China, which is in an anxious mood of its own, has become increasingly difficult.
But the way to address China’s internal tensions and emerging nationalism, and the resulting strains in its relationships with its neighbors, is not to put the region’s countries in the position of having to choose between China and the US.
The right approach is to be constant, to stress long-term commitments, and to speak in a calm and measured way, understanding that good China policy is about relationships, not transactions.
No one does that better than this president.
Another aspect of the pivot involves moving away from the Middle East.
But no amount of fancy footwork, whether pivoting or pirouetting, can diminish that region’s importance.
The Middle East will remain a central pillar of world energy for decades to come.&#160; Whether it ultimately can export more energy than instability is the key question.
Unlike East Asia, the Middle East remains a region in turmoil, the complexity of which defies analytical consensus.
Do the region’s crises stem from the lack of peace with Israel?
Or is some combination of other factors – boiling frustration with the regional economic order, for example, or a US intervention that turned Sunni-led Iraq into the Arab world’s lonely, Shia-led black sheep – at its root?
The Obama administration needs to do a far better job in its second term when it comes to defining the issues and setting the scope of a reenergized US diplomatic effort in the region.
In Obama’s first term, mediators were dispatched to the region within days of his inauguration.
Perhaps this time, there should be a greater effort at developing coherent polices first.
I suggest starting with Syria.
In the absence of international leadership in forging a political end-state, Syria’s conflict has tragically become a sectarian civil war – one that is rapidly metastasizing, with far-reaching consequences for US interests in the region and for prior US political investments in projects like Iraq.
We need to put aside crowd-pleasing calls for President Bashar al-Assad’s removal (though obviously he must go) and work harder with international partners, including Russia and China – both of which should, quite frankly, rank higher than Syria in terms of their importance to US foreign policy.
Finally, the US needs reliable partners.
And among the most reliable is Europe.
But Europe is preoccupied with its own economic problems, which have pressed European leadership to the breaking point.
Europe will be back (the sooner the better).
In the meantime, the US needs to do all that it can, including showing some uncharacteristic patience, to help Europe emerge from its crisis.
It also needs to continue to engage with Europe on international projects, including negotiations with Iran over its nuclear program – an issue of fundamental significance to international security.
No president in recent decades has had a better temperament and a clearer vision for facing the world’s challenges than the one that Americans have just reelected.
Obama now has an opportunity to put that talent to work in ways that he could not in his first term.
America’s Sequestered Recovery
BERKELEY – The United States is confronting another round of cuts in federal government spending, this time threatening to trim at least 0.5 percentage points from GDP growth and to precipitate a loss of at least one million jobs.
Automatic across-the-board spending cuts, the so-called “sequester,” would reduce spending by $85 billion, with defense programs cut by about 8% and domestic programs by about 5% this year – and with additional cuts of comparable dollar amounts every year until 2021.
All major government functions – national security, foreign aid, basic research, emergency relief, and education, to name a few salient examples – would experience an immediate and sizeable funding hit.
These cuts, along with the tax increases agreed to in January, would knock about 1.25 percentage points off 2013 GDP growth, consigning the economy to another year of tepid recovery and disappointing job gains.
The real aim of the sequester’s advocates is a smaller federal government – a goal that often is cloaked in the argument that excessive government spending is choking economic growth.
Although this is a politically compelling argument, because it stokes public fears about an out-of-control deficit, it flies in the face of the facts.
Anemic government spending, not profligacy, has been a major factor behind the economy’s lackluster recovery.
According to a recent report by the Congressional Budget Office, large spending cuts by state and local governments – and, more recently, a significant reduction in federal spending – have contributed to the unusual and prolonged weakness of aggregate demand.
In recent speeches, US Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke and Vice Chair Janet Yellen have described fiscal policy at the local, state, and federal levels as a powerful headwind slowing the economy’s return to full employment.
In the year after the recession ended, discretionary spending at the federal, state, and local levels boosted growth at about the same pace as in previous recoveries.
But, since then – and in sharp contrast to previous recoveries – fiscal policy has become contractionary, reducing aggregate demand and restraining growth.
State and local governments have cut spending and payrolls significantly.
And federal purchases of goods and services have been declining since 2010, when the temporary additional spending in the 2009 stimulus package came to an end.
Even without the sequester, real per capita government spending (including both purchases and transfer payments) has declined under President Barack Obama, while it increased under every preceding president since Richard Nixon.
(Indeed, per capita spending growth was much faster under the Republican administrations of Ronald Reagan and George W. Bush than it was under Democratic Presidents Jimmy Carter and Bill Clinton.)
And, even without the sequester, the federal budget deficit is set to fall at a faster pace during the next two years than in any two-year period since demobilization after World War II.
As a result of a deep and persistent deficiency in aggregate demand, the US economy has been operating far below its potential output level.
Real GDP fell by 8% relative to its noninflationary potential in 2008-2009, and has remained about 8% below its previous growth path ever since.
This translates into about $900 billion of foregone goods and services this year alone – a tremendous waste reflected in an unemployment rate of 7.9% and a poverty rate of 15%, significantly higher than the average of the past 30 years.
And the waste accumulates over time: the longer the economy operates far below its capacity, the slower the growth in its future capacity as a result of diminished risk-taking, foregone investment, and erosion of the skills base.
The significant loss of current and future potential output is all the more remarkable, because it has occurred despite a sustained and unprecedented effort by the Fed to boost demand and hasten the recovery.
Fed officials have repeatedly expressed concern that the prolonged weak recovery will inflict future pain in the form of slower long-run growth.
Motivated by this concern, the Fed has held the nominal short-term interest rate near zero – its effective lower bound – for more than five years, with a promise to keep it there until 2015, and has been purchasing about $1 trillion of long-term government bonds each year.
As a result, the nominal yield on the ten-year Treasury bond, a widely used measure of the federal government’s borrowing costs, hovers around 2%.
That is higher than the record low of 1.4% hit in 2012, but less than half the pre-2008 level and less than a third of its 40-year average.
In real terms, both short-term and long-term interest rates remain in negative territory.
Recent research has found that the multiplier for discretionary fiscal policy – the change in output caused by a change in discretionary government spending – is larger when nominal interest rates are low and there is a significant amount of underutilized resources.
These conditions describe the US economy as it faces yet another round of government spending cuts that would have negative multiplier effects on GDP and job growth.
Indeed, these effects are likely to be larger than expected compared to conventional multiplier estimates, which rest on two assumptions: the economy is close to full employment; and the contraction in demand caused by a cut in government spending will be offset by a drop in interest rates.
Neither assumption applies today.
Even worse, the sequester’s across-the-board spending cuts make no distinction between effective and essential programs and programs that represent special interests or have outlived their original purpose.
Such arbitrary cuts are likely to inflict more damage on the economy than sensibly targeted cuts of the same magnitude.
The sequester is the product of ideology and political stalemate.
It has no economic justification.
In the long run, additional targeted spending cuts will be necessary as part of a balanced package to stabilize the debt/GDP ratio.
But they are not necessary now.
Indeed, by endangering the economy’s halting recovery, they would be counterproductive.
The Single-Engine Global Economy
TOKYO – The global economy is like a jetliner that needs all of its engines operational to take off and steer clear of clouds and storms.
Unfortunately, only one of its four engines is functioning properly: the Anglosphere (the United States and its close cousin, the United Kingdom).
The second engine – the eurozone – has now stalled after an anemic post-2008 restart.
Indeed, Europe is one shock away from outright deflation and another bout of recession.
Likewise, the third engine, Japan, is running out of fuel after a year of fiscal and monetary stimulus.
And emerging markets (the fourth engine) are slowing sharply as decade-long global tailwinds – rapid Chinese growth, zero policy rates and quantitative easing by the US Federal Reserve, and a commodity super-cycle – become headwinds.
So the question is whether and for how long the global economy can remain aloft on a single engine.
Weakness in the rest of the world implies a stronger dollar, which will invariably weaken US growth.
The deeper the slowdown in other countries and the higher the dollar rises, the less the US will be able to decouple from the funk everywhere else, even if domestic demand seems robust.
Falling oil prices may provide cheaper energy for manufacturers and households, but they hurt energy exporters and their spending.
And, while increased supply – particularly from North American shale resources – has put downward pressure on prices, so has weaker demand in the eurozone, Japan, China, and many emerging markets.
Moreover, persistently low oil prices induce a fall in investment in new capacity, further undermining global demand.
Meanwhile, market volatility has grown, and a correction is still underway.
Bad macro news can be good for markets, because a prompt policy response alone can boost asset prices.
But recent bad macro news has been bad for markets, owing to the perception of policy inertia.
Indeed, the European Central Bank is dithering about how much to expand its balance sheet with purchases of sovereign bonds, while the Bank of Japan only now decided to increase its rate of quantitative easing, given evidence that this year’s consumption-tax increase is impeding growth and that next year’s planned tax increase will weaken it further.
As for fiscal policy, Germany continues to resist a much-needed stimulus to boost eurozone demand.
And Japan seems to be intent on inflicting on itself a second, growth-retarding consumption-tax increase.
Furthermore, the Fed has now exited quantitative easing and is showing a willingness to start raising policy rates sooner than markets expected.
If the Fed does not postpone rate increases until the global economic weather clears, it risks an aborted takeoff – the fate of many economies in the last few years.
If the Republican Party takes full control of the US Congress in November’s mid-term election, policy gridlock is likely to worsen, risking a re-run of the damaging fiscal battles that led last year to a government shutdown and almost to a technical debt default.
More broadly, the gridlock will prevent the passage of important structural reforms that the US needs to boost growth.
Major emerging countries are also in trouble.
Of the five BRICS economies (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa), three (Brazil, Russia, and South Africa) are close to recession.
The biggest, China, is in the midst of a structural slowdown that will push its growth rate closer to 5% in the next two years, from above 7% now.
At the same time, much-touted reforms to rebalance growth from fixed investment to consumption are being postponed until President Xi Jinping consolidates his power.
But serious challenges lie ahead.
Private and public debts in advanced economies are still high and rising – and are potentially unsustainable, especially in the eurozone and Japan.
Rising inequality is redistributing income to those with a high propensity to save (the rich and corporations), and is exacerbated by capital-intensive, labor-saving technological innovation.
This combination of high debt and rising inequality may be the source of the secular stagnation that is making structural reforms more politically difficult to implement.
If anything, the rise of nationalistic, populist, and nativist parties in Europe, North America, and Asia is leading to a backlash against free trade and labor migration, which could further weaken global growth.
Rather than boosting credit to the real economy, unconventional monetary policies have mostly lifted the wealth of the very rich – the main beneficiaries of asset reflation.
But now reflation may be creating asset-price bubbles, and the hope that macro-prudential policies will prevent them from bursting is so far just that – a leap of faith.
Fortunately, rising geopolitical risks – a Middle East on fire, the Russia-Ukraine conflict, Hong Kong’s turmoil, and China’s territorial disputes with its neighbors – together with geo-economic threats from, say, Ebola and global climate change, have not yet led to financial contagion.
Nonetheless, they are slowing down capital spending and consumption, given the option value of waiting during uncertain times.
So the global economy is flying on a single engine, the pilots must navigate menacing storm clouds, and fights are breaking out among the passengers.
If only there were emergency crews on the ground.
Beating America’s Health-Care Monopolists
BERKELEY – The United States’ Affordable Care Act (ACA), President Barack Obama’s signature 2010 health-care reform, has significantly increased the need for effective antitrust enforcement in health-insurance markets.
Despite recent good news on this front, the odds remain stacked against consumers.
As Berkeley economics professor Aaron Edlin has pointed out, consumer abstention is the ultimate competitor.
Companies cannot purchase or contrive a solution to consumers who say, “I’m just not going to buy this.”
But the ACA requires individuals to purchase health insurance, thus creating a vertical demand curve for potential monopolists.
Under these conditions, profits – and consumer abuse – can be maximized through collusion.
It is not surprising, then, that in 2015 some of the largest private American health-insurance companies – Anthem, Cigna, Aetna, and Humana – began exploring the possibility of merging.