Every financial crisis is inherently unknowable – before it occurs, and as it occurs.
By contrast, we understand past crises very well.
Accountants go over the books, the participants tell their tales to the newspapers (or sometimes before a judge), politicians explain why they are sorting out a mess, and in the end historians put together a story.
Because the past is knowable, the best way of understanding a current crisis is to search for a model in past experiences, even those that are long past.
But which is the right template?
Often the choice depends less on a rational assessment of similarities and differences than on gut feelings, proclivities to optimism or pessimism, or political orientation.
Currently, two dates are circulating widely, 1907 and 1931.
At the beginning of the current credit crunch, many historically minded people picked 1907 as the key precedent.
Not only is it an arithmetically neat 100 years in the past, but it also looked like an attractive parallel.
The crisis of 1907 was both immediately devastating, provoking a massive but short economic downturn, and, as it turned out, easily resolved.
The 1907 panic started in the United States, owing to a rise in interest rates as farmers in the West were paid for their crops and financial scandals in New York that seemed to implicate a large financial institution, the Knickerbocker trust.
The obvious lesson of 1907 that Americans learned was that central banks were the best placed institutions to restore liquidity in a financial panic, and, in the longer run, monetary reform gave the US its own central bank, the Federal Reserve, by 1914.
So 1907 became a comforting mantra in times of financial stress: a crisis cannot happen as long as the central bank understands the problem of liquidity.
There are modern parallels.
The Fed and the European Central Bank have recently pumped massive amounts of liquidity into the global financial system.
Strategically placed private institutions have done their part to shore up confidence.
Goldman Sachs, for example, has made a point of publicly buying endangered assets in its Global Equities Opportunity Fund.
The darker parallel is to the Great Depression of the 1930’s, when no amount of liquidity helped.
This is the historical analogy drawn by those who want governments to do more, particularly banks that feel vulnerable and desperately need a public bailout.
In August 2007, some German banks, at the earliest signs of difficulty because of their exposure to US sub-prime mortgages, started to talk only of 1931.
In the Great Depression, bank collapses made the downturn far worse. They were contagious across national frontiers.
Governments not only needed to help by providing a combination of public assistance and new legislation guaranteeing deposits, but also were called on to shield their constituencies from destabilizing international influences.
This nationalist-minded rhetoric has returned in the financial crisis of 2007.
Germans do not see why they should be vulnerable because of poor quality mortgage lending in American inner cities.
Depositors with the British bank Northern Rock blame American developments for the credit turbulence that made it impossible for the bank to continue to fund its lending.
Neither of these apparent historical parallels is convincing.
We are not living in 1907, when the gold standard limited the ability of central banks to supply additional liquidity.
Nor, following the fastest five-year period of economic growth in human history, are collapsing prices endangering the financial system, as they did during the Great Depression.
Today, the responses to the 1907 and 1931 crises would only make matters worse.
The continuous injection of liquidity would imply a greater likelihood of renewed asset bubbles in housing, equities, or modern art.
Government stabilization of the banking system can either be international, provoking complaints by outraged taxpayers about subsidizing others, or national, but only at the cost of greatly extended regulation of capital movements.
Both courses are unnecessary.
If today’s credit crunch has historical parallels, they are closer to nineteenth-century “normal crises” like 1837, 1847, or 1857.
In those panics, financial innovation caused uncertainty and nervousness, but also induced an important and beneficial learning process.
The financial institutions that survived the crises went on to play a crucial role in pushing further development, and they had enhanced reputations because they withstood a crisis.
Sometimes monetary and fiscal authorities have an obligation to ignore the wilder historical parallels and look at a broader picture.
Sometimes, too, the best response to a crisis is this: don’t just do something; stand there and do nothing.
The Perils of Prophecy
BERKELEY – We economists who are steeped in economic and financial history – and aware of the history of economic thought concerning financial crises and their effects – have reason to be proud of our analyses over the past five years.
We understood where we were heading, because we knew where we had been.
In particular, we understood that the rapid run-up of house prices, coupled with the extension of leverage, posed macroeconomic dangers.
We recognized that large bubble-driven losses in assets held by leveraged financial institutions would cause a panicked flight to safety, and that preventing a deep depression required active official intervention as a lender of last resort.
Indeed, we understood that monetarist cures were likely to prove insufficient; that sovereigns need to guarantee each others’ solvency; and that withdrawing support too soon implied enormous dangers.
We knew that premature attempts to achieve long-term fiscal balance would worsen the short-term crisis – and thus be counterproductive in the long-run.
And we understood that we faced the threat of a jobless recovery, owing to cyclical factors, rather than to structural changes.
On all of these issues, historically-minded economists were right.
Those who said that there would be no downturn, or that recovery would be rapid, or that the economy’s real problems were structural, or that supporting the economy would produce inflation (or high short-term interest rates), or that immediate fiscal austerity would be expansionary were wrong.
Not just a little wrong. Completely wrong.
Of course, we historically-minded economists are not surprised that they were wrong.
We are, however, surprised at how few of them have marked their beliefs to market in any sense.
On the contrary, many of them, their reputations under water, have doubled down on those beliefs, apparently in the hope that events will, for once, break their way, and that people might thus be induced to forget their abysmal forecasting track record.
So the big lesson is simple: trust those who work in the tradition of Walter Bagehot, Hyman Minsky, and Charles Kindleberger.
That means trusting economists like Paul Krugman, Paul Romer, Gary Gorton, Carmen Reinhart, Ken Rogoff, Raghuram Rajan, Larry Summers, Barry Eichengreen, Olivier Blanchard, and their peers.
Just as they got the recent past right, so they are the ones most likely to get the distribution of possible futures right.
But we – or at least I – have gotten significant components of the last four years wrong.
Three things surprised me (and still do).
The first is the failure of central banks to adopt a rule like nominal GDP targeting or its equivalent.
Second, I expected wage inflation in the North Atlantic to fall even farther than it has – toward, even if not to, zero.
Finally, the yield curve did not steepen sharply for the United States: federal funds rates at zero I expected, but 30-Year US Treasury bonds at a nominal rate of 2.7% I did not.
The failure of central banks to target nominal GDP growth remains incomprehensible to me, and I will not write about it until I think that I have understood the reasons.
As for wages, even with one-third of the US labor force changing jobs every year, sociological factors and human-network ties appear to exercise an even stronger influence on the level and rate of change – at the expense of balancing supply and demand – than I would have expected.
The third surprise, however, may be the most interesting.
Back in March 2009, the Nobel laureate Robert Lucas confidently predicted that the US economy would be back to normal within three years.
A normal US economy has a short-term nominal interest rate of 4%.
Since the ten-year US Treasury bond rate tends to be one percentage point above the average of expected future short-term interest rates over the next decade, even the expectation of five years of deep depression and near-zero short-term interest rates should not push the 10-Year Treasury rate below 3%.
Indeed, the Treasury rate mostly fluctuated between 3% and 3.5% from late 2008 through mid-2011.
But, in July 2011, the ten-year US Treasury bond rate crashed to 2%, and it was below 1.5% at the start of June.
The normal rules of thumb would say that the market is now expecting 8.75 years of near-zero short-term interest rates before the economy returns to normal.
And similar calculations for the 30-year Treasury bond show even longer and more anomalous expectations of continued depression.
The possible conclusions are stark.
One possibility is that those investing in financial markets expect economic policy to be so dysfunctional that the global economy will remain more or less in its current depressed state for perhaps a decade, or more.
The only other explanation is that even now, more than three years after the US financial crisis erupted, financial markets’ ability to price relative risks and returns sensibly has been broken at a deep level, leaving them incapable of doing their job: bearing and managing risk in order to channel savings to entrepreneurial ventures.
Neither alternative is something that I would have predicted – or even imagined.
The Perils of Striking Iran
In the winter of 2002-03, supporters of regime change in Iraq were upbeat in their vision of the post-invasion phase of the war.
Anyone who suggested that what is happening today was a likely scenario was criticized as being a pro-Saddam appeaser, anti-American, or both.
Yet a sober assessment of the difficulties ahead would have helped to avoid many of the mistakes that have proved to be so costly in terms of American lives and resources – not to mention the suffering of Iraqis.
Now some voices in the United States and elsewhere are proposing military action against Iran.
So it is logical to ask: what are the realistic scenarios concerning the consequences of such an intervention?
Are there any plans regarding how to handle the post-strike situation?
Without doubt, those willing to strike – either alone or in a coalition – have a range of options, ranging from naval and air blockades to targeted raids, sabotage inside the country, and massive attack from without.
But the Iranians also have cards up their sleeve – some predictable, some wild.
They may become malicious and aggressive in Iraq and Afghanistan.
The Iranian- and Syrian-backed Hezbollah militia may reinitiate hostilities.
Terrorist groups, both old and newly created, may receive fresh funding and volunteers.
A direct military showdown in the Gulf and the Straits of Hormuz, through which about 40% of the world’s traded oil is shipped, cannot be ruled out.
As a consequence, oil prices would skyrocket.
Some analysts argue that the negative effects of such an outcome would only last for “months.”
In their view, once Iran’s military capabilities and nuclear program are destroyed, the Iranians will no longer represent a threat.
However, it seems obvious that whatever happens, the Iranians will fight an asymmetric war not only on their own territory, but also in the neighboring region for years to come.
As the case of Iraq shows, “months” is a long time in the Middle East.
The fact that an Iranian reaction to a military attack might be ferocious does not mean that Iran’s government should be allowed to do whatever it deems appropriate.
On the contrary, the international community must be ready to enforce the most sacrosanct rules of peaceful coexistence, and sometimes this may include resorting to the use of force.
But, in an interdependent and interconnected world, the use of force cannot be the result of national political calculations.
Rather, it must be the product of the widest possible consensus on a critical threat assessment.
The war against Iraq in 1991 is the leading example of military intervention following global consensus.
If such a consensus cannot be reached, at least Western powers and like-minded states must agree, as in Kosovo in 1999, for example.
The third possibility – military action endorsed by a small group of states – should be avoided, for practical, legal, and moral reasons.
Today, efficiency of external action is inextricably linked to its legitimacy.
When it comes to deciding on how to deal with Iran, the US and its allies should bear in mind the following principles.
First, it is crucial to make a rational threat assessment.
Learning the lessons of the decision to invade Iraq, democracies should not allow personal obsessions, fantasies, and dogmas to contaminate the foreign policy-making process.
It is essential to distinguish between what we know, what we ought to know – and what, therefore, we would like the Iranians to tell us – and what is speculation.
Alarm bells signaling that the time to take action has arrived should ring at the right moment, and not before.
Second, as long as a serious breach of international law is not detected, negotiations with Iran must continue.
Iran is a party to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and has repeatedly declared that its nuclear program is for peaceful purposes only.
Engaging in discussions with Iran does not necessarily mean that we believe or deny those declarations.
Rather, it provides a way of reaching a better understanding of their point of view.
Negotiations are useful, too, because they promote an internal debate in Iran.
While an end to all contacts would probably lead to further radicalization, negotiations and the mere prospect of a future settlement may reinforce the influence of moderates.
With historical perspective, lack of proper negotiations has been counterproductive in the North Korean case.
Third, sanctions should not be discarded, but they should be interpreted as a means of pressure rather than as a mere prelude to war.
As Javier Solana, the European Union’s chief diplomat, who has conducted lengthy negotiations with Iran, rightly points out, even if the United Nations Security Council approves sanctions against Iran, the door to negotiations will always be open.
The same applies, of course, to sanctions dictated by Western powers on their own.
Finally, dealing with the Middle East, not just with Iran, requires a fresh, open-minded, and comprehensive approach.
All regional and local actors should be involved.
New methods should be explored.
The US administration must recognize that foreign policy is not security policy, and that a powerful military is not a magic wand.
True, if one has a hammer, all problems look like nails.
The real trouble begins when one thinks that the hammer might be the right solution for headaches, too.
Big Banks’ Tall Tales
WASHINGTON, DC – There are two competing narratives about recent financial-reform efforts and the dangers that very large banks now pose around the world.
One narrative is wrong; the other is scary.
At the center of the first narrative, preferred by financial-sector executives, is the view that all necessary reforms have already been adopted (or soon will be).
Banks have less debt relative to their equity levels than they had in 2007.
New rules limiting the scope of bank activities are in place in the United States, and soon will become law in the United Kingdom – and continental Europe could follow suit.
Proponents of this view also claim that the megabanks are managing risk better than they did before the global financial crisis erupted in 2008.
In the second narrative, the world’s largest banks remain too big to manage and have strong incentives to engage in precisely the kind of excessive risk-taking that can bring down economies.
Last year’s “London Whale” trading losses at JPMorgan Chase are a case in point.
And, according to this narrative’s advocates, almost all big banks display symptoms of chronic mismanagement.
While the debate over megabanks sometimes sounds technical, in fact it is quite simple.
Ask this question: If a humongous financial institution gets into trouble, is this a big deal for economic growth, unemployment, and the like?
Or, more bluntly, could Citigroup or a similar-size European firm get into trouble and stumble again toward failure without attracting some form of government and central bank support (whether transparent or somewhat disguised)?
The US took a step in the right direction with Title II of the Dodd-Frank reform legislation in 2010, which strengthened the resolution powers of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.&#160; And the FDIC has developed some plausible plans specifically for dealing with domestic financial firms.
(I serve on the FDIC’s Systemic Resolution Advisory Committee; all views stated here are my own.)
But a great myth lurks at the heart of the financial industry’s argument that all is well.
The FDIC’s resolution powers will not work for large, complex cross-border financial enterprises.&#160; The reason is simple: US law can create a resolution authority that works only within national boundaries.
Addressing potential failure at a firm like Citigroup would require a cross-border agreement between governments and all responsible agencies.
On the fringes of the International Monetary Fund’s just-completed spring meetings in Washington, DC, I had the opportunity to talk with senior officials and their advisers from various countries, including from Europe.
I asked all of them the same question: When will we have a binding framework for cross-border resolution?
The answers typically ranged from “not in our lifetimes” to “never.”
Again, the reason is simple: countries do not want to compromise their sovereignty or tie their hands in any way.
Governments want the ability to decide how best to protect their countries’ perceived national interests when a crisis strikes.
No one is willing to sign a treaty or otherwise pre-commit in a binding way (least of all a majority of the US Senate, which must ratify such a treaty).
As Bill Dudley, the president of the New York Federal Reserve Bank, put it recently, using the delicate language of central bankers, “The impediments to an orderly cross-border resolution still need to be fully identified and dismantled.
This is necessary to eliminate the so-called ‘too big to fail’ problem.”
Translation: Orderly resolution of global megabanks is an illusion.
As long as we allow cross-border banks at or close to their current scale, our political leaders will be unable to tolerate their failure.
And, because these large financial institutions are by any meaningful definition “too big to fail,” they can borrow more cheaply than would otherwise be the case.
Worse, they have both motive and opportunity to grow even larger.
This form of government support amounts to a large implicit subsidy for big banks.
It is a bizarre form of subsidy, to be sure, but that does not make it any less damaging to the public interest.
On the contrary, because implicit government support for “too big to fail” banks rises with the amount of risk that they assume, this support may be among the most dangerous subsidies that the world has ever seen.
After all, more debt (relative to equity) means a higher payoff when things go well.
And, when things go badly, it becomes the taxpayers’ problem (or the problem of some foreign government and their taxpayers).
What other part of the corporate world has the ability to drive the global economy into recession, as banks did in the fall of 2008?
And who else has an incentive to maximize the amount of debt that they issue?
What the two narratives about financial reform have in common is that neither has a happy ending.
Either we put a meaningful cap on the size of our largest financial firms, or we must brace ourselves for the debt-fueled economic explosion to come.
The Phantom Middle East Peace Process
TEL AVIV – Twenty years after the Madrid Peace conference, and ten years after President Bill Clinton’s heroic efforts at Camp David failed to yield a settlement between Israelis and Palestinians, one cannot escape the conclusion that the Israeli-Palestinian peace process has become one of the most spectacular deceptions in modern diplomatic history.
The process fell victim to the parties’ inability to bridge the gap between what was politically feasible for them and what was required for a settlement.
Trapped between the possible and the necessary, Israelis and Palestinians simply learned to live without a solution.
However obsessed international opinion may be with Gaza’s agony, to most Israelis the Palestinian “problem” seems to be happening on the dark side of the moon.
The wall/fence in the West Bank and Ariel Sharon’s disengagement from Gaza have practically done away with daily friction between Jews an Arabs.
Absorbed by their booming economy, reassured by President Barack Obama’s recent commitment never to let Israel down, and convinced of their success in defeating Palestinian terrorism in the West Bank and deterring Hamas from venturing into another war, Israelis have lost any sense of urgency concerning the Palestinian problem.
Israelis also find satisfaction in the relative prosperity of the West Bank, where order and stability are being secured by well-trained security forces, in line with Prime Minister’s Salam Fayyad’s meticulous bottom-up construction of Palestinian statehood.
Moreover, massive inflows of international aid make Israel’s occupation one of the most convenient in world history; the Israelis control the land and its population without having to bear the financial burden of direct rule.
All this in order to go back to the 1967 borders, for which few Israelis feel nostalgic.
As for the Palestinians, the gap between the colossal tragedy of the Nakbah (the lost war at Israel’s founding) and the poverty of a territorial solution that sandwiches their demilitarized mini-state between Israel and Jordan – neither suffering from excessive love for Palestinian statehood – is bound to remain an open wound.
And Palestinians would view any solution to the refugee problem that Israel might accept as a betrayal of the ethos of Palestinian nationalism, namely the Right of Return.
The state of Palestine would lack legitimacy among Palestinians themselves.
True, Hamas has been indicating recently a readiness to contemplate a solution based on the 1967 borders, but it is doubtful that its leaders and members could live with the betrayal of the refugees.
Then again, the idea of Palestinian statehood is not central to Hamas’s worldview, in which the strategic objective is the ultimate victory of Islam.
For Hamas, Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas is a “transitional figure,” to be swept away together with his secular PLO in the revolutionary drive to an Islamic society.
It is the resulting sense of paralysis that explains the proliferation of new political paradigms in both Israel and Jordan.
Jordanians of the caliber of Former Prime Ministers Abdelsalam Al-Majali and Taher al-Masri, as well as a former adviser of King Hussein, Adnan Abu-Odeh, have been advancing schemes for a Jordanian-Palestinian solution.
Their argument is essentially that the peace process’s troubles stem from its deviation from the original intention of the architects of the Madrid Peace Conference, where a Jordanian-Palestinian delegation sat representing the two peoples.
Conspicuously, notable figures on the Israeli right – among them Former Defense and Foreign Minister Moshe Arens, who is also a political mentor of Netanyahu, and Knesset Speaker Rubi Rivlin – mirror the Jordanians’s position.
Whereas the latter champion the concept of one political space that would include the two banks of the Jordan River, the Israelis respond with their own concept of one political space between the Mediterranean and the Jordan River.
Never truly convinced of the viability of the two-state solution, and encouraged by the failure of the peace process so far, the Israeli right is going back to toying with the most dangerous scenario of all, the bi-national state.
As always, they want the best of all worlds: an emphatically Jewish state in which Palestinians would have citizenship rights, but no national rights whatsoever. That is not a bad formula for a state of permanent civil war.
Trapped in their contradictions and zero-sum national dreams, Israelis and Palestinians cannot expect a perfect solution.
Their task is to embrace the least imperfect solution before they decline into Doomsday scenarios, such as a hostile Israeli unilateral disengagement, or a one-state reality of unending conflict.
The Phelps Factor
On December 10, Edmund Phelps, my colleague at Columbia University, received the Nobel Prize in economics for 2006. The award was long overdue.
While the Nobel Prize committee cited his contributions to macroeconomics, Phelps has made contributions in many areas, including the theory of growth and technological change, optimal taxation, and social justice.
Phelps’ key observation in macroeconomics was that the relationship between inflation and unemployment is affected by expectations, and since expectations themselves are endogenous – they change over time – so, too, will the relationship between unemployment and inflation.
If a government attempts to push the unemployment rate too low, inflation will increase, and so, too, will inflationary expectations.
This insight holds two possible policy implications.
Some policymakers have concluded from Phelps’ analysis that the unemployment rate cannot be lowered permanently without ever-increasing levels of inflation.
Thus, monetary authorities should simply focus on price stability by targeting the rate of unemployment at which inflation does not increase, referred to as the “non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment” (NAIRU).
But the NAIRU is not immutable.
The correct implication, which Phelps repeatedly emphasized, is that governments can implement a variety of policies, particularly structural policies, to allow the economy to operate at a lower level of unemployment.
Policies that focus exclusively on inflation are misguided for several other reasons.
As a practical matter, even controlling for expectations (as Phelps’ work insists that we do), the relationship between unemployment and inflation is highly unstable.
It is virtually impossible to discern the relationship from the data except in a few isolated periods.
Changes in education levels, unionization, and productivity are part of the explanation for this instability.
But, whatever the reason, policymakers face considerable uncertainty about the level of NAIRU.
Thus, they still face a trade-off between pushing unemployment too low, and setting off an episode of inflation, and not pushing hard enough, resulting in an unnecessary waste of economic resources.
How one views these risks depends on the costs of undoing mistakes, which in turn depends on other properties of the inflation-unemployment relationship that Phelps’ analysis did not address.
The weight of evidence indicates that the cost of undoing the mistake of pushing unemployment down too far is itself very low, at least for countries like the US, where the relationship has been carefully studied.
In this view, the Federal Reserve should aggressively pursue low unemployment, until it is shown that inflation is rising.
By contrast, inflation “hawks” argue that inflation must be attacked preemptively.
While most central banks are inflation hawks, this stance is a matter of religion, not economic science.
There is simply little or no empirical evidence that inflation, at the low to moderate rates that have prevailed in recent decades, has any significant harmful real effects on output, employment, growth, or the distribution of income.
Nor is there evidence that inflation, should it increase slightly, cannot be reversed at a relatively minor cost – comparable to the benefits of additional employment and growth enjoyed in the excessive expansion of the economy that led to the increase in inflation.
In the early 1990’s, the Fed, and many others, thought that the NAIRU was around 6%-6.2%.
Based on changes in the economy, I and the staff that worked with me on President Bill Clinton’s Council of Economic Advisers argued that the NAIRU was considerably lower.
We were right.
Unemployment fell to 3.8% without any surge in inflation.
This matters because, as the great economist Arthur Okun argued, reducing unemployment by two percentage points would increase output by 2%-6%, or $0.5-1.5 trillion dollars in the case of America.
Even for a rich country, that is a lot of money.
It could be used to put America’s social security system on a stable footing for the next 75-100 years.
It could even pay for a substantial share of the cost for a war like that in Iraq!
Phelps’ work helped us to understand the complexity of the relationship between inflation and unemployment, and the important role that expectations can play in that relationship.
But it is a misuse of that analysis to conclude that nothing can be done about unemployment, or that monetary authorities should focus exclusively on inflation.
That view belongs to a school of modern macroeconomics that assumes rational expectations and perfectly functioning markets.
In other words, individuals – usually assumed to be identical – fully use all available information to forecast the future in an environment of perfect competition, no capital market shortcomings, and full insurance of all risks.
Not only are these assumptions absurd, but so are the conclusions: there is no involuntary unemployment, markets are fully efficient, and redistribution has no real consequence.
But, while government policies, according to this school, are ineffective, that matters little.
Because markets are always efficient, there is no need for government intervention.
More perniciously, many supporters of this view, when confronted with the reality of unemployment, argue that it arises only because of government-imposed rigidities and trade unions.
In their “ideal” world without either, there would, they claim, be no unemployment.
For more than three decades, Phelps has shown that there is an alternative approach.
He has tried to understand what we can do to lower unemployment and increase the well-being of those at the bottom.
But he has also striven to understand what makes capitalist economies dynamic, what lies behind the entrepreneurial spirit, and what we can do to promote it further.
Phelps’ economics remains one of action, not resignation.
The Philippines Joins the Asian Race
MANILA – In 1980, my father arrived in the United States to undergo a heart bypass, due to the rigors of his imprisonment by the dictatorship of Ferdinand Marcos.
The dictatorship offered him a reprieve, but, true to its nature, one dependent on its whims.
Having already been condemned by a kangaroo court to death by musketry, my father refused to hoist a white flag. “The Filipino,” he insisted, “is worth dying for.”
Three years later, my father went home, not to die, but to infuse new life into the demoralized ranks of the opposition to the dictatorship.
His assassination upon his arrival at Manila airport became the ultimate proof of the sincerity of what he had proclaimed throughout his life.
In 1986, my countrymen peacefully defied Marcos’s tanks and demonstrated their faith in themselves.
Marcos fled, and democracy was restored without bloodshed.
My mother, who then became President, also had an enduring message: the democracy that we had regained at such a high price could be ensured only by a vigorous commitment to making its institutions work.
In 2009, my countrymen again took to the streets to accompany my mother to her final resting place.
This massive expression of solidarity evolved into an effort to draft me to run for the presidency in 2010.
At the polls, my countrymen conferred a solemn mandate on me to make democracy the means for eliminating corruption and alleviating poverty.
Our administration is committed to transforming a country where nice guys finish last into one where those who deviate from the straight and narrow face punishment for their crimes.
Our goal is to empower citizens to demand the rule of law, regardless of who is in power.
My colleagues in government are expected to demonstrate this by means of sustained reforms that foster meritocracy, transparency, and accountability.
We started with the National Food Authority, a government corporation tasked with ensuring an adequate supply of rice.
From 1972 to 2000, the NFA accumulated 12.9 billion pesos ($290 million) in debt.
Within a year of taking office, my predecessor increased the NFA’s debt to 18 billion pesos.
In the course of the next eight and a half years, her administration imported much more rice than was needed, resulting in 177 billion pesos in debt by the time she stepped down.
In a shift from the illogical import policy of the past, we focused our energies on revitalizing rural irrigation, which boosted the first dry-season crop yields.
This year, our government will import 64% less rice than in 2010.
My father taught me that the most important freedom is freedom from hunger.
Without food security, individuals can have no chance of achieving social mobility.
That is why we are investing in our fellow citizens by means of a conditional cash-transfer program, called Pantawid Pamilya in Tagalog, which is patterned after Brazil’s Bolsa Familia.
We are also providing cash assistance to eligible poor families on the condition that pregnant mothers and children avail themselves of preventive health care, and that children regularly attend school.
This program already covers roughly 2.3 million poor families, providing them with yet another key to social mobility.
Mobilizing resources for these programs depends on cutting wasteful programs and rooting out corruption in our bureaucracy.
One agency where large-scale graft and corruption was traditionally rampant was the Department of Public Works and Highways.
By instituting open, competitive, and transparent bidding, the department has saved 2.5 billion pesos from 3,692 projects nationwide in the past year.
We expect 6-7 billion pesos in savings by the end of this year, which can be used for other high-priority development projects.
To promote fiscal transparency, our Finance Department has created a Web site called “Pera ng Bayan,” or “The People’s Money.”
It allows the public to report tax cheats, smugglers, and crooks anonymously.
The government likewise subjects officials to lifestyle checks and vets their statements of assets and liabilities to find out if what they have acquired is commensurate with their declared income.
These campaigns are yielding results. Sixty-seven tax-evasion cases and 43 smuggling cases, with claims totaling more than 26 billion pesos and 58 billion pesos, respectively, have been filed against groups and individuals.
But it is not enough to be efficient and honest in public spending.
We must also attract foreign investment, despite the difficulties facing Europe, the US, and Japan.
Our economic diplomacy has three key objectives, one of which is to secure more markets for our exports and enticing more tourists to visit the country.
Our diplomacy is also focused on protecting the well-being of the roughly ten million Filipinos working overseas.
But attracting investment to create jobs at home and ease poverty is the best way to ensure that our countrymen are not forced to go overseas in the first place.
Investment has been coming in, but more is needed.
Our Business Process Outsourcing industry is now the second largest in the world, behind India, with revenues of $8.9 billion in 2010 rising to a projected $11 billion in 2011.
The Philippines also ranks fourth in the world in terms of shipbuilding.
Our sound fiscal management has been widely recognized, with all of the major credit ratings agencies upgrading the Philippines within our government’s first year.
And the World Economic Forum ranked us 75th in its latest Global Competitiveness Report – a ten-spot jump from last year, and the Philippines’ highest ranking since it entered the survey.
The Philippines reopened for business under new management only a little more than a year ago. It is faring very well – and is set to become increasingly profitable.
The Philippines’ Sanctuaries of Terror
The presence of insurgent or terrorist sanctuaries in non-belligerent countries is one of the most intractable, explosive issues in international relations.
It was a central fact of the Vietnam War, brought about the destruction of Lebanon, and continues to plague the coalition in Iraq.
It is also key to the present war on terror in Southeast Asia.
Vietnam differed from Korea and Malaya, where containment and counterinsurgency prevailed, because the communists could outflank allied forces in South Vietnam by using “neutral” territory in Cambodia and Laos.
Like the PLO presence in Lebanon until 1982, this strategy plunged hapless host countries into civil war and provoked invasions by stronger powers, in turn spurring more extremist movements – the Khmer Rouge, Hezbollah, and Islamic Jihad.
Like previous host countries, the Philippines is a weak state, at peace with its neighbors and the West.
But, since 1994, its lawless southern islands have replaced Afghanistan as the main training ground and refuge for Southeast Asian jihadists.
Most are Indonesians belonging to Jemaah Islamiyah (JI), Mujahidin Kompak, and other Darul Islam factions.
Graduates of Mindanao’s terror camps, for example, now rival in number the older generation of Southeast Asian Afghan alumni that forged ties with al-Qaeda.
Veterans of the Mindanao camps took part in almost every JI-linked bombing since 2000, including the attack that killed hundreds in Bali in 2002.
New cohorts will pose a danger for years to come.
The terrorist attacks on the United States of September 11, 2001, galvanized American interest in the southern Philippines.
Mere weeks after the planes hit, Pentagon planners negotiated a return of American troops to Mindanao for the first time since the colonial era. Indeed, Mindanao was the second front in the war on terror until Iraq came to dominate US threat perceptions.
Australian Premier John Howard has likewise openly mulled pre-emptive military strikes on terrorist sanctuaries in the region.
Mindanao is not Cambodia or Lebanon, but the essential dilemma is the same.
How does one separate the terrorist parasite from its unwilling host, without doing fatal violence to the patient?
In the Philippines, the diagnosis is complicated by the fact that terrorists are embedded in a volatile Muslim insurgency with which the West has no quarrel.
The Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) is Southeast Asia’s strongest separatist group.
It enjoys popular support, expresses legitimate grievances, and peace talks are underway.
Like the Palestinians, however, the MILF is riven by factions, and its leaders cannot, or will not, exclude terrorists from areas that they control.
In part, this reflects political hedging by the MILF in the face of Manila’s incapacity to make meaningful concessions.
President Gloria Arroyo’s government is on the ropes, with a state of emergency declared in February, following an abortive coup attempt and months of instability arising from allegations of fraud in the 2004 elections.
The allegations involve the armed forces’ manipulation of the Mindanao vote – underscoring how state failure in the south, a politicized military, and paralysis in the capital reinforce each other in a downward spiral.
State failure in the southern Philippines now places the entire region at risk.
After a rough passage to democracy, a traditionally strong Indonesian state is reasserting itself, forcing jihadists out, and across Mindanao’s porous frontiers.
Despite concerns over conflict in southern Thailand, there are no secessionist enclaves beyond government control, and no indications of foreign terrorist involvement.
Only in the Philippines do state failure, chronic insurgency, and proliferating ties between local and foreign terrorists come together in a lethal cocktail.
Combined with a restive military and an impotent administration, the country has become Southeast Asia’s weakest link in the war on terror.
So what is to be done?
American forces are probing the sanctuaries in the guise of training exercises, and they are backing targeted air strikes.
But they must tread lightly, lest they be drawn into a shooting war, which would catalyze new alliances among local and foreign militants.
A conventional military approach failed in Cambodia and Lebanon. It would fail in Mindanao, too.
Instead, surgical military strikes based on an expanded intelligence effort should complement the peace process, prying extremists away from the MILF mainstream.
A crucial, if embryonic, mechanism in this campaign is the Ad Hoc Joint Action Group, established by the Philippine government and MILF negotiators to facilitate cooperation against “lawless elements” in MILF territory.
The Group’s mandate should be widened, and resources should be provided to allow it to tackle terrorism explicitly.
In return for MILF cooperation, the US, Australia, and other interested countries must pick up political slack and build the government’s capacity to deliver a sustainable peace agreement for Mindanao.
Prompt, substantial infusions of post-conflict aid will be indispensable ingredients for peace.
But so will security reforms.
The Filipino armed forces must be better equipped to close down any remaining terrorist sanctuaries – and keep them closed.
However, this will remain a futile mission until the armed forces are professionalized and depoliticized through reorientation to external defense, border security, and special operations. Only then will they lose their vested interest in an insurgency that has no end.
The Pillars of Darwinism
This month marks the 150th anniversary of the publication of Charles Darwin’s 
 On the Origin of Species
 .
The evolutionary theory he presented in that great book rests on two pillars: the idea of descent with modification, and the idea of natural selection. amp#160;
Darwin believed that present-day organisms are descendants of much simpler ancestors: they are the products of unbroken lines of heredity that stretch back to the origin of life.
Today, we have a mass of evidence, ranging from studies of ancient fossils to the latest discoveries of molecular biology, that supports this theory.amp#160; 
Darwin, however, did not invent the idea of descent with modification.
Fifty years earlier, Jean-Baptiste Lamarck had suggested that living things are products of a long historical process of transformation.
But the evolutionary mechanisms he proposed, which included the inheritance of characteristics induced by the environment, never found favor.amp#160; 
It is Darwin’s second powerful idea – the idea that even the most complicated features of organisms are the outcome of natural selection – that has been the key to his theory’s long-term success.
Natural selection has provided scientific explanations of traits as diverse as the mammalian eye, the bird’s wing, and the ability of plants to transform light into sugars.
There are now many examples of the operation of natural selection in nature. 
The two pillars of evolutionary theory are the consequences of interaction among three distinctive features of living organisms: reproduction (individuals produce offspring), heredity (like gives rise to like), and variation (sometimes offspring are different from their parents).
Natural selection results whenever the differences between individuals affect the number of offspring they produce.
If the variations that affect reproduction are 
 heritable
 , the outcome is 
 evolution
 by natural selection.
Yet discoveries made during the latter part of the twentieth century have shown that there is much more to inheritance than DNA.
We now know of several mechanisms that enable cells with identical DNA to have different characteristics, which are transmitted to daughter cells.
This
 epigenetic
 inheritance is a crucial part of normal development in multi-cellular animals like us.
A person’s pancreas cells and skin cells are clearly different, yet they have the same genes with the same DNA sequences.
Moreover, the cells’ features are inherited in their respective cell lineages, even though the stimuli that triggered the differences between them during embryonic development are long gone. 
Epigenetic inheritance occurs not only 
 within
 individuals during their development; it also occurs 
 between generations
 : individual yeast cells or bacterial cells can transmit epigenetic variations from one generation to the next, and multi-cellular organisms can transmit them through their sperm and eggs.
If the epigenetic state of its germ cells is altered during an organism’s development, this variation can be transmitted to its descendants.
The work of Michael Skinner and his colleagues provides a good example of this: they found that injecting pregnant rats with a chemical that suppresses androgens (male sex hormones) causes their descendants to have diseases that are inherited for several generations.
There are many other examples of heritable epigenetic variations, some of which are environmentally induced.
Gal Raz and one of us (EJ) recently went through the scientific literature and found 101 cases of epigenetic inheritance between generations of bacteria, fungi, protozoa, plants, and animals, and we are sure that this is just the tip of a very large iceberg.
In addition to cellular epigenetic inheritance, there are other non-genetic ways in which variations can be transmitted from generation to generation.
As humans, we are well aware of these: the transmission of cultural variations, such as different religious beliefs, is a prime example.
But there are many less familiar examples of information that is learned or acquired from parents by non-genetic means, ranging from the feeding techniques of monkeys and rats to the food preferences of rabbits and the song dialects of birds and whales.
Recognizing that there is more to heredity than DNA has implications for medicine and agriculture, as well as for evolutionary theory.
For example, we know that some environmental insults and stresses, such as temporary starvation, can affect future generations.
In evolutionary studies, because heritable non-genetic variations are often induced by the environment, we have to expand our notion of heredity and variation to include the inheritance of acquired variations, the once disparaged idea that was part of Lamarck’s theory.
In a sense, we have to go back to Darwin’s original, pluralistic convictions.
Darwin, unlike many of his more dogmatic followers, saw a role for induced variation in evolution.
Today, in the light of the newly discovered epigenetic mechanisms, Darwinian evolution should include descent with epigenetic as well as genetic modifications, and natural selection of induced as well as random variations.
Certainly, it should not be reduced to “selfish genes.”
The Poetry of the Euro
PRINCETON – The purpose of creating a common currency has been largely and surprisingly forgotten in crisis-torn Europe.
Instead, there seem to be more pressing concerns: gloomy speculation about the eurozone’s impending collapse and desperate attempts to find institutional fixes to its extensive governance problems.
But the euro was not just the outcome of an idiosyncratic quest to reduce the wear on pockets stuffed with odd national coins, or to facilitate intra-European trade.
The bold European experiment reflected a new attitude about what money should do, as well as how it should be managed.
In opting for a “pure” form of money, created by a central bank independent of national authority, Europeans self-consciously flew in the face of what had become the dominant monetary tradition.&#160;
In the twentieth century, the creation of money – paper money – was usually thought to be the domain of the state.
Money could be issued because governments had the power to define the unit of account in which taxes should be paid.
This tradition went back well before paper, or fiat, currencies.
For many centuries, even while metallic money circulated, the task of defining units of account – livres tournois, marks, gulden, florins, or dollars – remained a task of the state (or of those with political power).
Abuse of this role, with governments addressing excessive debt by inflating it away, was deeply destructive of political order in the first half of the twentieth century.
After World War II, the liberal politicians most committed to European federalism saw this point clearly.
The economist, central-bank governor, finance minister, and president of the Italian Republic, Luigi Einaudi, pleaded the case in the immediate aftermath of the war: “If the European federation takes away from the individual states the power of running public works through the printing press, and limits them to expenses that are financed solely by taxes and voluntary loans, it will by that act alone have accomplished a great work.”
But monetary abuse is no less dangerous in political systems with multi-layered authority, and in the past often led to the breakup of federal states.
That is because inflation is not a benign cure for economic ills, in which beneficent and stimulatory effects are spread equally over the entire region under the inflationary monetary authority.
Making inflation depends on the central bank’s decision to monetize specific debt instruments.
After all, the monetary authority never decides simply to convert every obligation into money.
Instead, it decides that some industries, banks, or political authorities need to be sustained for the general good.
Those industries, banks, and political authorities that are not so privileged are inevitably resentful, and view the central bank’s actions as an abuse of power.
In federal systems, in particular, those businesses and political authorities far removed from the center are most likely to be excluded from the monetary stimulus and hence are inclined to be resentful.
Hyperinflation in Germany in the 1920’s fanned separatism in Bavaria, the Rhineland, and Saxony, because these remote areas thought that Germany’s central bank and central government in Berlin were discriminating against them.
The separatists were politically radical – on the left in Saxony, and on the far right in Bavaria and the Rhineland.
There are also more recent cases of the same effect. In late-1980’s Yugoslavia, as the socialist regime disintegrated, the monetary authorities in Belgrade were inevitably closest to Serbian politicians such as Slobodan Milošević and to Serbian business interests.
As a result, the Croats and Slovenes wanted out of the federation. In the Soviet Union, inflation appeared as an instrument of Moscow bureaucrats, and there, too, more remote areas sought to break away.
The makers of modern Europe saw that unstable and politically abused money would be a European nightmare, and lead to destructive national animosities and antagonisms.
They were supported by the twentieth century’s two most influential economists, Friedrich von Hayek and John Maynard Keynes.
Hayek was the most consistent critic of state-produced money.
His proposal, competitive currencies produced by “free banking” in which numerous private authorities would issue their own money, was more radical than the solution adopted by Europeans in the 1990’s.
But the Hayekian element of a money-issuing authority that was extensively protected against political pressures, and consequently against political opprobrium, was a key part of the European Union’s Maastricht Treaty.
Keynes, too, in planning for the postwar order, proposed a synthetic global currency that would guarantee stability and prevent deflation.
The vision of central-bank independence as a necessary part of the constitution of a sound and stable political order was not simply a European construct in the 1990’s.
It was also reflected in legislative changes affecting other central banks, and in central bankers’ growing prestige.
That view is now seriously challenged.
In the aftermath of the worst financial crisis since WWII, central banks are once again being called on to monetize securities issued by some debtors, but not others.
That task of selecting between debtors is highly political, and poisons the idea of monetary stability.
Jean-Claude Trichet, until recently the president of the European Central Bank, liked to claim that money was like poetry, before adding that both give a sense of stability.
That unusual but accurate formulation is reminiscent of General August Neidhardt von Gneisenau’s famous reply to the Prussian King, who dismissed as “nothing more than poetry” von Gneisenau’s patriotic concerns in the early nineteenth century.
“Religion, prayer, love of one’s ruler, love of the fatherland, what are these but poetry?” von Gneisenau asked.
“Upon poetry is founded the security of the throne.”
Stable money, too, is the foundation of political order.
We should not allow ourselves to be so overwhelmed by today’s crisis that we forget that.
Europe’s Political Stress Tests
PRINCETON – In recent years, the European Union – or, more accurately, the powerful countries of northern Europe – has been subjecting its weaker members to social and political “stress tests” in the name of fiscal rectitude.
As a result, southern Europe and parts of Eastern Europe have become a kind of political laboratory, with experiments producing strikingly varied – and increasingly unpredictable – outcomes in different countries.
At the last EU summit, Luxembourg’s prime minister, Jean-Claude Juncker, even suggested that the risk of a “social revolution” should not be excluded.
While that outcome remains unlikely, it is increasingly clear that many European countries – and the EU as a whole – need to renegotiate their basic social contracts.
But European elites, preoccupied with short-term fixes, have not considered the long-term need for such revisions – to their own detriment.
Indeed, despite significant variations by country, one trend is becoming increasingly apparent across the EU: voters, regardless of their political orientation, are ejecting at the first opportunity leaders who implement austerity.
But, beyond this overwhelming opposition to austerity, countries’ experiences vary widely.
Greece has seen the rise of an overtly fascist party, Golden Dawn, which proudly celebrates the legacy of former dictator Ioannis Metaxas.
Although Golden Dawn has existed for roughly two decades, only in the last year did it gain enough support to enter parliament.
Moreover, its poll numbers continue to climb.
Golden Dawn’s success does not reflect a deep-seated desire among Greeks to return to authoritarianism.
The party has simply stepped in where the Greek state – long plagued by inefficiency and corruption – has retreated, providing basic welfare and other services to desperate citizens, while engaging in unprecedented violence against people who are or look like immigrants.
One way that Golden Dawn attempts to embody the state is by having party members out on the streets as vigilantes.
Austerity has similarly sharpened a long-standing crisis of statehood and political legitimacy in Italy, reflected in the rise of a new anti-establishment party, the Five Star Movement, which claims to transcend the traditional left-right political spectrum.
Indeed, the movement lacks clear policy objectives, instead capitalizing on popular disgust with Italy’s political elites – a sentiment that led directly to the last election’s failure to produce a clear winner.
The sense of revulsion is acute: Many of the Five Star Movement’s supportershope to transfer control of Italy’s government to citizen-representatives, whose every move would be digitally monitored to preclude corruption.
Some countries’ electorates initially backed austerity, but none has re-authorized it.
In Spain, for example, voters understood the implications of supporting the ruling Popular Party, making it one of the only southern states where the government had some kind of mandate to implement tough austerity.
But the mutually reinforcing recession and debt crisis that Spain now faces have reinvigorated Catalonia’s long-standing secessionist movement; austerity has transformed a chronic, though manageable, problem into an acute existential question.
Similarly, Portugal’s center-right Social Democratic Party has pushed a tough pro-austerity line, including tax hikes and spending cuts, since coming to power in 2011.
But new measures introduced last month have driven an increasingly frustrated population – which, until recently, had endured painful austerity with little of the public outcry seen elsewhere in southern Europe – to the streets to demand a general election two years ahead of schedule.
Political and social turmoil across southern Europe holds several lessons for austerity’s proponents – especially for Germany.
First and foremost, the dogma that solid public finances – and, more broadly, a functioning state – can be achieved only through painful austerity is an illusion.
When forced to choose between their societies and their clientele, politicians may well decide that allowing social tensions to rise – even to dangerous levels – is better than sacrificing their own power bases.
In fact, when Germany embarked a decade ago on a reform program featuring major cuts to the welfare state and a more flexible labor market, it broke the rules of the eurozone’s Stability and Growth Pact.
Public spending had to rise before it could fall, in order to provide some slack while renegotiating parts of the social contract.
The second lesson from southern Europe is that muddling through is unlikely to work.
Building the needed support for a new social contract will require an appeal to fairness, not just to fiscal rectitude.
And a mechanism to authorize the new deal – such as a grand coalition actually empowered by elections (not just reluctant support by major parties for technocratic leaders like Italy’s Mario Monti) – is essential.
Alternatively, citizens could try to lead efforts to re-negotiate their countries’ constitutional arrangements.
Iceland, for example, has embarked on an unprecedented experiment in crafting a bottom-up, “crowd-sourced” constitution.
Similarly, albeit less radically, ordinary citizens comprise two-thirds of Ireland’s Constitutional Convention.
If southern eurozone countries followed the route of forging a new social deal, they would have to ensure that it ultimately intersects with the paths of the northern European members.
While all eurozone countries do not have to converge on a single model, their interdependence means that a pan-European social and economic settlement is needed.
European leaders must move beyond the increasingly implausible mantra of “belt-tightening today; full bellies tomorrow,” and recognize that, at its core, the euro crisis is a political crisis.
Rather than focus on quick policy fixes, Europe’s leaders need to pursue long-term solutions.
And that includes new social contracts.
Europe’s Populists at the Gate
LONDON – Is Europe’s crisis over?
Investors, policy analysts, and even officials are quietly beginning to suggest that this might be the case.
The euro has strengthened by nearly 10% against the dollar since European Central Bank President Mario Draghi vowed on July 26 to do “whatever it takes” to hold the currency together.
Similarly, the Euro VIX, a popular measure of expectations of euro volatility, has fallen significantly.
The cost of buying protection against fluctuations in the euro/dollar exchange rate declined last month to its lowest level in nearly five years.
Borrowing costs for the Spanish and Italian governments have similarly fallen dramatically.
A consistent narrative underpins this change in market conditions.
European leaders have put in place mechanisms to support Italy and Spain.
As of October, the continent has an operational European Stability Mechanism to purchase new Italian and Spanish government bonds if investors go on strike.
In parallel, the ECB has announced an “outright monetary transactions” (OMT) program to purchase bonds already trading on the secondary market.
At their most recent summit, European Union leaders reiterated their commitment to finalize the design of a single supervisory mechanism by January 1, 2013, and to activate it by the end of next year.
These steps, it is argued, have taken both sovereign-default risk and a banking crisis off the table.
With the ESM and ECB capping interest rates on government bonds, countries will have as much time as they need – and they will need plenty – to reduce their debt burdens to manageable levels.
And, with a single supervisor in place, the ESM will be permitted to inject capital directly into troubled banks.
The new banking union can then be extended to include a common resolution fund to enable the orderly dissolution of insolvent institutions.
To be sure, there are some gaps in this narrative.
The ESM has limited firepower, and, along with the ECB, will buy only the bonds of governments that ask, something that proud leaders are reluctant to do.
The end-2013 deadline for implementation of the banking union is a long way off.
Even if there is agreement on the need for a common resolution fund – which is not clear – there is no agreement on how to pay for it.
Nevertheless, the markets evidently regard this as a comforting bedtime story – all the more so now that European leaders have averred that Greece will not be pushed out of the eurozone.
Officials recognize that cutting off EU support and compelling the ECB to stop providing credit to the Bank of Greece would be Europe’s Lehman Brothers moment.
The consequences could be catastrophic, not just for Greece, but also for Portugal, Spain, Italy, and who knows whom else.
In their October 18 communiqué, eurozone leaders stated in no uncertain terms that they are not prepared to go there.
Given Europe’s facility at creative accounting, some way will be found to keep Greece on life support.
So, is the crisis really over?
In focusing on summit declarations and promises of far-reaching reforms of EU institutions, investors are missing the real risk: the collapse of public support for, or at least public acquiescence to, the austerity policies required to work down heavy debt burdens – and for the governments pursuing these policies.
Mass anti-austerity protests are one warning sign.
Another is growing popular support for neo-Nazi movements like Golden Dawn, now the third-largest political party in Greece.
The rise to power of a “rejectionist” European government – that is, one that unilaterally rejects the policy status quo – would immediately bring the crisis to a head.
A Greek government that summarily rejected conditions set by the EU and the International Monetary Fund would immediately be cut off by the ECB and forced to exit the euro.
A Spanish government that did likewise would lose all prospect of support from the ECB’s OMT program, and the markets would quickly pounce.
Some will object that dire warnings of political reaction are overdrawn.
So far, no country has voted into power a rejectionist administration.
Even in Greece, where conditions are the worst, Golden Dawn is still a minority party.
The answer to these critics is, unfortunately, “just wait.”
It is worth recalling that nearly four years passed from the onset of the Great Depression in Germany to the Nazis’ accession to power.
Europe needs a growth strategy to put this political genie back in the bottle.
It needs policies that hold out the promise of lower unemployment and better times.
The continuing absence of such policies is the gravest threat to the euro.
Unless that changes, markets will wake up to that risk – perhaps with a jolt – sooner or later.
The Political Stock Market
Many economic and financial analysts complain that emerging countries' stock markets are often heavily manipulated by their governments and are more political than economic.
The unstated assumption seems to be that, in contrast, some pristine force of economic nature drives stock markets in advanced countries, and that forecasting their performance is thus like forecasting the growth of trees.
This description of stock markets in emerging countries is not wrong, just biased, because the same description applies to stock markets in advanced countries.
Indeed, the best analysts know that forecasting the performance of any country's stock market substantially means forecasting how well the government wants stock market investors to fare in the current political environment.
Consider the United States stock market, by far the world's largest.
The general perception is that the government leaves companies alone and that the returns from investing in the US stock market reflect the fundamental forces of a strong capitalist economy.
This is one reason why the US is a magnet for portfolio investors from around the world.
But the returns that make US stock markets so attractive reflect a delicate political balance. In particular, tax rates that affect stocks have varied through time as political pressures change.
During World War II, for example, political support for great fortunes diminished and the government sharply increased taxes on capital gains, dividends, and high incomes in general.
When World War II produced a strong recovery from the Great Depression of the 1930's, President Roosevelt and Congress slapped on an excess-profits tax to ensure that shareholders would not benefit too much.
By contrast, in 1980, when there was no war but the stock market was low, US voters elected Ronald Reagan, a man many thought too right wing to be president.
He asked for - and got - cuts in capital gains, dividend, and income taxes.
Political interference in the stock market is not merely about taxes on capital gains, dividends, and income.
Property taxes, excise taxes, import duties, and sales taxes - all of which are paid, directly or indirectly, by corporations - can have a magnified impact on corporate profits, and hence on the stock market.
It is no coincidence that wherever stock markets thrive, governments take care that these taxes stop well short of destroying after-tax corporate profits.
Indeed, the politics of stock markets does not stop with taxes. On the contrary, almost every activity of government has an impact on corporate profits, and in turn, on the stock market.
After the 1929 stock market crash the US government suspended much anti-trust activity, allowing companies to acquire monopoly power that would boost their value.
This policy delayed the recovery from high unemployment, but even that was not enough to rein in the political forces arrayed in favor of supporting the stock market.
Similarly, one of the most important things that President Reagan did was to destroy much of the remaining power of America's labor unions, which compete for their share of the corporate pie.