Several countries have attacked the ICC; African Union members want heads of state to be immune from prosecution, thus undermining a fundamental principle of the court.
To be sure, many states undergoing political transition are doggedly pursuing some form of justice.
For example, justice and human rights are at the heart of the historic peace talks in Colombia.
Despite the collapse of the Arab Spring, Tunisia is pressing ahead with reforms, including the creation of a Truth and Dignity Commission.
But these societies may find it difficult to address adequately their troubled pasts without the support of international institutions.
Elsewhere, the fight for human rights might become virtually impossible.
Indeed, it will be hard enough to defend the human-rights gains made since the end of the Cold War, much less to expand them.
Fortunately, governments’ growing reticence about progress on human rights – if not outright obstruction – will not stop civil-society groups from continuing their fight for justice.
Groups like is Argentina’s Mothers of Plaza de Mayo and the Mothers of Srebrenica have always bravely led the way; they will, no doubt, continue to do so.
But the absence from this process of key governments, especially the emerging powers, threatens to end the world’s all-too-brief era of accountability.
It is time for the international community to redouble its resolve, regain its sense of purpose, and reaffirm, in both word and deed, its commitment to human rights and a more just world.
Davos Man’s Depression
NEW YORK – For 15 years, I have attended the World Economic Forum in Davos.
Typically, the leaders gathered there share their optimism about how globalization, technology, and markets are transforming the world for the better.
Even during the recession of 2001, those assembled in Davos believed that the downturn would be short-lived.  
But this time, as business leaders shared their experiences, one could almost feel the clouds darkening.
The spirit was captured by one participant who suggested that we had gone from “boom and bust” to “boom and Armageddon.”
The emerging consensus was that the IMF forecast for 2009, issued as the meeting convened, of global stagnation – the lowest growth in the post-war period – was optimistic.
The only upbeat note was struck by someone who remarked that Davos consensus forecasts are almost always wrong, so perhaps this time it would prove excessively pessimistic.
Equally striking was the loss of faith in markets.
In a widely attended brainstorming session at which participants were asked what single failure accounted for the crisis, there was a resounding answer: the belief that markets were self-correcting. 
The so-called “efficient markets” model, which holds that prices fully and efficiently reflect all available information, also came in for a trashing.
So did inflation targeting: the excessive focus on inflation had diverted attention from the more fundamental question of financial stability.
Central bankers’ belief that controlling inflation was necessary and almost sufficient for growth and prosperity had never been based on sound economic theory; now, the crisis provided further skepticism.
While no one from either the Bush or Obama administrations attempted to defend American-style free-wheeling capitalism, European leaders argued for their “social market economy,” their gentler form of capitalism with its social protections, as the model for the future.
And its automatic stabilizers, with spending automatically increasing as economic woes increased, held out the promise of moderating the downturn.
Most American financial leaders seemed too embarrassed to make an appearance.
Perhaps their absence made it easier for those who did attend to vent their anger.
But business leaders from the “real” sector and the few labor leaders who work hard at Davos each year to advance a better understanding of the concerns of working men and women among the business community were particularly angry at the financial community’s lack of remorse.
A call for the repayment of past bonuses was received with applause.
Indeed, some American financiers were especially harshly criticized for seeming to take the position that they, too, were victims.
The reality is that they were the perpetrators, not the victims, and it seemed particularly galling that they were continuing to hold a gun to the heads of governments, demanding massive bailouts and threatening economic collapse otherwise.
Money was flowing to those who had caused the problem, rather than to the victims.
Worse still, much of the money flowing into the banks to recapitalize them so that they could resume lending has been flowing out in the form of bonus payments and dividends.
The fact that businesses around the world were not getting the credit they need compounded the grievances expressed at Davos.
This crisis raises fundamental questions about globalization, which was supposed to help diffuse risk.
Instead, it has enabled America’s failures to spread around the world, like a contagious disease.
Still, the worry at Davos was that there would be a retreat from even our flawed globalization, and that poor countries would suffer the most.
But the playing field has always been unlevel.
How could developing countries compete with America’s subsidies and guarantees?
So how could any developing country defend to its citizens the idea of opening itself even more to America’s highly subsidized banks?
At least for the moment, financial market liberalization seems to be dead.
The inequities are obvious.
Even if poor countries were willing to guarantee their deposits, the guarantee would mean less than that from the United States.
This partly explains the curious flow of funds from developing countries to the US – from whence the world’s problems originated.
Moreover, developing countries lack the resources to engage in the massive stimulus policies of the advanced countries.  Making matters worse, the IMF still forces most countries that turn to it for help to raise interest rates and lower spending, worsening the downturns.
And, to add insult to injury, banks in advanced countries, especially those receiving aid from their governments, seem to be pulling back from lending in developing countries, including through branches and subsidiaries.
America led the world in globalization.
With American-style capitalism and America’s financial markets in disrepute, will America now lead the world into a new era of protectionism, as it did once before, during the Great Depression?
Deadlock in Durban
NEW YORK – The 17th conference of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, popularly known as COP-17, is taking place in Durban, South Africa, at a critical moment, as the historic 1997 Kyoto Protocol is set to expire next year.
But, like the climate-change conferences in Copenhagen in 2009 and in Cancún in 2010, COP-17 can be expected to spend much and produce little.
Indeed, the extravagance of these conferences seems to grow, rather than shrink, as their dismal results become more apparent.
COP-15 in Copenhagen lasted 12 days, and is estimated to have attracted 15,000 delegates and 5,000 journalists.
The carbon emissions created by so many people flying to Denmark was real, while the emissions targets that the conference sought remained beyond reach.
That will be true in Durban as well – and on an even greater scale.
The real problem is that the expectations concerning meaningful action on climate change, as opposed to gimmicks such as US President Barack Obama’s last-minute arrival and minuscule gestures in Copenhagen, are now lower than ever.
There are two problems that cannot be wished away.
First, the United States under Obama’s ineffective leadership has drifted yet further into a “What’s in it for me?” attitude on key issues requiring international action.
In place of what the economist Charles Kindleberger once called an “altruistic hegemon,” the America that the world now faces is what I call a “selfish hegemon.”
Thus, the US has virtually pulled out of the Doha Round of multilateral trade negotiations, with Obama acquiescing to greedy business lobbies that will not settle unless more of their demands are met.
But not only has Obama abandoned Doha; he has also seriously endangered the multilateral trading system by diverting US efforts and resources to discriminatory bilateral trade deals and, most recently, to the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which will principally aid countries that are worried about an aggressive China and seek political security rather than increased trade.
The same is true of environmental action: after Australia’s belated ratification of the Kyoto Protocol in 2007, the US remains the only country that has not ratified the agreement.
The second problem is that the sheer weight of the US in international affairs, though diminished nowadays, has nonetheless led to a corruption of the principles that should underpin a new climate-change treaty to succeed the Kyoto Protocol.
For example, unlike the World Trade Organization, whose dispute-settlement mechanism imposes penalties for abandoning negotiated reductions of trade barriers, the targets for emission reductions are not binding and enforceable commitments.
The US has not agreed to accept such sanctions for failing to meet emissions targets; but, without penalties, the exercise is largely futile and only encourages cynicism about the effort to combat climate change.
Moreover, abandoning the Kyoto Protocol’s exemption of developing countries from obligations for current emissions, the US has insisted on obligations from China and India that reflect a common form of “taxation” of emissions.
But there are persuasive reasons why these countries insist that the obligations must instead reflect per capita emissions, a criterion that would require far greater emission cuts by the US than its leaders now contemplate.
Besides, these countries correctly argue that the tradeoff between action on climate change and poverty reduction is more compelling for them at their level of per capita income, unless they can access newly emerging technologies at low cost.
This demand suggests that the US should subsidize the flow of technology to India and China from US firms holding patents, which is highly impractical.
That is where the $100 billion Global Climate Change Fund, promised at the Cancún COP-16 conference, comes in.
Unfortunately, even environmental icons like Al Gore in the US are so heavily invested in new green technology that their self-interest is tied up in this fund being spent on developing privately owned new technologies that are protected by patents.
The new “Green Revolution” seeds that the Nobel laureate agronomist Norman Borlaug developed with public money were freely available to all users anywhere.
The technology developed by the money spent from the Global Climate Change Fund also should be equally available to all, including India and China, which would then enable them to agree to more emissions cuts.
Indeed, even the contributions to the Fund should have reflected the past damage by the developed countries over the course of a century of carbon emissions – an obligation based on the well-established tort principle that the US has accepted for domestic pollution.
But here, too, the US has rejected the idea outright.
Several such sensible ways to design the Kyoto Protocol’s successor treaty have been undermined by efforts to accommodate inappropriate US-led demands and objections, resulting in the impasse that became evident at the COP conferences in Copenhagen and Cancún.
Those who do not believe in magic know better than to hope that it will somehow disappear in Durban.
Dear World, Please Confront America
Is it possible to fall out of love with your own country?
For two years, I, like many Americans, have been focused intently on documenting, exposing, and alerting the nation to the Bush administration’s criminality and its assault on the Constitution and the rule of law – a story often marginalized at home.
I was certain that when Americans knew what was being done in their name, they would react with horror and outrage.
Three months ago, the Bush administration still clung to its devil’s sound bite, “We don’t torture.”
Now, Physicians for Human Rights has issued its report documenting American-held detainees’ traumas, and even lie detector tests confirm they have been tortured.
The Red Cross report has leaked: torture and war crimes.
Jane Mayer’s impeccably researched exposé The Dark Side just hit the stores: torture, crafted and directed from the top.
The Washington Post gave readers actual video footage of the abusive interrogation of a Canadian minor, Omar Khadr, who was seen showing his still-bleeding abdominal wounds, weeping and pleading with his captors.
So the truth is out and freely available.
And America is still napping, worrying about its weight, and hanging out at the mall.
I had thought that after so much exposure, thousands of Americans would be holding vigils on Capitol Hill, that religious leaders would be asking God’s forgiveness, and that a popular groundswell of revulsion, similar to the nineteenth-century anti-slavery movement, would emerge.
To paraphrase Abraham Lincoln, if torture is not wrong, nothing is wrong.
And yet no such thing has occurred.
There is no crisis in America’s churches and synagogues, no Christian and Jewish leaders crying out for justice in the name of Jesus, a tortured political prisoner, or of Yahweh, who demands righteousness.
I asked a contact in the interfaith world why. He replied, “The mainstream churches don’t care, because they are Republican.
And the synagogues don’t care, because the prisoners are Arabs.”
It was then that I realized that I could not be in love with my country right now.
How can I care about the fate of people like that?
If this is what Americans are feeling, if that is who we are, we don’t deserve our Constitution and Bill of Rights.
Even America’s vaunted judicial system has failed to constrain obvious abuses.
A Federal court has ruled that the military tribunals system – Star Chambers where evidence derived from torture is used against the accused – can proceed.
Another recently ruled that the president may call anyone anywhere an “enemy combatant” and detain him or her indefinitely.
So Americans are colluding with a criminal regime.
We have become an outlaw nation – a clear and present danger to international law and global stability – among civilized countries that have been our allies.
We are – rightly – on Canada’s list of rogue nations that torture.
Europe is still high from Barack Obama’s recent visit.
Many Americans, too, hope that an Obama victory in November will roll back this nightmare.
But this is no time to yield to delusions.
Even if Obama wins, he may well be a radically weakened president.
The Bush administration has created a transnational apparatus of lawlessness that he alone, without global intervention, can neither roll back nor control.
Private security firms – for example, Blackwater – will still be operating, accountable neither to him nor to Congress, and not bound, they have argued, by international treaties.
Weapons manufacturers and the telecommunications industry, with billions at stake in maintaining a hyped “war on terror” and their new global surveillance market, will deploy a lavishly financed army of lobbyists to defend their interests.
Moreover, if elected, Obama will be constrained by his own Democratic Party.
America’s political parties bear little resemblance to the disciplined organizations familiar in parliamentary democracies in Europe and elsewhere.
And Democrats in Congress will be even more divided after November if, as many expect, conservative members defeat Republican incumbents damaged by their association with Bush.
To be sure, some Democrats have recently launched Congressional hearings into the Bush administration’s abuses of power.
Unfortunately, with virtually no media coverage, there is little pressure to broaden official investigations and ensure genuine accountability.
But, while grassroots pressure has not worked, money still talks.
We need targeted government-led sanctions against the US by civilized countries, including international divestment of capital.
Many studies have shown that tying investment to democracy and human rights reform is effective in the developing world.
There is no reason why it can’t be effective against the world’s superpower.
We also need an internationally coordinated strategy for prosecuting war criminals at the top and further down the chain of command – individual countries pressing charges, as Italy and France have done.
Although the United States is not a signatory to the statute that established the International Criminal Court, violations of Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions are war crimes for which anyone – potentially even the US president – may be tried in any of the other 193 countries that are parties to the conventions.
The whole world can hunt these criminals down.
An outlaw America is a global problem that threatens the rest of the international community.
If this regime gets away with flouting international law, what is to prevent the next administration – or this administration, continuing under its secret succession plan in the event of an emergency – from going further and targeting its political opponents at home and abroad?
We Americans are either too incapable, or too dysfunctional, to help ourselves right now.
Like drug addicts or the mentally ill who refuse treatment, we need our friends to intervene.
So remember us as we were in our better moments, and take action to save us – and the world – from ourselves.
Maybe then I can fall in love with my country again.
Death and Tobacco Taxes
A global killer is ripping through the world’s poorer countries largely unchecked.
Within 25 years, it will cause 10 million deaths a year worldwide –more than malaria, maternal deaths, childhood infections, and diarrhea combined .
Over half of the dead will be aged 30 to 69, losing about 25 years of life expectancy.
The culprit? Tobacco.
The same addiction that became the top preventable cause of death in Western countries has made big inroads in developing countries.
Smoking killed 100 million people in the twentieth century, mostly in developed countries.
On current trends smoking will kill about one billion people in the twenty-first century, mostly in developing countries.
In India, smoking triples the risk of death from tuberculosis in men and women and may even contribute to the spread of tuberculosis to others.
About 1 million people per year will soon die from smoking in China and India.
Perhaps 150 million young adults will be killed by tobacco in these two countries alone, unless there is widespread cessation.
But the death tolls of the past need not become the world’s future.
We know how to control tobacco use.
Cessation by the 1.1 billion current smokers is needed to lower tobacco deaths over the next few decades.
Reduced uptake of smoking by children would save lives chiefly after 2050.
Quitting works: even those who stop smoking in their 40’s lower their risk of death remarkably, and those who quit in their 30’s have death risks close to lifelong non-smokers.
Tobacco tax increases, dissemination of information about the health risks of smoking, smoking bans in public, complete bans on advertising and promotion, and cessation therapies are effective in helping smokers to quit.
Tobacco taxes are probably the single most cost-effective intervention for adult health in the world.
A tripling of the excise tax would roughly double the price of cigarettes (as has happened in New York City), preventing about three million deaths per year by 2030.
Most OECD countries began to take tobacco control seriously in the last two decades, and have decreased male tobacco deaths since.
But effective tobacco control measures are not underway in developing countries.
Taxes are about 80% of the street price of cigarettes in Toronto, but less than 30% in Beijing or Delhi.
In many countries, tobacco taxes have fallen in real terms.
Knowledge of the health risks from smoking is low: 61% of Chinese smokers in 1996 thought tobacco did them “little or no harm.”
Opposition from the tobacco industry is an obvious obstacle to tobacco control.
Spurious economic arguments against higher taxes have been debunked in the West, but are still commonly repeated in the finance ministries of developing countries.
Money not spent on tobacco would be spent on other goods and services.
Indeed, even sharply reduced demand for tobacco would not mean unemployment in most countries.
Tax hikes lower consumption and raise revenue in the medium-term: a 10% higher tax means about 7% higher revenue over the medium term.
These funds are a precious resource in fighting poverty.
In China, a 10% higher price would reduce consumption by 5% and raise enough excise revenue to pay for a basic health package for 33 million poor rural Chinese.
Even in the face of smuggling, higher taxes reduce consumption and raise revenue.
Smuggling is abetted by the tobacco industry in order to gain market share and scare finance ministers into lowering taxes.
But governments can counter it in several ways: local language warnings with a prominent tax stamp on cigarette packs are one example.
Another common argument against tobacco control – that if people are not harming others, governments should not interfere with their individual decisions – is at odds with both common sense and the evidence.
Most smokers become addicted as adolescents or young adults, when shortsightedness and lack of information make rational decisions difficult.
In countries with good information about tobacco risks, by the time child smokers become adults, more than 80% wish they never started.
Recently, no less than William F Buckley has argued that nicotine addiction cannot be dismissed as free choice.
Moreover, recent economic research finds that higher taxes are justified on welfare grounds, because the costs to smokers are huge (even though the external costs to others might be small), and that higher cigarette taxes do not hurt the poor (since the self-control value of higher taxes helps the poor more).
Nobel laureate Amartya Sen wisely reminds us that “it is important that the practical case for tobacco control is not dismissed on the basis of an incomplete libertarian argument.”
The agenda is clear.
Governments must take tobacco seriously as a leading killer of adults worldwide.
International poverty goals must include tobacco control.
Developing countries must not be fooled by the empty economic arguments that paralyzed control efforts in the West for so long.
The Gates Foundation can fund action and research.
There are hopeful signs: more than 160 countries have signed the World Health Organization’s global tobacco control treaty, and the Caribbean heads of state have recently declared they want to tackle tobacco together.
About 150-180 million tobacco deaths would be avoided before 2050 if the proportion of adults in developing countries who quit smoking increases from below 5% today to 30-40% by 2020 (like current quit rates in Canada).
Because control policies deter children from starting, even greater benefits can be expected beyond 2050.
Benjamin Franklin once said, “In this world, nothing can be said to be certain, except death and taxes.”
Yet we have a tax that could prevent hundreds of millions of premature deaths.
It is time to use it.
Death-Defying Europe
As the European Union prepares to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome later this month, the EU is widely perceived to be on its knees.
European integration, is felt to have, somehow met its Waterloo in 2005, when Dutch and French referendums unexpectedly torpedoed the draft EU constitution.
Media stories have focused on the paralysis that is said to have gripped EU decision-making, but the reality is different.
Far from suffering an irreversible decline in its fortunes, the EU has been has been conducting business as usual, quietly getting on with the job of constructing new policies and projects.
Take a look at some recent headlines.
The EU is putting together an energy and environment strategy that aims to end the self-defeating competition within Europe for oil and gas, while also establishing Europe as global leader in the effort to halt climate change.
The Union’s common foreign and security policy may not yet mean that Europe speaks to the world with one voice, but it is taking shape and has already healed some of the wounds inflicted by disagreements over the war in Iraq.
Of equal importance, Europe’s economic integration continues to move ahead, with the euro buoyant and a single marketplace for financial services now coming into sight.
The starting point for the EU’s unhappy bid to create a shared constitution had been fears that its decision-making mechanisms were being overloaded by the accession of so many new members, first in May 2004 and again at the beginning of this year.
The constitutional treaty was originally designed to streamline the system, and it was only later that it was over-enthusiastically expanded into the lengthy and pompous document that is now a dead letter.
Yet there are signs that the EU machine has so far been coping rather well without the constitution.
The volume of EU rule-making last year was almost exactly the same as 10 years ago.
During 2005 and 2006, the flow of EU directives, regulations, and associated reports, green papers, and communications continued at the same rate as the 2,800 a year chalked up in 1996, when Jacques Delors was at the helm of the European Commission and the EU project was being widely hailed as unstoppable.
Brussels is nowadays a government town akin to Washington, D.C, even if it is also a place where complex negotiations among the Union’s 27 members grind forward only slowly.
On top of all this, the European economy is looking brighter.
In Germany, the EU’s economic locomotive, unemployment is down and business confidence is up.
And throughout the EU, the positive effects of the enlargement strategy that has brought in 10 ex-communist countries over the past three years looks to be generating a new self-confidence.
None of this should be surprising.
It would take a good deal more than a hiccup in the EU’s delicate political process to bring integration to a standstill, let alone put it into reverse.
The global pressures pushing European nations closer together are as strong as ever, so the impasse over the EU’s constitutional treaty was never going to push Europe off course for very long.
The path ahead is far from clear, of course.
But a consensus does seem to be emerging on how the EU’s future will pan out.
Diplomats and policy analysts are generally agreed that key elements of the failed constitution will be rescued from the wreckage and turned into something along the lines of the “mini-treaty” that Nicolas Sarkozy, the front-runner in the French presidential race, proposed last autumn at a Friends of Europe meeting in Brussels.
The details are still anyone’s guess, but the consensus view is that the EU will have many of the constitution’s most important procedural mechanisms by sometime next year.
The EU is far from being out of the woods.
Creating coherent policies is unremittingly difficult when there are so many nations, each with a different political culture.
But the idea that the constitutional crisis is holding everything back is mistaken.
The much greater problem has been that EU governments have been concentrating so hard on the details of “building Europe” that they have neglected broader strategic questions.
There is little or no discussion of where Europe is heading and what sort of Europe its people want.
It is strange but true that even American unilateralism under President George W. Bush has not provoked a genuine debate over Europe’s future role in the world.
The EU’s problem is not its so-called “constitutional crisis,” but rather its lack of a recognizable political identity.
Death in Lhasa
PRAGUE – On April 8, two Tibetans, Lobsang Gyaltsen and Loyak, were sentenced to death by the Municipal Intermediate People’s Court in Lhasa.
Both men were convicted of committing arson that caused death against Chinese owned businesses.  Another two Tibetan activists, Tenzin Phuntsok and Kangtsuk, received a suspended death sentence, and a third, Dawa Sangpo was sentenced by the same court to life imprisonment.
These latest verdicts are the first death sentences meted out by Chinese courts to those who took part in protests that swept Lhasa and other Tibetan cities in the spring of 2008.
Since these trials took place in complete isolation from the rest of the world, with no impartial observers or foreign journalists present, it is to be doubted, strongly, that the defendants received anything remotely like a fair trial in accordance with international judicial standards.
We therefore appeal to the authorities of the People’s Republic of China to rescind the decision to execute these protesters, and to provide them with an opportunity to be re-tried in a judicial process that is more in keeping with the international standards that China says that it adheres to.
And the first standard that must be met is that the trial, first of all, must be verifiable and open to international observation.
But beyond the grim fates of the Tibetans that have now been sentenced by the Tibetan court to death or life imprisonment for the protests that took place a year ago, we are also concerned about the hundreds of other detained protesters who have yet to be tried by the Municipal Court in Lhasa.
Indeed, it is our belief that the recent death sentences could mark the onset of an avalanche of highly doubtful Court rulings in Tibet, which could lead to a worrying number of executions in that tense and troubled region.
If China is to gain an international position of respect commensurate with its position in the world economy, as well as to benefit from its rise to pre-eminence among the world economic powers, it is vital that China’s representatives in Tibet acknowledge the need for due legal process for all of its citizens, including its ethnic minorities.
Tied to that sense of due process of law is a call for the Chinese leadership to allow representatives of the international community to have access to Tibet and its adjoining provinces.
Hampir seperempat terumbu karang di Situs Warisan Dunia Great Barrier Reef di Australia – salah satu ekosistem terkaya dan paling beragam di dunia – mati akibat pemutihan karang massal terburuk dalam sejarah.
Bahkan di bagian paling utara Great Barrier Reef, kawasan paling murni dan jauh dari jangkauan manusia, kini hampir 50% karangnya telah musnah.
Perubahan iklim mengakibatkan kemungkinan terjadinya suhu panas di atas rata-rata yang memicu pemutihan ini meningkat hingga 175 kali.
Ketika laut menyerap panas dari atmosfer, pemutihan karang besar-besaran seperti yang merusak Great Barrier Reef – di luar fenomena lainnya akibat kenaikan suhu – akan semakin sering menimpa hamparan terumbu karang dengan tingkat kerusakan lebih parah.
Masa depan sejumlah Situs Warisan Dunia yang tidak ternilai – dan tentunya bumi kita – bergantung pada seberapa cepat upaya penurunan emisi gas rumah kaca yang dipicu perubahan iklim.
Sayangnya alih-alih melindungi situs-situs yang ada di negaranya dengan menerapkan aksi iklim yang kuat, pemerintah di banyak negara justru secara aktif mengutamakan proyek-proyek energi kotor seperti tambang batubara dan pembangkit listrik tenaga pembakaran batubara.
Bahkan ketika Great Barrier Reef sekarat, Australia terus menambah eksploitasi bahan bakar fosil di dalam negeri.
Selama satu tahun terakhir, pemerintah Australia mengizinkan tambang batubara Carmichael dan pelabuhan Abbot Point, yang berlokasi di dekat Great Barrier Reef, untuk memfasilitasi ekspor global atas produk dari tambang Carmichael.
Emisi yang dihasilkan dari tambang tersebut termasuk salah satu jumlah emisi terbesar di dunia yang dihasilkan hanya dalam satu proyek.
Masalah ini tidak terbatas di Australia saja.
Negara dengan dataran rendah seperti Bangladesh, salah satu negara paling rentan terhadap perubahan iklim, pemerintahnya mendukung usulan pembangunan dua pembangkit listrik tenaga batubara berskala besar yang berdekatan dengan Situs Warisan Dunia Sundarbans.
India juga bersikap sama.
Selain mengeluarkan gas rumah kaca dalam jumlah besar, kedua pembangkit tersebut akan merusak Sundarbans, tempat bertemunya sungai Gangga dan sungai-sungai lainnya dengan Teluk Benggala di hamparan pulau bakau yang menjadi lokasi bermukimnya harimau-harimau Benggala yang terancam punah serta lumba-lumba sungai.
Pembangkit listrik tersebut akan mencemari air dengan debu batubara yang beracun, mengeluarkan sisa-sisa batubara, dan mengharuskan pengerukan palung sungai.
Merkuri dari pipa-pipa akan bermuara di perairan, mengkontaminasi pasokan makanan bagi ratusan ribu orang serta flora dan fauna, dan ketika itu terjadi maka kerusakannya bersifat permanen.
Memang benar Bangladesh mengalami keterbatasan energi, sebuah masalah yang harus diatasi jika pemerintahnya ingin maju dan perekonomiannya tumbuh.
Namun ada alternatif lain.
Negara tersebut berpotensi besar dalam hal produksi energi terbarukan dan sudah menjadi yang terdepan di program tenaga surya di atap bangunan (rooftop solar energy).
Tentu saja, tanggung jawab untuk mencegah bahaya perubahan iklim yang diakibatkan kegiatan manusia tidak hanya diemban oleh negara-negara yang memiliki Situs Warisan Dunia.
Tapi mengingat hal-hal yang sudah kita ketahui, pemeloporan proyek-proyek energi kotor yang merusak tidak lagi dapat dibenarkan.
Ketika pemerintah gagal melindungi kekayaan alam yang dimilikinya, Komite Warisan Dunia (WHC) harus bangkit untuk membantu mengakhiri eksploitasi bahan bakar fosil yang tidak ada hentinya.
Terutama, WHC harus mengeluarkan rekomendasi kepada pemerintah untuk mengurangi ancaman-ancaman terkait dengan bahan bakar fosil, mengidentifikasi situs-situs yang terancam bahaya semacam itu, serta menjalankan misi monitoring.
Sasaran pertama dan utama haruslah ditujukan untuk mendorong pemerintah yang memiliki kapasitas untuk mengurangi ancaman-ancaman terkait dengan bahan bakar fosil yang membahayakan sejumlah situs yang ada, agar segera bertindak.
Tindakan dari WHC akan membantu mendidik dan memberdayakan masyarakat sipil, sembari memberi tekanan pada lembaga-lembaga keuangan untuk menunda pengucuran dana bagi proyek-proyek pembangunan yang besar.
Pertemuan-pertemuan tahunan WHC, seperti yang baru-baru ini diselenggarakan di Istanbul, merupakan forum yang tepat untuk mengerahkan upaya tesebut.
Kini, lusinan lembaga dan lebih dari 60.000 orang menuntut WHC untuk menyerukan pembatalan rencana pembangunan pembangkit listrik tenaga batubara, melainkan untuk berinvestasi pada energi terbarukan.
Selain itu, lusinan ilmuwan terkemuka, LSM, serta advokat asing dan advokat asal Australia sudah menuntut agar WHC counsel Australia tidak lagi memberikan dukungannya pada pembangunan yang akan memperparah dampak perubahan iklim yang menimpa Great Barrier Reef.
Seiring dengan semakin buruknya ancaman perubahan iklim yang menghantui kita, lembaga-lembaga yang berkuasa seperti WHC harus bangkit dan melawan kebergantungan pada batubara dan bahan bakar fosil lainnya, sebuah warisan yang beracun dan mematikan.
Jika komite tersebut terus berdiam diri dan tidak menyikapi isu yang krusial ini, situs-situs Warisan Dunia sejagat akan sengsara.
A Hanging in India
NEW DELHI – On July 30, Yakub Memon, a chartered accountant and the brother of a notorious gangster now living in self-imposed exile, was hanged for complicity in the planning and execution of serial bomb blasts that killed 257 people in Mumbai in 1993.
The hanging, India’s first in three years, has prompted reactions ranging from dismay to scarcely concealed bloodlust.
And it has intensified the domestic debate over the death penalty.
To be sure, no one suggests that India’s judicial system did not function properly in Memon’s case.
He was convicted according to due process of law, and his punishment was in accordance with valid statutes.
During his 21 years behind bars, Memon exhausted every possible appeal available to him, including one for presidential clemency.
The Supreme Court even held an emergency hearing at 2:30 in the morning, just hours before the execution was set to occur, before deciding to allow it to proceed.
But the question remains: Should capital punishment be on the books at all?
As an opposition legislator, I attracted considerable opprobrium for voicing my opinion, on the morning of Memon’s hanging, that it should not be.
I expressed my sadness that our government has killed a human being, whatever his crimes may have been.
State-sponsored killing diminishes us all, I added, by reducing us to murderers, just like those we are punishing.
My view is not popular in India, and my own party disclaimed my statement.
But my position is based on ample evidence that the death penalty does not actually deter the crimes it punishes.
Data collected by the Death Penalty Project at Delhi’s National Law University demonstrate conclusively that there is no statistical correlation between applying the death penalty and preventing murder.
This evidence echoes similar findings in other countries.
My statements were also motivated by problems with the way capital punishment is imposed in India.
The Supreme Court has declared that the death penalty should be applied only in the “rarest of the rare” cases.
And, indeed, the last three executions in the country stemmed from terrorist offenses that threatened or took a large number of lives.
But the decision to impose capital punishment remains highly subjective.
Indeed, whether the death penalty is meted out depends on a number of variables, beginning with judicial and social biases.
Public outrage – potentially fueled by inflammatory media coverage – can push for a harsher sentence, especially in cases relating to terrorism or crimes against women.
Economic status also comes into play, with poor criminals being executed much more often than wealthy ones, not least because they cannot afford high-quality legal representation.
And the president’s decision to commute a sentence is subjective.
A 1983 case held that one way to determine whether a crime meets the “rarest of the rare” requirement is whether the community’s “collective conscience” has been “so shocked” that it expects those wielding judicial power to inflict the death penalty, regardless of their personal opinions.
This leaves much room for the arbitrary and disproportionate application of capital punishment.
From 2010 to 2013, 436 death sentences were handed down by lower courts.
Of those, 280 were commuted to life imprisonment, with many of the other cases likely to remain in limbo for decades.
As for the death sentences that have already been carried out – two in that four-year period – it is impossible to ascertain the objective criteria that made the crimes in question more heinous or “rarer” than those that did not merit execution.
Ambiguity and subjectivity have no place in matters of life and death.
Yet, when it comes to the imposition of capital punishment, both are prominent.
That makes it all the more difficult to justify the practice.
Just a couple of weeks before Memon’s execution, India’s Law Commission, a government body composed of retired judges and legal experts that works for legal reform, organized consultations to assess the effectiveness of the provisions governing the death penalty in India and the purpose of the penalty itself.
Unsurprisingly, based on the evidence and the opinions presented at the Law Commission’s hearings, there was a general consensus that the courts are unable to adopt a fair and non-discriminatory approach to the death penalty, and support for its abolition was overwhelming.
That will not happen any time soon.
The Indian public overwhelmingly supports the death penalty, especially for convicted terrorists.
The debate over Memon’s hanging was often emotional, with media interviewing survivors of the Mumbai blasts.
Moreover, it has been suggested that the alternative to the death penalty – life imprisonment – would make India vulnerable to hijackings and other assaults by terrorist groups attempting to free their jailed comrades.
In the face of such security concerns, my argument that taking a human life is wrong, and that the state should not compound criminal wrongdoing with its own, found little resonance.
Globally, India is part of a dwindling minority.
More than 130 countries have abolished the death penalty.
Twenty-five countries have it on the books, but have not executed anyone for decades.
That leaves roughly 30 countries that still apply it.
India’s membership in this group has international repercussions; for example, European Union countries will not extradite criminals to countries where they may face execution.
But the real problem is deeper: capital punishment is, at its core, about nothing more than retribution.
It may be tempting to declare that anyone who kills (or participates in killing) innocent people does not deserve to live.
But is revenge a worthy motive for a state’s actions, especially toward its own citizens?
India’s greatest son Mahatma Gandhi observed that “an eye for an eye makes the whole world blind.”
For now, India remains blind to the case for abolishing the death penalty.
One day, I am sure, it will see the light.
Until then, the lonely battle for its abolition must continue.
Debating Defense
BRUSSELS – The Haitian earthquake has made two things horrifically clear: security challenges are not only man-made, and military forces are often a vital part of humanitarian aid. This is a timely reminder, because security and defense are now the focus of a major debate within both NATO and the European Union.
Generals, it is said, always prepare to fight the last war – an old jibe, but one that contains an element of truth.
Indeed, flexibility does not come naturally to armed forces, with the result that the two decades since the end of the Cold War have seen only slow adaptation to the military’s evolving roles.
But NATO’s priorities this year include a sweeping review of its own strategic purpose, something the alliance has not questioned since 1999, while the EU continues to struggle towards its goal of forging a European defense policy worthy of the name.
In both cases, there are more questions than answers.
To begin with, what is meant by security?
Does it refer to the geopolitics of international relations, or to protecting society against terrorist attacks?
It is both, of course, but the sort of policies that will achieve these two very different objectives is far from clear.
How America and Europe should engage with governments around the world will be crucially important in the coming years.
In addition to issues like climate change, there is also a sense that other players are flexing their muscles.
Is the comparatively new Shanghai Cooperation Organization a flimsy grouping of China, Russia, and the Central Asian countries, or is it shaping up to be a new global defense and security player whose existence will have serious implications for the West?
Does the birth of the G-20 strengthen the Atlantic security relationship, or does it contain the seeds of NATO’s eventual demise?
Indeed, does the West’s security thinking reflect the realities of a world which within two generations will number some nine billion people?
Right now, the future of Western security is being shaped by tensions within the Atlantic relationship.
There is really no consensus on whether Afghanistan is a “winnable” war, and whether the Bush administration’s “war on terror” set the West on a long-term course that may prove comparable in scale to the Cold War.
Indeed, many Europeans wonder whether American leadership in Afghanistan and elsewhere is the solution or the problem.
There is probably even less agreement in both the United States and the EU on whether the security of citizens is genuinely at stake in Afghanistan, and whether the Iranian nuclear program really poses a threat to the West.
It is not that easy for Europeans to set the future security agenda when their credibility on defense matters leaves so much to be desired.
Of the two million men and women in EU countries’ armed forces, only 2% are combat ready.
The jury is still out on whether the European Security and Defense Policy has significantly improved the EU’s military capabilities and outreach.
Some argue that Europe needs to follow the example of its agricultural policy and introduce a CAP-style defense budget so that free-rider EU countries start to pay their way.
There is also criticism that Brussels still has not done enough to persuade or even force EU governments to open up their military procurement to one another.
European governments have resisted genuine opening of their national defense markets for a host of reasons, including an obsession with meeting national defense requirements, concerns over sovereignty, and a desire to protect jobs and local high-technology capabilities.
So where do we go from here?
A dozen international think tanks are organizing a worldwide on-line debate, to be held from February 4-9, in association with NATO, the European Commission, and several governments.
The debate will be open not just to defense experts, but also to non-governmental organizations, development specialists, and anyone with views on where global security thinking should be headed.
The five-day Internet debate will include 10 topics, ranging from human rights to piracy, from crisis preparedness to climate change, and from development to conflict prevention.
MILAN – Italians and other Europeans have serious problems addressing their own national debts, public and private, so it may seem immodest for a European to discuss America’s growing and grave debt problem.
But the fiscal realities on both sides of the Atlantic nowadays are very similar, and only lingering trust in the promise of America keeps alive the expectation among some Europeans that some grand American coup de théâtrewill resolve the country’s dire debt situation.
Of course, many Americans recognize the scale of the country’s debt burden.
Admiral Mike Mullen, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and thus America’s highest ranking military officer, recently said, “The greatest danger to American security comes from the national debt.”
Four Americans out of ten agree with him, whereas less than three in ten deem terrorism or Iran more dangerous.
America’s Great Power status has always been tied to its level of debt.
Indeed, it was the absence of debt that marked the United States’ emergence as a world power between 1914 and 1917.
The US went from owing $3 billion (mostly to Great Britain) to being a net creditor for about the same amount, thanks to $6 billion in war credits given to the Western Allies.
A further $3 billion in credits for European post-war reconstruction cemented America’s status as the world’s premier creditor nation, with its surplus equal to roughly 8% of GNP at the time.
This shift meant that the US had essentially replaced Britain as the heart of the world’s financial and monetary system.
Previously, thanks to the gold standard and Britain’s political stability, the City of London had been the world’s key source of capital and financial guarantees for more than a century.
The new era began suddenly in January 1915, when, after a few months of deep uncertainty, gold started to be shipped to New York in increasing quantities.
A few months earlier, the veteran Boston financier Henry Lee Higginson had sketched in a letter to President Woodrow Wilson what America’s new strategy should be.
“This is our chance to take first place,” he wrote.
America’s financial house had to be put in order, all debts repaid, and, as London had done for a long time, confidence had to be maintained, which meant guaranteeing the dollar’s convertibility into gold.
Alone among the world’s great nations, the US did manage to guarantee dollar convertibility throughout the Great War.
With peace, the dollar and Wall Street became the dominant force on the world’s financial landscape.
The financial-market rules established after 1933 by President Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal enabled the dollar to replace the British pound at the center of the international system.
America’s role as the world’s banker went unchallenged for the next 40 years ago, until President Richard Nixon decoupled the dollar from gold.
Yet, even without the gold standard, America’s economic might, together with the recycling of petrodollars, kept the dollar on top.
Indeed, the US remained the world’s premier creditor nation until 1986-1987, when it became a debtor nation again.
In the two decades that followed, America’s debt usually was around $3 trillion, rising or falling with the exchange rate of the dollar.
Starting in 1990, the US began to import more and more capital, particularly from Asia.
In the 2000’s, China became the prime source of debt financing, and Americans were happy, because it enabled the US Federal Reserve to keep interest rates low.
There were some who foresaw danger.
The Swedish economist Axel Leijonhufvud foresaw asset-price inflation – houses in particular – and a worsening of credit quality.
Financial innovation soon made that prediction come true.
It is enough to remember that in 2008 there were only 12 public companies in the world with AAA credit ratings, but more than 60,000 – mostly American – triple-A structured financial products.
The US, the world’s banker, had mutated into the world’s hedge fund.
With that change, the banker’s traditional imperative to maintain fidelity and trust – to “keep faith,” as Higginson put it – was forgotten.
And it is in America’s public debt that the debris of its financial system’s broken promises are collected, just as Italy’s massive public debt reflects its past national prodigality.
The figures for the US are staggering.
Public debt includes not only the federal government’s current $13.2 trillion, but another $3 trillion owed by America’s states, counties, and cities.
In addition, there is the $3.9 trillion in debt owed by America’s government-backed housing-finance agencies (Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and others), which currently underwrite more than 90% of all US mortgages.
As a result, America’s public debt has reached roughly 140% of GDP.
The US Congress is well aware of what these numbers portend, but its members have chosen to avert their eyes.
Indeed, the president is no longer required to provide the usual five-year forecast of the country’s fiscal position. A one-year perspective is now deemed sufficient.
So, where does that leave the world economy?
There is no newly emerging Great Power that can assume responsibility for global finance, as there was in 1914.
Back then, Wall Street was ready for the job.
Someday, Shanghai and Hong Kong might be ready, but that possibility is of little help now.
Debt and Democracy
PRINCETON – The European Union’s sovereign-debt crisis constitutes a fundamental threat not only to the euro, but also to democracy and public accountability.
At the moment, Europe’s woes and dilemmas are confined to relatively small countries like Greece, Ireland, and Hungary.
But all of them look as if their governments have cheated on fundamental articles of the democratic contract.
The rotating presidency of the EU is about to shed a spotlight on one of these countries.
Hungary’s turn at the EU helm comes at a time of fierce debate over Prime Minister Victor Orbán’s alteration of constitutional law and suppression of press freedom, as well as a new round of worries about the country’s financial sustainability.
Hungary has many reasons to be sensitive to the issue of the political consequences of debt.
After all, Hungary still holds the world record for hyperinflation, with the currency debased by 1027 in the 1940’s, paving the way for the imposition of Communist dictatorship.
The EU’s debt arithmetic is uncertain and precarious.
Fiscal consolidation in the Mediterranean countries might just do the trick, and allow – at great cost – a return to normal financing arrangements.
But if market nervousness persists and interest rates remain high relative to rates for secure German debt, the debt burden will rapidly become unsustainable.
So it might be a good idea for the EU to prepare a mechanism that spells out how debt can be trimmed.
Many economists have argued this case on the basis of arithmetic calculation.
But the European Central Bank, notably by ECB board member Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, has elegantly spelled out the case against debt reduction – a case that is politically significant and deeply moral.
Indeed, the principle of not reneging on public debt is deeply intertwined with the development of legal security, representative government, and modern democracy.
In the wake of the Glorious Revolution of 1688, when Britain revolted against the spendthrift Stuart dynasty, the British government adopted a new approach to debt. Voting on budgets in Parliament – a representative institution – ensured that the people as a whole were liable for the obligations incurred by their government.
A constitutional approach limited the scope for wasteful spending on luxurious court life (and on military adventure), which had been the hallmark of early modern autocratic monarchy.
The lesson of 1688 was reinforced by the next European revolutionary wave.
In the aftermath of the French Revolution and Napoleon, France was heavily in debt, and the revolutionary regimes had discredited themselves through paper-currency (assignat) inflation.
After the Congress of Vienna returned King Louis XVIII to the French throne, his advisers debated whether or not to recognize the debt incurred by Napoleon. The decision not to default contributed to the legal security needed for the French economy to catch up with Britain’s industrial revolution.
The experience of wartime inflations and de facto defaults in the twentieth century made the theme of responsible finance a crucial part of a new European consensus.
A foundation of the European integration process was recognition of the importance of a stable currency to political legitimacy.
Indeed, the EU’s critical French-German axis was held together by the conviction that political order in a democracy depended on the security of debt.
In Germany, the expropriation of two generations of middle-class bond holders was seen as the outcome of the Kaiser’s war, and then of Hitler’s war – in other words, a result of democratic failure.
After inflation and unstable government, Charles de Gaulle rebuilt the French political system, but also the idea of the French nation, by championing currency stability.
He explicitly went back to the legacy of Napoleon, and argued that France could be stable only with a strong currency.
The financial revolution that swept the world over the last two decades seemed to sever the link between representative government and public finance.
Derivatives and other complex financial instruments seemed to offer a way to circumvent citizens’ responsibility for expenditure to which they had consented.
In other words, modern government finance had come to resemble sub-prime mortgages, which created the illusion of universal home ownership; rules and limits no longer applied.
Countries could practice generosity on the never never.
The apparently hard rules of the EU’s Maastricht Treaty and its Growth and Stability Pact, which impose a 3%-of-GDP ceiling on fiscal deficits and 60% on government debt, encouraged ingenious accounting to shift expenditure for purely cosmetic purposes.
The financial revolution went in parallel with the effective disenfranchisement of Europeans.
For the past 20 years, it looked as if power was being shifted to a technocratic elite.
Behind-the-scenes accounting tricks were accompanied by behind-the-scenes political tricks.
Citizens, unsurprisingly, complained about the declining legitimacy of EU institutions.
Similarly, in guaranteeing the debt of Irish banks in September 2008, the Irish government did something that no responsible government should have contemplated.
It took responsibility for obligations that amounted to a multiple of Ireland’s national income, driving up government debt to more than 1,300% of GDP.
Prime Minister Brian Cowen, who still defends this action, is likely to be massively punished in the next elections.
But Cowen’s actions were symptomatic of a broader failure: the fundamental link between the liability of citizens and taxpayers and the responsibilities of government had been broken.
The idea of shifting some part of EU members’ existing government debt to a European bond may be technically appealing, but it will work only if there is a return to the British principles of 1688 (or the principles of the American Revolution).
Taxpayers across the EU must have the sense that they control what they owe – and that they will not be held responsible for the mistakes and frauds of the unholy alliance between irresponsible finance and irresponsible government.
Debt, Dictatorship, and Democratization
NEW YORK – After Saddam Hussein’s fall, the United States successfully pressed creditors to write off much of Iraq’s external debt.
Senior American officials, including Paul Wolfowitz, later President of the World Bank, argued that the Iraqi people should not be saddled with obligations that the dictator contracted in order to enrich himself and oppress his subjects.
The question is this: how much of the money went to meritorious development projects, and how much went instead to prop up the regime and line its leaders’ pockets?
In the case of Egypt, for example, Minister of Economic Cooperation Faiza Abu al-Naga suggested in January that Mubarak himself was directing the country’s foreign-loan policy and “oversee[ing] the entire process.”
Debt relief will doubtless make it easier for new regimes to proceed with much-needed policies to create jobs, improve infrastructure, and develop human capital.
Such a commission should be composed largely of nationals who have broad public credibility, perhaps with a minority delegation of foreign experts.
In the years since the 2008 global financial crisis, austerity and balance-sheet repair have been the watchwords of the global economy.
And yet today, more than ever, debt is fueling concern about growth prospects worldwide.
The McKinsey Global Institute, in a study of post-crisis debt trends, notes that gross debt has increased about $60 trillion – or 75% of global GDP – since 2008.
China’s debt, for example, has increased fourfold since 2007, and its debt-to-GDP ratio is some 282% – higher than in many other major economies, including the United States.
A global economy that is levering up, while unable to generate enough aggregate demand to achieve potential growth, is on a risky path.
But to assess how risky, several factors must be considered.
First, one must consider the composition of the debt across sectors (household, government, non-financial corporate, and the financial sector).
After all, distress in these sectors has very different effects on the broader economy.
As it turns out, economies with similar and relatively high levels of gross debt relative to GDP exhibit sharp differences when it comes to the composition of the debt.
Excessive household debt is particularly risky, because a shock in the price of assets (especially real estate) translates quickly into reduced consumption, as it weakens growth, employment, and investment. Recovery from such a shock is a long process.
The second factor to consider is nominal growth – that is, real growth plus inflation.
Today, real growth is subdued and may even be slowing, while inflation is below target in most places, with some economies even facing the risk of deflation.
Because debt is a liability for borrowers and an asset for creditors, these trends have divergent effects, increasing value for the asset holder, while increasing the liability of the debtor.
The problem is that, in a low-growth environment, the probability of some form of default rises considerably.
In that case, nobody wins.
The third key factor for assessing the risk of growing debt is monetary policy and interest rates.
Though no one knows exactly what a “normal” interest-rate environment might look like in the post-crisis world, it is reasonable to assume that it will not look like it does today, when many economies are keeping rates near zero and some have even moved into negative territory.
Sovereigns with high and/or rising debt levels may find them sustainable now, given aggressively accommodative monetary policy.
Unfortunately, though such accommodation cannot be sustained forever, today’s conditions are often viewed as semi-permanent, creating the illusion of stability and reducing the incentive to undertake difficult reforms that promote future growth.
The final, and arguably most important, factor shaping debt risk relates to investment.
Increasing debt to sustain current consumption, whether in the household or government sector, is rightly viewed as an unsustainable element of a growth pattern.
Here, China’s case is instructive.
In a sense, the frequent refrain that China’s debt is on an unsustainable path is true.
After all, high levels of debt increase vulnerability to negative shocks.
But, in another sense, this misses the point.
Many governments nowadays are accumulating debt in order to buttress public or private consumption.
This approach, if overused, can amount to borrowing future demand; in that case, it is clearly unsustainable.
But, if used as a transitional measure to help jump-start an economy or to provide a buffer from negative demand shocks, such efforts can be highly beneficial.
Moreover, in a relatively high-growth economy, ostensibly high debt levels are not necessarily a problem, as long as that debt is being used to fund investments that either yield high returns or create assets worth more than the debt.
In the case of sovereign debt, the return on investment can be viewed as the increment to future growth.
The good news is that, in China, much of the accumulated leverage has indeed been used to fund investment, which in principle creates assets that will augment future growth.
(Whether the results of the government’s recent decision to increase the fiscal deficit to stimulate the economy follow this long-term growth-enhancing pattern remains to be seen.)
The bad news is that directed lending and the relaxation of credit standards in China, particularly after the crisis, have led to investment in assets in real estate and heavy industry with a value well below the cost of creating them.
The return on them is negative.
China’s so-called debt problem is thus not really a debt problem, but an investment problem.
To address it, China must reform its investment and financial systems, so that low- or negative-return investments are screened out more reliably.
That means tackling the mispricing of risk that results from the government’s backing of the country’s state-owned banks (which surely could not be allowed to fail).
Many developed countries are also failing to invest in high-return assets, but for a different reason: Their tight budgets and rising debts are preventing them from investing much at all.
As this weakens growth and reduces inflation, the speed at which their sovereign-debt ratios can be reduced declines considerably.
In order to spur growth and employment, these economies must start paying closer attention to the kind of debt they accumulate.
If the debt is financing growth-promoting investment, it may be a very good idea.
If, however, it is financing “current operations” and raising short-term aggregate demand, it is highly risky.
Of course, the situation is not cut and dried.
The return to public investment is affected by the presence or absence of complementary reforms, which vary from country to country. And there is some potential for abuse, with expenditures being misclassified as investments.
Yet, in an environment of low long-term interest rates and deficient short-term aggregate demand (which means there is little risk of crowding out the private sector), it is a mistake not to relax fiscal constraints for investment.
In fact, the right kind of public investment would probably spur more private-sector investment. Identifying such investment is where today’s debt debate should be.
Restructuring Debt in the Dark
CAMBRIDGE – As the Annual Meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank begin in Washington, DC, one member country is conspicuously absent: Venezuela.
Yet there is much to be discussed about the country’s finances.
Indeed, a sovereign-debt crisis is inevitable.
All major sovereign-debt crises of the past – including in Mexico and Greece – have generated changes in the rules, jurisprudence, or strategies adopted by debtors, creditors, and international financial institutions.
Most recently, Argentina’s 15-year legal battle with its creditors – in which holdouts did measurably better than creditors who had years earlier accepted a debt exchange – destabilized the international financial architecture and generated a new set of rules.
Venezuela will be the first country to navigate the new rules; the country can ill afford to get it wrong.
Venezuela is in a severe crisis of its own making.
The government used the period of high oil prices from 2004 to 2013 to quintuple its external debt, expropriate significant chunks of the economy, and impose draconian price, labor, and currency controls.
As the price of oil collapsed in 2014, the government, having lost access to capital markets because of its profligacy, chose to continue servicing its bonded debt and default on its obligations to importers and most non-financial creditors.
The government also eschewed both advice and financing from the IMF, instead balancing its foreign-exchange flows by mandating the biggest import contraction in Latin America’s history.
This caused output to plummet over 30% (owing to the cut in imported inputs), triggered 700% inflation, and led quickly to widespread shortages of essentials.
Among other things, this unprecedented skewing of priorities led to a collapse in oil production, because the national oil company PDVSA failed to maintain its productive infrastructure and defaulted on payments to key contractors in order to pay its bondholders – thereby killing the goose that laid the golden eggs.
Venezuela’s lack of market access means that it cannot roll over its obligations, except under conditions that worsen its solvency, as PDVSA is trying to do.
Nor can it generate sufficient foreign exchange to pay its debts as they come due.
So, one way or another, Venezuela will need to restructure its existing debt.
A restructuring is ultimately in everybody’s interest; starving the economy of imports merely weakens Venezuela’s capacity to produce and repay.
But what tools does Venezuela have at its disposal to secure a cooperative solution with its creditors in a post-Argentina world?
And what role should international financial institutions play to facilitate an efficient outcome?
A critical component of successful debt restructuring is to ensure that similarly situated creditors receive comparable treatment.
But this is impossible unless the “holdout” problem is solved: if a majority of creditors agree to reduce or postpone their claims, it is always tempting for an individual creditor to hold out for full payment by free riding on other creditors’ pain.
That is why bankruptcy courts and bonds with collective-action clauses (CACs) seek to impose on all bondholders, including potential holdouts, agreements accepted by a qualified majority of creditors.
Two things happened in Argentina.
First, the defaulted sovereign bonds did not have CACs, so there was no way to force holdouts to accept the initial deal.
More important, years later, US courts accepted a novel interpretation of the pari passu clause advanced by holdout creditors (and rejected by virtually all other mainstream participants and practitioners in sovereign finance).
As a result, Argentina was barred from making a current interest payment to holders of its restructured debt unless it simultaneously paid the holdouts the full amount of principal and interest contractually owed to them.
Restructuring in the post-Argentina world is made more challenging because the holdouts’ success in that case means that bondholders inclined to negotiate a solution will have to explain to their own investors why they are not pursuing the potentially more lucrative holdout strategy.
Venezuela’s debt is different.
About 60% of the country’s public foreign debt consists of bonds, with about half issued by the government and half by PDVSA.
With few exceptions, government bonds have CACs, making it somewhat easier to address the holdout problem.
PDVSA bonds have all been issued in the US and, as legally required of all corporate bonds, they do not contain CACs.
PDVSA may nonetheless be entitled to bankruptcy protection both in Venezuela and in the US.
In this event, PDVSA could obtain a court-mandated standstill order with respect to legal action against it until a restructuring agreement is reached, thereby avoiding a disorderly seizure of assets.
As an additional form of pressure to secure participation, PDVSA’s exclusive right to exploit Venezuela’s hydrocarbon reserves can be withdrawn or modified.