But it is not out of place to remind ourselves that economists and bureaucrats need not always have things their own way.
Is US Monetary Policy Made in China?
AMSTERDAM – For much of the year, investors have been fixated on when the Fed will achieve “liftoff” – that is, when it will raise interest rates by 25 basis points, or 0.25%, as a first step toward normalizing monetary conditions.
Markets have soared and plummeted in response to small changes in Fed statements perceived as affecting the likelihood that liftoff is imminent.
But, in seeking to gauge changes in US monetary conditions, investors have been looking in the wrong place.
Since mid-August, when Chinese policymakers startled the markets by devaluing the renminbi by 2%, China’s official intervention in foreign-exchange markets has continued, in order to prevent the currency from falling further.
The Chinese authorities have been selling foreign securities, mainly United States Treasury bonds, and buying up renminbi.
This is the opposite of what China did when the renminbi was strong.
Back then, China bought US Treasury bonds to keep the currency from rising and eroding the competitiveness of Chinese exporters.
As a result, it accumulated an astounding $4 trillion of foreign reserves.
And what was true of China was also true of other emerging-market countries receiving capital inflows.
These countries’ foreign reserves, mainly held in US securities, topped $8 trillion at their peak last year.
The effects of these purchases attracted considerable attention.
In 2005, US Federal Reserve Chair Alan Greenspan pointed to the phenomenon as an explanation for his famous “conundrum”: interest rates on Treasury bonds were lower than market conditions appeared to warrant.
His successor, Ben Bernanke, similarly pointed to purchases of US debt by foreign central banks and governments as a reason why American interest rates were so low.
Now this process has gone into reverse.
Although no one outside official Chinese circles knows the exact magnitude of China’s foreign-exchange intervention, informed guesses suggest that it has been running at roughly $100 billion a month since mid-August.
Observers believe that roughly 60% of China’s liquid reserves are in US Treasury bills.
Given that reserve managers prefer to avoid unbalancing their carefully composed portfolios, they probably have been selling Treasuries at a rate of roughly $60 billion a month.
The effects are analogous – but opposite – to those of quantitative easing.
Recall that the Fed began its third round of quantitative easing (QE3) by purchasing $40 billion of securities a month, before boosting the volume to $85 billion.
Monthly sales of $60 billion by China’s government would lie squarely in the middle.
Estimates of the effects of QE3 differ.
But the weight of the evidence is that QE3 had a modest but significant downward impact on Treasury yields and a positive effect on demand for riskier assets.
Menzie Chinn of the University of Wisconsin has examined the impact of foreign purchases and sales of US government securities on ten-year Treasury yields.
His estimates imply that foreign sales at a rate of $60 billion per month raise yields by ten basis points.
Given that China has been at it for 2.5 months, this implies that the equivalent of a 25-basis-point increase in interest rates has already been injected into the market.
Some would object that the renminbi is weak because China is experiencing capital outflows by private investors, and that some of this private money also flows into US financial markets. This is technically correct, but it is already factored into the changes in interest rates described above.
Recall that capital also flowed out of the US when the Fed was engaged in QE, without vitiating the effects. That was what the earlier debate over “currency wars” – when emerging markets complained about being inundated by financial inflows from the US – was all about.
Another objection is that QE operates not just through the so-called portfolio channel – by changing the mix of securities in the market – but also through the expectations channel.
It signals that the authorities are seriously committed to making the future different from the past.
But if Chinese intervention is just a one-off event, and there are no expectations of it continuing, then this second channel shouldn’t be operative, and the impact will be smaller than that of QE.
The problem is that no one knows how long capital outflows from China will persist or how long the Chinese authorities will continue to intervene.
From this standpoint, the Fed’s decision to wait to begin liftoff is eminently sensible.
And, given that China holds (and is therefore now selling) euros as well, the European Central Bank also should bear this in mind when it decides in December whether to ramp up its own program of quantitative easing.
Why Finance Can Save the Planet
PARIS – Most people hate finance, viewing it as the epitome of irresponsibility and greed.
But, even after causing a once-in-a-century recession and unemployment for millions, finance looks indispensable for preventing an even worse catastrophe: climate change.
Action is urgently needed to contain global warming and prevent a disaster for humanity; yet the global community is desperately short of tools.
There is not much support for the most desirable solutions advocated by economists, such as a global cap on greenhouse-gas emissions, coupled with a trading system, or the enforcement of a worldwide carbon price through a global tax on CO2 emissions.
Instead, negotiations for the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Paris in December are being conducted on the basis of voluntary, unilateral pledges called Intended Nationally Determined Contributions.
Although the inclusion of voluntary targets has the merit of creating global momentum, this approach is unlikely to result in commitments that are both binding and commensurate to the challenge.
That is why climate advocates are increasingly looking for other means of triggering action.
Finance is at the top of their list.
For starters, finance provides an accurate yardstick to gauge if deeds are consistent with words.
In 2011, “Unburnable Carbon,” a path-breaking report by the nongovernmental Carbon Tracker Initiative, showed that the proven fossil-fuel reserves owned by governments and private companies exceed by a factor of five the quantity of carbon that can be burned in the next 50 years if global warming is to be kept below two degrees Celsius.
Reserves held just by the 200 top publicly listed fuel companies – thus excluding state-owned producers such as Saudi Arabia’s Aramco – exceed this carbon budget by one-third.
And that means that these companies’ stock-market valuation is inconsistent with containing global warning.
This realization prompted a campaign to convince investors to divest from carbon-rich assets.
Individuals and institutions representing a $2.6 trillion portfolio have already joined the divestment movement.
Furthermore, Bank of England Governor Mark Carney has highlighted the threat represented by potentially stranded carbon assets.
Investors are being warned that, from the standpoint of financial stability, “brown” securities bear specific risk.
The amount of divestment may look big – and it is, particularly given that the campaign started recently.
Yet $2.6 trillion amounts to less than 5% of global private non-financial securities.
The trend is real, but it is still too little to trigger significant changes in fossil-fuel companies’ valuation and behavior.
A second reason why finance matters is that the transition to a low-carbon economy requires huge investments.
According to the International Energy Agency, global investment in energy supply currently amounts to $1.6 trillion annually, and 70% of it is still based on oil, coal, or gas.
Green investment amounts to only 15% of the total, and investment in energy efficiency – in buildings, transport, and industry – totals a meager $130 billion.
Containing the increase in average surface temperature to two degrees requires developing clean technologies, and even more important, a four-fold increase in investment in energy efficiency over the next ten years.
Yet such investment will not be financed easily: its return depends on a still-elusive carbon price and will often materialize only in the long run, while improving energy efficiency implies replacing hundreds of millions of outdated vehicles and refitting hundreds of millions of energy-voracious buildings.
Adequate financing instruments are required for the right purpose at the right place and at the right scale.
Development banks and green banks have a huge role to play.
For example, dedicated long-term loans, coupled with a tax break or a subsidy, would help households decide to modernize their homes.
But the real hope among climate specialists is that innovative finance could help provide the planning clarity that is currently missing.
To elicit the investments that are necessary to mitigate climate change and green the economy, the elimination of fossil-fuel subsidies and a credible, fast-rising path for the price of carbon are vital.
But, because high fuel prices are unpopular with consumers and raise competitiveness concerns among businesses, governments are reluctant to take action today – and may renege on their commitments to act tomorrow.
To overcome such trepidation, advocates for climate action are turning to incentives.
Some have recommended that governments issue CO2 performance bonds, whose yield would be reduced if companies exceed their carbon target.
Another idea, put forward in a recent paper by Michel Aglietta and his colleagues, is to map out a path for an indicative price of carbon called its “social value” and provide green project developers a government-guaranteed carbon certificate representing the value of the corresponding emissions reduction.
Central banks, they suggest, would then refinance loans to such developers, up to the value of the carbon certificate.
This would amount to a calculated bet.
If the price of carbon in, say, ten years, actually corresponds to the announced social value, the project will be profitable and the developer will repay the loan.
But if the government reneges on its commitment, the developer will default, leaving the central bank with a claim on the government.
Failure to increase the price of carbon would result either in higher public debt or, in the case of monetization, inflation.
The idea is to force governments to have skin in the game, by balancing the risk of inaction on the carbon tax with the risk of insolvency or inflation.
There would be no procrastination.
Action against global warming would take place without delay.
But a decade or so later, governments – and societies more broadly – would need to choose between taxation, debt, and inflation.
Undertaking massive investment now and deciding only later how to finance it looks irresponsible – and so it is.
But not acting at all would be even more irresponsible.
Models Behaving Badly
LONDON – “Why did no one see the crisis coming?”
Queen Elizabeth II asked economists during a visit to the London School of Economics at the end of 2008.
Four years later, the repeated failure of economic forecasters to predict the depth and duration of the slump would have elicited a similar question from the queen: Why the overestimate of recovery?
Consider the facts.
Likewise, the IMF now predicts that the European economy will be 7.8% smaller in 2015 than it thought just two years ago.
Some forecasters are more pessimistic than others (the OBR has a particularly sunny disposition), but no one, it seems, has been pessimistic enough.
Economic forecasting is necessarily imprecise: too many things happen for forecasters to be able to foresee all of them.
So judgment calls and best guesses are an inevitable part of “scientific” economic forecasts.
But imprecision is one thing; the systematic overestimate of the economic recovery in Europe is quite another.
Indeed, the figures have been repeatedly revised, even over quite short periods of time, casting strong doubt on the validity of the economic models being used.
These models, and the institutions using them, rely on a built-in theory of the economy, which enables them to “assume” certain relationships.
It is among these assumptions that the source of the errors must lie.
Two key mistakes stand out.
The models used by all of the forecasting organizations dramatically underestimated the fiscal multiplier: the impact of changes in government spending on output.
Second, they overestimated the extent to which quantitative easing (QE) by the monetary authorities – that is, printing money – could counterbalance fiscal tightening.
Until recently, the OBR, broadly in line with the IMF, assumed a fiscal multiplier of 0.6: for every dollar cut from government spending, the economy would shrink by only 60 cents.
This assumes “Ricardian equivalence”: debt-financed public spending at least partly crowds out private spending through its impact on expectations and confidence.
If households and firms anticipate a tax increase in the future as a result of government borrowing today, they will reduce their consumption and investment accordingly.
On this view, if fiscal austerity relieves households of the burden of future tax increases, they will increase their spending.
This may be true when the economy is operating at full employment – when state and market are in competition for every last resource.
But when there is spare capacity in the economy, the resources “freed up” by public-sector retrenchment may simply be wasted.
Forecasting organizations are finally admitting that they underestimated the fiscal multiplier.
The OBR, reviewing its recent mistakes, accepted that “the average [fiscal] multiplier over the two years would have needed to be 1.3 – more than double our estimate – to fully explain the weak level of GDP in 2011-12.”
The IMF has conceded that “multipliers have actually been in the 0.9 and 1.7 range since the Great Recession.”
The effect of underestimating the fiscal multiplier has been systematic misjudgment of the damage that “fiscal consolidation” does to the economy.
This leads us to the second mistake.
Forecasters assumed that monetary expansion would provide an effective antidote to fiscal contraction.
The Bank of England hoped that by printing £375 billion of new money, ($600 billion), it would stimulate total spending to the tune of £50 billion, or 3% of GDP.
But the evidence emerging from successive rounds of QE in the UK and the US suggests that while it did lower bond yields, the extra money was largely retained within the banking system, and never reached the real economy.
This implies that the problem has mainly been a lack of demand for credit – reluctance on the part of businesses and households to borrow on almost any terms in a flat market.
These two mistakes compounded each other: If the negative impact of austerity on economic growth is greater than was originally assumed, and the positive impact of quantitative easing is weaker, then the policy mix favored by practically all European governments has been hugely wrong.
There is much greater scope for fiscal stimulus to boost growth, and much smaller scope for monetary stimulus.
This is all quite technical, but it matters a great deal for the welfare of populations.
All of these models assume outcomes on the basis of existing policies.
Their consistent over-optimism about these policies’ impact on economic growth validates pursuing them, and enables governments to claim that their remedies are “working,” when they clearly are not.
This is a cruel deception.
Before they can do any good, the forecasters must go back to the drawing board, and ask themselves whether the theories of the economy underpinning their models are the right ones.
Hollande in Mali
PARIS – While hundreds of thousands demonstrated in Paris against the right of homosexual couples to marry and adopt children, French troops were arriving in Mali to stop a coalition of Islamist and rebel forces from taking control of its capital, Bamako, and creating in the Sahel a sanctuary for terrorists.
These are trying times for French President François Hollande.
Besieged economically at home, where his popularity is at its lowest since his election last year, can he regain credibility, if not support, as supreme commander of French forces?
Once upon a time, “I intervene, therefore I am” might as well have been a French motto, particularly in Africa.
But, while French national identity is intimately bound up with France’s international standing – how it is perceived in the world – enthusiasm for intervention has receded.
The benefits have become more dubious, while the costs and risks have grown increasingly evident.
If France has again become a regional gendarme by default, it is largely for three reasons.
American enthusiasm for intervention in Africa has greatly diminished since the operation in Somalia in 1992-1993 – and more globally following the long wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.
European interest in military intervention in Africa is as low as ever.
And, as for the region’s governments, it would be an understatement to say that they are not yet ready militarily to take their fate into their own hands.
While France is not alone – manifestations of support have come from its Western and African partners, as well as from the Middle East – it will bear the primary responsibility and the risks.
For Islamic fundamentalists, France is now the “Great Satan.”
Indeed, the conflict in Mali is taking place geographically in Africa, but in many ways its causes and ramifications lie in the Middle East.
When France intervened in an African country in the past, there was no risk of terrorist attacks on its territory or on its citizens elsewhere in the world.
That is no longer the case.
It is too early to say what will happen in Mali or the Sahel – or, for that matter, in France itself.
For the moment, the French are standing, overwhelmingly, behind Hollande.
They would have criticized him had he remained passive while Bamako fell into the hands of terrorists.
Yet this support may be fragile, and could collapse if something goes wrong on the ground – or, worse, in France.
Before the intervention, Mali was not a French priority.
Rising unemployment at home seemed to be a more urgent task than did addressing instability in Africa.
While the French public agrees that Mali cannot be allowed to become a haven for terrorists, the way Afghanistan did in the late 1990’s, attitudes toward intervention have evolved in recent decades.
In the early 1980’s, after a particularly bloody terrorist attack on French and American forces in Lebanon, France’s tolerance for military casualties seemed much higher than that of the United States.
But this has changed.
The French now find themselves on the front line at a time when they have much less appetite for it.
Moreover, budget restrictions have severely constrained French military capabilities.
French and British military intervention was successful in Libya in 2011 at least in part as a result of US military procurement.
Of course, from a French perspective, the US role is somewhat ironic.
In the years after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, the Americans always had to be on the front line – battling the enemy abroad to avoid having to battle him at home, in the parlance of the time – while the European allies were perceived as the cleaning staff.
But imperial fatigue after Iraq and Afghanistan has left its imprint.
Americans are starting to enjoy – probably too much for their allies – what President Barack Obama, describing the US role in Libya, called “leading from behind.”
For Hollande, war in Mali is both an opportunity and a risk.
If Nicolas Sarkozy, whom he defeated, was widely regarded as “too” presidential, Hollande has given the impression of not being presidential “enough.”
His fall from public grace – too statist and fiscally intrusive for the right, but too moderate and social democratic for the true left – was more rapid than that of any president of the Fifth Republic.
Of course, with unemployment rising every month, it is difficult to remain popular for long.
As the supreme commander of an army at war, Hollande can now try to reinvent himself.
But, successive presidents since Jacques Chirac have failed to reconcile the French with politics.
France’s citizens have tended to expect too much from their state, and now they may be expecting too little from politics and politicians at a time when deep divisions on fundamental economic and social issues run not only between the traditional right and left, but also within both camps.
Will foreign intervention reunite the French?
Will war in Africa be the defining moment of Hollande’s presidency?
Will he be remembered as the French Harry Truman – a discreet, uncharismatic man who, when faced with urgent and dramatic circumstances, ended up doing the right things for lack of a better alternative?
This is a portentous moment both for Mali and for security in the Sahel and Europe.
It is no less significant for Hollande and France.
France Alone?
PARIS – In less than two years, France has carried out three decisive foreign military interventions.
In March 2011, its airstrikes in Libya (alongside those of Great Britain) thwarted Colonel Muammar el-Qaddafi’s troops as they prepared to retake the city of Benghazi.
A month later, French forces in Côte d’Ivoire arrested President Laurent Gbagbo, who had refused to recognize his rival’s election victory, putting the country at risk of civil war.
Now France has intervened in Mali.
The latest intervention was initially planned as part of a European mission to support African forces, but France abruptly decided to act unilaterally to blunt the advance of Islamists who threatened to overrun Mopti, the last barrier before reaching the capital, Bamako.
Beyond that objective, France seeks to protect its many nationals in the region; maintain stability in the Sahel, where states are very weak; and prevent Mali’s transformation into a base of Islamist terrorism directed at Europe.
A lot is at stake – all the more so because French intervention is likely to be extensive.
While the Islamists have been temporarily defeated, they are well armed and receive supplies from Libya via Algeria, which has suppressed Islamists at home but seems to turn a blind eye to their transit through its territory.
Moreover, the capabilities of the Malian army and those of other West African countries that are supposed to join the operation are too weak to turn the tide.
The United States tried to train the Malian army, but failed miserably.
So, with the security of Europe as a whole at stake, why is France the only country involved?
One explanation is to view the intervention as a neo-colonial bid to protect a French preserve.
This is a profound error.
France has no interest in protecting a Malian regime that it knows to be corrupt and incompetent; indeed, France recently refused to support a request from President François Bozizé’s regime in the neighboring Central African Republic for aid in dealing with rebels.
France’s motivations are broader.
In particular, France has always considered Sub-Saharan Africa and the Arab world to be natural spheres of political and strategic influence that are necessary to maintaining its position as a global power.
The second explanation is more credible: France, aside from Great Britain, is Europe’s only true military power.
It believes that operational military capability is a condition of power – a view that is not shared by the overwhelming majority of European states, which continue to display a collective aversion to war.
To be sure, Europe has the means for joint action.
In 2003, following the start of the Iraq war, Europe embraced a strategy prepared by Javier Solana, then the European Union’s High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy.
But, while a large number of Europeans naively believed that this was the prelude to a joint European strategy, the proposal was drafted in terms that were so vague as to allow any outcome – or none.
The EU’s Lisbon Treaty mentions “permanent structured cooperation” in security and defense policy, and an entire institutional apparatus of political and military committees exists to anticipate, prepare for, and implement military operations at the European level.
But this mechanism lacks the common political will needed to activate it; the less it is used, the less usable it will become.
During the Libyan crisis, Solana’s successor, Catherine Ashton, deliberately sought to limit the EU’s role to that of a super-NGO focused on humanitarian aid and economic development.
Recently, during the vote on Palestinian representation at the United Nations, the EU called for its members to abstain – an odd way to affirm Europe’s commitment to global leadership.
For Great Britain, Europe-wide defense is a nonstarter.
Britain has deviated from this principle only once, when it agreed to participate in the Atalanta anti-piracy operation off the Horn of Africa – probably because it was placed in command.
As a result, those who want a common European defense capability lack the means to create it, while those who have the means to create it do not want it (with the possible exception of France).
Britain’s bilateral cooperation with France – highlighted during the Libyan crisis – is sometimes very strong.
But, despite the two countries’ 2010 treaty on defense and security cooperation, the British have decided, for budgetary reasons, to acquire aircraft that will not be compatible with French aircraft carriers.
Even Spain and Italy, the two countries most affected by developments in the Mediterranean and the Sahel, have reduced their military expenditures significantly.
Unlike Germany, both participated in the Libyan intervention, but with highly limiting rules of engagement for their forces.
For example, Italian naval forces were instructed to avoid the waters off the coast of Tripoli, and Spanish tanker aircraft were forbidden to refuel fighter jets.
Europe as a whole currently devotes only 1.6% of its GDP to defense, compared to 4.8% for the US.
It is the only world region where military expenditures are decreasing.
Its deployed forces are extremely small, accounting for 4% of all military personnel worldwide, versus 14% for the US.
Industrial cooperation, which could constitute an economic and military asset, is also weakening, as demonstrated by Germany’s successful opposition to the proposed EADS/BAE merger, which was officially canceled in October.
Germany had seemed to embark on a more robust policy since its participation in military operations in Afghanistan.
Now, however, it recoils at any prospect of military intervention, even as it remains the world’s third-largest arms exporter.
Europe is reluctant to develop a substantial military force, because the European project was created in opposition to the idea of power.
Yet this stance has become untenable.
Europe faces real threats, which France alone cannot contain.
Moreover, the international system is increasingly coalescing around national powers that consider military force to be an essential prerequisite of influence.
Europe does not face a choice between soft and hard power.
It must combine both if it is to survive.
The French Disconnection
PARIS – Dire conditions can permit what was once unthinkable to push its way into public debate.
In France, the idea that now dares to speak its name is that the country will sink into an ever-deeper economic malaise unless it regains its monetary sovereignty.
Two striking statements on economic policy by France’s leaders in the first weeks of this year have highlighted the force of this logic.
First, President François Hollande, worried about the euro’s appreciation against other major world currencies, called for an exchange-rate target.
Then, Pierre Moscovici, the finance minister, said that Europe might grant France a delay in meeting the 3%-of-GDP budget-deficit target mandated from this year onward under the eurozone’s newly ratified fiscal compact.
These positions imply a desire to exercise sovereign power over the Economic and Monetary Union’s rules and decisions.
Back in 1989-1991, exactly the same motive underlay President François Mitterrand’s imposition of the euro on Germany – that is, to harness the Bundesbank’s monetary power to a framework in which France could be confident of wielding decisive influence.
Since the single currency was France’s condition for accepting German reunification, Germany played along.
Two decades later, Germany may be in a different mood.
The sovereign-debt-and-banking crisis that has roiled the monetary union since 2010 has steadily exposed the realities at play here, as irrevocably fixed exchange rates lock in and deepen differences in eurozone members’ competitiveness.
In France’s case, the loss of competitiveness and resulting sharp decline in export performance has been aggravated by relying on crushing taxation of labor to finance generous welfare programs and top-drawer public services (a practice exacerbated by stifling labor-market regulation).
In a monetary union, there are only two ways to close a competitiveness gap between countries: transfers from the more competitive to the less competitive, or internal devaluation, which means real wage cuts.
Not surprisingly, the preference has been for transfers, which, until the 2008 financial crash, took the form of cross-border private-sector lending to governments and banks.
Following the credit-bubble burst in 2008, fiscal transfers replaced these private financial flows, causing budget deficits to balloon.
And now, with the German government, as chief creditor, calling the shots on cross-border transfers to weaker eurozone countries, all such transfers are conditional on austerity (that is, internal devaluation).
Bailouts from the European Stability Mechanism represent the clearest example of this, with the fiscal compact now committing signatories to tight deficit targets and structural adjustment.
And more austerity is a vital, if less well remarked on, condition of the European Central Bank’s declared willingness to buy unlimited quantities of troubled countries’ short-term government debt.
So far, the “bazooka” represented by the ECB’s “outright monetary transactions” program has had the desired effect – without having to be used.
Eurozone financial markets have stabilized, and the euro has appreciated against the dollar and the yen.
But, as Hollande’s recent declarations indicate, currency appreciation is the last thing that an uncompetitive country like France needs.
Although the French government, unlike its Spanish and Italian counterparts, has not yet had any difficulty financing itself at low interest rates, currency appreciation as the economy slides into recession is like fuel poured onto an unlit bonfire.
Unless growth is restored, France’s already large public debt will expand unsustainably, heightening the risk that investors will shun French government bonds.
From this predicament stems the fashionable idea that the bond market would actually welcome less fiscal austerity, because this would boost economic growth, in turn making the level of public debt appear more sustainable in the long run.
It is no surprise that Moscovici is beginning to push for a “collective European decision” to relax the fiscal treaty’s terms, given that French compliance would require massive new spending cuts.
Will Germany agree to such a relaxation – or, for that matter, to Hollande’s implicit demand that the ECB follow Japan’s example and loosen monetary policy to drive the exchange rate back down?
Unlike Japan (and, of course, the United States), France, as a member of a monetary union, cannot pursue domestic goals unilaterally.
To avoid disaster, France has only two options: somehow force a change in German policy or go it alone.
There are two reasons why, until now, the second option – leaving the monetary union – has been unthinkable.
The first has to do with economic and financial risks.
Ditching the euro might trigger a banking crisis, capital flight, inflation, and perhaps even sovereign default.
On the other hand, higher competitiveness and erosion of the real value of debt would quickly outweigh these costs by restoring confidence in the French economy’s prospects.
This strategy’s success, starting with the speed of restored access to external financing, would depend on the credibility of government policies – monetary, fiscal, and, above all, the radical and indispensable supply-side reforms for which there would now be breathing space.
The specter of continuing economic stagnation and ever-rising unemployment (with the young and older workers being the worst hit) should remove the second, geopolitical obstacle to a French exit from the eurozone.
For French elites since World War II, alignment with Germany has been central to projecting French power and influence.
Such ambitions must now be sacrificed for the sake of the French public’s well-being.
France will not regain its economic strength without setting aside the euro.
Even during that adjustment, there is no reason why relations with European partners should suffer in any fundamental sense.
On the contrary, the sustainable prosperity that would result from that adjustment would create a much healthier long-term foundation for continuing the quest for an “ever closer union” in Europe.
Why France Will Sink Europe’s Constitution
If public opinion polls are to be believed, on May 29 the French will reject the European Union’s draft constitutional treaty.
Because all EU member countries must ratify the constitution, a French “Non” will, in effect, kill it.
Amazing as this turn of events seems, it has been long in the making.
It is amazing because France is not just a founding member of the European Community, but also has been the main driving force behind all major steps toward “ever closer union.”
For three decades, this worked.
France and Germany had forged an alliance that called the shots in Europe.
Not interested in geopolitical power – a legacy of its Nazi past – Germany was content to back France’s ambitions as long as the Common Market allowed it to be Europe’s economic powerhouse.
But that alliance is unraveling as Germany’s own status declines, owing to its mediocre economic performance and the loss of its prestigious Deutschemark.
Moreover, Germany is increasingly interested in exercising political influence on its own; as a result, it is no longer happy with what it gets from the alliance with France.
At the same time, successive EU enlargements over the decades have brought in other powerful contenders, chiefly Spain and the UK, as well as smaller countries who are unwilling to bow before French-German leadership.
In short, France has lost control of Europe.
This is not new, but it has only recently started to sink in, and it hurts.
France is also economically wounded.
Here is a country that has long cherished its “exception” from the normal rules of market economics, a foggy view that rejects both central planning and free markets and claims to offer a well-balanced middle ground.
The French do not care that they have never been able to articulate their vision of a “third way,” for they remain deeply convinced that the state has a key role to play in steering markets in order to defend “higher” values from the single-minded pursuit of materialism.
This view, propagated since World War II by a quasi-Marxist intelligentsia, is so ingrained that the French do not even bother to understand how markets operate.
They look upon economics as an ideological battleground, where all views can be entertained without being confronted with logic, much less with facts.
Yet facts have been hitting hard.
Growth has been lackluster for a quarter of a century and unemployment remains stubbornly high.
Urban crime, once described as the wages of unfettered individualism, now resembles what is found in the United States, the French model’s bête noire.
What has this to do with Europe?
The EU, by design, increases economic competition, but France is ill equipped.
One after the other, most European countries have reformed their economies, shedding the cozy arrangements that used to protect every interest group from the pressure of competition.
Even Germany, after even worse performance than France, has now taken decisive steps.
Unable to reform their labor markets because of the fear of street protests, French governments of all political stripes seek to protect their ailing firms, only to face limits imposed by the rules of the Common Market.
The bloated French public sector, which many see as the employer of last resort, cannot afford its expensive personnel. 
While many private French firms are thriving, they do so by economizing on manpower and, increasingly, by outsourcing production, often to new EU member countries where labor costs are considerably lower.
Public education is in shambles and France’s higher education system now faces competition from other European countries. 
Humbled by economic malaise and loss of influence, the French are scared.
They fear the future, because the future means either market-oriented reforms or further economic and political downgrading, both of which are seen as unacceptable, if only because they clash with French self-esteem.
The European Constitution has little to do with any of these challenges, but a majority of French people has started questioning the strategy that has long masked France’s diminishing status.
They are alarmed by what they see as the domination of Anglo-Saxon economic principles – the last nail in the coffin of France’s mythical “exception.”
So the EU is now seen as the Trojan horse that threatens the myriad of state-sanctioned benefits and handouts that every citizen enjoys.
Of course, most French people would ultimately benefit from doing away with this inefficient web of big and small privileges, but most voters, depressed by poor economic prospects and unnerved by high unemployment, are simply unwilling to take the risk.
They do not understand the roots of their economic troubles and are nostalgic for better times.
They mistakenly see the European Constitution as one more challenge, at a time when they want to be nursed and protected.
Scared people rarely make wise choices. 
Bismarck versus Bismarck
ATHENS – The centrality of Germany to Europe and, more widely, to world affairs has been amply, and often bloodily, demonstrated over many centuries.
Indeed, Germany’s strategic position at the heart of Europe, as well as its huge economic and military potential, made it first a prize to be sought, and then, following Otto von Bismarck’s completion of German unification in 1871, a nation-state to be feared.
Bismarck’s legacy was a Germany that dominated European politics until the end of World War II.
That legacy is now reasserting itself.
After the interlude of the Cold War, during which Germany served as the center of discord between East and West, reunification permitted the reassertion of German power within the context of the European Union and, most notably, the eurozone.
Today, however, the question is whether Germany is ready and willing to provide leadership in the conduct of the EU’s affairs – and, if so, to what end.
Europe is currently facing its most challenging crisis of the postwar period.
After six quarters of recession, the slump is spreading to the eurozone’s core countries.
Unemployment, above 12% on average, is at a record high.
In Spain and Greece, more than one-quarter of the labor force is jobless, while the unemployment rate hovers around 60% among young people.
Despite harsh austerity, large fiscal deficits persist, and banks remain undercapitalized and unable to support a sustained economic recovery.
Social malaise is deepening as expectations – and actual prospects – for economic improvement are likely to remain poor for the foreseeable future.
Faith in the European project is declining, and, given the eurozone’s lack of cohesion, stagnation and recession may lead to popular rejection of the EU, accompanied by serious challenges to democracy, including the rise of neo-fascist parties.
And yet, despite the risks, European leaders remain remarkably inactive, apparently reassured by European Central Bank President Mario Draghi’s promise to do “whatever it takes” to protect the monetary union from collapse.
But prolonged inaction, induced by relative calm in financial markets, will perpetuate stagnation and eventually lead to a breakup of one sort or another.
Either gradual attrition, with weaker countries defaulting, will lead to a more restricted German-led club of “virtuous” countries, or Germany itself will choose to pursue a policy of narrow fiscal advantage by seceding from the eurozone.
The political and economic weakness of France and Italy, together with Britain’s gradual withdrawal from EU affairs, highlight Germany’s key role in rescuing the eurozone from the current crisis.
But true leadership requires a sense of direction and a willingness to pay up, and, here, Germany has lately been found wanting.
Despite German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s evident political skills and high domestic standing, her government lacks a concrete design for “ever closer Union” in Europe.
As a result, it, too, is in a weak position to mobilize the resources and competences required to restore Europe.
Instead, Merkel’s Germany has been doing as little as possible, as late as possible, to prevent the euro’s collapse.
This policy cannot endure for long.
Either stagnation will lead to the eurozone’s breakup, or circumstances will force a policy change.
So, in which areas must Germany lead?
First, European public debt should be partly and gradually mutualized.
National banking systems should be unified, in order to separate private losses from sovereign debt, with centralized supervision and resolution authorities, as well as a deposit-insurance scheme, forming the core of a European banking union.
Strong central institutions, responsible to a directly elected parliament, are needed to coordinate fiscal and economic policies.
In the shorter term, the single market should be extended to services, and free-trade arrangements should be promoted either multilaterally or bilaterally with major trading partners such as the United States.
Austerity should be eased, particularly in the fiscally stronger core economies, and substantial resources should be devoted to boosting youth employment and investment in small and medium-size firms in the over-indebted countries.
Germany’s reluctance to lead on these issues partly reflects historical inhibitions, which are always difficult to overcome.
The persistence of pre-Keynesian orthodoxy in German economic thought, with its moral abhorrence of the “sin of borrowing” (and thus its neglect of aggregate demand), does not help, either.
The federalist structure of Germany’s political system, moreover, favors parochial approaches over grander designs.
Nonetheless, Germany must accept that the alternative to a democratically unified currency union is German economic hegemony.
In the longer run, that outcome would destroy the common European project, in turn undermining Germany’s own economic prosperity and strategic security – a Bismarckian scenario from which Bismarck would have recoiled in horror.
Why Germany Should Lead or Leave
NEW YORK – Europe has been in a financial crisis since 2007.
When the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers endangered the credit of financial institutions, private credit was replaced by the credit of the state, revealing an unrecognized flaw in the euro.
By transferring their right to print money to the European Central Bank (ECB), member countries exposed themselves to the risk of default, like Third World countries heavily indebted in a foreign currency.
Commercial banks loaded with weaker countries’ government bonds became potentially insolvent.
There is a parallel between the ongoing euro crisis and the international banking crisis of 1982.
Back then, the International Monetary Fund saved the global banking system by lending just enough money to heavily indebted countries; default was avoided, but at the cost of a lasting depression.
Latin America suffered a lost decade.
Germany is playing the same role today as the IMF did then.
The setting differs, but the effect is the same.
Creditors are shifting the entire burden of adjustment on to the debtor countries and avoiding their own responsibility.
The euro crisis is a complex mixture of banking and sovereign-debt problems, as well as divergences in economic performance that have given rise to balance-of-payments imbalances within the eurozone.
The authorities did not understand the complexity of the crisis, let alone see a solution.
So they tried to buy time.
Usually, that works.
Financial panics subside, and the authorities realize a profit on their intervention.
But not this time, because the financial problems were combined with a process of political disintegration.
When the European Union was created, it was the embodiment of an open society – a voluntary association of equal states that surrendered part of their sovereignty for the common good.
The euro crisis is now turning the EU into something fundamentally different, dividing member countries into two classes – creditors and debtors – with the creditors in charge.
As the strongest creditor country, Germany has emerged as the hegemon.
Debtor countries pay substantial risk premiums for financing their government debt.
This is reflected in their cost of financing in general.
To make matters worse, the Bundesbank remains committed to an outmoded monetary doctrine rooted in Germany’s traumatic experience with inflation.
As a result, it recognizes only inflation as a threat to stability, and ignores deflation, which is the real threat today.
Moreover, Germany’s insistence on austerity for debtor countries can easily become counterproductive by increasing the debt ratio as GDP falls.
There is a real danger that a two-tier Europe will become permanent.
Both human and financial resources will be attracted to the center, leaving the periphery permanently depressed. But the periphery is seething with discontent.
Europe’s tragedy is not the result of an evil plot, but stems, rather, from a lack of coherent policies.
As in ancient Greek tragedies, misconceptions and a sheer lack of understanding have had unintended but fateful consequences.
Germany, as the largest creditor country, is in charge, but refuses to take on additional liabilities; as a result, every opportunity to resolve the crisis has been missed.
The crisis spread from Greece to other deficit countries, eventually calling into question the euro’s very survival.
Since a breakup of the euro would cause immense damage, Germany always does the minimum necessary to hold it together.
Most recently, German Chancellor Angela Merkel has backed ECB President Mario Draghi, leaving Bundesbank President Jens Weidmann isolated.
This will enable the ECB to put a lid on the borrowing costs of countries that submit to an austerity program under the supervision of the Troika (the IMF, the ECB, and the European Commission).
That will save the euro, but it is also a step toward the permanent division of Europe into debtors and creditors.
The debtors are bound to reject a two-tier Europe sooner or later.
If the euro breaks up in disarray, the common market and the EU will be destroyed, leaving Europe worse off than it was when the effort to unite it began, owing to a legacy of mutual mistrust and hostility.
The later the breakup, the worse the ultimate outcome.
So it is time to consider alternatives that until recently would have been inconceivable.
In my judgment, the best course of action is to persuade Germany to choose between either leading the creation of a political union with genuine burden-sharing, or leaving the euro.
Since all of the accumulated debt is denominated in euros, it makes all the difference who remains in charge of the monetary union.If Germany left, the euro would depreciate.
Debtor countries would regain their competitiveness; their debt would diminish in real terms; and, with the ECB under their control, the threat of default would disappear and their borrowing costs would fall to levels comparable to that in the United Kingdom.
The creditor countries, by contrast, would incur losses on their claims and investments denominated in euros and encounter stiffer competition at home from other eurozone members.
The extent of creditor countries’ losses would depend on the extent of the depreciation, giving them an interest in keeping the depreciation within bounds.
After initial dislocations, the eventual outcome would fulfill John Maynard Keynes’ dream of an international currency system in which both creditors and debtors share responsibility for maintaining stability.
And Europe would avert the looming depression.
The same result could be achieved, with less cost to Germany, if Germany chose to behave as a benevolent hegemon.
That would mean implementing the proposed European banking union; establishing a more or less level playing field between debtor and creditor countries by establishing a Debt Reduction Fund, and eventually converting all debt into Eurobonds; and aiming at nominal GDP growth of up to 5%, so that Europe could grow its way out of excessive indebtedness.
Whether Germany decides to lead or leave, either alternative would be better than creating an unsustainable two-tier Europe.
Why Greece Declined a Euro Holiday
BRUSSELS – For the entire first half of this year, since the far-left, anti-austerity Syriza party came to power in January, the Greek saga virtually monopolized the attention of European policymakers.
Even as their country’s economy crashed, Greece’s new government remained adamant in demanding debt relief without austerity – that is, until mid-July, when they suddenly agreed to the creditors’ terms.
Indeed, as of July 13, Greece’s staunchly anti-austerity government has been obliged to impose even tougher austerity and pursue painful structural reforms, under its creditors’ close supervision.
Why did the Greek government concede to terms that not only controverted its own promises, but also closely resembled those that voters had overwhelmingly rejected in a popular referendum barely a week earlier?
Many believe that Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras was responding to an ultimatum from his European partners: Accept our demands or leave the euro.
The question is why a Greek exit from the euro (“Grexit”) amounted to such a potent threat.
In fact, from an economic perspective, Grexit no longer represents the potential catastrophe that it once did.
After all, the main short-term cost – financial-system disruption – has already materialized in Greece: banks and the stock market have been shut down, and capital controls have been imposed.
While those actions were needed to stem large-scale capital flight and prevent the banking system’s collapse, they also caused the Greek economy to contract sharply.
In this context, Greek negotiators might have considered another proposal, circulated informally by the German finance ministry, recommending that Greece receive immediate debt forgiveness, in exchange for leaving the euro temporarily.
If Greece remained in the euro, no relief would be granted – a proviso consistent with the German position that debt restructuring for eurozone countries would be illegal.
While the legal argument is probably spurious, an outright debt reduction for a eurozone country remains politically impossible.
The German proposal, spearheaded by Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble, highlights the fundamental change that has occurred in Greece’s relationship with its European partners since its last bailout package three years ago.
In 2012, Greece was offered hundreds of billions of euros in financial support, and its creditors, including Greek commercial banks, were pushed to accept substantial “voluntary” haircuts.
Tellingly, when George Papandreou, Greece’s prime minister at the time, proposed a referendum on the existing adjustment program and his country’s continued eurozone membership in 2011, he was warned off in no uncertain terms by France’s then-President Nicolas Sarkozy and German Chancellor Angela Merkel.
Though Papandreou would have campaigned for the adjustment program and the euro, a referendum was a risk that his European partners were unwilling to take.
Tsipras’s government, by contrast, was able to hold its referendum, and even campaign against the creditors’ proposed adjustment program (which, it should be noted, was no longer on the table).
Even the resounding “no” delivered by Greek voters could not strengthen the government’s negotiating position, for a simple reason: Grexit is no longer considered a threat to the euro’s stability.
That is why German officials – especially Schäuble – have been encouraging Greece to leave.
One can only speculate about Schäuble’s motivation in pushing for Grexit.
He seems to believe that a more integrated eurozone, though certainly desirable, is not feasible with a country that cannot be trusted to abide by the terms to which its government has agreed.
Whatever Schäuble’s reasons, his proposal could have represented a way out for Greece, whose economy had been squeezed dry by austerity and whose banking system was already closed.
Immediate debt reduction and the recovery of economic sovereignty – even at the expense of exiting the euro, at least temporarily – would seem to have offered significant long-term benefits.
In a sense, it amounted to a golden opportunity, with Germany offering to pay for something that many believe Greece should be doing anyway.
Nonetheless, the Greek government rejected an exit, and instead accepted the creditors’ tough terms.
This suggests that, during the negotiations, Greece’s leaders were driven by more than economics.
Perhaps, contrary to popular belief, countries’ political attachment to Europe via the euro remains very strong, even where, as in Greece, people have endured unprecedented hardship since joining the monetary union.
The monetary union’s rationale, as many have noted, was always more political than economic.
For precisely that reason, it may well be too early to write off the single currency.
Why India is Riskier than China
NEW HAVEN – Today, fears are growing that China and India are about to be the next victims of the ongoing global economic carnage.
This would have enormous consequences.
Asia’s developing and newly industrialized economies grew at an 8.5% average annual rate over 2010-11 – nearly triple the 3% growth elsewhere in the world.
If China and India are next to fall, Asia would be at risk, and it would be hard to avoid a global recession.
In one important sense, these concerns are understandable: both economies depend heavily on the broader global climate.
China is sensitive to downside risks to external demand – more relevant than ever since crisis-torn Europe and the United States collectively accounted for 38% of total exports in 2010.
But India, with its large current-account deficit and external funding needs, is more exposed to tough conditions in global financial markets.
Yet fears of hard landings for both economies are overblown, especially regarding China.
Yes, China is paying a price for aggressive economic stimulus undertaken in the depths of the subprime crisis.
The banking system funded the bulk of the additional spending, and thus is exposed to any deterioration in credit quality that may have arisen from such efforts.
There are also concerns about frothy property markets and mounting inflation.
While none of these problems should be minimized, they are unlikely to trigger a hard landing.
Long fixated on stability, Chinese policymakers have been quick to take preemptive action.
That is particularly evident in Chinese officials’ successful campaign against inflation.
Relatively small fiscal deficits – only around 2% of GDP in 2010 – leave China with an added dimension of policy flexibility should circumstances dictate.
Nor has China been passive with respect to mounting speculative excesses in residential property.
In April 2010, it implemented tough new regulations, raising down-payments from 20% to 30% for a first home, to 50% for a second residence, and to 100% for purchases of three or more units.
This strategy appears to be working.
In November, house prices declined in 49 of the 70 cities that China monitors monthly.
Moreover, it is a serious exaggeration to claim, as many do today, that the Chinese economy is one massive real-estate bubble.
Yes, total fixed investment is approaching an unprecedented 50% of GDP, but residential and nonresidential real estate, combined, accounts for only 15-20% of that – no more than 10% of the overall economy.
In terms of floor space, residential construction accounts for half of China’s real-estate investment.
Identifying the share of residential real estate that goes to private developers in the dozen or so first-tier cities (which account for most of the Chinese property market’s fizz) suggests that less than 1% of GDP would be at risk in the event of a housing-market collapse – not exactly a recipe for a hard landing.
As for Chinese banks, the main problem appears to be exposure to ballooning local-government debt, which, according to the government, totaled $1.7 trillion (roughly 30% of GDP) at the end of 2010.
Approximately half of this debt was on their books prior to the crisis.
Some of the new debt that resulted from the stimulus could well end up being impaired, but ongoing urbanization – around 15-20 million people per year move to cities – provides enormous support on the demand side for investment in infrastructure development and residential and commercial construction.
That tempers the risks to credit quality and, along with relatively low loan-to-deposit ratios of around 65%, should cushion the Chinese banking system.
India is more problematic.
As the only economy in Asia with a current-account deficit, its external funding problems can hardly be taken lightly.
Like China, India’s economic-growth momentum is ebbing.
But unlike China, the downshift is more pronounced – GDP growth fell through the 7% threshold in the third calendar-year quarter of 2011, and annual industrial output actually fell by 5.1% in October.
But the real problem is that, in contrast to China, Indian authorities have far less policy leeway.
For starters, the rupee is in near free-fall.
That means that the Reserve Bank of India – which has hiked its benchmark policy rate 13 times since the start of 2010 to deal with a still-serious inflation problem – can ill afford to ease monetary policy.
Moreover, an outsize consolidated government budget deficit of around 9% of GDP limits India’s fiscal-policy discretion.
While China is in better shape than India, neither economy is likely to implode on its own.
It would take another shock to trigger a hard landing in Asia.&#160;&#160;
One obvious possibility today would be a disruptive breakup of the European Monetary Union.
In that case, both China and India, like most of the world’s economies, could find themselves in serious difficulty – with an outright contraction of Chinese exports, as in late 2008 and early 2009, and heightened external funding pressures for India.
While I remain a euro-skeptic, I believe that the political will to advance European integration will prevail.
Consequently, I attach a low probability to the currency union’s disintegration.
Barring such a worst-case outcome for Europe, the odds of a hard landing in either India or China should remain low.
Seduced by the political economy of false prosperity, the West has squandered its might.
Driven by strategy and stability, Asia has built on its newfound strength.
But now it must reinvent itself.
Japanese-like stagnation in the developed world is challenging externally dependent Asia to shift its focus to internal demand.
Downside pressures currently squeezing China and India underscore that challenge.
Asia’s defining moment could be hand.
Why is China Booming?
Providence, R.I.  – China is now celebrating the 30th anniversary of the period officially known as “reform and opening.”
Labeling time in this way echoes China’s imperial history.
During moments of political transition – a military victory, for example – the emperor might designate a special “era name” to help celebrate the good news.
Or the court might test out a new era name after a political debacle, in an effort to wipe the slate clean.
The last emperor of the Tang Dynasty proclaimed seven era names in fourteen years, as he sought in vain to “re-brand” his reign and avoid his regime’s demise.
Deng Xiaoping began to champion “reform and opening” in 1978.
“Reform” suggested a loosening of central controls on economic life, undertaken in a spirit of pragmatism and gradualism, as an antidote to Mao Zedong’s ideology of “revolution.”
Similarly, “opening” heralded the PRC’s integration into the world community – especially the capitalist West.
Deng’s principles still guide policy today.
One must go back to the Qing Dynasty (1644-1912) and its 60-year era of “heavenly flourishing” ( Qianlong ) in the eighteenth century to find a comparable period of coherent political and economic policy.
The era of “reform and opening” has outlived its “emperor” by more than a decade, and has been the common thread running through transfers of political authority from Deng to Jiang Zemin and Hu Jintao.
Even the largest popular challenge the Chinese Communist Party ever faced, the demonstrations of 1989, now looks like a blip that helped Deng consolidate support for his model of development.
If one factor undergirds China’s commitment to “reform and opening,” it is the extraordinary macroeconomic changes of the past 30 years.
In China, people call it fazhan , or “development,” but in much of rest of the world, it is more commonly described simply as the “China Boom,” or the “China Miracle.”
The boom began in the countryside in the late 1970’s and 1980’s, and was followed by today’s urban, industrial-led growth.
Indeed, there have been many smaller “booms” – in consumption, foreign direct investment, domestic stock markets, trade, travel, overseas study, military modernization, and international diplomacy.
There is also a boom in pollution and toxic waste, and booming interest in religion – from Buddhism to Pentecostal Christianity – and in Confucian philosophy.
Little in China today speaks of moderation.
A leading fashion industry executive argues that a key engine driving the economic boom has been the influx of women into the workforce, particularly in the manufacturing zones of the south.
Another compelling explanation comes from a venture capitalist who credits Chinese society with copious reserves of entrepreneurial energy that derives, he believes, from the fact that Chinese culture attaches very little shame to failing in a business enterprise.
High tolerance for failure keeps everybody striving to succeed.
Whatever the cause, the boom seems an unlikely capstone to a century of war, ferment, and revolution, and only adds to the sense of discontinuity that characterizes modern China.
Certainly, few observers looking in 1978 at the smoldering embers of the Cultural Revolution, or at the seeming ruination of the post-1989 years, thought China would emerge as the lightning rod of the world’s developmental hopes.
Paradoxically, the apparently discontinuous and contradictory nature of the “era of reform and opening” may actually help explain how China’s boom came about.
The tumult of the Maoist period instilled in a broad cross-section of people a profound appreciation for stability, and a yearning to be left alone.
Deng capitalized on this revolution-weariness by diminishing the role of politics and the state in people’s private lives and freeing them to release their pent-up energy to pursue their own goals.
Revolutionary communism may well have cleared the path for the boom in other ways as well, suggesting that the shift from socialist utopianism to capitalist pragmatism was less a U-turn than a sequential process of “creative destruction.”
After all, Mao’s Cultural Revolution against “feudal society” did raze much of the cultural landscape, denuding it not only of traditional values and institutions, but also of failed socialist efforts, leaving China ready for the seeds of capitalist development.
Mao’s revolution fueled countless rectification movements and campaigns that inverted the once-inviolate primacy of ruler over ruled, scholar over worker, husband over wife, father over son, and family over individual.
By the time of the reforms of the 1980’s and 1990’s, bonds tying individuals to culture, the state, the work unit, and household-registration systems, for example, had largely unraveled.
The path had been cleared for a vast new population of atomized entrepreneurs and laborers, freed from fealty to family and Party, to storm the marketplace with newly liberated individual energy.
Of course, the boom’s costs should not be discounted.
Environmental damage has been staggering, the gap between rich and poor has been growing, and urbanization – with all its attendant problems – has surged.
And, at least so far, the boom has not induced the systemic political changes for which many hoped.
But still, a key question remains unanswered: why did China’s boom happen?
This is one of the great questions of our time, relevant not only to China’s future, but to scores of other developing countries enthralled by China’s extraordinary, but still largely unexplained, success.
Why is China Lashing Out?
NEW YORK – It must be galling for the Chinese government to keep seeing Nobel Prizes go to the wrong Chinese.
The first wrong Chinese was Gao Xingjian, a critical playwright, artist, and novelist, who received the Nobel Prize for literature in 2000, while living in exile in Paris.
The latest is Liu Xiaobo, a literary critic and political writer, who was awarded this year’s Nobel Prize for Peace while serving a prison sentence for “subversion” of the Communist regime.
Since the Dalai Lama is not a Chinese citizen, I will leave out his Nobel Peace Prize, though to China’s rulers it was perhaps the most irritating of all.
Yet the Chinese government’s response to Liu’s Nobel Prize has been extraordinary.
Instead of a show of lofty disdain, or official silence, it made a colossal fuss, protesting fiercely about plots to undermine China, and putting dozens of prominent Chinese intellectuals, including Liu’s wife, Liu Xia, under house arrest.
As a result, the utterly powerless, hitherto quite obscure Liu Xiaobo, has become not only world famous, but much better known inside China, too.
Combine this with China’s bullying of Japan, by blocking the export of rare-earth metals vital for Japanese industry, over a few uninhabited islands between Taiwan and Okinawa, and its refusal to let the renminbi appreciate, and one must wonder why China is being so heavy-handed in its foreign relations.
These strong-arm tactics stand out even more against the deftness of Chinese diplomacy over the last few decades.
Japan, the old wartime enemy, has been outmaneuvered repeatedly, and a soft touch made South Koreans and Southeast Asians feel relatively comfortable with China’s increasing power.
But China’s recent thuggish behavior is changing Asian opinions.
As the warm welcome given to Hillary Clinton on her recent swing through Asia – even in communist Vietnam – appears to show, Southeast Asians are more than happy to hang on to Pax Americana for a bit longer, out of fear of China.
Other Asian countries might even be drawn closer to Japan, the only alternative to the US as a counterbalance to the Middle Kingdom.
This cannot be what China wants.