Fifth, persistent QE can lead to asset bubbles both where it is implemented and in countries where it spills over.
Such bubbles can occur in equity markets, housing markets (Hong Kong, Singapore), commodity markets, bond markets (with talk of a bubble increasing in the United States, Germany, the United Kingdom, and Japan), and credit markets (where spreads in some emerging markets, and on high-yield and high-grade corporate debt, are narrowing excessively).
Although QE may be justified by weak economic and growth fundamentals, keeping rates too low for too long can eventually feed such bubbles.
That is what happened in 2000-2006, when the US Federal Reserve aggressively cut the federal funds rate to 1% during the 2001 recession and subsequent weak recovery and then kept rates down, thus fueling credit/housing/subprime bubbles.
Sixth, QE can create moral-hazard problems by weakening governments’ incentive to pursue needed economic reforms.
It may also delay needed fiscal austerity if large deficits are monetized, and, by keeping rates too low, prevent the market from imposing discipline.
Seventh, exiting QE is tricky.
If exit occurs too slowly and too late, inflation and/or asset/credit bubbles could result.
Also, if exit occurs by selling the long-term assets purchased during QE, a sharp increase in interest rates might choke off recovery, resulting in large financial losses for holders of long-term bonds.
And, if the exit occurs via a rise in the interest rate on excess reserves (to sterilize the effect of a base-money overhang on credit growth), the ensuing losses for central banks’ balance sheets could be significant.
Eighth, an extended period of negative real interest rates implies a redistribution of income and wealth from creditors and savers toward debtors and borrowers.
Of all the forms of adjustment that can lead to deleveraging (growth, savings, orderly debt restructuring, or taxation of wealth), debt monetization (and eventually higher inflation) is the least democratic, and it seriously damages savers and creditors, including pensioners and pension funds.
Ninth, QE and other unconventional monetary policies can have serious unintended consequences.
Eventually, excessive inflation may erupt, or credit growth may slow, rather than accelerate, if banks – faced with very low net interest-rate margins – decide that risk relative to reward is insufficient.
Finally, there is a risk of losing sight of any road back to conventional monetary policies.
Indeed, some countries are ditching their inflation-targeting regime and moving into uncharted territory, where there may be no anchor for price expectations.
The US has moved from QE1 to QE2 and now to QE3, which is potentially unlimited and linked to an unemployment target.
Officials are now actively discussing the merit of negative policy rates.
And policymakers have moved to a risky credit-easing policy as QE’s effectiveness has waned.
In short, policies are becoming more unconventional, not less, with little clarity about short-term effects, unintended consequences, and long-term impacts.
To be sure, QE and other unconventional monetary policies do have important short-term benefits.
But if such policies remain in place for too long, their side effects could be severe – and the longer-term costs very high.
Asia’s Rebalancing Act
SEOUL – Rapid economic growth in China undoubtedly benefits the rest of Asia.
Indeed, strong Chinese demand has supported its trading partners’ export-led growth for much of the past three decades.
But now, faced with a slowdown in China and significant downside risks there, the rest of Asia must abandon over-reliance on export-oriented development strategies and strive to ensure stable and sustainable growth domestically and regionally.
China’s vulnerabilities and risks – stemming from property bubbles, shadow banking, and local-government debt – have triggered concerns about a crisis not only there, but also in neighboring Asian countries.
Some, indeed, now predict a Chinese banking or fiscal disaster; others predict long-term stagnation equivalent to Japan’s lost decades.
These “hard landing” scenarios are extreme.
But the road ahead is bumpy and uncertain.
No one can guarantee that Prime Minister Li Keqiang’s attempts to achieve deleveraging and structural reform will succeed.
Moreover, external shocks, policy mistakes, and political instability could disrupt even the best-laid plans.
In any case, China’s stellar growth record cannot be sustained.
Even if it manages a “soft landing,” annual output growth will slow to 5-6% in the coming decades.
Standard growth theory predicts “convergence” of per capita GDP: a fast-growing country will eventually encounter difficulty maintaining high rates of labor mobilization, capital accumulation, and technological progress.
In China, labor inputs have fallen as a result of declining fertility and an aging population.
Reduced rates of return will lower investment rates.
China may be able to rely on policy reforms to boost productivity growth; but, with relatively low innovative capacity, it will struggle to catch up with frontier technologies.
China’s inevitable growth slowdown, along with a large tail risk, threatens stable growth in Asian economies that have become increasingly interdependent.
Trade within Asia now accounts for more than half of the continent’s total trade turnover.
Moreover, direct investment and financial flows contribute further to economic interdependence.
The rise in intra-Asian trade reflects China’s central role in East Asia’s production networks.
From 2001 to 2011, China’s share of South Korean exports doubled, from 12% to 24%; its share of Japanese exports grew even faster, rising from 8% to 20%.
As a result, China has become South Korea’s single largest export market, and Japan’s second largest.
It is also the largest trading partner of all ten members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
Asian economies’ deepening trade and financial integration has left them increasingly vulnerable to growth shocks from China, with exporters of commodities and capital goods especially vulnerable.
In fact, a study by the Asian Development Bank shows that Chinese shocks have larger and more persistent effects on individual Asian economies’ output than do global shocks, as a 1% increase in China’s GDP raised GDP in emerging East Asia by about 0.6%.
As they prepare for the coming Chinese slowdown and seek to minimize the risk of regional destabilization, Asian economies must strengthen domestic demand and reduce excessive reliance on exports to China.
In other words, sustainable growth requires all of Asia’s China-dependent economies to rebalance their two main growth engines.
To enhance domestic demand, Asia, including China, must reallocate resources and structurally transform the economy.
Reinforcing social safety nets, broadening and deepening financial markets, and supporting small and medium-size enterprises would also strengthen domestic demand.
Likewise, service-sector liberalization will be essential to promoting productivity and creating jobs.
In short, implementation of fiscal, financial, and structural reforms can mitigate the spillover effects from China’s slowdown.
But a second reform front, aimed at enhancing regional coordination, must also be opened.
With economic shocks able to spread more quickly than ever before, owing to broadened trade and financial channels, all Asian countries must maintain a sound macroeconomic environment.
Perhaps most important, deeper regional integration calls for closer cooperation in macroeconomic and financial surveillance, as envisaged by the Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralization.
Asian countries must be able to conduct well-coordinated candid reviews of one another to reduce the likelihood of risks and detect emerging vulnerabilities.
China’s long-term growth potential – and that of the rest of developing Asia – is not pre-defined.
Maximizing it requires not only that individual countries address their weaknesses and rebalance their sources of growth, but also that they build and strengthen the regional institutions needed to manage economic integration.
The Temptation of China’s Capital Account
BEIJING – Despite fluctuations, China’s overall economic growth has been stable over the last three decades, owing not only to the economy’s strong fundamentals, but also to the government’s successful management of cross-border capital flows.
Capital controls enabled China to emerge from the Asian financial crisis of 1997-1998 largely unscathed, even though its financial system was at least as fragile as those of the affected countries.
The Asian financial crisis persuaded China’s leaders to shelve plans, launched in 1994, to liberalize the capital account.
In 2002, China reinitiated liberalization efforts, lifting restrictions on Chinese enterprises’ ability to open foreign-currency bank accounts, and allowing residents both to open foreign-currency accounts and to convert the renminbi equivalent of $50,000 annually into foreign currencies.
The authorities also introduced the “qualified domestic institutional investors” (QDII) program to enable residents to invest in foreign assets – one of many initiatives aimed at easing upward pressure on the renminbi’s exchange rate by encouraging capital outflows.
At the same time, the “qualified foreign institutional investors” (QFII) scheme allowed licensed foreign entities to invest in domestic capital markets.
In early 2012, the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) released a report calling for policymakers to take advantage of a “strategic opportunity” to accelerate capital-account liberalization.
Shortly after the release, QFII quotas were relaxed significantly.
In fact, such an acceleration has been underway since the government initiated renminbi internationalization in 2009.
Although currency internationalization is not tantamount to capital-account liberalization, progress on the former presupposes progress on the latter.
By allowing enterprises to choose currencies for trade settlement, and creating renminbi “recycling mechanisms,” the government effectively eased the restrictions on short-term cross-border capital flows.
Most economists in China seem to support the PBOC’s stance, citing the potential benefits of capital-account liberalization.
But Chinese policymakers should also recognize the significant risks inherent in relaxing capital controls.
First, China needs capital controls to retain monetary-policy independence until it is ready to adopt a floating exchange-rate regime.
As Barry Eichengreen has pointed out in the context of the post-WWII Bretton Woods system, capital controls weaken “the link between domestic and foreign economic policies, providing governments room to pursue other objectives.”
Because capital controls capped “the resources that the markets could bring to bear against an exchange-rate peg,” they “limited the steps that governments had to take in its defense.”
With current- and capital-account surpluses, the renminbi’s exchange rate is still under upward pressure.
Without adequate controls on short-term cross-border capital inflows, the PBOC will find it difficult to maintain monetary-policy independence and exchange-rate stability at the same time.
Second, China’s financial system is fragile, and its economic structure rigid.
Hence, the Chinese economy is highly vulnerable to capital flight.
In recent years, China’s financial vulnerability has been rising, with enterprise debt estimated to exceed 120% of GDP, and broad money supply (M2) amounting to more than 180% of GDP.
At the beginning of 2012, China’s concerns centered on local-government debt, underground credit networks, and real-estate bubbles.
Now, growth in shadow-banking activities has been added to the list.
Without capital controls, an unforeseen shock could trigger large-scale capital flight, leading to significant currency devaluation, skyrocketing interest rates, bursting asset bubbles, bankruptcy and default for financial and non-financial enterprises, and, ultimately, the collapse of China’s financial system.
A third reason to go slow on easing capital controls is that China’s economic reforms remain incomplete, with property rights not yet clearly defined.
Amid ambiguity over ownership and pervasive corruption, the free flow of capital across borders would encourage money laundering and asset-stripping, which would incite social tension.
Finally, with more than $3.3 trillion in foreign-exchange reserves, China is a particularly attractive target for international speculators.
Owing to its underdeveloped financial system and inefficient capital markets, China would be unable to withstand an attack akin to those that triggered the Asian financial crisis without the protection of capital controls.
Already, even without a major speculative attack, the exchange-rate and interest-rate arbitrage facilitated by renminbi internationalization have imposed significant losses on China.
To be sure, a cautious approach should not be allowed to impede incremental progress toward capital-account liberalization.
But a broad framework for determining the timing of each policy step, based on rigorous cost-benefit analysis, is essential.
While some measures that the PBOC has taken under the banner of capital-account liberalization have turned out to be both necessary and appropriately moderate, others may need to be reassessed and rescinded.
Today, as all major developed economies resort to expansionary monetary policy, the global economy is being flooded with excess liquidity, and a “currency war” is looming large.
As a result, short-term capital inflows, whether seeking a safe haven or conducting carry trades, are bound to become larger and more volatile.
In these circumstances, with China’s financial system too fragile to withstand external shocks, and the global economy mired in turmoil, the PBOC would be unwise to gamble on the ability of rapid capital-account liberalization to generate a healthier and more robust financial system.
On the contrary, policymakers should tread carefully in their pursuit of financial liberalization.
Given China’s extensive reform agenda, further opening of the capital account can wait; and, in view of liberalization’s ambiguous benefits and significant risks, it should.
Brave New Cells?
LONDON – The United Kingdom’s Human Fertilization and Embryology Authority (HFEA) has launched a public consultation to gauge attitudes toward controversial new medical procedures aimed at preventing the transmission of incurable diseases that result from mutations of cell structures called mitochondria.
Supporters of such research are framing criticism of it as opposition to saving children’s lives and an impediment to scientific development.
But this view neglects a crucial factor in the debate: the techniques being developed involve permanent genetic alterations passed on to future generations.
The mitochondria are the energy-producing “batteries” of the cell, containing the only DNA outside of the cell nucleus – 37 genes, or roughly 0.2% of a person’s genetic makeup.
Given that these genes are contained in the egg, and thus are inherited only from the mother, the new techniques aim to replace the mother’s mutated mitochondria with that of a healthy female donor of eggs without the mutation.
This results in embryos that contain genetic material from three people – the child’s father and mother, plus the egg donor.
So the real question is how the public feels about crossing the line between medical treatments for existingpeople and irreversible genetic alterations that would be passed on to future generations through genetic modification of the human germline (the sequence of germ cells,such as sperm and eggs, containing genetic material that a child may inherit).
Despite the good intentions behind mitochondrial research, international concern about the implications of breaching this barrier is mounting.
Indeed, not only do most scientists and governments worldwide consider human germline genetic modification unacceptable; it is expressly prohibited in more than 40 countries, including the UK.
As a result, experts in the United States, Canada, Germany, Israel, and elsewhere have responded critically to the prospect of Britain unilaterally undermining the consensus that prohibits such techniques.
Mitochondrial mutations can have serious consequences, including epilepsy, liver failure, diabetes, and cardiomyopathy.
But, while the number of people affected by such mutations is estimated to be between one in 200 and one in 400, mutations do not translate to serious diseases in most cases.
Because the harmful changes are often only present in low levels, and because a single cell can contain both mutated and normal mitochondria, it is widely believed that only one person in 5,000 – or even one in 10,000 – will be affected by mitochondrial disease.
Despite this relatively low frequency, the Wellcome Trust (an organization dedicated to improving human and animal health) recently donated £4 million ($6.5 million) to scientists at the University of Newcastle to establish a center for mitochondrial research.
In a 2010 paper, the scientists reported some early success with a technique involving the use of human zygotes (single-cell embryos) that had been engineered to contain only healthy mitochondria.
But they managed to develop only 8% of the zygotes to a slightly later stage.
Nevertheless, in 2011, a coalition of scientists and funders submitted a letter to former UK Secretary of State for Health Andrew Lansley requesting regulation revision, in order to permit the new techniques’ use in clinical treatment “once sufficient pre-clinical evidence [was] established.”
The influential groups backing the coalition – including the UK Academy of Medical Sciences, the Medical Research Council, and the Wellcome Trust – claimed that “translating research into treatment [looked] achievable in the near future.”
But “treatment” does not mean helping existing sufferers.
Rather, the techniques might allow a small subset of women with mitochondrial disease (in the UK, roughly 10-20 annually) to reduce the risk that their children will inherit the mutation – at the cost of setting a precedent with serious potential consequences.
In addition to national legislation, international treaties like the Council of Europe Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine (which the UK has not signed) specifically prohibit human germline genetic modification.
The easy explanation for this prohibition would be moral aversion to eugenics, the pseudoscience of improving a population’s genetic composition, which was popular in the West in the first half of the twentieth century, before being discredited by the example of the Nazis.
Unlike eugenicists, proponents of altering mitochondrial DNA simply hope to free future generations from deadly diseases.
Nonetheless, critics fear the slippery slope.
After all, breaching the ethical and legal barrier to permanent genetic modification could make it more difficult to block its application for treating non-lethal conditions, or even for enhancing qualities like cognitive ability or athletic prowess.
But the more urgent threat is that any kind of germline genetic modification could do long-term, permanent damage.
The HFEA’s own expert panel reported that the safety of mitochondrial techniques is far from being proven for current users.
There is no telling what it could mean for their descendants.
According to Joanna Poulton, an expert in mitochondrial research at Oxford University, it is not yet appropriate to offer treatment with so little knowledge of the potential consequences when reasonable alternatives – such as egg donation from a woman unaffected by mitochondrial disease or pre-implantation genetic diagnosis – are available.
She says, “There are very few families who don’t want to use donated oocytes (eggs), where PGD would not work, and where the risk of having severely affected babies is so high that it might be worth trying the new techniques.”
In fact, mitochondrial studies have already begun to produce unexpected results.
For example, scientists in Oregon recently observed abnormal fertilization in some of the human eggs that they had manipulated.
Given that the defective eggs miscarry naturally, more eggs than expected would be needed for the technique – possibly posing a risk to the donors.
Indeed, in their study, the team used 106 eggs from seven women, one of whom donated a total of 28 eggs, indicating possible ovarian hyperstimulation, which can be dangerous or even fatal.
Like all human endeavors, science gets some things wrong.
Germline genetic modification threatens to make such errors permanent.
The UK scientific and charitable organizations advocating mitochondrial research are proud of the permissive legislative framework that has enabled them to establish an “international lead.”
But extending that leniency to human germline genetic modification may well cause future generations to view their actions very differently.
Taming the Arctic Oil Rush
VIENNA – The rapid shrinkage of Arctic ice cover is one of the most dramatic changes in nature currently occurring anywhere on the planet, with profound environmental and economic implications.
On one hand, we stand to lose one of the Earth’s largest and most significant ecosystems.
On the other hand, the once fabled northeast and northwest passages will reduce shipping times and costs by as much as half, bringing China and Japan much closer to Europe and North America’s east coast.
More immediately, the Arctic’s vast reserves of fossil fuels and minerals will become far more accessible than they are today.
On land, oil fields in Alaska and gas fields in northern Russia have been producing hydrocarbons on a large scale for many years, but the estimated reserves under the Arctic Ocean are much larger.
At today’s prices, these reserves could be worth more than $7 trillion, according to international energy companies; factoring in the accompanying natural gas, $10 trillion would probably be a conservative figure.
Because much of the Arctic Ocean is shallow and located on continental shelves, the bordering countries are scrambling to stake claims to exclusive economic zones under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
The political heat is also being turned up in the Arctic Council, a body set up to facilitate cooperation between states with Arctic territories.
Besides the eight members – Canada, the five Nordic countries, Russia, and the United States – the Council has six permanent observers, including major countries like Germany, France, and the United Kingdom.
Now China, India, and Japan are pressing to get in.
Not only states are playing for position in the Arctic.
The large oil and gas companies are very active, too.
In the wake of the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010 and the subsequent US drilling embargo, the approval of Shell’s drilling operations off the Alaskan coast received considerable media attention.
However, this year’s planned drilling of three wells in the Chukchi Sea and two in the Beaufort Sea was first reduced to one well and then postponed until next year after a containment dome – an emergency device for stopping a blowout – was damaged.
In other parts of the Arctic, though, exploratory drilling has continued.
Cairn Energy is drilling south and west of Greenland.
In Russia, Rosneft and BP are involved in a complicated arrangement to exploit Arctic offshore oil and gas resources – for example, in the Pechora Sea.
Rosneft has also signed exploration agreements with Statoil, ExxonMobil, and Eni.
Of the large oil companies, only one – France’s Total – has argued against Arctic oil exploration and exploitation on the grounds of environmental risks and economic costs.
There are several oil-related environmental risks specific to the Arctic Ocean.
For starters, there is the weather and climate.
Even if the Arctic Ocean becomes ice-free in the summer, most of the year it is not, and icebergs from melting glaciers will become more common and possibly larger.
This, together with frequent, powerful, and icy storms that appear on short notice, increases the likelihood of blowouts and other spills.
Then there are the problems associated with remoteness.
The BP disaster in 2010 happened in the best possible place in terms of nearby resources for capping a blowout: the Gulf of Mexico contains the world’s largest concentration of oil companies, subcontractors, petroleum engineers, equipment, workshops, etc.
Yet it took three months to cap the Macondo well.
In the Arctic, all of those resources are thousands of kilometers away.
In the Gulf, the cleanup operations engaged tens of thousands of people in Mississippi and nearby US states.
Where are such people to be found in the Arctic?
Furthermore, in warm waters, most of the oil and its effects largely dissipate within five years.
In cold waters, however, recovery takes much longer, as the Exxon Valdez spill in Alaska in 1989 demonstrated.
The rule of thumb that chemical and biochemical processes double in speed with each increase of ten degrees Celsius is a reasonable approximation here, too.
Thus, processes that take five years in the Gulf of Mexico would take more than 20 in the Arctic.
Meanwhile, in the low biodiversity ecosystems of the Arctic, with their simple food webs, so-called cascading effects are more pronounced than in temperate or warm regions.
The demise of one species or trophic level (which contains organisms performing the same function in the food chain), leads to changes in others in a rapid sequence that is difficult to foresee.
The new US rules for offshore oil operations in the Arctic – which forced Shell to postpone drilling until next year – are certainly stricter than the old rules, and will reduce the risk of a blowout.
But, if one occurs, the only reliable way to stop it and cap the well is to drill a relief well.
That takes months in the best of circumstances; it could take a year or more in the Arctic.
There is, however, one way to shorten the time required to cap a well to a matter of days: drill two holes in parallel from the start.
In case of a blowout in one hole, the other could quickly become the relief well.
Obviously, this would cause the cost of drilling to increase significantly.
But, if we cannot wait to explore for oil in the Arctic until we have the technology to do it safely, the authorities should demand no less of the oil companies.
The Risky Rich
NEW YORK – Today’s swollen fiscal deficits and public debt are fueling concerns about sovereign risk in many advanced economies.
Traditionally, sovereign risk has been concentrated in emerging-market economies.
After all, in the last decade or so, Russia, Argentina, and Ecuador defaulted on their public debts, while Pakistan, Ukraine, and Uruguay coercively restructured their public debt under the threat of default.
But, in large part – and with a few exceptions in Central and Eastern Europe – emerging-market economies improved their fiscal performance by reducing overall deficits, running large primary surpluses, lowering their stock of public debt-to-GDP ratios, and reducing the currency and maturity mismatches in their public debt.
As a result, sovereign risk today is a greater problem in advanced economies than in most emerging-market economies.
Indeed, rating-agency downgrades, a widening of sovereign spreads, and failed public-debt auctions in countries like the United Kingdom, Greece, Ireland, and Spain provided a stark reminder last year that unless advanced economies begin to put their fiscal houses in order, investors, bond-market vigilantes, and rating agencies may turn from friend to foe.
The severe recession, combined with the financial crisis during 2008-2009, worsened developed countries’ fiscal positions, owing to stimulus spending, lower tax revenues, and backstopping and ring-fencing of their financial sectors.
The impact was greater in countries that had a history of structural fiscal problems, maintained loose fiscal policies, and ignored fiscal reforms during the boom years.
In the future, a weak economic recovery and an aging population are likely to increase the debt burden of many advanced economies, including the United States, the UK, Japan, and several euro-zone countries.
More ominously, monetization of these fiscal deficits is becoming a pattern in many advanced economies, as central banks have started to swell the monetary base via massive purchases of short- and long-term government paper.
Eventually, large monetized fiscal deficits will lead to a fiscal train wreck and/or a rise in inflation expectations that could sharply increase long-term government bond yields and crowd out a tentative and so far fragile economic recovery.
Fiscal stimulus is a tricky business.
Policymakers are damned if they do and damned if they don’t.
If they remove the stimulus too soon by raising taxes, cutting spending, and mopping up the excess liquidity, the economy may fall back into recession and deflation.
But if monetized fiscal deficits are allowed to run, the increase in long-term yields will put a chokehold on growth.
Countries with weaker initial fiscal positions – such as Greece, the UK, Ireland, Spain, and Iceland – have been forced by the market to implement early fiscal consolidation.
While that could be contractionary, the gain in fiscal-policy credibility might prevent a damaging spike in long-term government-bond yields.
So early fiscal consolidation can be expansionary on balance.
For the Club Med members of the euro zone – Italy, Spain, Greece, and Portugal – public-debt problems come on top of a loss of international competitiveness.
These countries had already lost export-market shares to China and other low value-added and labor-intensive Asian economies.
Then a decade of nominal-wage growth that out-paced productivity gains led to a rise in unit labor costs, real exchange-rate appreciation, and large current-account deficits.
The euro’s recent sharp rise has made this competitiveness problem even more severe, reducing growth further and making fiscal imbalances even larger.
So the question is whether these euro-zone members will be willing to undergo painful fiscal consolidation and internal real depreciation through deflation and structural reforms in order to increase productivity growth and prevent an Argentine-style outcome: exit from the monetary union, devaluation, and default.
Countries like Latvia and Hungary have shown a willingness to do so.
Whether Greece, Spain, and other euro-zone members will accept such wrenching adjustments remains to be seen.
The US and Japan might be among the last to face the wrath of the bond-market vigilantes: the dollar is the main global reserve currency, and foreign-reserve accumulation – mostly US government bills and bonds – continues at a rapid pace.
Japan is a net creditor and largely finances its debt domestically.
But investors will become increasingly cautious even about these countries if the necessary fiscal consolidation is delayed.
The US is a net debtor with an aging population, unfunded entitlement spending on social security and health care, an anemic economic recovery, and risks of continued monetization of the fiscal deficit.
Japan is aging even faster, and economic stagnation is reducing domestic savings, while the public debt is approaching 200% of GDP.
The US also faces political constraints to fiscal consolidation: Americans are deluding themselves that they can enjoy European-style social spending while maintaining low tax rates, as under President Ronald Reagan.
At least European voters are willing to pay higher taxes for their public services.
If America’s Democrats lose in the mid-term elections this November, there is a risk of persistent fiscal deficits as Republicans veto tax increases while Democrats veto spending cuts.
Monetizing the fiscal deficits would then become the path of least resistance: running the printing presses is much easier than politically painful deficit reduction.
But if the US does use the inflation tax as a way to reduce the real value of its public debt, the risk of a disorderly collapse of the US dollar would rise significantly.
America’s foreign creditors would not accept a sharp reduction in their dollar assets’ real value that debasement of the dollar via inflation and devaluation would entail.
A disorderly rush to the exit could lead to a dollar collapse, a spike in long-term interest rates, and a severe double dip recession.
The Road Map Includes Damascus
Powerful countries know that it is dangerous to be seen to flinch, because enemies take heart and allies’ knees begin to knock.
A great power also knows that if it sets out on a military adventure without setting achievable goals, it can get into bad trouble.
What’s true for great powers is doubly true for beleaguered Israel, which failed to dismantle Hezbollah’s power over Lebanon.
But the Lebanon war’s failure may yet provide an opening to peace if Israel is bold enough to seize it.
The world has two chief aims in the area between Cairo and Teheran: to maintain peace in the wider Middle East so that oil flows freely through the Persian Gulf; to steer the dispute between Israelis and Palestinians toward a settlement that guarantees the safety of Israel in its internationally recognised borders, while meeting the Palestinian people’s legitimate national aspirations for their own state.
The two issues have long been connected, but the main link is now President Bashar Al-Assad’s Syria.
Isolated, desperate for allies, Syria has been helping Iran in its quest for regional hegemony.
Since Lebanon’s Cedar Revolution evicted Syria last year, the Syrians have sought to haul Lebanon back within their sphere of influence.
They back Hezbollah – and help Iran send it weapons – because Sheikh Hassan Nasrallah’s shock troops keep the government in Beirut weak.
The Syrians also like to present themselves as the last real Arab defenders of the Palestinian cause.
In short, Syria, with its geographical position, its Iranian links and weapons, and its brutal Ba’athist regime, has become the lynchpin of developments between the Mediterranean and the Gulf.
To secure Lebanon, and to bring Hamas to the bargaining table with Israel, it is Syria that Israel and the United States must deal with, one way or another.
Syria’s position and interests should make it amenable to a deal.
Of course, Syria still believes in a “Greater Syria” and never fully accepted Lebanon’s sovereignty.
Syrian intelligence and troops – present in Lebanon since 1976 – were forced out in 2005 only under enormous international pressure and $1billion were lost in smuggling revenue last year much of which previously flowed to the Syrian military.
Many of the Hezbollah rockets that rained on Israel bore the markings of Syria’s Defence Ministry.
Yet Syria has one redeeming feature: it is a secular country that traditionally recoils from Islamic fundamentalism.
Indeed, President Hafez Al-Assad, Bashar’s father, massacred up to 38,000 mainly Sunni fundamentalist Muslim Brotherhood insurgents in Hama in 1982.
Today, parts of the ruling Ba’ath elite worry about Syria’s deepening alliance with theocratic Iran and Islamist Hezbollah.
That alliance reflects fear, not commitment.
The moderate Sunni Gulf Arab emirates, suspicious of growing Shia ascendancy and of Iranian irredentism in the region, have stopped propping up Syria’s economy due to its alliance with the ayatollahs of Iran.
Labelled by the US as part of the “axis of evil,” Syria has also seen Saudi financial aid dry up and fears that the trade benefits that would come with ratification of its Association Agreement with the EU will never materialize.
Both Syria’s reluctant alliance with Iran, and its economic desperation, provide openings that Israel and the West should test.
But what might Syria want?
Like most Arabs, Bashar Al-Assad views Israel from the perspective of pan-Arab anguish at Palestinian dispossession, but also sees a chance to use the Palestinians to strengthen his regime’s power by putting his own imprint on any settlement.
Like his father, Assad is cautious.
So long as Egypt remains neutral, he is unlikely to risk another war with Israel, let alone a war with America or with America and Israel combined.
The big puzzle is what Assad wants with Lebanon.
If his aim is a government in Beirut that takes into account Syria’s genuine security concerns, Israel can live with that.
Besides, widespread revulsion against Syria for its alleged role in the murder of former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri, particularly among Lebanon’s Maronites, Sunnis, and Druze, means that Lebanon is unlikely to ever become totally subservient again – that is, unless Hezbollah gets to call the shots.
Israel now faces three options.
It can flinch while pretending not to; it can carry on more or less as before, hoping for some positive new development; or it can try to decouple Syria from Iran and Hezbollah.
The latter option is the only scenario that could stop the Islamist drift in the Middle East.
But prying Syria from Iran’s embrace means, eventually, reopening the Golan Heights question.
A deal with Syria is not impossible, given the ambiguities in Assad’s position.
On the Israeli/American side, it would include recognition that Syria has security interests in Lebanon.
If Syria in turn accepts Lebanon’s sovereignty, and if it helps force Hezbollah into becoming a political force shorn of its military power, Israel and America ought to persuade Lebanon’s government to accept that Syria and Lebanon need to consult each other in security matters.
For Syria, a peace deal would also include an understanding that Israel’s occupation of the Golan Heights is to be settled by serious negotiation, not war.
Such a diplomatic opening may be hard for Israel’s prime minister, Ehud Olmert, to accept, let alone to sell to Israelis.
So America and Europe must help him reach this conclusion.
America and Israel must drop their refusal to talk to Syria.
Indeed, the time is ripe to offer assurances to the isolated Syrian regime that blocking Hezbollah’s rearmament, stopping Islamist fighters’ passage into Iraq, and improving the country’s appalling human rights record would bring valuable diplomatic and economic benefits, including a strengthened association agreement with the EU.
Israel would gain much by talking to its enemy.
Conscious of its vulnerability to rocket attacks, Israel knows that needs a defensible state, safe from external aggression.
Removing Syria as a threat is a key element in achieving this strategic objective.
The Road to Arab Democracy
JERUSALEM – During the turmoil of the French Revolution, a popular saying arose: “How beautiful was the republic – under the monarchy.”
The Revolution aimed at achieving Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity. Instead, it wrought for France – and much of Europe – Jacobin terror, right-wing counter-terror, decades of war, and eventually Napoleonic tyranny.
A similar challenge now faces North Africa and the Middle East, where most Arab countries are experiencing massive upheavals.
Historically speaking, what is now happening is without precedent in the Arab world.
For the first time, Arab authoritarian regimes have been toppled, and others are threatened, by mass demonstrations calling for freedom and democracy.
Previously, Arab regimes changed through military coups and other sorts of putsches, never through popular revolutions.
During the great democratic wave of the 1990’s, which brought down dictatorships in Eastern Europe, Latin America, sub-Saharan Africa, and Southeast Asia, nothing similar happened in Arab North Africa and the Middle East.
Now, however, the region’s political inertia has been disrupted. Cairo’s Tahrir Square has become a symbol for both hope and “people power.”
Yet, while most Arab regimes now appear threatened, only two authoritarian rulers – Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali in Tunisia and Hosni Mubarak in Egypt – have been actually deposed so far. Theirs were relatively “soft” autocracies.
Much more oppressive and ruthless rulers – Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi in Libya, Bashar Assad in Syria, and Ali Abdullah Saleh in Yemen – though seriously threatened, have proven far more resilient (up to now) in suppressing popular opposition.
Even in tiny Bahrain, the Sunni minority has, for now, succeeded in maintaining its rule over the Shia majority, albeit with military help from neighboring Sunni-led countries.
As always, it is easier to bring down an autocracy than to construct and consolidate a democratic regime.
When communism in Eastern Europe collapsed, their old systems, despite some obvious differences, had the same characteristics: they were one-party dictatorships, with state control over the economy, education, and the media.
Today, they are very different from each other. Poland, Czech Republic, and Hungary, for example, succeeded in navigating a successful transition to democracy and a functioning market economy.
Yet, even in Egypt, the challenges are enormous.
With early elections called for September, there is serious doubt as to whether opposition groups will have the time, means, and experience to organize effective political parties.
At the moment, only the army – which has effectively ruled the country since 1952 – and the Muslim Brotherhood, which has the widest social networks, appear to be serious players.
Will the army, whose monopoly of power is paradoxically legitimized by the massive demonstrations that toppled Mubarak, be willing to give up the enormous political and economic clout that it has amassed over decades?
One hears about a possible modus vivendi between the army and the Muslim Brotherhood.
Indeed, some activists are already back in Tahrir Square demonstrating against such an incongruous yet possible alliance.
In Libya, if Qaddafi falls, can such a highly tribalized country possess the building blocks needed for a functioning democracy?
The issue, one should emphasize, is not Islam as such: in Europe, the Catholic Church was for a long time the greatest enemy of democracy and liberalism.
Yet Christian Democratic parties today are one of the pillars of European democracy.
Like Christian churches, Islam can also change, and Indonesia and Turkey could well be examples for such a possibility.
But a context in which a fundamentalist Islamic group like the Muslim Brotherhood is the strongest organization in society, with very little effective countervailing powers, creates a serious challenge.
How will all of this influence the Israeli-Palestinian peace process, which appears stuck? It may be difficult to know, especially as the fundamentalist Hamas, now in control of Gaza, might be encouraged by the rising power of its parent organization in Egypt.
The recent escalation of violence along Gaza’s border with Israel does suggest that events are developing in a dangerous direction.
As for Israel, it initially responded to the Arab revolts in a confused way.
Now its leaders maintain that they would welcome democratic changes in the region as a guarantor of peace and common values, though they express skepticism about whether such developments are actually imminent.
Skepticism is in order also with respect to the unknown consequences of Western military intervention in Libya: it may have been asked for by the Arab League and legitimized by the UN Security Council, yet the outcome is far from certain. Whatever happens in Libya will have repercussions across the region.
The road to democracy has always been rocky – look at a century of upheavals in Europe and the difficulties the US faced when dealing with slavery and the rights of its black population.
It is to be hoped that there will be a light at the end of the tunnel in the Arab Middle East as well, but the tunnel may be a long one.
The Road to Food Security
ROME – Recently, I was on a road in the Southern Choma District of Zambia to meet with Rosemary Pisani, a smallholder farmer and mother of eight who struggled to feed her children prior to joining a farmer’s cooperative to raise goats.
Thanks to the cooperative and support from other farmers, she now has a thriving business and all of her children are in school.
On the way to meet her, I passed women walking through mud to the market with large loads of fruit and vegetables stacked on their heads.
I imagined how I might be on my way to a very different rural community if the road we were on was paved and well maintained.
Often in Africa, the few paved roads that do exist are littered with potholes and lead to unpaved ones that are nearly impossible to navigate without a proper vehicle.
Closer to farming communities, roads disappear entirely.
This leaves rural areas, which have the potential to feed the more than one billion hungry people, cut off and isolated.
In sub-Saharan Africa, almost 70% of all people living in rural areas live more than a 30-minute walk from the nearest maintained road.
Kofi Annan, Chairperson of the Board of the Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa (AGRA), has acknowledged this isolation: “The average African smallholding farmer swims alone. She has no insurance against erratic weather patterns, gets no subsidies, and has no access to credit.
I say ‘she’ because the majority of small-scale farmers in Africa are women.”
Indeed, half of the world’s smallholders are women, and we must keep in mind their punishing task of walking long lengths to get their produce to market.
At the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), we believe that farming, regardless of size or scale, must be seen as a business, and smallholder farmers as small-scale business owners rather than poor people who need handouts.
There is growing recognition that these smallholder farmers and their rural communities are a major part of the solution to food insecurity and poverty – but only if they have what they need to do their jobs.
The Green Revolution of the last century had a tremendous impact on agricultural yields and food production, transforming the lives of millions of people.
Much of this success stemmed from infrastructure that was already in place.
India’s road density at the start of its Green Revolution in the 1970’s was 388 kilometers per 1,000 square kilometres.
This compares with 39 kilometers per 1,000 square kilometers in Ethiopia today and 71 per 1,000 in Senegal.
New roads bring other essential services to rural communities.
In Ethiopia, only 2% of rural people have access to electricity, and telephone communication is more or less absent.
Researchers believe that this is because only 17% of rural communities in the country live within one mile of a paved road.
Together with poor infrastructure, many small farmers in Africa have insufficient access to productive assets, such as land, water, and new technologies.
As a result, yields are generally too low to allow the millions of rural households to generate marketable surpluses.
Even if smallholders are able to produce a surplus, their lack of access to downstream activities, such as processing and marketing, prevents them from selling it easily.
The cause of these missing, but vital, resources lies in the shameful neglect of agriculture in the past two decades.
Both developed and developing countries – caught up in rapid economic expansion and technological development – got distracted.
They turned off the tap to agriculture, leaving small farmers to rely on basic farming practices and on government and donor handouts.
That tap must be turned back on.
In IFAD’s experience, working simply to double the income of a smallholder farmer who scrapes by on less than a dollar a day is poverty management, because at two dollars a day, he or she still remains poor.
But supporting that smallholder in launching a farming business that could generate a five-fold increase in income amounts to poverty eradication.
If smallholder farmers are to be given the opportunity to become viable businesses, it is essential that they be connected to markets.
Indeed, support for rural infrastructure – including last-mile roads, electrification, post-harvest facilities, support for agricultural associations and cooperatives, and access to land and irrigation facilities – is a crucial element in the value chain.
Each link in the value chain, from the smallholder to the local trade agents and agro-processors to regional and national markets, needs to be strengthened.
We need to link food producers with the people who need their product through viable and well maintained infrastructure.
In addition, we need to provide them with research and technology to ensure that they can grow the best-quality produce, and storage capabilities so that they can sell at peak prices.
If smallholder farmers have the basic infrastructure they need to get their goods to market, they will not only be able to feed themselves and their communities, but will contribute to wider food security.
We just need to put the pavement down so that farmers like those I saw in Zambia can more easily make their way on the road to food security.
The Road to Post-War Recovery
For the world’s advanced countries, a key challenge is to broaden economic and social inclusion without diminishing the economic dynamism they already have. .
The problems of war-ravaged countries are far more acute and their choices much more constrained.
Indeed, they confront a double challenge: to create dynamic economies and to promote, at the same time, economic and social inclusion.
Without both of these elements, national reconciliation will likely prove impossible.
Social exclusion in industrial countries imposes costs throughout society that policymakers must address with effective and targeted measures.
Lack of jobs, for example, often leads people, particularly the young, away from work and into dependency on drugs and crime.
Society, then , needs to pay for the costs of crime prevention policies and the administration of justice.
A flexible labor market, as many suggest, will not in itself promote inclusion.
Welfare programs in war-ravaged countries often aggravate joblessness by reducing work incentives and creating a culture of dependency.
Minimum-wage laws and labor agreements often make the least productive workers unaffordable to law-abiding employers.
So what these countries need are more employment opportunities and higher salaries in the private sector for these workers.
Specifically, a wage subsidy program that lowers the cost of hiring full-time unskilled workers could make it more attractive for firms to hire them.
At the same time, on-the-job training would make the program attractive to workers and to society as a whole.
Governments could afford the cost of the subsidies since cutting unemployment would not only lower public security costs, but would also reduce the need for welfare programs.
In countries coming out of war or other conflicts, efforts at inclusion are futile in stagnant economies.
Without both dynamism and inclusion, the path to peace will be elusive, as recent experiences in Kosovo, East Timor, Afghanistan, Iraq, and many countries in Africa illustrate.
Thus, post-war transitions require that policies that encourage dynamism and inclusion go hand in hand.
Economic recovery needs to begin as soon as possible, not only because this is essential to maintaining political and social stability, but also because donors are unwilling to support economic reconstruction unless countries do their part to create an environment conducive to ensuring its sustainability.
In the midst of political, social, and institutional vulnerabilities, as well as the vast damage to human and physical infrastructure that are the legacy of conflict, this is a monumental task.
Policymaking in these war torn economies is unique.
Most countries in post-conflict situations suffer from weak fiscal positions, rendering the provision of internally financed subsidies impractical in most cases.
Moreover, foreign assistance, while stable in “normal” developing countries, often exhibits sharp spikes in countries undergoing war-to-peace transitions.
In many cases, post-conflict aid can reach extraordinarily high levels after the conflicts ends, both in per capita terms and relative to the size of the recipient economies.
Typically, however, this type of aid declines very rapidly.
Low-income countries in the normal process of development, for example, receive steady inflows of official foreign assistance of about 3% of their gross national income.
By contrast, aid reached 95% of gross national income in Rwanda soon after the conflict ended, but fell to 20% within five years.
Consolidating peace following violent conflict has little chance of success unless jobs are created and the economy is quickly stabilized and brought onto a path of investment and growth with low inflation.
The United Nations reckons that if economic reconstruction fails in terms of promoting dynamism and inclusion, countries in the transition to peace have an even chance of reverting to war.
Leaving aside the cost in terms of human lives, the economic costs of maintaining peace are but a fraction of what would be required for humanitarian assistance, military intervention, and peacekeeping operations should the country relapse into conflict.
Hence, effective financing for peacetime is a good investment of donors’ resources and a major factor in conflict prevention.
But donors need to avoid some common mistakes.
In many cases, economic reconstruction has failed partly because donors required that their own nationals or companies be used.
This policy has often led to programs that countries do not want and to employment of foreign experts for tasks that nationals could and should have performed.
By providing domestic firms with wage subsidies for hiring unskilled workers, donors would increase the effectiveness and fairness of their assistance in support of national-led reconstruction and conflict prevention.
Given lower labor costs, local businessmen could decide to invest under the conditions of uncertainty and high risk that characterize post-conflict situations.
The advantages in terms of employment creation, reintegrating former combatants into productive activities, savings from safety-net programs, and improved public security would be many.
This type of aid would also provide political support for the authorities from a population grateful for policies that promote job creation.
At the same time, this policy would have neither the fiscal cost associated with government-financed subsidies, nor the distortions caused by the difficulty of cutting subsidies once the government has offered them.
Grant-supported subsidies would remain in place for a finite period, and donors would gradually phase them out as aid programs expire.
Furthermore, such subsidies would help reactivate the private sector, which is essential as large-scale post-conflict aid withers to the low levels that are common under conditions of normal development.
The Roar of the Democratic Wave
PARIS – Has the uprising in Tunisia sparked a new democratic wave that will conquer Egypt and eventually sweep away the authoritarian “Arab exception”?
After southern Europe in the 1970’s, Latin America in the late 1980’s, and Central and Eastern Europe in the 1990’s, it seems that now it is the Mediterranean region’s turn.
For Europe, democratization immediately to its south is a vital interest.
Zine El Abidine Ben Ali’s ouster in Tunisia signalled the collapse of the Arab “stability” model, praised by many Western leaders, consisting of authoritarianism and overrated economic performance.
The surge of anger and revolt in Egypt, whatever its final outcome, marks the beginning of the end for authoritarian nationalist Arab regimes.
In contrast to Tunisia, the military is a pillar of the Egyptian regime.
But it is unlikely that Egypt’s huge (mostly conscript) army will engage in massive, violent repression, which would be unprecedented in that country.
Even if President Hosni Mubarak hangs on to complete the remainder of his term, the ruling National Democratic Party’s regime, its legitimacy irreparably shaken, will not survive for long.
Omar Suleiman’s appointment as Vice-President (and heir-apparent) indicates that the army has accepted that Mubarak must leave sooner or later.
Nor, it seems clear, will Mubarak secure the succession of his son, Gamel, before he goes.
The regime’s international legitimacy is equally in a shambles.
The United States, Egypt’s main ally, while stopping short of siding with the protesters, is holding the regime to Mubarak’s promise of a “better democracy,” and demanding swift action to meet the people’s legitimate demands.
By hinting strongly that its $1.5 billion in largely military aid would be withheld in the event of unacceptable levels of repression, the US revealed that the post-Mubarak era is already being contemplated.
The US – and Europe – are keen to avoid a sudden collapse of the Egyptian regime.
But a protracted and incremental process of small steps towards economic and then political reform – the sequence contemplated by the European Union – is no longer an option.
The regime is past reforming, and must give way to a new democratic republic, with a new constitution.
Ideally, this should come about in a manner similar to democratic transitions in Latin America in the 1980’s, when authoritarian, army-backed rulers yielded to popular demands for radical, democratic regime change.
Resorting to thugs to carry out widespread intimidation, and blaming violence on the largely peaceful protests of hundreds of thousands of ordinary Egyptians, as their government has done, is not a good omen.
Unlike in Tunisia, Europeans and Americans should increase the pressure on Egypt’s leaders – primarily the military at this stage – to start fulfilling the regime’s promises of political reform.
This will lack credibility under Mubarak, whose refusal to stand down is a recipe for chaos.
It is necessary that the international community:
·        Withdraw support for Mubarak;
·        Support the formation of a transitional authority, supported by the military and the “street,” and including independent political figures untainted by the regime, to prepare free and fair elections;
·        Call for an amnesty for all political prisoners.
Many of the conditions needed for a democratic transformation – a vibrant and organized civil society, a relatively free press, and well-respected opposition figures, as well as a variety of battered but breathing political parties of different persuasions – are already present.
Fear of the Muslim Brotherhood, which is only marginally involved in an uprising that it did not initiate and has no hope of controlling, is no excuse for trying to save a failing regime.
The tragic consequences of eleventh-hour attempts to save the Shah in Iran should not be forgotten.
There is also no reason to believe (contrary to the regime’s insistence) that the Brotherhood would emerge victorious from a democratic transition.
Of course, there are concerns about the future of Egypt’s foreign policy, especially toward Israel.
But there is no indication that a non-authoritarian Egyptian regime would call into question the bilateral peace treaty, though a definite end to the Gaza blockade and a shift in attitude towards Hamas – in the sense of a more serious attempt at forging Palestinian unity – are to be expected.
For Europe, the best option is to support the mass movement calling for regime change led by Mohammed ElBaradei, the Nobel laureate and former head of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
The joint declaration by German Chancellor Angela Merkel, French President Nicolas Sarkozy, and British Prime Minister David Cameron, calling for a “broad-based government” and “free and fair elections” in Egypt stands in stark contrast to the embarrassed silence that was heard at the outset of Tunisia’s democratic uprising.
It is still too soon, however, to conclude that Europeans have finally overcome their fear of Arab democracy and will not be tempted to accept milder forms of “liberal authoritarianism” should the crisis drag on or a military takeover occur.
That would be a grave mistake, for such an outcome would most likely pave the way for extreme alternatives.
Europe and the US must be as supportive of democracy in the Mediterranean region as they are within Europe itself.
When tides are turning, people will remember who stood with them and who did not.
As it did during Ukraine’s Orange Revolution in 2004, Europe needs to show that it stands for democracy, not merely for stability.
The Rocky Road to Recovery
NEW YORK – A consensus now exists that America’s recession – already a year old – is likely to be long and deep, and that almost all countries will be affected.
I always thought that the notion that what happened in America would be decoupled from the rest of the world was a myth.
Events are showing that to be so. 
Fortunately, America has, at last, a president with some understanding of the nature and severity of the problem, and who has committed himself to a strong stimulus program.
This, together with concerted action by governments elsewhere, will mean that the downturn will be less severe than it otherwise would be.
The United States Federal Reserve, which helped create the problems through a combination of excessive liquidity and lax regulation, is trying to make amends – by flooding the economy with liquidity, a move that, at best, has merely prevented matters from being worse.
It’s not surprising that those who helped create the problems and didn’t see the disaster coming have not done a masterly job in dealing with it.
By now, the dynamics of the downturn are set, and things will get worse before they get better.
In some ways, the Fed resembles a drunk driver who, suddenly realizing that he is heading off the road starts careening from side to side.
The response to the lack of liquidity is ever more liquidity.
When the economy starts recovering, and banks start lending, will they be able to drain the liquidity smoothly out of the system?
Will America face a bout of inflation?
Or, more likely, in another moment of excess, will the Fed over-react, nipping the recovery in the bud?
Given the unsteady hand exhibited so far, we cannot have much confidence in what awaits us.
Still, I am not sure that there is sufficient appreciation of some of the underlying problems facing the global economy, without which the current global recession is unlikely to give way to robust growth – no matter how good a job the Fed does.
For a long time, the US has played an important role in keeping the global economy going.
America’s profligacy – the fact that the world’s richest country could not live within its means – was often criticized.
But perhaps the world should be thankful, because without American profligacy, there would have been insufficient global aggregate demand.
In the past, developing countries filled this role, running trade and fiscal deficits. But they paid a high price, and fiscal responsibility and conservative monetary policies are now the fashion.
Indeed, many developing countries, fearful of losing their economic sovereignty to the IMF – as occurred during the 1997 Asian financial crisis – accumulated hundreds of billions of dollars in reserves.
Money put into reserves is income not spent.
Moreover, growing inequality in most countries of the world has meant that money has gone from those who would spend it to those who are so well off that, try as they might, they can’t spend it all.
The world’s unending appetite for oil, beyond its ability or willingness to produce, has contributed a third factor.
Rising oil prices transferred money to oil-rich countries, again contributing to the flood of liquidity.
Though oil prices have been dampened for now, a robust recovery could send them soaring again.
For a while, people spoke almost approvingly of the flood of liquidity.
But this was just the flip side of what Keynes had worried about – insufficient global aggregate demand.
The search for return contributed to the reckless leverage and risk taking that underlay this crisis. 
America’s government will, for a time, partly make up for the increasing savings of US consumers.
But if America’s consumers go from their near zero savings to a modest 4% or 5% of GDP, then the depressing effect on demand  (in addition to that resulting from declines in investment, exports, and state and local  government expenditures) will not be fully offset by even the largest government expenditure programs.
In two years, governments, mindful of the huge increases in the debt burden resulting from the mega-bailouts and the mind-boggling deficits, will be under pressure to run primary surpluses (where government spending net of interest payments is less than revenues.) 
A few years ago, there was worry about the risk of a disorderly unwinding of “global imbalances.”
The current crisis can be viewed as part of that, but little is being done about the underlying problems that gave rise to these imbalances.
We need not just temporary stimuli, but longer-term solutions.
It is not as if there was a shortage of needs; it is only that those who might meet those needs have a shortage of funds.
First, we need to reverse the worrying trends of growing inequality.
More progressive income taxation will also help stabilize the economy, through what economists call “automatic stabilizers.”
It would also help if the advanced developed countries fulfilled their commitments to helping the world’s poorest by increasing their foreign-aid budgets to 0.7% of GDP.
Second, the world needs enormous investments if it is to respond to the challenges of global warming.
Transportation systems and living patterns must be changed dramatically. 
Third, a global reserve system is needed.
It makes little sense for the world’s poorest countries to lend money to the richest at low interest rates.
The system is unstable.
The dollar reserve system is fraying, but is likely to be replaced with a dollar/euro or dollar/euro/yen system that is even more unstable.
Annual emissions of a global reserve currency (what Keynes called Bancor, or the IMF calls SDRs) could help fuel global aggregate demand, and be used to promote development and address the problems of global warming.
This year will be bleak.
The question we need to be asking now is, how can we enhance the likelihood that we will eventually emerge into a robust recovery?
Did Taxes Cause the Financial Crisis?
CAMBRIDGE – After the financial crisis erupted in 2008, many observers blamed the crisis in large part on the fact that too many financial firms had loaded up on debt while relying on only a thin layer of equity.
The reason is straightforward: whereas equity can absorb a business downturn – profits fall, but the firm does not immediately fail – debt is less forgiving, because creditors do not wait around to be paid.
Short-term creditors cash out or refuse to roll over their loans, denying credit to financially weakened firms.
Long-term creditors demand to be “made whole” and sue.
Without cash, the firm fails.
Financial firms in the United States pay about 34% of their profits in taxes, and, while they can deduct interest payments to creditors from taxable income, equity is not taxed as favorably.
Most countries have similar tax preferences for debt over equity, thereby encouraging financial and other corporations to use more debt, as financial analysts have long known.
And yet the argument that this tax preference for debt played a role in the financial crisis – and that it remains an ongoing risk to financial stability – was quickly rejected.
After all, the tax preference for debt has existed for a long time, and nothing heightened it before the crisis hit.
On the contrary, if anything, the tax preference has decreased somewhat over time.
And the crisis was quite clearly tied to the explosion in risky mortgage-backed securities in the US; when the market abruptly realized that these securities could not be paid off in full, many systemically important financial firms were seen to be much weaker than they had seemed.
Catastrophic economic consequences followed.
All of this is true, but, given the possibility of a major overhaul of US corporate taxation, which President Barack Obama has proposed, we should revisit the conventional wisdom concerning the supposedly weak connection between corporate taxation and the financial crisis.
Indeed, in my view, policymakers, academics, and the media have rejected too resolutely the idea that corporate taxation played no more than a minor role.
To be sure, the tax preference for debt has been embedded in the economy for a long time, with no financial crises for most of that period.
And, yes, tax incentives are not the only – and perhaps not even the most important – reason why financial institutions use a lot of debt and minimize equity.
Most important, while reliance on debt made financial institutions riskier, creditors knew that, in a crisis, the government would probably bail out the largest, if not all of them.
Government was less likely to bail out equity.
Viewed from this perspective, it is no wonder that the question of how debt is taxed has played a small role in financial-reform packages.
Financial institutions fell off the cliff in 2008, it is argued, because they got too close to the edge.
Destabilized by too much short-term debt and too much exposure to risky, overvalued, low-quality mortgage-backed securities, they tripped and fell over it.
So regulators have focused on command-and-control orders to financial firms to increase their equity, and to reduce the riskiness of their investments.
But consider another way of viewing the crisis and our financial institutions: the financial system was never all that far from the cliff’s edge, even before 2008, because the tax system encouraged financial firms to overload themselves with debt.
They generally managed themselves and their risks well, so they did not fall.
But then, in the run-up to the crisis, they miscalculated, taking on too much short-term debt and over-investing in risky securities.
The added risks pushed the financial system past the tipping point, but the baseline problem was that it always contained too much risky debt.
From this perspective, it becomes clear that the baseline tax-induced risks should not be ignored.
The policy consensus has properly focused first on the new risks that were added.
But focusing on those added risks should be only the first step; doing so should not lead us to ignore the baseline risks that the tax system creates.
The taxation issue may go deeper.
The tax system first encourages financial firms to use more debt than is safe, but there is a parallel effect on non-financial firms and many homeowners.
Tax deductions for interest payments encourage them to borrow, too, an issue that has long been understood.
But, less obviously, these borrowers then demand more tax-induced lending from financial institutions, because tax benefits make their own use of debt cheaper.
Were their demand for debt lower – and, in the case of corporate debtors, were they to rely more on equity – financial institutions would face less pressure to use so much debt themselves.
Much consideration has already been devoted to how to reform corporate taxation in a way that levels the playing field for equity relative to debt; more than 20 years ago, the US Treasury conducted a major analysis and devised a plan to do so.
As the Obama administration moves ahead with its new proposals, it should look back at the financial crisis, which provides strong grounds for implementing such a change.
One Flew Over the Resource Curse
GENEVA – Geopolitical insight is often gained through real-life&#160;experience, rather than big-picture thinking.
Arriving at Charles de Gaulle airport in Paris from Conakry, Guinea, is a case in point: Conakry’s airport, located in one of the world’s poorest countries, outperforms France’s prestigious global hub in terms of cleanliness, service, and pride.