In particular, Internet users want to stop companies befuddling their customers with convoluted and legalistic service agreements in order to extract and sell their data.
This type of abuse could be limited by creating legal and social contracts to govern the authorization of data use.
One idea, proposed by the information scientist Marc Davis, is to draw up a standard, readable seven-point “Terms of Service” agreement that empowers people’s control of the uses of their personal data.
Another is to allow users themselves to decide from a preset menu how much personal information they are prepared to share.
But the trust issue goes beyond just regulation.
Companies must find ways to introduce new technologies and do business that are popular with their customers and retain their trust.
(Indeed, in a world of human-robot interfaces, 3D printing, nanotechnology, and shale-gas extraction, any innovative company must ask itself this basic question.)
Finally, we must consider the human dimension of our virtual world.
Hyper-connectivity not only creates new commercial opportunities; it also changes the way ordinary people think about their lives.
The so-called FoMo (fear of missing out) syndrome reflects the anxieties of a younger generation whose members feel compelled to capture instantly everything they do and see.
Ironically, this hyper-connectivity has increased our insularity, as we increasingly live through our electronic devices.
Neuroscientists believe that this may even have altered how we now relate to one another in the real world.
At the heart of this debate is the need to ensure that in a world where many, if not all, of the important details of our lives – including our relationships – exist in cyber-perpetuity, people retain, or reclaim, some level of control over their online selves.
While the world of forgetting may have vanished, we can reshape the new one in a way that benefits rather than overwhelms us.
Our overriding task is to construct a digital way of life that reinforces our existing sense of ethics and values, with security, trust, and fairness at its heart.
Gimme Shelter From Dictatorship
NEW YORK – Following US President Barack Obama’s trailblazing visit to Cuba, a free concert by the Rolling Stones in Havana might seem like a relatively minor event.
Obama revived relations with Cuba after more than a half-century of deep hostility.
The septuagenarian Stones just played some very loud music.
And yet, symbolically, the concert was not minor at all.
To grasp the importance of the Stones’ performance in front of hundreds of thousands of adoring Cubans, one has to understand what rock and roll meant to people living under Communist dictatorships.
In the 1970s, for example, Czechoslovakia, like other Communist states, was a dreary, oppressive, joyless place, where mediocre party hacks set the tone, and creativity was stifled under a blanket of enforced conformism.
Rock and roll was considered a noxious form of capitalist decadence.
A local rock band named Plastic People of the Universe, performing in English, was arrested in the late 1970s for “organized disturbance of the peace.”
Recordings by the Rolling Stones and other Western groups were banned.
And yet records were smuggled into Czechoslovakia and other Eastern European countries, where they were treasured by young rock fans, including the dissident playwright Václav Havel, who would later become the country’s president.
The forbidden sounds – loud, anarchic, sexy – offered an escape from the drabness of a tightly policed normality.
Rock and roll allowed people to imagine what it would be like to be free, if only for fleeting moments.
For that reason, the authorities viewed it as profoundly subversive.
Rock fans in Western democracies listened to groups like the Rolling Stones, the Velvet Underground, or Frank Zappa’s Mothers of Invention, for pleasure.
There was a certain amount of political bluster among rock stars, to be sure, but this was widely regarded as frivolous posturing.
Not in countries like Czechoslovakia, where the music – more than the posturing – was an expression of serious rebellion.
Indeed, the defense of the Plastic People of the Universe became a public cause for dissidents like Havel, ultimately giving rise to Czechoslovakia’s Charter 77 movement.
When Havel offered Zappa an official role in his democratic government after the Communist regime had fallen, Zappa was as astonished as everyone else.
But it showed how much his music had meant to people like Havel, when they had to listen to it secretly, risking arrest.
The role of rock music in countries behind the Iron Curtain was beautifully dramatized in Tom Stoppard’s 2006 play Rock ‘n’ Roll, in which a Havel-like character, named Ferdinand (after characters of the same name in Havel’s own plays), extolls the music as a supreme form of political resistance.
Other people in the play scoff at this notion, treating musical subversion as trivial.
Stoppard, like Havel, clearly doesn’t agree.
The play ends with the Rolling Stones’ historic concert in Prague in 1990.
Rock is ecstatic music.
Ecstasy allows people to let go of themselves.
This is not always benign.
Mass hysteria at Nazi rallies was a form of ecstasy too.
So is the behavior of soccer crowds, which can sometimes turn violent.
I once witnessed a group of highly respectable Singaporeans letting go of themselves in an evangelical church service.
Urged on by an excited Japanese preacher, men in grey suits started writhing on the floor, foaming at the mouth, and jabbering nonsense.
It was not an edifying spectacle.
In fact, it was frightening.
But the Japanese preacher was not wrong to claim that people – especially, as he put it to his congregation, buttoned-up Japanese and Singaporeans – sometimes need a relief from everyday conformity.
Music-induced ecstasy is not the same as speaking in tongues in a religious frenzy.
But the experiences are related.
That is why official guardians of social order are so often eager to ban such practices.
Indeed, as far back as 380 BC, Plato warned against departing from traditional forms of music.
Musical innovation, he wrote in The Republic, and especially exciting new sounds, were a danger to the polis.
He believed that lawlessness began with unorthodox kinds of musical entertainment, and advised the authorities to put a stop to such things.
Last month, Mick Jagger told his Cuban fans in Spanish that “finally the times are changing.”
Perhaps they are.
Obama struck a similar note in his farewell speech in Havana.
He spoke about a new era, “a future of hope.”
He told Raúl Castro, the stiff-legged Cuban strongman, who is more than a decade older than Jagger and almost three decades older than Obama, that he should not fear freedom of speech.
These are fine words.
But real political freedom in Cuba may be slow to come.
And the example of China shows that individual hedonism can be successfully combined with political authoritarianism.
(The Stones have already played in Shanghai, even though the Chinese authorities insisted on vetting their songs.)
But it is a start.
Rock and roll has officially come to Cuba.
Jagger paid proper respect to Cuba’s own ecstatic musical traditions.
Cubans already know how to dance.
The next, much bigger step is for the autocrats to get off the floor.
Rolling the Dice in Cyprus
PRINCETON – The task was never going to be an easy one: impose losses worth about €5.8 billion ($7.5 billion) on lenders to the Cypriot government and depositors with the country’s banks.
And now that effort has led Europe to its latest impasse.
In marathon negotiations, the Cypriot government, under the supervision of the troika (the European Commission, the European Central Bank, and the International Monetary Fund), agreed to a one-time “tax” on bank deposits.
But, despite an amendment to exempt accounts containing less than €20,000, the Cypriot parliament overwhelmingly rejected the plan, leaving Cyprus – and Europe – in limbo.
In fact, large depositors are not unlike senior bondholders, and the proposed haircut was a small but welcome step forward.
But, because it did not go far enough, a hole remained.
There were other options.
Lee Buchheit, the veteran sovereign-debt attorney who should have been in the negotiating room, and Mitu Gulati of Duke University have proposed an elegant “reprofiling” of Cyprus’s €15 billion sovereign debt that would instantly reduce the financing pressure on the country.
But such considerations were off the table well before the deliberations began.
Instead, the initial decision was to confiscate just under €3 billion from accounts containing less than €100,000 –&#160;the cutoff for deposit insurance.
Make no mistake: this would have been the greatest policy error since the start of the financial crisis five years ago.
Indeed, the proposal amounted to a rupture with the near-universal agreement that small depositors should be considered sacrosanct.
After all, televised news footage of panicked depositors in long lines outside banks and at ATMs can cause immeasurable financial damage far beyond a country’s borders.
Historians will argue whether forcing Lehman Brothers into bankruptcy in September 2008 precipitated the subsequent global financial crisis.
Vincent Reinhart, formerly of the US Federal Reserve and now at Morgan Stanley, has argued that the Lehman decision was correct (the error came earlier, with the bailout of Bear Stearns, which created an expectation that all banks would be bailed out).
Private risks must be privately borne.
By contrast, the proposal to impose losses on small Cypriot depositors had no redeeming justification whatsoever.
As in Ireland, the most vulnerable were being asked to take the hit, while large depositors were let off lightly and other lenders were to be spared.
But it gets worse.
There has never been an official explanation of why lenders to a sovereign should not share the pain, despite the “no bailout” principle on which the eurozone was founded.
Most observers cite the authorities’ concern that if any sovereign does not honor its debts, all sovereign borrowers will be penalized.
But such contagion risk is trivial compared to the wildfire that could be ignited by imposing losses on small depositors.
In mid-2007, Cyprus qualified for eurozone membership by meeting the stringent Maastricht criteria, intended to ensure that new entrants would behave responsibly and flourish in the secure environment provided by the currency union.
In the months leading up to the decision, the IMF urged Cyprus to take all necessary steps to ensure a favorable outcome.
The benefits of Cyprus’s adoption of the euro may never be clear.
By 2009, the IMF’s Article IV Staff Report was already ringing the alarm bells.
Public debt was still low, but growing rapidly; the current-account deficit was ballooning (reaching 15% of GDP in 2008); and the banks had gone Icelandic, with assets worth more than three times Cyprus’s GDP.
As the report noted, the huge and highly concentrated banking sector’s problems could “quickly escalate to systemic proportions with serious economic repercussions.”
And so they have.
This is a remarkable outcome, given that the risks have been so well known and understood.
Indeed, the Cypriot authorities have been engaged in ongoing discussions with the troika for the past year.
And yet, despite all of the preparation, a night of closed-door negotiations led to a stunningly elementary error.
Compounding that error was the absence of any substantive decision concerning how to extricate Cyprus from its downward spiral.
Cypriot debt, we are told, will rise to 140% of GDP, but will fall to about 100% of GDP in less than a decade.
This appears to be another replay of the Greek scenario, with targets for reducing the debt burden repeatedly missed, until more drastic steps become inevitable.
Most important, no restructuring of Cypriot banks appears imminent; on the contrary, the intent seems to be to keep large depositors from fleeing and preserve the highly risky system.
The Central Bank of Cyprus has provided large loans to Cypriot banks under the Emergency Liquidity Assistance arrangement, implying that the collateral offered did not meet the standards of the ECB.
More train wrecks are in the making.
The problems in Cyprus now threaten international financial stability.
If the idea of a European banking union is serious, now is the moment to advance it.
That means reaffirming the commitment to deposit insurance, closing unviable banks, and recapitalizing the rest with European (not Cypriot) funds.
The troika’s decision on Cyprus was akin to policymaking by rolling the dice.
The coming days will reveal the extent of the immediate damage that it has caused.
But, with another display of reactive and ad hoc decision-making, we are no wiser about how Europe intends to resolve its dilemmas.
Could the Cypriot setback catalyze a fresh start?
Romney versus Obama
CAMBRIDGE – While the presidential primary elections in the United States are not over, Mitt Romney is now almost certain to be the party’s nominee to face Democratic President Barack Obama in November.
As Governor of Massachusetts, Romney built a record as a competent and moderate conservative, a political profile that suited him to the state’s electorate.
But the Republican Party’s far right wing dominates the primaries, so Romney has worked hard to escape the “moderate” label by staking out very conservative positions.
Now, as the party’s presumptive nominee, he must move back toward the political center, where the majority of voters are to be found.
So which is the real Mitt Romney?
And how can voters judge the two candidates?
Obama has a proven track record, albeit one that has disappointed many who voted for him in 2008.
Of course, his supporters argue that he had to adapt to two ongoing wars and the worst recession since the 1930’s.
Moreover, after the 2010 mid-term elections, a hostile Republican-controlled House of Representatives blocked his initiatives.
Romney, for his part, will hold up Obama’s early, still-unmet promises, while Obama will call Romney a “flip-flopper” who changes his positions to suit the moment (and the audience).
In fact, the difficulty of predicting the eventual winner’s performance in office is not new.
In his 2000 presidential bid, George W. Bush famously promised “compassionate conservatism” and a humble foreign policy, but governed very differently, as when he decided to invade Iraq.
Likewise, Woodrow Wilson and Lyndon Johnson campaigned on promises of peace, but each took America to war shortly after being elected.
Do such post-election changes in direction make a mockery of democracy?
How can voters make intelligent judgments when campaigns are so carefully scripted and slickly promoted?
Leadership theorists suggest that we should pay less attention to leaders’ policy promises than to their emotional intelligence – their self-mastery and ability to reach out to others.
Contrary to the view that emotions interfere with clear thinking, the ability to understand and regulate emotions can result in more effective thinking.
As Supreme Court Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes reputedly quipped after meeting Franklin D. Roosevelt: “Second-class intellect, but first-class temperament.”
Most historians would agree that Roosevelt’s success as a leader rested more on his good nature than on his analytical skills.
The energy and optimism that he unleashed in his administration’s first hundred days did not reflect concrete policy proposals in his campaign.
Psychologists have wrestled with the concept of intelligence, and how to assess it, for more than a century.
General IQ tests measure dimensions of intelligence such as verbal and spatial dexterity, but IQ scores generally predict only about 10-20% of success in life.
And, while experts disagree about how much of the other 80% is attributable to emotional intelligence, they generally agree that it is an important and learnable skill that increases with age and experience, and that individuals possess it to varying degrees.
Leaders work hard to manage their public images, which requires some of the same emotional discipline and skill that successful actors possess.
Ronald Reagan’s experience in Hollywood served him well in this regard, and Roosevelt was a master at image management. Despite his pain and difficulty in moving on legs crippled by polio, he maintained a cheery exterior and avoided being photographed in a wheelchair.
Whether they realize it or not, leaders always convey signals.
Emotional intelligence involves the awareness and control of such signals, and the self-discipline that prevents personal psychological needs from distorting policy.
If emotional intelligence is inauthentic, others will likely find out in the long run.
Richard Nixon, for example, was strong on cognitive skills, but weak on emotional intelligence.
He was able to strategize effectively on foreign policy, but was less able to control the personal insecurities that eventually led to his downfall – a shortcoming that emerged only over time.
Indeed, it was not until well into his presidency that the public learned of his infamous “enemies list.”
Bush showed emotional intelligence in midlife by mastering his problems with alcohol, and in displaying the courage to persevere with unpopular policies.
But, at some point, perseverance becomes emotional stubbornness.
Like Wilson, Bush had an obstinate commitment to his vision that inhibited learning and adjustment.
Perhaps the flexibility that Obama and Romney have shown is not such a bad quality for a president after all.
The rigors of the prolonged campaign provide voters with some clues about stamina and self-discipline.
Each of the Republican candidates took a turn as front-runner in this race, and the rigors of the primary season exposed the flaws in some, like Texas Governor Rick Perry, who were initially attractive.
Now, in the general election, how Romney, in particular, relates to his party’s platform will tell us something about the strength of his independence and future cabinet appointments.
But the most important variable for voters to examine is the candidate’s biography.
I do not mean the slick books and television advertisements that are produced for their campaigns.
While image consultants and acting ability can mask a candidate’s character, an integrated life over time is the best basis to judge the authenticity of the next president’s temperament and how he will govern.
Above all, sophisticated voters will themselves be emotionally intelligent enough to be prepared for surprises.
When their candidate disappoints them – as he inevitably will, regardless of the election’s outcome – they will bear in mind that democracy is the worst system, except for all of the others.
Coase’s Chinese Legacy
HONG KONG – The recent death of Ronald H. Coase, the founding father of new institutional economics, is a great loss to Chinese economists who are seeking an effective framework for understanding China’s ongoing economic transformation.
His legacy – insights into the role of firms, financial institutions, and the state in shaping the market and driving economic development – will prove crucial as China works to achieve high-income status.
With two seminal papers, Coase changed the way economists view institutions’ impact on an economy.
His 1937 paper “The Nature of the Firm” introduced the concept of transaction costs into discussions of a firm’s structure, function, and limitations.
And his 1960 paper “The Problem of Social Cost” proposed that the state could manage the negative externalities, such as pollution or traffic, of economic activities through well-defined property rights.
In his final years, Coase shifted his focus to the emergence of capitalism and the creation of markets in China.
According to Coase, since the period of reform and opening up began in 1979, China has been a living experiment in institutional evolution, shaped simultaneously by the central government and by local governments and enterprises.
This evolution is at the center of a case study of Foshan – a city of seven million people located near Guangzhou, at the heart of the Pearl River Delta – launched last year by a team of Chinese researchers (of which we were a part).
As it turns out, Foshan may well be the ideal example to test Coase’s views.
Given Foshan’s proximity to Hong Kong, it is firmly embedded in global supply chains – a fact that has helped to drive rapid nominal GDP growth, from roughly ¥1.3 billion in 1978 to ¥670.9 billion ($109.7 billion) last year.
The private sector – focused on the production of home appliances, machinery equipment, construction materials, textiles, and food – accounts for more than 60% of Foshan’s GDP.
Foshan is also home to the world’s largest wholesale lighting and furniture markets, and its products are exported internationally.
According to the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, Foshan is China’s most competitive prefecture-level city, and its eighth most competitive city overall, owing partly to institutional innovations by local governments at the township, district, and prefecture levels.
These innovations enabled Foshan to create markets that were largely defunct before 1979, while coping with rapid urbanization, industrialization, and globalization.
Foshan’s development offers important insight into the core problem that China is now facing: how to transform a low value-added, manufacturing-based economy into a high value-added, innovation-fueled economy.
While the previous model brought 30 years of success in terms of GDP growth, it generated considerable risks and imbalances – including environmental degradation, social inequities, excessive debt, industrial over-capacity, and a bloated state sector.
As Foshan’s experience demonstrates, cities can play a pivotal role in correcting these imbalances and driving China’s economic transition.
The Chinese city evolved as a walled-in seat of power centered around a marketplace.
Indeed, the two characters that comprise the Chinese word for city (城市) mean “castle” (城) and “market” (市) – an apt juxtaposition, which endures today in the form of the relationship between collective state-led action to build strong markets and private-sector competition within and among cities.
In terms of physical infrastructure, China’s most dynamic cities – such as Beijing, Shanghai, and Foshan – already resemble Western metropolises like Paris and Chicago.
But this “hardware” is inefficient without the “software” needed to manage it – namely, as Coase suggested, an efficient property-rights infrastructure (the laws, procedures, and administrative capacity needed to support efficient, fair, and innovative markets).
The convergence of consumer lifestyles and preferences driven by globalization has enabled the world’s major cities to specialize production for global markets.
But, given regional differences in political, social, and economic arrangements – often reflecting the particularities of local history and culture – significant divergences in citizens’ attitudes remain.
Responsibility for ensuring the smooth functioning of markets despite these disparities falls to the state.
In other words, markets are global networks, which depend on cities to serve as hubs; cities, in turn, require state coordination of supply chains to deliver market-enabling public goods effectively.
China’s growth story has entailed the orchestration of at least four supply chains: a global production supply chain, run largely by the private sector; a logistics supply chain, run by state-owned enterprises; a finance supply chain, mainly comprising state-owned banks; and a government-services supply chain.
Cities like Foshan have benefited substantially from the effective coordination of these networks.
But a fifth supply chain – that of human talent – has largely been neglected, and cities cannot achieve their potential unless they can attract the best human talent.
A Coasian analysis of China’s development would center on the complex interaction between the locally minded state and the globally minded market, with the key lesson being that, contrary to free-market ideology, less government does not necessarily mean more market.
Rather, an expanding market needs a strong government, but with a more targeted approach that emphasizes, for example, developing the property-rights infrastructure, building the human talent pool, and implementing macroeconomic policies that support high-quality growth.
Neither capitalism nor socialism has fully revealed how to achieve efficient GDP growth, an inclusive society, and ecological sustainability simultaneously.
If China applies Coase’s institutional insights to develop an effective development framework, it may well manage to strike this crucial balance.
China’s Currency Conundrum
PALO ALTO – The People’s Bank of China (PBOC), it seems, cannot win.
In late February, the gradual appreciation of the renminbi was interrupted by a 1% depreciation (to $1:¥6.12).
Though insignificant in overall trade terms, especially when compared with the volatility of floating exchange-rate regimes, the renminbi’s unexpected weakening sparked a global furor.
The uproar was not surprising.
After all, China has been under constant pressure from foreign governments to revalue, in the mistaken belief that a stronger currency would reduce China’s large trade surplus.
And, since July 2008, when the exchange rate was $1:¥8.28 (and had been held constant for ten years), the PBOC has more or less complied, with appreciations approximating 3% per year through 2012.
However, the international outcry obscured an unintended but perhaps more troubling feature of China’s exchange-rate policy: the tendency for sporadic renminbi appreciation (even small movements) to trigger speculative inflows of “hot” money.
With short-term interest rates in the United States near zero, and the “natural” interbank interest rate in faster-growing China at near 4%, an expected 3% appreciation, for example, translates into an “effective” interest-rate differential of 7%.
This is an enticing spread for currency speculators who borrow in dollars and circumvent China’s capital controls to buy renminbi assets.
The hot-money problem is only made worse by the ongoing international pressure for further renminbi revaluation, usually from Western economists and politicians who blame the exchange rate for China’s current-account surplus with the US and other developed economies.
In reality, the trade imbalance reflects the difference between China’s large savings surplus and the even bigger US saving deficiency (largely explained by the US fiscal deficit).
Indeed, the wholesale price index – the best measure of tradable-goods prices in China – has been falling by about 1.5% annually, which suggests that the renminbi may even be slightly overvalued.
Simply put, exchange-rate movements do not properly correct net trade (saving) imbalances between open economies; but they can increase hot money flows.
So the PBOC tried to keep speculators off guard by introducing more uncertainty into the exchange-rate system, as occurred with February’s surprise devaluation.
In mid-March, the PBOC announced that the daily movement in the renminbi/dollar rate would be increased from ±1% to ±2%, to further dampen hot-money speculators’ enthusiasm.
While this is all well and good, speculative inflows would be further dampened if today’s central rate, say, $1:¥6.1, was stabilized into the indefinite future.
There is another, less-discussed justification for holding the currency at a stable rate.
The adjustment mechanism usually provided by exchange-rate movements could instead be delivered by wage changes.
It is only in more sluggish industrial economies, where wages are assumed to be inflexible, that policymakers advocate exchange-rate movements as a means to overcome wage stickiness.
However, in rapidly growing emerging markets, wages are often sufficiently flexible on the upside.
For example, if an employer (particularly an exporter) fears future renminbi appreciation, he may hesitate to raise wages in line with productivity increases, in order to keep his costs under control.
But if he can be confident that the exchange rate will remain stable, he will not need to restrain wages – and China has experienced 10-15% annual wage growth already.
With faster wage growth at a stable nominal exchange rate, and by encouraging unit labor costs to converge to those in developed economies, China’s real international competitiveness would be better calibrated.
As a result of policymakers’ heavy focus on the exchange rate, China’s State Administration of Foreign Exchange has now accumulated more than $4 trillion in reserves – far exceeding the amount needed to cover any imaginable currency emergency.
Worse, the very act of currency intervention can undermine the PBOC’s control of monetary policy.
Buying dollars increases the domestic base money supply, risking inflation and asset-price bubbles.
Efforts to “sterilize” these purchases and dampen domestic credit expansion also have adverse consequences.
The PBOC frequently does this by selling bonds to commercial banks or raising their reserve requirements.
But this has reduced these banks’ effectiveness as financial intermediaries, while encouraging the rise of shadow banking to circumvent the restrictions.
What, then, are the PBOC’s options?
One approach might be simply to let the renminbi float without official intervention or controls on capital inflows.
Again, this would inevitably trigger hot-money inflows, with speculators taking advantage of the spread between Chinese interest rates and the near-zero, short-term rates in developed economies, thereby driving up the renminbi further (and creating yet more opportunities for speculation).
There would be no well-defined market equilibrium, or upper bound, for the renminbi/dollar exchange rate.
Even without hot-money inflows, the renminbi’s exchange rate would face upward pressure, owing to the absence of corresponding outflows to finance the trade (saving) surplus.
As an immature international creditor, China is unable to balance the inflows by making renminbi loans abroad.
Nor would it want to make dollar-denominated loans.
Private banks, insurance companies, pension funds, and so on have limited appetite for building up liquid dollar claims on foreigners when their own liabilities – deposits, insurance claims, and pension obligations – are denominated in renminbi.
The potential currency mismatch would require the PBOC (which cares little for exchange-rate risk) to step in as the international financial intermediary and buy liquid dollar assets on a vast scale.
Moreover, foreign investors remain reluctant to borrow from Chinese banks in renminbi, or to issue renminbi-denominated bonds in Shanghai.
That will remain true as long as they fear continued outside political pressure to appreciate.
China is therefore caught in a currency trap, owing to its own saving surplus (and America’s saving deficiency) and near-zero interest rates on dollar assets.
Although fully liberalizing China’s domestic financial markets and “internationalizing” the renminbi may be possible one day, that day is far off.
For now, if China tries to liberalize its financial markets, hot money will flow the wrong way – into the economy, rather than out.
Thus, China must maintain controls on inflows of financial capital for the time being, with the PBOC intervening to stabilize the renminbi/dollar exchange rate.
Until conditions in the world economy improve substantially, China’s policymakers will have no easy way out.
But, even if they are constrained, the economy can continue to grow.
Asal Mula Ketidakpercayaan di Timur Tengah
DURHAM – Rasa tidak percaya yang mengjangkit masyarakat Timur Tengah sangat jelas.
Sebagaimana dikonfirmasi melalui beberapa controlled experiments, warga Arab memiliki rasa percaya yang sangat rendah terhadap orang asing, baik itu ekspatriat maupun penduduk setempat, dibandingkan dengan warga Eropa misalnya.
Hal ini menghambat kemajuan di berbagai bidang, mulai dari pengembangan bisnis hingga reformasi di pemerintahan.
Masyarakat dengan tingkat kepercayaan rendah memiliki tingkat partisipasi yang jauh lebih rendah di perdagangan internasional dan menarik investasi lebih kecil.
Bahkan, menurut World Values Survey dan riset terkait, kepercayaan di kalangan masyarakat Timur Tengah relatif rendah sehingga mereka membatasi transaksi komersial di antara kenalan saja, baik secara pribadi atau melalui teman/keluarga.
Akibat rendahnya kepercayaan, warga Arab sering melewatkan kesempatan menarik.
Sama halnya, pada setiap interaksi dengan lembaga publik, warga Arab cenderung melakukan perantaraan dengan individu yang memiliki kedekatan tertentu dengan mereka.
Salah satu konsekuensinya adalah ketidakadilan mengenai ekspektasi seseorang terhadap lembaga. Hal ini melemahkan efektivitas lembaga.
Jelas sekali terdapat urgensi untuk mengatasi defisit kepercayaan di Timur Tengah.
Langkah pertama adalah memahami penyebabnya.
Salah satu petunjuk potensial terletak pada perbedaan antara persepsi Muslim dan Nasrani.
Tentu tidak ada data resmi yang mengukur defisit tersebut; di sejumlah kawasan Timur Tengah, jumlah umat Nasrani yang ada terlalu sedikit sehingga sulit untuk membuat perbandingan statistik.
Namun bukti tidak resmi menunjukkan bahwa pembeli, pedagang, dan investor di Timur Tengah umumnya menganggap umat Nasrani setempat lebih terpercaya dibandingkan sesama warga yang Muslim.
“Sejak dahulu sudah begitu,” kata mereka.
Studi saya bersama sejarawan ekonomi, Jared Rubin, yang mempelajari produk-produk pengadilan agama Islam di Istanbul pada abad 17 dan 18 mungkin bisa menerangkan asal mulanya.
Pada zaman tersebut, Istanbul adalah kota kosmopolitan, sekitar 35% penduduk setempat adalah umat Nasrani dan 6% di antaranya Yahudi.
Berdasarkan hukum Islam (syariah), pemeluk agama Islam harus melakukan transaksi bisnis sesuai aturan-aturan Islam, dan apabila mereka hendak menyelesaikan suatu sengketa, pengadilan agama Islam harus dipergunakan.
Dalam hal ini, penganut Nasrani dan Yahudi bisa bertransaksi dengan siapapun, namun mereka berhak mengikuti aturan-aturan Islam dan mempergunakan pengadilan agama, jika berkenan.
Namun tentu saja, jika mereka terlibat dalam sebuah perkara dengan seorang Muslim, perkara tersebut harus diselesaikan di pengadilan agama.
Ketika seorang Muslim dan non-Muslim saling berhadapan di persidangan, penganut agama Islam mendapat keuntungan yang signifikan.
Pertama, pelatihan bagi hakim-hakim memberi kecenderungan bagi mereka untuk mempercayai sesama Muslim.
Kedua, seluruh pegawai pengadilan beragama Islam, berarti kesaksian dipandang hanya dari kacamata Muslim.
Ketiga, Muslim bisa bersaksi melawan siapapun, sementara orang-orang Nasrani dan Yahudi hanya diizinkan bersaksi melawan orang non-Muslim lainnya.
Namun keuntungan-keuntungan di atas memiliki kekurangan tersendiri.
Akibat sistem hukum yang memudahkan Muslim cedera janji tanpa konsekuensi, mereka acap kali tergoda untuk menghindar dari pembayaran utang dan mangkir dari tanggung jawabnya terhadap mitra bisnis dan penjual.
Sementara itu, warga non-Muslim, yang mana kewajiban atas mereka ditegakkan sebegitu kuatnya, dikenal akan sifat dapat dipercaya.
Guna menggambarkan perbedaan perceived risk, pemberi pinjaman, yang mayoritas Muslim, mengenakan 2 poin persentase lebih rendah bagi pemeluk Nasrani dan Yahudi yang mengajukan pinjaman dibandingkan yang beragama Islam (15% per tahun bagi non-Muslim dan 17% bagi Muslim).
Jadi tampak bahwa persepsi sikap dapat dipercaya di dunia Arab bahwasanya mengakar atau setidaknya dipengaruhi oleh timpangnya penegakan atas janji atau kesepakatan berdasarkan hukum Islam.
Perbedaan sektarian dalam penegakan hukum tidak berlangsung lama.
Pada pertengahan abad ke-19, pengadilan agama digantikan oleh pengadilan sekuler, setidaknya untuk urusan perdagangan dan keuangan.
Penegakan terhadap perjanjian kemudian menjadi lebih berimbang.
Jumlah warga non-Muslim di negara-negara dengan penduduk Muslim terbanyak di Timur Tengah sudah berkurang drastis, melalui emigrasi dan pertukaran populasi.
Akibatnya, lebih sedikit warga Muslim asal Timur Tengah yang memiliki pengalaman pribadi berbisnis dengan non-Muslim.
Akan tetapi, kesan lama tentang Muslim yang kurang terpercaya masih bertahan dan diteruskan di keluarga dan sejawat.
Kebiasaan lama sebagai oportunis yang suka ingkar janji juga tak kunjung hilang dan semakin menegaskan stereotype yang diwariskan.
Kecenderungan untuk membatasi transaksi hanya kepada kenalan adalah respon alamiah dalam situasi yang minim kepercayaan.
Ironis memang betapa stereotype yang merusak ini justru muncul dari sistem hukum yang secara eksplisit dimaksudkan untuk memberi keunggulan kepada Muslim yang dominan secara militer dan politik dalam hubungan sosial dan ekonomi dengan umat Nasrani dan Yahudi.
Selain menaikkan biaya transaksi ekonomi antar Muslim pada saat itu, aturan-aturan bertujuan untuk membatasi kebebasan beragama – peniadaan “pilihan hukum” kepada Muslim dan pembatasan kesaksian di hadapan persidangan bagi non-Muslim – membantu menciptakan budaya ketidakpercayaan yang kini menghambat kemajuan di berbagai bidang.
Hukum Islam lalu melemahkan komunitas Muslim yang seharusnya dijaga.
Ketika beragam gerakan politik berusaha menegakkan kembali syariah, ingat sekali lagi kerugian jangka panjang yang telah diakibatkan.
Bukan hukum Islam yang sekarang diperlukan Timur Tengah, tapi berbagai upaya untuk membangkitkan kepercayaan antar dan di dalam komunitas, lembaga swasta dan pemerintah.
Menghidupkan kembali hukum Islam hanya akan memperburuk defisit kepercayaan yang merupakan sumber utama keterbelakangan ekonomi dan kegagalan politik di Timur Tengah.
Round-Trip Freedom
NEW YORK – Western media describe my friend and colleague Chen Guangcheng as a blind activist who made a flight to freedom when China allowed him to journey from Beijing to the United States.
What is essential about Chen is neither his blindness nor his family’s visit to the US, but the fact that he upholds a vision of universal human rights, a vision that can be fully realized only when, and if, China honors its promise to allow him one day to return home.
China has a history of forcing scholars and dissidents like us into exile.
When the Chinese student movement broke out in 1989, I was pursuing a Ph.D. in mathematics at the University of California-Berkeley. I traveled to Beijing to participate as an activist in Tiananmen Square, where I narrowly escaped the massacre and was able to make my way back to the US.
Due to my activism, however, China refused to renew my passport.
So, when I returned to China in 2002 to help the movement for workers’ rights, I used a friend’s passport.
China incarcerated me as a political prisoner for five years, until 2007. For a year and a half of that period, I was held in solitary confinement, without access to visitors, reading materials, or even paper and pen.
Upon my release, China renewed my passport on the condition that I return to the US.
I have tried three times to return to my homeland, only to see China block each attempt at the Hong Kong airport.
So Chen’s case serves as a reminder that those who want to support Chinese activists’ struggle for human rights must support our right to enter and leave China freely.
It also confirms that China’s top leaders can be moved when the international community, led by the US, puts specific cases like his on the table.
China’s leaders directed negotiators to resolve the issue before the arrival of US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, because she could be counted on to raise the issue in full view of the world’s media.
This naming and shaming approach can be more effective than most observers think.
Human rights need not take a back seat to doing business with China.
As a case in point, many Western observers thought that Norway’s trade relations with China would be undermined when dissident Liu Xiaobo was invited to receive the Nobel Peace Prize in Oslo in December 2010.
China complained loudly, refused to allow Liu to collect the prize, and even threatened Norway with financial repercussions.
The same month, however, one of China’s largest oil companies concluded a drilling contract with Norway’s Statoil, clearly signaling that diplomatic tensions would not stop business.
So Western diplomats who negotiate with China should call lower-level officials’ bluff, and focus on the signal-to-noise ratio, bearing in mind that, ultimately, decisions are taken quietly at a higher level by pragmatic leaders who are indeed susceptible to pressure.
After all, economic growth remains China’s best hope to keep the regime afloat, and it is the main criterion for officials’ promotion through the ranks.
So the last thing that officials at any level want to do is jeopardize international trade.
The strong commitment of US President Barack Obama’s administration in supporting Chen made a difference, and it will make a difference in other cases, too.
So we voices for human rights in China have reason to express gratitude to Clinton, Ambassador Gary Locke, House Speaker John Boehner, US Representatives Chris Smith, Frank Wolf, Nancy Pelosi, Jim McGovern, and Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, and many citizens who spoke out for Chen.
Chen had been sentenced to four years and three months in jail because he alienated corrupt local officials.
After he served his term, the same officials funneled government funds to hire 200 thugs to punish him further by keeping him confined to his house.
The resolution of Chen’s dilemma shows that standing up for human rights will gain the grudging respect of China’s leadership and citizenry.
In addition, promoting democracy and human rights in authoritarian countries such as China will improve their social equality, economic productivity, and political stability in the long run, making them better trading partners.
The right of return and freedom of speech were uppermost in Chen’s mind as he engineered his family’s departure for the US.
I know because I spoke with him while he was in a hospital, negotiating his release.
Exile is not freedom.
For Chen, as for myself, the true flight to freedom will be made with a return ticket home.
Running From the Ruble
PARIS – In recent weeks, the fall in the Russian ruble and Russian stock markets closely tracked the declines in global oil prices.
But everything changed on December 15.
The oil price remained stable, but the ruble and the stock-price indices lost 30% in the subsequent 24 hours.
An unprecedented effort by the Central Bank of Russia (CBR) in the wee hours of December 16 to stabilize the ruble, by hiking the interest rate from 10.5% to 17%, proved useless.
The cause of Russia’s “Black Monday” was readily apparent: the government bailout of state-owned Rosneft, the country’s largest oil company.
Usually, bailouts calm markets; but this one recalled early post-Soviet experiments, when the CBR issued direct loans to enterprises – invariably fueling higher inflation.
The CBR’s governor at the time, Viktor Gerashchenko, was once dubbed the world’s worst central banker.
In 2014, the CBR is more constrained than it was in Gerashchenko’s era: it cannot lend directly to firms.
Yet it has also become more sophisticated at achieving the same ends that Gerashchenko sought.
In October, Rosneft issued $11 billion worth of ruble-denominated bonds (an unparalleled amount for the Russian market, equivalent to 70% of the total value of corporate bonds issued in Russia this year).
The coupon on these bonds was actually 1.5 percentage points below sovereign bonds of similar maturity, which is also unusual, especially given that Rosneft currently is subject to Western sanctions.
Then, unnamed investors (allegedly the largest Russian state banks) benefited from the CBR’s decision on December 12 to allow these bonds to be used as collateral for three-year CBR ruble loans at the policy rate.
Moreover, the CBR scheduled a special auction for such loans on December 15 – with the total amount of the loans similar to that of Rosneft’s bond issue.
Thus, the CBR would be able to provide a massive pile of rubles to Rosneft at below-market rates.
So why did the deal trigger a panic?
At first glance, this deal was intended to meet contemporary Russia’s most important economic challenge.
Sanctions have cut off Russian banks and companies from Western financial markets.
Russian companies have to repay or refinance about $300 billion of debt over the coming two years.
Some of this debt is owed to Russian companies’ offshore owners, who will certainly be happy to roll it over.
But in most cases, firms’ liabilities comprise real debt owed to major international banks.
The best example is Rosneft, which borrowed about $40 billion in 2013 to buy its competitor, TNK-BP.
About $10 billion of this debt has to be repaid in the fourth quarter of 2014, including a $7 billion payment on December 21 ($20 billion more will have to be repaid in 2015).
Financial-market investors have been waiting patiently for the government to announce a strategy for addressing the issue of external corporate debt.
The CBR did introduce a 12-month dollar facility for up to $50 billion, but this will barely last until the end of 2015.
Given that the price of oil is likely to remain low, Asian financiers – even the Chinese – do not seem eager to refinance Russian companies, and sanctions are unlikely to be lifted, investors clearly wanted a bigger and bolder solution.
Rosneft had repeatedly asked for $40 billion from Russia’s sovereign wealth fund.
But, with that money already committed to other purposes, the government opted for a non-transparent and non-market-based solution that would have made Gerashchenko proud.
Unfortunately, this solution poses several immediate problems.
For starters, the risk of Rosneft defaulting – as well as the cost of providing subsidized loans – rests with the bondholders.
If the bondholders are indeed the largest state-owned banks, the deal actually hurts the banking system: it increases the concentration of risk and implies additional losses from buying bonds with below-market interest rates.
Second, because Rosneft must repay its external debt, it is likely to use its bailout cash to buy dollars, which can only result in further downward pressure on the ruble.
Rosneft has denied this publicly, but the markets nonetheless seem to expect that the newly printed rubles will flood the currency markets.
Third, the non-transparent structure of the deal undermines trust in the CBR’s integrity and independence.
The day after Black Monday, Minister of Economy Alexey Ulyukaev said that the CBR should have increased interest rates sooner.
This immediately raised suspicion that the CBR delayed the interest-rate hike in order to complete the deal at the lower rate.
Finally, this bailout fails to answer the question it was supposed to address.
Investors do not know whether the Rosneft bailout is a one-off deal and, if it is not, which companies can hope to receive similar treatment from the CBR.
Thus, they do not understand how (and whether) Russian corporate debt will be repaid or refinanced – or how much trust they can place in the ruble.
Europe’s Rule-of-Law Crisis
BRUSSELS – From the rubble of two world wars, European countries came together to launch what would become the world’s largest experiment in unification and cooperative, shared sovereignty.
But, despite its impressive achievements over the decades, the European project now risks disintegration.
An unresolved financial crisis, a refugee crisis, a deteriorating security environment, and a stalled integration process have created throughout Europe a toxic, unstable political environment in which populism and nationalism thrive.
Perhaps the clearest manifestation of this is the erosion of the rule of law in the European Union.
Two EU members in particular, Hungary and Poland, are now jeopardizing hard-won European democratic norms – and thus undermining the very purpose of European integration.
In Hungary, liberal-democratic values have come under systematic attack from Prime Minister Viktor Orbán’s government.
Since his return to the premiership in 2010, Orbán has committed Hungary to an authoritarian nationalist path, and he has exploited the refugee crisis to cement a “siege mentality” that helps him sustain popular support.
In the process, fundamental rights have been ignored, media freedom has been curbed, refugees have been demonized, and Orbán is doing everything in his power to weaken the EU.
Attempts by EU institutions to convince Orbán to change course have only emboldened him to commit further outrages against democratic norms.
Meanwhile, a democratic crisis has emerged in Poland as well, starting last October, when the Law and Justice (PiS), a Euroskeptic party that also opposes immigration, secured an outright parliamentary majority by promising to implement populist economic policies and “put Poland first.”
Yet, since the election, PiS has launched a series of attacks on the Polish constitution itself.
Government legislation aimed at reforming Poland’s Constitutional Court has been condemned by the Court itself and the European democracy watchdog, the Venice Commission.
The government has effectively precluded the Court from ruling on the constitutionality of legislation.
This weakens a key pillar of the democratic rule of law – and thus is highly problematic for Poland and Europe alike.
Hungary and Poland are the leading edge of a far-right agenda that has taken hold throughout Europe, pursued by parties that are exploiting the political vacuum created by the EU’s failure to address the financial and refugee crises.
So how can the tables be turned?
In democratic countries, it is vital that democracy’s enemies be fought with democratic means.
It is vital that the outside world impress on the Hungarian and Polish people themselves that in a globalized world, nationalism offers only false security and economic irrelevance.
Both countries, at the heart of Europe, have profited enormously in every sense from EU membership; they must not throw away their opportunity to make further progress.
Hungarians and Poles rejected international isolation in 1989.
After the fall of the Iron Curtain, both countries became staunch NATO allies even before they joined the EU.
The geopolitical and security arguments for European unity are overwhelming, and there can be no united Europe without Hungary and Poland.
But all of us, and in particular the peoples of Hungary and Poland, must remember that NATO, like the EU, was founded on the fundamental principles of democracy, individual liberty, and the rule of law.
A government that flouts those principles jeopardizes the coherence and solidarity of the alliance.
It is therefore vital that the United States and other NATO allies speak out now and insist that functioning democratic checks and balances are safeguarded.
It would be unimaginable for NATO heads of state to go ahead with their planned leadership summit in Warsaw in June if Poland remains in its constitutional crisis, with the government disregarding the rule of law and the opinion of a respected international body.
Hungarians and Poles must be reminded that Russian President Vladimir Putin is actively attempting to divide and weaken the EU and NATO.
If Europe is to face down aggression from the Kremlin, it is essential that Poland and Hungary adhere to these groups’ fundamental values and principles.
But it is also necessary that the EU itself develop a more comprehensive mechanism for safeguarding the rule of law within the Union.
The EU has mechanisms to regulate economic policies, safeguard the environment, and police the Single Market.
But Europe has always been much more than an economic project; it is also a union of values, which no member can be allowed to repudiate without consequence.
Governments are created and fall apart, and politicians come and go; but democratic institutions should be spared from political interference.
The sad reality is that, were they to apply for EU membership today, neither Hungary nor Poland would be admitted.
Their people should weigh carefully what that means.
Their current leaders claim to be defending national interests. But is it really in their countries’ interest to be sidelined by the US, NATO, and the rest of Europe?
Rules for Calamity and Crisis
NEW YORK &#45;&#45; Several years ago, my daughter lay in a coma after a serious fall.
Two nurses came into her hospital room to prepare for a transfusion.
One clutched a pouch of blood and the other held my daughter’s medical dossier.
The first read aloud from the bag, “Type A blood,” and the other read aloud from the file, “Alexa Holmes, Type A blood.”
They then proceeded, following a script, to switch props and roles, the first nurse reading from the file, “Alexa Holmes, Type A blood,” and the second reading from the bag, “Type A blood.”
Why do well-trained professionals, when struggling with a rapidly unfolding emergency, adhere to rules laid down in advance?
The principal reason is that in times of crisis people fall into predictable but avoidable errors, largely because of panic.
Over time, detailed protocols have evolved for such confusing situations to encourage cool-headedness and minimize the risk of avoidable error.
The value of improvisation in the face of novel threats does not imply that existing rules should be peremptorily discarded.
This point is almost trite, but it remains virtually unnoticed by last-ditch defenders of the Bush administration’s foreign policy.
Even today, the leading Republican presidential candidates suggest that the rule of law is an unaffordable luxury in the battle with al-Qaeda.
They claim that constitutionalism and due process, if meticulously followed, reduce the government’s “flexibility” in devising ways to prevent terrorist attacks.
It is easy to imagine situations in which flexibility can be increased by curtailing individual rights and abandoning pre-established decision-making rules.
But generalizing from these exceptions is unwise.
An administration that has consistently boasted of its willingness to bend (and sometimes break) the law to meet an unprecedented threat has become notorious not for its flexibility, but for its rigidity.
Might there be a causal relation between the Bush administration’s cavalier, if not hostile, attitude toward law and its dazzling inability to acknowledge mistakes and manage midstream readjustments?
Could it be that a willingness to flout the law and circumvent the Constitution tends to produce not nimbleness, but obduracy and intransigence?
Just as adherence to rules can improve the performance of emergency-room personnel, so due process and constitutionalism can improve the performance, especially in a crisis, of law-enforcement officers and national-security policymakers.
Requiring the government to test the factual basis of its decision to use force is not a shackle to be thrown off, but an incentive for forethought and a psychologically stabilizing support.
A government that routinely makes fundamental national-security decisions based on undisclosed information, which no one outside a tiny circle of partisan loyalists ever has a chance to assess, is unlikely to make wise choices.
The idea that executive officials will fight terrorism more effectively when they know that no one is watching is farfetched.
A presidency that, having dismantled traditional checks and balances, is never compelled to provide coherent reasons for its policies, is soon likely to have few coherent reasons for its policies.
The self-defeating proclivities of such laxly monitored executive power are now visible for all to see.
Consider the decision radically to loosen evidentiary standards when deciding to incarcerate terrorist suspects in Guantánamo Bay or elsewhere.
The result has been to encourage liars to clog the system with disinformation and false leads while discouraging honest people from reporting what they observe, lest an innocent neighbor be incarcerated on the basis of misperceptions.
Secrecy is, of course, necessary in national-security affairs.
But excessive secrecy leads to scarce resources being diverted into wild-goose chases.
And, to hide from scrutiny, the executive branch inevitably ends up hiding from itself – for example, by preventing well-informed experts in the State Department from independently appraising decisions made in the Pentagon.
Obligatory consultation with independent and informed people may be annoying, but it can avert misunderstandings and accelerate the painful process of correcting blunders.
Having invaded an oil-rich Arab country that played no role in the terrorist attack of September 11, 2001, the United States has imprudently allowed itself to be sucked into its attackers’ primitive logic of collective punishment and group revenge.
It thereby abandoned the most essential pillar of the rule of law, namely the individualization of culpability.
Restricting criminal liability to actual perpetrators, carefully excluding clansmen and kin, is a fragile historical innovation aimed at interrupting spirals of bloody inter-communal violence.
The administration arguably devoted most of its counterterrorism efforts not to law enforcement operations, but into “war” in Muslim lands because it failed to keep a cool head in the immediate aftermath of the attacks on New York and Washington.
It thereby inadvertently confirmed the jihadists’ vilest propaganda, suggesting that Muslims worldwide can, for no apparent reason, become targets of America’s lethal fury.
The surest way to rouse violent resistance is to communicate to people that there is nothing they can personally do to avoid being attacked.
That is yet another reason why flouting inherited rules and protocols, in the name of national security, has made, and will continue to make, the terrorist threat catastrophically worse.
Running from Musharraf
How times change the man.
Pakistan’s embattled president, Pervez Musharraf, once declared, “I am not at all a politician.
I don’t think I’m cut out for politics.”
Eight years after seizing power and exiling his main civilian opponents, the general is moving heaven and earth to hold on to political office.
Though he took power in a bloodless coup, there was little doubt about his popularity at the time.
The public had tired of a civilian regime marked by corruption and economic chaos.
Musharraf’s personal frankness and integrity appealed to the street and earned him de facto legitimacy.
The general, who offered the father of modern Turkey, Kemal Atatürk, as his model, also seemed to represent a vision for his country that combined economic growth with support for secularizing impulses.
But, given his unwillingness to seek support for his regime and his policies from the ballot box, Musharraf succeeded in undermining both.
Over the years, he rigged referendums, browbeat the judiciary, and asked Islamic parties for support to shore up his government.
A president’s modernizing vision degenerated into a dictator’s power-driven myopia.
Musharraf admitted on television this year, “Yes, my popularity has been reduced.”
Yet he clearly failed to comprehend that this was not just about approval ratings.
The political core of his regime had become hollow.
In March, he sacked the chief justice of the Supreme Court, Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry, probably because Chaudhry objected to Musharraf’s seeking a constitutionally questionable third term as president.
It proved to be the tipping point, triggering waves of protests by lawyers and other groups in Pakistan’s main cities.
Unable to vote the general out of office, the public took to the streets.
Polls show Musharraf’s support has fallen to a third of the population, and that two-thirds oppose his seeking another presidential term.
Simultaneously, there has been considerable erosion of support from Musharraf’s strongest external backer, the United States.
After he seized power, America welcomed Musharraf’s willingness to fight al-Qaeda and the Taliban on his territory in exchange for large infusions of military aid.
The general fought less out of conviction than pragmatism, but the end result was the same.
Or so the US believed.
Given the long-standing relationship between Pakistan’s Islamic militants and the military, it became clear there were limits to how far Musharraf was prepared to go in the “war on terrorism.”
Musharraf is now desperate to beg, steal, or borrow any political legitimacy he can get – including from the two civilian political leaders he exiled.
His most ambitious strategy has been to try to form a partnership with Benazir Bhutto, the head of one of the two largest democratic parties.
Bhutto initially saw this as an opportunity to end her exile and ease herself into the prime ministership with a politically wounded partner.
Her primary demand was that Musharraf surrender his uniform.
The other civilian leader, Nawaz Sharif, responded by defying his exile, returning to Pakistan, and promptly being re-expelled.
But Sharif succeeded in undermining the Bhutto-Musharraf plan, positioning himself as Pakistan’s genuine champion of democracy.
In one move, he reversed the Pakistani political dynamic: being farthest from the dictator became more valuable than being closest to him.
Unsurprisingly, Bhutto is now having second thoughts about an alliance with Musharraf, who has been reduced to chasing after her in an effort to salvage the deal.
Musharraf, according to his lawyer’s depositions before the Supreme Court, plans to give up his uniform after the indirect presidential elections he scheduled for October 6.
In preparation, he has replaced senior generals in the Pakistani army with officers considered more beholden to him, evidently hoping that this will ensure the military’s loyalty even after he removes himself from the chain of command.
However, his options are shrinking rapidly.
The US, concerned with ensuring stability in case of a transition to a new government, is keeping silent about its preference for Musharraf to remain head of both the government and the army.
The Bush administration is slowly recognizing that for a Pakistani leader to be an effective counterterrorism ally, he or she must have a modicum of legitimacy.
The two civilian leaders may soon begin vying with each other to see who can claim to be more anti-Musharraf.
Even Osama bin Laden, sensing an opportunity to stir up trouble and win popular support, has issued a video calling for a jihad against Musharraf.
Nor can Musharraf count on the military, despite his recent appointments.
The generals have always placed the institution of the military above all else, including rulers from their own ranks.
If they come to believe that Musharraf is sinking, they can be counted on to cut him loose, especially if he becomes a civilian.
Masalah Pengungsi dan Kemiskinan di Pedesaan
ROMA – Pakar pembangunan dan pembuat kebijakan layak berfokus pada migrasi ke perkotaan dan kebutuhan atas urbanisasi berkelanjutan.
Tapi mereka tidak boleh lalai atas perubahan-perubahan besar yang terjadi di pedesaan, yang seringkali terabaikan.
Meskipun kebutuhan atas pangan – didorong oleh kenaikan jumlah penduduk dan pendapatan – menciptakan peluang bagi masyarakat pedesaan, sayangnya kelaparan dan kemiskinan masih terpusat di kawasan desa di negara-negara berkembang.
Jika isu pembangunan di desa lagi-lagi dikesampingkan, pemuda-pemudi akan terus meninggalkan daerah pertanian dan desa demi mencari penghidupan lebih baik di perkotaan atau di luar negeri.
Tahun lalu, di Majelis Umum PBB, para pemimpin dunia mengadopsi Agenda 2030 untuk Pembangunan Berkelanjutan dan 17 Tujuan Pembangunan Berkelanjutan (SDG), yang menegaskan komitmen “leave no one behind.”
Kemudian, mengingat jumlah pengungsi forcibly displaced persons meroket di tahun ini, PBB akan mengadakan pertemuan puncak pada tanggal 19 September guna membahas persoalan tersebut.
Akan tetapi, segala usaha untuk mengatasi lonjakan migran dan pengungsi di dunia tidak akan berhasil kecuali ditargetkan untuk memecahkan penderitaan masyarakat miskin di pedesaan.
Menurut Bank Dunia, pada tahun 1990, sekitar 37% penduduk di negara-negara berkembang hidup dengan pendapatan kurang dari $1,90 per hari.
Pada tahun 2012, angkanya turun menjadi 12,7% atau setara dengan lebih dari satu miliar orang keluar dari kemiskinan ekstrem.
Akan tetapi, ketimpangan antar kawasan desa dan kota telah meningkat.
Sekarang, tiga perempat penduduk paling miskin dan paling menderita kelaparan di dunia tinggal di pedesaan.
Pertanian kecil menyokong kehidupan bagi 2,5 miliar orang di seluruh dunia, menyumbangkan 80% pangan yang diproduksi di Asia dan Afrika Sub-Sahara.
Namun sebagian besar petani kecil masih bekerja tanpa kondisi-kondisi dasar yang diperlukan untuk mengembangkan usahanya dan berinvestasi di komunitas, seperti pendanaan, infrastruktur, akses pada pasar, jaminan atas kepemilikan lahan, dan hak atas sumber daya.
Ini berarti upaya-upaya mengubah pedesaan harus menargetkan faktor-faktor kelembagaan di atas (serta meningkatkan kesetaraan gender dan menegaskan supremasi hukum), sembari memperkenalkan teknologi baru kepada masyarakat setempat.
Yang terpenting, warga di desa harus dilibatkan, tidak hanya sebagai pemangku kepentingan atau penerima bantuan, tapi sebagai mitra.
Dua studi baru memberi perspektif penting mengenai tantangan dalam pengentasan kemiskinan, kelaparan, dan ketidaksetaan di seluruh dunia.
Rural Development Report, dirumuskan oleh International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) dan segera diluncurkan pada tanggal 14 September, memuat riset baru bagi pembuat kebijakan dan pihak lain yang berusaha memberantas kemiskinan.
Sekelompok pemikir terkemuka menganalisis upaya-upaya pembangunan di pedesaan di lebih dari 60 negara berkembang dan menarik kesimpulan atas hal-hal yang berfungsi dan tidak.
Salah satu temuan utama adalah pembangunan berfokus secara khusus pada masyarakat pedesaan memiliki efek positif pada pendapatan, keamanan, serta pangan dan gizi.
Lalu, perbaikan kualitas hidup tersebut diterjemahkan ke peningkatan di bidang pendidikan, pelayanan kesehatan, dan layanan penting lainnya.
Pada saat yang sama, perbaikan yang tersebut di atas belum dialami secara merata, dan kemajuan di Afrika Sub-Sahara masih jauh tertinggal dibandingkan kawasan lain.
Studi kedua, didanai oleh IFAD dan baru-baru ini diterbitkan oleh International Food Policy Research Institute, meneliti kemerosotan perekonomian dunia yang bermula pada tahun 2012 dalam konteks penduduk pedesaan.
Studi tersebut menyimpulkan sebagai akibat dari krisis, besar kemungkinan ada penambahan 38 juta orang yang tetap menderita kemiskinan ekstrem pada tahun 2030 dan petani kecil di negara-negara berpendapatan menengah yang paling berisiko.
Hal ini menimbulkan hambatan besar bagi pencapaian SDG untuk mengakhiri “segala bentuk kemiskinan di semua negara” dan menegaskan kebutuhan atas kebijakan dan investasi yang menargetkan pedesaan secara khusus, yang mana tindakan pengentasan kemiskinan lebih diperlukan dan bisa berdampak lebih besar.
Kemajuan di pedesaan sejauh ini mengungkapkan potensi masa depan.
Dalam banyak kasus, perekonomiannya sudah mengalami diversifikasi dan menjadi lebih dinamis, dan pembangunan jalan-jalan baru dan jaringan komunikasi mengurangi kesenjangan budaya dan jarak fisik antar penduduk kota dan desa.
Di desa-desa dan kota-kota kecil, jenis masyarakat baru mulai berkembang yang mana, sektor pertanian, meskipun masih relevan, bukan lagi satu-satu usaha yang menentukan kehidupan berekonomi dan berbudaya.
Sekarang waktunya melihat pembangunan secara lebih holistik, mengakui bahwa pembangunan pedesaan dan pembangunan perkotaan bisa berjalan berdampingan – justru saling membutuhkan.
Jika kita mengabaikan kawasan desa, kemiskinan dan kelaparan yang berkepanjangan akan terus mendorong arus migrasi, tidak hanya perpindahan ke kota tapi juga ke negara tetangga dan terdekat atau bahkan lebih jauh.
Melalaikan pembangunan pedesaan tidak akan membuat negara-negara berkembang bisa maju; sebaliknya, pengabaian tersebut ibarat memasang gigi mundur pada roda pembangunan.
Rushdie a la Russe
June will be a cruel month in Russia's courts.