The environmental impact is magnified by large-scale farming.
The social consequences can also be severe: eviction, the loss of livelihoods, and violent conflict.
The use of plastic must also be reined in.
Since the 1950s, worldwide production has increased by a factor of one hundred.
Every year, more than 280 million tons of plastic is produced, with vast quantities making their way into groundwater, rivers, and oceans – and onward up the food chain.
Though plastic is not biodegradable, not a single country has pledged to prevent it from entering our environment.
Another largely unexplored possibility would be to set targets for phasing out environmentally damaging and socially detrimental subsidies.
Globally, such subsidies, like those offered by the European Union’s Common Agricultural Policy, run into the hundreds of billions of dollars, draining budgets and often doing nothing for the poor.
Cutting them would not only remove perverse incentives; it would also free up money for education, universal health care, and infrastructure in rural areas, where it is needed to create income opportunities.
Unfortunately, we are unlikely to get the world of our wishes.
The SDG negotiations reflect what is currently possible in a multilateral framework: relatively little.
No government is truly willing to tackle the causes of inequality and hunger, which would require making fair taxation and comprehensive welfare a top priority.
Such reforms would be more effective than any development aid, but for now they are off limits.
The rules of the global economy also remain untouchable, making it nearly impossible to restructure financial and trade policies to ensure that they do not result in more poverty, unchecked climate change, and irreversible resource destruction.
The language agreed upon so far is not reassuring.
A timeworn commitment to economic growth at all cost is no answer to the question of how development can be balanced against the limits of our planet and the fact that billions of people live in poverty.
In a finite world, infinite growth is impossible, and rising output will not put food on everyone’s table if the benefits of growth are not fairly distributed.
It is not only the advanced countries that are impeding the creation of a bolder development agenda.
Elites in emerging and developing countries are using the SDG negotiations primarily as a platform to call for international aid transfers.
The UN is only as good as its members.
We will know how good they are by the extent to which they view the SDGs as an opportunity to establish truly new priorities and truly universal goals for environmental and development policy in the twenty-first century.
Raúl Castro’s China Strategy
MEXICO CITY &#45;&#45; Fidel Castro’s resignation from two of his three leadership posts, together with the appointment of his younger brother, Raúl, as his successor, marks the end of an era…sort of.
Raúl replaced Fidel as President of the Councils of Ministers and of State, but not as First Secretary of the Cuban Communist Party.
And, in a scene worthy of the glory years of Stalinism, Raúl received the unanimous permission of Cuba’s “parliament” to consult with Fidel on all major issues.
As long as Fidel is around – writing, meeting foreign dignitaries, and weighing in on everything from ethanol to the American presidential campaign – two things will remain clear.
First, Raúl will barely be able to budge even on the modest, strictly economic and regulatory reforms that he hopes, somewhat naïvely, will put food back on Cubans’ table.
Second, while the succession arrangement that the Castros designed years ago has the advantage of stability and predictability, Raúl will be unable to replace the old guard with younger leaders (his successor in the Armed Forces is 72 and his vice-president is 77).
Doing so would give whomever he chooses an edge when Raúl, who is 76, passes on, and he and Fidel do not necessarily agree on who should come next.
Raúl’s strategy is to pursue a Vietnamese or Chinese solution: pro-market economic reforms under continued Communist rule, with no progress on democracy or human rights.
For those in the United States who have rightly concluded that the half-century trade embargo has proved counter-productive, this is an appealing halfway response that provides an alibi for moderation: one day, economic reforms will bring political change.
For Latin American pragmatists, always fearful of Cuban fifth columnists, it offers a way to square the circle: encouraging change in Cuba without going too far.
And, for some European governments, it is a typical hands-off remedy that places the problem squarely in America’s lap.
But the Vietnamese or Chinese roads are unacceptable in Latin America, which has made huge progress in transforming advances in democracy and respect for human rights into a regional legal order that goes beyond national sovereignty or the sacrosanct principle of non-intervention.
After decades of coups, dictatorships, torture, and disappearances, Latin America today, while not devoid of these plagues, has built a number of firewalls to forestall them.
Accepting a Cuban exception would represent an enormous setback.
What will deter the next Central American dictator and murderer if the Cubans are given a free pass?
Invoking pragmatism to justify continued human rights violations in Cuba merely because economic reforms might dissuade a mass exodus to Mexico and Florida is a bad idea.
Mexico has seemed especially tempted to return to its Cuban complicity of the past.
It appears that during an upcoming visit to Havana, the Mexican foreign minister will not meet with local dissidents, breaking with precedents established since 1993.
There are sound reasons to set a timetable for Cuba’s return to the Latin American democratic fold, without imposing elections as a first step or precondition.
Indeed, free and fair elections and full respect for human rights can come at the end of the road – if that end is clearly established.
What would be unacceptable are the two extremes: making an immediate transition to democratic rule a precondition for normalization of relations with the US and re-entering the Latin American community, or exempting Cuba from the obligation to adhere to democratic principles and practices on the grounds that it is somehow different.
In 1953, Fidel Castro, in what is probably the best-known speech in Latin American political history, proclaimed in court that history would absolve him.
In fact, history will judge him, and his nearly 50 years in power, only when the results are in: when the initial achievements in health and education and combating inequality are evaluated according to international standards and with the transparency to which the rest of the region’s countries are subject.
Only then we will know if the trade-off at least made sense, even if for many it was unacceptable: authentic social justice and progress in exchange for authoritarian rule, international ostracism, and a cultural desert.
Africa’s Hidden Hunger
DAR ES SALAAM – Just over 20 years ago, South African photographer Kevin Carter shocked the world with a controversial photograph of a famished young Sudanese child being watched by a vulture during a famine.
Critics slammed the shot as “disaster porn,” calling it yet another example of how the international media sensationalize African problems.
But what disturbs me is not the photograph.
Rather, it is that two decades later, the conditions that the photograph depicts remain basically the same.
Every year, 3.1 million children around the world still die of hunger.
As an African doctor, I know that the ravages of serious malnutrition and hunger are not always visible.
They are not always as manifest as they are in the protruding ribs of ghostly children hooked up to feeding tubes, like those I used to see in hospital wards in Tanzania.
Chronic malnutrition, or “hidden hunger,” shows itself in other ways – but it can be just as devastating and deadly.
And while deaths from many other diseases, including acute malnutrition, have declined, hidden hunger remains pervasive.
In the last two decades, astounding success has been achieved in the fight against HIV, tuberculosis, and malaria.
New HIV infections have dropped by as much as 50% in some countries in Africa, with AIDS-related deaths down by 30-48%; TB cases have declined by 40%, and malaria cases by 30%.
But the stunting of early childhood growth as a result of malnutrition remains high, dropping by only about 1% over the same period.
In Africa, hunger remains the leading cause of death in children, accounting for half of all deaths of children under the age of five and killing more than AIDS, TB, and malaria combined.
In fact, many scientific studies have shown that a malnourished child is much more likely to contract an infection, to suffer from other illnesses, and to suffer from them longer.
Diarrhea, for example, is a deadly disease for severely underweight children, who are 12 times more likely to die from an ailment that should be easily treated.
And severely underweight children are 9.5 times more likely to die from malaria as well.
Indeed, childhood malnutrition is now confirmed to be the leading cause of the global disease burden, with the World Health Organization attributing to it 45% of all deaths under the age of five in 2011. Recent reports from the war-ravaged Central African Republic indicate that more children there are dying from hunger than from bullets.
These numbers make the problem of malnutrition look insurmountable. But what works is no secret: vitamin A, iodized salt, and fortified foods.
The lack of vitamin A alone results in blindness in a half-million children every year, with half of them dying within 12 months of losing their sight. Similarly, half of all women of childbearing age in developing countries suffer from weakened immune systems, owing to anemia caused by iron deficiency.
The long-term damage caused by malnutrition has a domino effect, impeding educational achievement, and ultimately, hobbling national economies.
Addressing this ongoing crisis requires money – an estimated $10 billion per year – and new and better strategies to bring life-saving solutions to the mothers and children who most need them.
The Africa Union has declared 2014 the year of agriculture and food security in Africa, and the continent’s agriculture sector is expected to grow significantly. In theory, that should improve overall nutrition; but increased investment in agriculture is not a panacea.
We need to concentrate on building nutrition-sensitive agriculture programs that include small-scale farmers, households, women, and children.
A big step would be to increase women’s control over land ownership and farming decisions, along with access to agricultural credits and subsidies designed to encourage domestic food production through home gardening and cattle and poultry husbandry.
Studies show that women are much more likely than men to spend additional income on food and health.
Increasing their farming income and decision-making power ultimately has a greater impact on children’s health and nutrition.
Moreover, agricultural policies, subsidies, and investments have traditionally benefited cereal farmers.
But policymakers need to concentrate on increasing access to more nutritious foods, such as meat, fruit, and vegetables, which are too expensive for the poor.
Malnutrition causes the greatest damage during the first thousand days of life, leading to grievous and irreversible changes in infant health.
Credit rating agencies, which play an important role in modern capital markets, completely failed in the years preceding the financial crisis.
What is needed is an effective mechanism for rating the raters.
There is widespread recognition that rating agencies have let down investors.
Many financial products related to real estate lending that Standard &amp; Poor, Moody’s, and Fitch rated as safe in the boom years turned out to be lethally dangerous.
And the problem isn’t limited to such financial products: with issuers of other debt securities choosing and compensating the firms that rate them, the agencies still have strong incentives to reciprocate with good ratings.
What should be done?
One proposed approach would reduce the significance of the raters’ opinions.
In many cases, the importance of ratings comes partly from legal requirements that oblige or encourage institutional investors and investment vehicles to maintain portfolios of assets that have received sufficiently high grades from the recognized agencies.
Disappointment about the raters’ performance, and skepticism about the effectiveness of regulation, has led to calls to eliminate any regulatory reliance on ratings.
If ratings are not backed by the force of law, so the argument goes, regulators need not worry about rating quality and can leave the monitoring of raters to the market.
Even if ratings were no longer required or encouraged by law, however, demand for ratings – and the need to improve their reliability – would remain.
Many investors are unable to examine the extent to which a bond fund’s high yield is due to risk-taking, and would thus benefit from a rating of the fund’s holdings.
Given past experience, we cannot rely on market reputation to ensure that such ratings will be reliable.
Another approach would be to unleash the liability system.
On this view, if investors were able to take raters to court, raters’ incentives would improve.
But, while such judicial scrutiny may be effective in eliminating some egregious cases, it cannot ensure that raters do the right thing when courts are not expected to be able to tell after the fact what the right thing was.
There is thus no substitute for providing raters with incentives to provide as accurate a rating as they can.
This can be done by making raters’ profits depend not on satisfying the issuers that select them, but on performing well for investors.
If raters’ profits depend on such performance – on the accuracy of their ratings – the profit motive would turn from a source of perverse incentives to a provider of beneficial incentives.
The US Senate voted this month to incorporate such a mechanism into the financial reform bill that will now have to be reconciled by the bill passed by the US House of Representatives.
Under the Senate’s approach, regulators would create rules under which an independent regulatory board would choose raters.
The board would be allowed to base its choices on raters’ past performance.
For such a mechanism to work well, it must link the number of assignments won by raters, and thus their compensation, to appropriate measures of their performance.
Such measures should focus on what makes ratings valuable for the investors who use them – their accuracy in forecasting financial health.
Once developed, such a mechanism should not be limited (as, unfortunately, it is in the Senate’s bill) to ratings of structured financial products.
It should apply to all products that rating agencies evaluate.
All ratings of financial products raise the same incentive problems and could benefit from reform.
Predictably, the Senate’s bill encountered stiff resistance from the dominant rating agencies.
Standard &amp; Poor argued that such a mechanism would provide credit rating agencies with “less incentive to compete with one another, pursue innovation, and improve their models, criteria, and methodologies.”
Well, such a mechanism would indeed reduce raters’ negative incentives to compete with one another to please issuers of securities, and to pursue innovations and improvements that enable raters to serve issuers better.
But it would strengthen raters’ positive incentives to compete with one another to produce accurate ratings, and to pursue innovations and improvements that enable raters to achieve that far more socially beneficial goal.
Rating agencies have been and should remain an important aspect of modern capital markets.
But to make ratings work, the raters need to be rated.
Taking Back Immigration
LONDON – Within hours of US President Barack Obama’s re-election last month, a powerful belief took hold: overwhelming support from Latino voters had helped to secure his victory.
Suddenly, the Republican Party, long identified with a hard line on immigration, started talking about the need for comprehensive reform.
Pundits argued that if the Republicans resisted reform, they would lose the Latino vote for the next generation, relegating their party to near-permanent opposition status.
That might or might not be true.
But the American election’s implications for immigration run deeper than electoral expediency – with lessons for governments around the world.
The remarkable speed with which anti-immigration positions buckled indicates that what most Americans want, above all, is a rational approach; they want their political leaders to take responsibility for the issue, rather than running away from it.
When it comes to immigration, politicians usually are driven by fear – a tendency that has become even more acute since the onset of the global financial crisis.
The rise of extreme nationalists in places like Greece and Finland has reinforced the belief that talking about immigration, except to argue against it, is politically fraught.
So politicians either address immigration in the context of border security and cultural identity, or they ignore it.
But they might well be misreading their citizens’ concerns.
Voter reaction is often less about disliking immigrants than it is about a profound sense of frustration that governments have failed to create an immigration system that works.
They want a system that allows for the legal entry of needed workers, while preventing illegal entry; clamps down on exploitative employers; and provides resources to integrate immigrants into communities.
Voters might not like that some migrants enter their country illegally.
But many find it equally or even more unconscionable that migrants are forced to live for decades in the shadows – or that children raised by immigrant parents could be deported to countries that they have never seen.
When migration is undertaken in a legal, orderly way, the public supports it.
A recent transatlantic survey by the German Marshall Fund found that, while majorities in all countries were worried about illegal immigration, anxiety about legal immigration was low – with only 26% of European&#160;respondents expressing concern, and just 18% doing so in the United States.
Such false perceptions make it even more difficult to have a reasonable debate about the issues.
Tackling migration-related challenges is necessary regardless of whether one favors more or less immigration.
Today, according to the United Nations, there are 214 million people living outside their country of birth, up from approximately 82 million in 1970.
So, even if not a single new person were to cross a border, the challenges would still be with us.
The reality, of course, is that many countries, especially OECD members, will decide that they need more immigrants as their own populations age and shrink.
This implies that they should figure out how to manage immigration well, rather than outsourcing much of the process to smugglers and extremists.
And, in a world in which nearly half of migrants are now moving from one developing country to another, the problems are no longer confined to the West.
The good news is that there have been important advances during the last decade in managing migration.
For example, policymakers can draw on successful programs to integrate migrant children into educational systems.
They can learn how some countries are successfully matching their businesses’ labor needs with immigrants’ skills.
Developing countries, meanwhile, are getting smarter about how to leverage the $406 billion in remittances that their expatriate citizens will send home this year – by issuing diaspora bonds, for example, or by creating targeted investment opportunities for them.
Many pivotal stakeholders also are advocating for a more rational immigration system.
Labor unions, once known for their skepticism toward immigration, are increasingly in favor of pro-immigration reforms.
In fact, unions were a driving force behind last year’s Domestic Workers Convention, which seeks to protect the rights of the world’s estimated 50-100 million domestic workers.
By supporting smart, progressive reforms, politicians should at least be able to neutralize the issue of immigration on Election Day, if not turn it to their advantage.
More important, electoral politics aside, they would be helping to craft better societies whose politics are shaped by reasonable debate among citizens, not distorted by the community-destroying behavior of smugglers and extremists.
This, after all, is what democratic politics is all about.
Rationality versus Intelligence
TORONTO – In 2002, the cognitive scientist Daniel Kahneman of Princeton University won the Nobel Prize in Economics for work done with his longtime collaborator Amos Tversky (who died in 1996).
Their work had to do with judgment and decision-making – what makes our thoughts and actions rational or irrational.
They explored how people make choices and assess probabilities, and uncovered basic errors that are typical in decision-making.&#160; 
The thinking errors they uncovered are not trivial mistakes in a parlor game.
To be rational means to adopt appropriate goals, take the appropriate action given one’s goals and beliefs, and hold beliefs that are commensurate with available evidence.
It means achieving one’s life goals using the best means possible.
To violate the thinking rules examined by Kahneman and Tversky thus has the practical consequence that we are less satisfied with our lives than we might be.
Research conducted in my own laboratory has indicated that there are systematic individual differences in the judgment and decision-making skills that Kahneman and Tversky studied.
Ironically, the Nobel Prize was awarded for studies of cognitive characteristics that are entirely missing from the most well-known mental assessment device in the behavioral sciences: intelligence tests.
Scientists and laypeople alike tend to agree that “good thinking” encompasses sound judgment and decision-making – the type of thinking that helps us achieve our goals.
Yet assessments of such good (rational) thinking are nowhere to be found on IQ tests.
Intelligence tests measure important things, but they do not assess the extent of rational thought.&#160; This might not be such a grave omission if intelligence were a strong 
 predictor
 of rational thinking.
But my research group found just the opposite: it is a mild predictor at best, and some rational thinking skills are totally dissociated from intelligence.
To an important degree, intelligence tests determine the academic and professional careers of millions of people in many countries.
Children are given intelligence tests to determine eligibility for admission to school programs for the gifted.
Corporations and the military depend on assessment and sorting devices that are little more than disguised 
 intelligence 
 tests.
Perhaps some of this attention to intelligence is necessary, but what is not warranted is the tendency to ignore cognitive capacities that are at least equally important: the capacities that sustain rational thought and action.
Critics of intelligence tests have long pointed out that the tests ignore important parts of mental life, mainly non-cognitive domains such as socio-emotional abilities, empathy, and interpersonal skills.
But intelligence tests are also radically incomplete as measures of 
 cognitive
 functioning, which is evident from the simple fact that many people display a systematic inability to think or behave rationally despite having a more than adequate IQ.
Nevertheless, recent progress in the cognitive science of rational thought suggests that nothing – save for money – would stop us from constructing an “RQ” test.
Such a test might prove highly useful.
Suboptimal investment decisions have, for example, been linked to overconfidence in knowledge judgments, the tendency to over-explain chance events, and the tendency to substitute affective valence for thought.
Errors in medical and legal decision-making have also been linked to specific irrational thinking tendencies that psychologists have studied.
There are strategies and environmental fixes for the thinking errors that occur in all of these domains.
But it is important to realize that these thinking errors are more related to rationality than intelligence.
They would be reduced if schools, businesses, and government focused on the parts of cognition that intelligence tests miss.&#160; 
Instead, these institutions still devote far more attention and resources to intelligence than to teaching people how to think in order to reach their goals.
It is as if intelligence has become totemic in our culture.
But what we should really be pursuing is development of the reasoning strategies that could substantially increase human well-being.
Rattling the Renminbi
BEIJING – From July 2005 until this past December, China’s renminbi (RMB) appreciated steadily.
But then the RMB fell unexpectedly, hitting the bottom of the daily trading band set by the Peoples’ Bank of China (PBoC) for 11 sessions in a row.
Though the RMB has since returned to its previous trajectory of slow appreciation, the episode may have signaled a permanent change in the pattern of the exchange rate’s movement.
As long as China was running a trade surplus and receiving net inflows of foreign direct investment, the RMB remained under upward pressure.
Short-term capital flows had little impact on the direction of the RMB’s exchange rate.
There were two reasons for this.
First, thanks to an effective – albeit porous – capital-control regime in China, short-term “hot money” (capital coming into China aimed at arbitrage, rent-seeking, and speculation) could not enter (and then leave) freely and swiftly.
Second, short-term capital flows usually would strengthen rather than weaken upward pressure on the RMB’s exchange rate, because speculators, persuaded by China’s gradual approach to revaluation, bet on appreciation.
So why, if China was still running a decent current-account surplus and a long-term capital surplus, did the RMB suddenly depreciate, forcing the PBoC to intervene (though not very vigorously) to prevent it from falling further?
Many economists outside of China have argued that the December depreciation resulted from betting by investors that Chinese policymakers, facing the prospect of a hard landing for the economy, would slow or halt currency appreciation.
But if that were true, we would now be seeing significant long-term capital outflows and heavy selling of RMB for dollars in China’s foreign-exchange market.
We see neither reaction.
More importantly, the RMB’s slow appreciation resumed fairly promptly after December’s dip, while investors’ bearish sentiments about China’s economy remain consistent.
In fact, the RMB’s sudden fall in December reflects China’s liberalization of cross-border capital flows.
That process began in April 2009, when China launched the pilot RMB Trade Settlement Scheme (RTSS), which enables enterprises, especially larger ones, to channel their funds between Mainland China and Hong Kong.
As a result, an offshore RMB market, known as the CNH market, was created in Hong Kong alongside the onshore market, now dubbed the CNY market.
But, in contrast to the CNY, the CNH is a free market.
Given expectations of RMB appreciation and a positive interest-rate spread between Mainland China and Hong Kong, the RMB had a higher value in dollar terms on the CNH than on the CNY market.
That difference led to active exchange-rate arbitrage by mainland importers and multinational firms – one form of capital inflows from Hong Kong to the mainland.
Correspondingly, RMB liabilities owed by mainland Chinese and multinationals increased, as did RMB assets held by Hong Kong residents.
Exchange-rate arbitrage by mainland importers and multinationals creates upward pressure on the CNY and downward pressure on the CNH.
In an economy with flexible interest and exchange rates, arbitrage eliminates the exchange-rate spread quickly.
But, because China’s exchange rate and interest rates are inflexible, the CNH-CNY spread persists, and arbitragers are able to reap fat profits at the economy’s expense.
Last September, however, financial conditions changed suddenly in Hong Kong.
The liquidity shortage caused by the European sovereign debt-crisis led developed countries’ banks – especially European banks with exposure in Hong Kong – to withdraw their funds, taking dollars with them.
As a result, the CNH fell against the dollar.
At the same time, the shortage of dollars had not yet affected the CNY, which remained relatively stable.
The CNH therefore became cheaper than the CNY.
Consequently, mainland importers and multinationals stopped buying dollars from the CNH market and returned to the CNY market.&#160;At the same time, mainland exporters stopped selling dollars in the CNY market and turned to the CNH market.
The dollar shortage created depreciation pressures on the CNY, which the PBoC declined to offset.
The CNY was thus bound to fall, which it did last September.
Reverse arbitrage meant capital outflows from the Chinese mainland.
Correspondingly, RMB liabilities owed by mainlanders and multinationals decreased, as did RMB assets held in Hong Kong.
In fact, increases in financing costs and uncertainty about RMB appreciation prompted a partial sell-off of RMB assets by Hong Kong residents.
In short, because the RTSS made cross-border capital movements much easier, short-term flows have become a major factor in determining the RMB’s exchange rate.
External shocks affect the offshore exchange rate first, and then feed through to the onshore exchange rate.
The RMB will continue to appreciate in the near future, owing to strong economic fundamentals, but the inherent instability of short-term capital flows will make its exchange rate more volatile.
This change is bound to pose new challenges for decision makers in the United States and China, particularly as they engage in a fresh round of debate about China’s exchange-rate policy.
Reaffirming Europe
ROME/STOCKHOLM – The ongoing global economic crisis is shaking beliefs and approaches that have long been enshrined in European policies.
Indeed, the crisis is calling into question the very foundations of the European Union.
There is thus an urgent need to reassert the core character and identity of Europe.
The very nature of our European model – a model that is open internally, externally, and globally – must be reaffirmed.
Internally, Europe should remain both an open society and an open economy.
We should fight against the protectionist temptations that would unravel the very foundation of the European project, a project based on the “four freedoms”: free movement of goods, people, services, and capital.
But the European economic recovery plan that was recently reaffirmed by the European Council of Ministers is mainly focused on national measures to support domestic demand.
In implementing this plan, governments must refrain from the temptation to turn national measures into narrow protectionist schemes.
Such a development would threaten growing unemployment in Europe and elsewhere, and make fighting the crisis much more difficult.
So a return of economic, social, or political nationalism is simply not an option.
Indeed, intra-EU trade today accounts for nearly two-thirds of EU member states’ total trade.
And the EU itself is the leader in world trade, accounting for 18%, followed by the US and China.
Even the free circulation of workers and people in Europe is a well-established and positive reality: 2% of EU citizens – more than 10 million people – reside in a Union member country other than their native one.
Moreover, in 2006, 57% of European citizens declared themselves ready to move abroad for professional reasons.
Among these, young Europeans are the most motivated (a half-million EU young people are already studying in another country).
The crisis must also not become an excuse to create new institutional formats that jeopardize the delicate balance between the different EU institutions, a balance that – through appropriate adjustments – has been proven by the test of time.
Of course, the crisis does highlight the need to strengthen the EU’s institutions and instruments for common action and coordination.
We need final and complete ratification of the Lisbon Treaty in order to have the institutionally and internationally stronger European Union we need.
Nor should today’s uncertainties become an excuse to call into question the need to continue and complete the process of EU enlargement.
Extending the EU’s area of freedom and democracy, peace, stability, and prosperity, especially throughout south-eastern Europe, is in the interest of every European citizen.
Indeed, we need to send a strong signal to our neighbors in the Western Balkans that their European perspective is still alive, as reaffirmed by the European Heads of State in 2008.
And we remain convinced of the strategic and economic benefits of bringing Turkey into the Union.
Of course, the process of accession depends on the readiness of the adhering countries, but it should not be halted or slowed down.
Globally, Europe needs to promote an open, inclusive, and effective system of international governance.
Through its wide-ranging experience of convergence of national interests and values, the EU has emerged as a model of multilateralism and as the most powerful normative actor in all areas of governance.
The EU is ready to play a major role in building a new system of global governance.
This requires further development and deepening of strategic relations with emerging powers, such as China, India, and Brazil, as well as with regional organizations.
This is precisely what Italy has been promoting during its current presidency of the G-8.
We need to integrate today’s emerging powers into a new system of global governance.
The latter, however, should be ready to share the burden with us.
This is also the moment to inject new energy into the Doha round of global trade talks.
A successful conclusion of the round would be the strongest possible action to counter protectionist tendencies and resume growth in world trade.
Finally, in times of economic crisis we should be guided more than ever by our common democratic values – the inner dimension of our European identity and a crucial unifying factor for our societies.
They are also a powerful tool for European leadership in global affairs.
Europe has a special role to play in securing a better world where human rights and individual freedoms are widely and fully respected.
We must not shy away from our responsibilities.
Realism about Russia
BERLIN – Russia’s strategy to revise the post-Soviet order in what it calls its “near abroad” will be pursued with even more perseverance following its victory over Georgia.
Europe should have no illusions about this and should begin to prepare itself.
But, as the European Union ponders what to do, cold realism, not hysterical overreaction, is in order.
Unfortunately, equating the current situation in the Caucasus with the Soviet Union’s invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 does not attest to this kind of realism.
Neither the West nor NATO constitutes the decisive strategic threat facing Russia, which comes from the Islamic South and from the Far East, in particular the emerging superpower, China.
Moreover, Russia’s strength is in no way comparable to that of the former Soviet Union.
Indeed, demographically, Russia is undergoing a dramatic decline.
Apart from commodity exports, it has little to offer to the global economy.
Notwithstanding booming oil and gas revenues, its infrastructure remains underdeveloped, and successful economic modernization is a long way off.
Likewise, its political and legal system is authoritarian, and its numerous minority problems remain unsolved.
As a result, Russia’s current challenging of the territorial integrity of Georgia might prove to be a grave error in the not-so-distant future.
Given this structural weakness, the idea of a new Cold War is misleading.
The Cold War was an endurance race between two similarly strong rivals, the weaker of which eventually had to give up.
Russia does not have the capacity to wage another struggle of that type.
Nevertheless, as a restored great power, the new Russia will for the time being attempt to ride in the slipstream of other great powers for as long as doing so coincides with its possibilities and interests; it will concentrate on its own sphere of influence and on its role as a global energy power; and it will otherwise make use of its opportunities on a global scale to limit America’s power.
But it will not be able to seriously challenge the United States – or looking towards the future, China – in ways that the Soviet Union once did.
It is now clear that in the future, Russia will once again pursue its vital interests with military force – particularly in its “near abroad.”
But Europe must never accept a renewal of Russian great power politics, which operates according to the idea that might makes right.
Indeed, it is here that Russia’s renewed confrontation with the West begins, because the new Europe is based on the principle of the inviolability of boundaries, peaceful conflict resolution, and the rule of law, so to forgo this principle for the benefit of imperial zones of influence would amount to self-abandonment.
Further eastward expansion of NATO, however, will be possible only against fierce Russian resistance. Nor will this kind of policy in any way create more security, because it entails making promises that won’t be kept in an emergency – as we now see in Georgia.
For too long, the West has ignored Russia’s recovery of strength and was not prepared to accept the consequences.
But not only Russia has changed; so has the entire world.
America’s neo-conservatives have wasted a large part of their country’s power and moral authority in an unnecessary war in Iraq, willfully weakening the only global Western power.
China, India, Brazil, Russia, and the Persian Gulf today are the world economy’s new growth centers and will soon be centers of power to be reckoned with.
In view of these realities, the threat of exclusion from the G8 doesn’t really feel earth shattering to Russia.
Europe’s disunity and impotence underline this image of a West that has partially lost touch with geo-political realities.
The response to the return of Russia’s imperial great power politics has nothing to do with punishing Russia, and a lot to do with establishing innately Western – especially European – positions of power.
This requires several measures:
·        a new political dynamism vis-à-vis Turkey to link this country, one crucial for European security, permanently to Europe;
·        putting a stop to Moscow’s divide-and-conquer politics by adopting a common EU energy  policy;
·        a serious initiative for strengthening Europe’s defense capabilities;
·        a greater EU commitment to Ukraine to safeguard its independence;
·        a greater freedom of travel for all the EU’s Eastern neighbors.
All of this, and much more, is needed to send a clear signal to Russia that Europe is unwilling to stand idly by as it returns to great power politics.
Presumably, none of this will happen, and it is precisely such inaction that is, in large part, the cause of Russia’s strength and Europe’s weakness.
At the same time, however, one shouldn’t lose sight of the joint interests linking Russia and the West.
Cooperative relations should be maintained as far as possible.
It is blatantly obvious that for Russia’s elites, weakness and cooperation are mutually exclusive.
Therefore, whoever wants cooperation with Russia – which is in Europe’s interest – must be strong.
That is the lesson from the violence in the Caucasus that Europe must urgently take to heart.
Realism in Iraq
The Washington mountain has labored and brought forth less than a mouse.
General David Petreaus and President George W. Bush have spoken, but United States policy in Iraq remains as it was.
This policy has led the US into a trap, so that now the largest and most important power in the world is facing only bad options.
If the US followed its national interests, it would withdraw from Iraq as soon as possible, because the war can no longer be won.
It is weakening the West’s leading power and strengthening the West’s enemies.
But the US cannot withdraw without sending the entire region into chaos.
The US wanted to establish a democratic Iraq.
Instead, after a US withdrawal, the country might fall apart, possibly leading to “balkanization” of the Middle East, with extremely dangerous consequences for the whole region.
With the war in Iraq, the US also wanted to initiate a democratic transformation of the entire Middle East.
Instead, it has helped Iran to gain a regional ascendancy that the country could never have achieved on its own.
Instead of a democratic transformation, were the US to withdraw now, the Middle East would face a war of all against all for regional hegemony.
There is no indication that Bush will begin to grasp this bitter reality during the remaining months of his term.
If he were to admit defeat, his presidency would be destroyed.
He will thus pass the war on to his successor.
This might be advantageous for Bush’s domestic purposes, but as a foreign policy, it will only escalate the risk of a Middle East explosion.
The current US turn toward collaboration with Sunni militias holds within it the risk of a final break-up of Iraq into three parts.
The key question is whether the consequences of Iraq’s disintegration could be contained within its national borders, or whether large parts of the region would be affected.
A disintegrating Iraq would draw all its neighbors and other powers in the region into an undeclared war of succession.
Moreover, in the Middle East, there is no safety net like the European Union, which has helped lure the Balkans out of the abyss.
The only way out of this dilemma is to set a reachable and realistic goal.
Instead of victory, the goal must be a minimum of stability – and this still seems achievable.
Indeed, US military withdrawal from Iraq can be accomplished without causing a major regional catastrophe only if America manages to establish such a minimum of regional stability.
What this requires is a sustainable consensus that includes all the parties involved.
Iraq’s future, if it still has any, will depend first and foremost on Iraqi Shiites, Sunnis, and Kurds, and, secondly, on Iraq’s neighbors and their interests and risk calculations.
But even if Iraq does fall apart after US withdrawal, it will be of vital importance to contain the consequences of its disintegration within Iraq’s own borders.
This will require a regional consensus that only the US can bring about.
It is hard to understand why the US does so little to advance the goal of regional stabilization, especially since it still retains considerable leverage in this respect.
As no regional power is strong enough to win a war of succession outright, all of these powers could only lose if a conflict ensues.
Indeed, all will be threatened by internal destabilization as a consequence of such a confrontation.
Certainly, talks and conferences make little sense without a coherent policy.
But with appropriate preparation, a regional solution is possible, and, of all the parties involved, Syria is uniquely positioned to help bring it about.
Syria is the only Arab country allied with Iran, and, as Iraq’s direct neighbor, it is crucial for Iraq’s stabilization.
Moreover, Lebanon’s security and independence hinges on Syria, and Syria is one of the main actors in the conflict between Israel and its Arab neighbors.
Finally, economically and politically, Syria is in a weak position, and its interests are by no means congruent with those of Iran.
It’s incomprehensible, then, why the US, having succeeded in striking a deal with Libya, vehemently rejects any initiative toward Syria.
If Syria changed sides, the situation in the region would be fundamentally transformed.
This would be true for Lebanon, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, Iraq and, above all, Iran.
For Iran, this development would be tantamount to a strategic worst-case scenario, bringing about its definitive isolation.
Should it become a realistic prospect, a decisive approach to Iran would make sense.
The ensuing “grand bargain” should concern the stabilization of Iraq, Iran’s nuclear program, and its role in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
If successful, the bargain should also aim at a total normalization of relations between Iran and the US.
To be sure, even a decisive regional strategy by the US and its Western partners will not stop terrorism and violence in Iraq or, indeed, in the Middle East overnight.
But it would be a decisive first step toward changing the regional balance of power that would enable the stabilization of Iraq and the region as a whole.
Only this can make a withdrawal of US troops from Iraq realistic in the foreseeable future.
Realism\u0027s Gift to Palestinian Radicals
In support of Ariel Sharon's plan to evacuate unilaterally all Gaza settlements and a few in the West Bank, the Bush administration backed Israel's stance on borders and refugees, two of the most important issues of Palestinian-Israeli final status negotiations.
This position is in clear violation of the text of the "roadmap" to achieve a Palestinian/Israeli peace, which the Bush administration claims it continues to believe in.
That claim does not withstand scrutiny.
President Bush assured the Israelis that, given the "new realities on the ground, including already existing major Israeli population centers," Israel does not have to return all the territories it occupied in 1967.
Moreover, in Bush's view, Israel need not worry about allowing Palestinian refugees to return to their homes inside Israel.
Instead, the vast majority of refugees are expected to settle in a Palestinian state.
Given Palestinian public opinion, the most likely outcome of Sharon's disengagement plan is the empowerment of Hamas and other Palestinian militants.
By presenting the settlements' evacuation as a unilateral step, Sharon allows Palestinian militants to present it as Israel bowing to the "reality" of defeat inflicted by their armed struggle.
Indeed, a survey that I conducted in April 2004 found that two-thirds of Palestinians saw the Israeli plan in just this light.
The same survey showed Hamas with more public support than the nationalist Fatah in the Gaza Strip.
Israel's disengagement plan presents the evacuation of Gaza settlements as an end to 37 years of occupation.
But at the same time, Israel insists that Gaza will not have any attributes of sovereignty and will continue to be governed by existing arrangements covering most aspects of security and civil administration.
This means that the Israeli military will continue to enter Gaza at will and maintain control over border crossings, airspace, and territorial waters. Nor will the Israeli military be withdrawn from the strip of land along the Palestinian-Egyptian border.
These conditions rule out any possibility of forging a security plan that would receive the support of all factions, including Hamas.
Under such conditions, the option of Hamas agreeing to a cease-fire and some form of power sharing with the Fatah-led Palestinian Authority would no longer be viable.
Sharon's disengagement plan may ultimately render the Gaza Strip little more than a suffocating ghetto isolated from Israel and the rest of the world.
While the new American positions do not represent a revolutionary change in US policy, they do represent a clear procedural and indeed substantive departure from previous American positions, particularly those of the Clinton administration.
The so-called "Clinton Parameters," which were presented just before the end of Clinton's second term, sought to preclude Israeli annexation of parts of the occupied territories by conditioning any border changes on "territorial swaps and other arrangements."
Similarly, while clearly advocating the absorption of refugees in the Palestinian state, the Parameters did not exclude Israel from the list of countries in which refugees could choose to live.
Indeed, the Palestinians themselves have always agreed to absorb refugees in their future state, but this was conditional on granting refugees the right to choose.
In almost all previous final status negotiations, Israel has agreed to accept a certain number of refugees as part of its contribution to help close this historical file.
With his letter, President Bush managed to punish the Palestinians twice: by making significant concessions on their behalf and by excluding them from negotiations.
On the other hand, Israel was rewarded twice: by receiving US assurances of significant Palestinian concessions, and by being relieved from paying a price in return for these concessions.
Aside from forcing Palestinian concessions on borders and refugees, the US also relieved Israel of the need to negotiate with the Palestinians until they change their leadership.
Most discouragingly, the American assurances will likely discredit Palestinian moderates and the positions they have advocated regarding the need for mutual concessions with Israel.
From now on, the Bush statement will strongly affect the framing of the solution to the issues of territory and refugees.
Under normal conditions of give and take, the idea of mutual concessions finds acceptance among the majority of Palestinians.
Now, however, the one-sidedness of the US approach is likely to discredit possible compromises in the eyes of the public.
Radicals will remind Palestinians that these two concessions represent a US-Israeli imposition and an attempt to force the Palestinians to bow to the realities of occupation and dispossession.
So concessions that were deemed legitimate and acceptable may now become illegitimate and unacceptable.
Moderate leaders who advocate these concessions in the context of give-and-take negotiations may become weaker and hardliners stronger.
For the Palestinians, the bottom line in the Sharon plan and the Bush letter is that diplomacy and negotiations no longer have a role: Israeli unilateralism, combined with American prejudgment, makes that clear.
The message is that any peace agreement can only come at the expense of Palestinian rights.
Facts on the ground will be understood as the ultimate arbiters, no matter how illegal and unjust they may be.
For Israel and its US supporters, this strategy has the seeming appeal of hardheaded realism.
But attempting to formalize a fait accompli will most likely lead nowhere in the direction of lasting peace, for under such conditions, Palestinians would have no reason to abandon violence.
The Real Roots of Populism
MONTEVIDEO – Out-of-control globalization has destroyed jobs, caused middle-class incomes to stagnate, and deepened income inequality.
In response, angry voters are turning to populist politicians.
Without a radical shift away from liberal economic policies, populism will be unstoppable.
This narrative is simple and increasingly popular.
It is also dead wrong.
Precisely because populism – whether leftist (Hugo Chávez in Venezuela, Podemos in Spain) or rightist (Donald Trump in the United States, the National Front in France) – is ugly, menacing, and destructive, its growing strength calls for nuanced explanation.
A weak grasp of causes will lead to ill-conceived solutions – at which point populism truly may become unstoppable.
One problem with the emerging conventional wisdom is that it mixes three sets of factors that should be kept separate for analytical and policy purposes.
Product-market deregulation and falling trade barriers belong to what academics call microeconomics.
Destabilizing international capital flows and self-defeating fiscal austerity (Exhibit A: the eurozone) are part of macroeconomics.
Lower transport costs and new labor-saving technologies fall under the rubric of exogenous structural change.
Lumping all three together as globalization only causes confusion.
This confusion was evident two months ago, when the International Monetary Fund published a piece that was greeted as the final nail in the coffin of “neoliberalism” (an empty label that can encompass whatever bugbear a critic wants to rail against on that particular day).
Yet the Fund was only saying what, at this point, is pretty obvious.
Unregulated international capital movements can be destabilizing.
Large inflows appreciate currencies, reduce competitiveness, and destroy jobs; sudden outflows cause those appreciated currencies to crash, bankrupting local financial institutions and requiring costly bailouts at taxpayers’ expense.
Moreover, added the Fund, fiscal austerity can backfire.
Cutting useful expenditures or raising distortionary taxes reduces the supply of goods. It also shrinks overall demand, which is fine when the economy is overheated, but devastating when the economy is depressed and a liquidity trap (Exhibit B: the eurozone again) prevents monetary policy from doing the heavy lifting.
If growth slows enough, the ratio of public debt to GDP can end up rising, despite austerity.
So macroeconomic mistakes are costly – in terms of growth, jobs, and income distribution.
That’s the bad news.
The good news is that, by imposing intelligent capital controls (as Chile did in the early 1990s and other countries have done since), an economy can enjoy the benefits of free trade in goods and services with less destabilizing capital mobility.
For nearly a decade, the IMF has been acknowledging that controls are a useful policy tool – a change of heart that I lauded back in 2011.
Likewise, misguided fiscal austerity is neither unavoidable nor inextricably linked to globalization – especially the smart kind that moderates short-term capital movements.
Closed economies also can have fiscal crises, and open economies can avoid them if they follow the right policies.
The key is to be Keynesian throughout the economic cycle: pursuing expansionary policies when growth is slow; tightening to reduce public debt (and thus create room for future expansion) when activity is buoyant.
Fiscal rules can help make such behavior politically palatable.
So there is no need to throw out the baby of a liberal international economic order with the bathwater of bad macroeconomic policy.
Economies open to foreign goods and technology can develop the tools to mitigate volatility and defend jobs.
Europe, laboring under a common currency, a half-hearted banking union, and an unnecessarily tight fiscal policy, has chosen to abandon those tools.
That choice was neither preordained nor one that the rest of the world should imitate.
The other problem with the conventional wisdom’s simplistic link between globalization and populism is that it gets the timing wrong.
Whatever the causes, average wages in the US have been stagnant since the 1970s.
As Daniel Gros has pointed out, the wage gap between highly educated workers and the rest has been roughly constant in Europe (and declining in the United Kingdom) over the last decade.
And in countries like Belgium, France, and Spain, the unemployment rate was at or above 10% for long periods in the 1980s and 1990s.
But there was no outbreak of nativist populism back then, and there is now. Why?
The answer has everything to do with politics.
And politics, as former US House Speaker Tip O’Neill liked to say, is always local.
Elites in Western countries discredited themselves by permitting the financial excesses that helped trigger the Great Recession and by being slow – particularly in Europe – to deal with the social consequences.
Next they underestimated the effect that unfettered migration and the perceived weakening of the nation-state would have on the sense of “us” – the people with whom we share a destiny and of whom we ask sacrifices (one of which is paying taxes).
Harvard’s Ricardo Hausmann has pointed out that the British choose to have four different football teams (England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland), even though having one united team might keep them from losing to tiny Iceland, as England did in the recent European Cup.
No wonder, then, that – viewing the choice this way – the UK opted for Brexit.
Now Western political elites are making another mistake when – seemingly cowed by the populists – they fail to mount a full-throated defense of liberalism’s virtues.
UK Labour Party leader Jeremy Corbyn’s pathetic efforts on behalf of the “Remain” campaign ahead of the Brexit referendum, and his inability (one might say unwillingness) to confront the Brexiteers’ many untruths, is a case in point.
In the 1930s, thinkers like John Maynard Keynes and political leaders like Franklin Roosevelt, with brave and eloquent words still worth quoting, discarded capitalism’s mindless orthodoxies in order to save the liberal democratic order.
One world war and tens of millions of deaths later, they succeeded.
Today, liberal democratic values are once again under siege, and the path paved by Keynes and Roosevelt is still the only way out.
We should follow it.
Reasoning with Iran
PARIS – Negotiations over Iran’s nuclear program have been stalled for more than three years.
For six years, the voices of reason have largely been drowned out, with passions and delusions claiming primacy.
Countries sitting on their own nuclear arsenals seem to think that they can give Iran orders; it’s a case of “do as I say, not as I do.”
Another favorite delusion in the West is to believe that Iran will surrender if pressure is steadily increased.
Anyone familiar with Iran knows that this provokes only a defiant response.
But Iran, too, harbors illusions, including the notion that it can count on support from non-Western countries, or at least from some sort of Islamic caucus.
Yet, at each stage in the crisis, Iran’s supposed “friends” have let it down.
Iran has also believed that it could split France, and perhaps Germany, away from the United States – as if either country would risk infuriating the Americans for the sake of a leader like Mahmoud Ahmadinejad.
Above all, Iran deludes itself that it can develop an advanced nuclear program by itself.
In fact, continued isolationism would force Iran to reinvent nuclear technologies already invented by others, no doubt with poor results.
Passions abound.
The West feels repugnance over the Iranian regime’s cynical human rights transgressions and hypocritical mixing of religion and politics.
Western public opinion abhors the constant insults directed at Israel, Jews, and the West in general.
There is a profound conviction in the West that an Iranian regime such as this must want nuclear weapons, and that it is acting accordingly.
But Iran has been forecast to develop the bomb for 20 years.
People remain convinced that next year, or maybe the year after, the prediction will come true.
Thus, insidiously, the burden of proof is shifted.
As Angela Merkel said at the United Nations in 2007: “The world does not need to prove to Iran that Iran is building an atomic bomb.
Iran must persuade the world that it does not want the Bomb.”
Emotions run high in Iran too, which is happy to return to its familiar role as eternal victim in plots by the Great Powers.
From time to time, Mohammed El Baradei, Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), has attempted to reintroduce reason and remind everyone that the focus must remain on capabilities, not intentions.
This raises the practical question of what Iran’s current bomb-making capability is.
Would it be possible to detect in advance clandestine activity aimed at producing one, and, if so, what would Iran have to pledge in the matter of inspections and checks, and how might such pledges be obtained?
We know that Iran has made progress with the centrifuge technology essential for producing the enriched uranium needed for nuclear weapons.
It is likely that Iranian teams have been working on the mechanics of a nuclear explosive device, at least at the blueprint stage, and the country is also developing ballistic missiles that would bring many regional capitals within range of a nuclear attack – Israeli cities, of course, being the obvious targets.
That said, Iran must still bring all of these programs together, and that cannot happen undetected.
Iran may be capable of producing sufficient nuclear material to make one or two bombs within the next couple of years, but such activities would inevitably come into the open, because Iran would either have to enrich the uranium under the eyes of IAEA inspectors or expel them, giving the game away.
At this stage, Iran still needs at least a year or longer to assemble one or two crude Hiroshima-type bombs.
The hardest part still lies ahead: the miniaturization needed to fit a nuclear device into a warhead.
Here, too, Iranian testing would also be easily detected.
So, to build a credible nuclear arsenal, Iran would need a decade or longer.
No one can say for sure that Iran’s regime has formally adopted a nuclear weapons program.
Although many Iranian leaders no doubt toy with the idea, others are carefully weighing the costs of such a venture – the risks of preventive strikes from outside, increased isolation, and a regional nuclear arms race.
The West’s options will continue to narrow if it maintains its present course.
It is a great pity that formal negotiations with Iran have been stalled since 2005 amid Western demands that Iran suspend all of its enrichment-related activities.
Three years have been wasted, and we have seen no signs of suspension or willingness to negotiate.
Do negotiations stand any chance of success with Ahmadinejad as president?
The answer is “no” if our objective remains forcing Iran to renounce all activity on centrifugation.
But this objective was also unattainable under President Mohammad Khatami, Ahmadinejad’s reform-minded predecessor.
Acquisition of this technology was, even then, a national priority.
If we alter course, progress may still be possible.
For example, if Iran’s nuclear activities were to be surrounded with enough voluntarily accepted checks and controls, we could be confident of detecting at an early stage any diversion toward military purposes.
Iran could develop its civil nuclear program while remaining a signatory to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty; the IAEA would be able to fulfill its role as watchdog; and perhaps confidence in Iranian intentions would slowly be restored.
We cannot know whether this course of action is realistic unless we try it.
But we do know that the alternatives – increasing sanctions, military strikes, and perhaps war – would have unforeseeable consequences.
Only rational behavior by the West has any chance of eliciting a rational response from Iran.
Reason in the Age of Trump
MADRID – In the classical Greek tragedy The Bacchae, the god Dionysus, powered by a thirst for vengeance, battles the inflexible and closed-minded King Pentheus for the soul of Thebes.
Ultimately, Pentheus’s rigidity – his attempt to suppress, rather than understand or adapt to, the emotions inflamed by the passionate and unconventional Dionysus – proves to be his undoing.
Dionysus emerges victorious, and Pentheus is ripped to shreds.
Today, the emotional and mercurial Donald Trump is challenging the US political establishment for America’s soul.
But Trump is no god.
And if he wins this battle, his country will be far worse off than Thebes, and the repercussions will be felt by the entire world.
While the likelihood of a Trump presidency seems to be declining by the day, it would be premature – and, indeed, highly risky – to dismiss it altogether.
As the British vote in June to exit the European Union starkly demonstrated, citizens of democratic countries are more than capable of making choices that contradict their own rational self-interest – a trend that has lately been picking up steam.
Paradoxically, this is not altogether illogical.
Amid economic struggle, national identity crises, and populist fearmongering – all amplified by social media – there is some sense in gravitating toward voices and ideas that provide comfort and an outlet for frustration.
But, while the fantasy of deus ex machina may feel good, it will not solve any problems.
Leaders like Trump make things much worse, because they undermine the rules-based system that has delivered untold prosperity and security over the last seven decades.
A century ago, the sociologist Max Weber classified the three types of legitimacy that can ground governmental authority: traditional (an inherited system); charismatic (a particular leader’s force of personality); or legal (a set of rational rules, applied fairly).
For Weber, the modern state was rooted in a self-evident legal legitimacy.
But, contrary to Weber’s assumptions, a growing number of Westerners today regard neither the logic nor the fairness of the rules as obvious.
This leaves space for new leaders to step in, using personal charisma and appeals to tradition to win support.
For everyone from right-wing populists in the West to ISIS recruiters, the combination has proved to be a powerful one.
To be sure, there are real problems with the current system.
Western democracies offer endless examples of regulation run amok, as well as instances of rules being applied unevenly.
Add to that enduring income, racial, and gender inequality, and frustration with the current system is not surprising.
But this is reason to pursue reform, not to advocate the wholesale exit that people are increasingly supporting.
And, indeed, the key to saving a rules-based order is not just to demonstrate its unquestionable superiority, but also to acknowledge and address its flaws.
That is the only way to change the perception of rules as a source of oppression, rather than protection.
Reform will not be easy.
Politically, it is much simpler – and electorally more rewarding – to criticize a system than it is to defend it, especially when that system is far from perfect.