Some discussion of this idea is beginning to appear in the press and, it is to be hoped, behind close doors among policymakers and union leaders.
Until this happens, it is in the rest of the world's interest to let the US continue to run an unprecedented current account deficit by financing it at the rate of $500 billion per year.
This allows the Chinese to keep their currency stable vis-à-vis the dollar, remain super-competitive, and thus enable a gradual shift of 200 million workers from agriculture into manufacturing, the authorities' aim over the next 10 years.
In Europe, America's external deficit keeps the sole source of growth alive.
But, again, this will not last forever.
Eventually, Europe will have to stop thinking that the US can save its economy and will have to start relying on its own resources.
But don't be surprised if the next European downturn will be blamed on the US and the depreciation of the dollar.
It is always useful to have a scapegoat.
The American World Turned Upside Down
PARIS – From Washington, the enthusiasm of the French for intervention in Libya is seen with a mixture of relief and puzzlement.
The Americans do not want the job and are happy that someone else does.
Indeed, President Nicolas Sarkozy’s willingness to intervene (alongside British Prime Minister David Cameron) helped close a dangerous gap between the world of “values,” which would call for direct American intervention against Muammar el-Qaddafi, and the world of “interest,” which impelled President Barack Obama to restraint.
America’s strategy seems to be to squeeze Qaddafi’s regime out of power through a combination of financial, economic, and even “psychological” pressure aimed at isolating the Colonel from his sources of support within his own inner circle.
That is a wise approach, one that may ultimately work.
But it will likely take a lot of time to produce results.
While Americans are relieved by France’s display of determination, they cannot refrain from expressing a sense of bemusement: Do the French really know what they are up against?
What has happened to them?
We know what war means, but they seem to have forgotten!
Indeed, France and the United States seem to have switched roles from just a few years ago.
Listening to Obama’s reflexive and distant speeches on Libya, one can nearly hear French Foreign Minister Dominique de Villepin’s flamboyant intervention at the United Nations on the eve of the invasion of Iraq in 2003.
And, though the circumstances and the “legal” environment are very different – there is a UN resolution for the Libya intervention, and a vague declaration of support by the Arab League – Sarkozy’s stance reminds some of George W. Bush’s enthusiasm for war.
The British, too, seem to be regarding the French with some perplexity.
Even though they are fighting side-by-side in Libya, with their armies expressing a deep confidence in each other, there are distinct nuances in each country’s position on military intervention.
The view from London contains the same element of “distance” – if not slight apprehension – found in the view from Washington.
To explain this difference in perspective, perhaps one should venture further into the past than the Iraq War and consider the divergence that already existed traditionally between the United Kingdom’s pragmatic approach to its imperial role and the French Empire’s missionary zeal.
A duty to accumulate wealth catalyzed the former; a duty to civilize inspired the latter.
The spectacular inversion of the French and US roles on the issue of intervention has different causes.
Some are linked to the personalities of Obama and Sarkozy; others reflect the nature of their political imperatives.
Obama’s priority is not to be dragged into another conflict.
Afghanistan is already such a costly quagmire.
Sarkozy’s goal is to “exist” as much as possible on the global stage.
But, beyond personalities and political calculus, what we are witnessing is a fundamental shift in the international system.
It is a shift that raises a major question: if those who are willing to act prove incapable of doing so “successfully,” what happens to global stability unless those who are capable are also willing to step in?
At the crossroads of this question stands NATO, an organization perceived as American by Europeans and international (i.e., not American) by the average US citizen.
But if NATO is – for better or worse – in command on the ground in Libya, it is the UN that has given the necessary green light to French action there.
It is this specific “marriage of reason” between France and the UN that is essential to understanding the French position on Libya.
Indeed, the same relationship between France and the UN that led to the country’s resistance to intervention in Iraq in 2003 has now pushed France to intervene in Libya in 2011.
Yet it is dangerous to believe that the world has found in this new-model Coalition of the Willing the solution that it was seeking in today’s increasingly chaotic post-American order.
Neither France nor Britain – not to mention the European Union, which is more divided than ever when it comes to military interventions – can be seen as substitutes for the US.
Despite Sarkozy’s exceptional activism, they have neither the means nor, in reality, the will.
Confronted with the world’s increasing complexity and America’s decreasing appetite for international responsibilities, the need for adequate rules – and for a referee to enforce them – is greater than ever.
In the face of growing risks of global anarchy, the courageous but risky activism of France and Britain should not be seen as a substitute for an engaged US.
But does such an engaged America still exist?
The answer is probably no.
The America that Can Say No
NEW YORK –­ Early this month, Kyrgyzstan’s president Kurmanbek Bakiyev went cap in hand to Moscow to ask for financial aid.
To make his request more palatable, Bakiyev announced that he was demanding that the United States close its airbase in Kyrgyzstan, which resupplies NATO troops in neighboring Afghanistan.
Similarly, late last year, Iceland’s government asked Russia to help bail out its banking system, while Pakistani President Asif Ali Zardari visited China in hopes of securing an emergency infusion of cash.
Some observers cite these episodes as evidence of decline in America’s international clout.
But there’s a larger point: so far, except for relatively small sums offered to the Kyrgyz, Russia and China haven’t offered much help.   
Amid much talk of a “post-American world,” many observers see a shift from a US-dominated international order toward a multipolar system, in which countries like China, Russia, and several others compete for global leadership on a range of common challenges and risks.
More than five years ago, China’s President Hu Jintao proclaimed that, “the trend toward a multipolar world is irreversible and dominant.”
When Vladimir Putin complained during a conference in Munich last year that US unilateralism stoked conflict around the world, an offended Senator John McCain responded that confrontation was unnecessary in “today’s multipolar world.”
When Putin welcomed Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez to Russia last September, he observed that, “Latin America is becoming a noticeable link in the chain of the multipolar world that is forming.”
Chávez agreed: “A multipolar world is becoming reality.”
All of them have it wrong.
US dominance is clearly on the wane, but a multipolar order implies that several emerging powers hold competing views about how the world should be run, and that they are prepared to act to advance their global agendas.
That is not the case.
Instead, we are witnessing the birth of a non-polar order, in which America’s chief competitors remain too busy with problems at home and in their immediate neighborhoods to shoulder the heaviest international burdens.
None of the emerging powers has even begun to use its growing political and economic clout to advance truly global ambitions – or to take on responsibilities that Washington can no longer afford.
Start with Russia.
Despite its growing ties with Venezuela and efforts to coordinate energy policy with natural gas-rich countries in North Africa, the Kremlin has no aspirations to rebuild Soviet-scale influence in Latin America, Africa, or Southeast Asia.
Nor does it have Soviet-style ideological appeal.
Instead, Russia’s leaders are busy protecting Russian markets, banks, and companies from the worst effects of the global financial crisis, consolidating state control over domestic economic sectors, and extending their foreign-policy leverage across former Soviet territory.
China’s need to satisfy its hunger for imported oil and other commodities has given it an international presence.
But its influence is more commercial than political.
China’s leaders must devote their attention to a staggering array of pressing problems at home: averting an economic slowdown that could push millions out of work and into the streets, the fallout from rural land reform, and efforts to manage enormous environmental and public health problems.
India must hold its own in China’s lengthening shadow.
Facing elections next year, the ruling Congress Party is spending the government’s time and money on subsidies for consumers, wage hikes for state employees, and debt relief for farmers.
Brazil is similarly preoccupied, appearing to have no grander near-term aspirations than to promote stability in Latin America, manage the effects of the global financial crisis, and inspire others in the developing world.
In short, there is a vacuum of global leadership just at the moment when it is badly needed.
President Barack Obama’s attention is now concentrated on stimulating the anemic US economy, crafting tax cuts, reforming energy and health-care policies, and restoring confidence in US financial institutions.
The European Union continues its internal debate over how best to bail out its failing banks and industries, handle the fallout from EU and euro-zone expansion, and manage increasingly rocky relations with Russia.
Who, then, can take the lead on efforts to create a new global financial architecture that reflects the complexities of twenty-first-century commerce?
Who can drive consensus on a multilateral response to climate change?
Who will replace an obsolete nonproliferation regime, provide collective security in emerging international hotspots, and build momentum behind Middle East Peace talks?
The international summit meeting in Washington in November 2008 underlined the problem.
The world’s richest countries (the G7) turned to the emerging powers within the G20 to help coordinate a response to the global financial slowdown.
Difficult as it is for seven countries to agree on anything, imagine the challenge of building consensus among 20.
Consider the competing views within this group on democracy, transparency, the proper economic role of government, new rules of the road for financial markets and trade, and how best to ensure that the United Nations, International Monetary Fund, and the World Bank fairly reflect today’s global balance of power.
For the next several years, when those in crisis turn to the US for help, they are increasingly likely to hear the word no.
And it is not at all clear that anyone else is willing and able to say yes.
The Anatomy of Global Economic Uncertainty
NEWPORT BEACH – The sense of uncertainty prevailing in the West is palpable, and rightly so.
People are worried about their futures, with a record number now fearing that their children may end up worse off than them.
Unfortunately, things will become even more unsettling in the months ahead.
The United States is having difficulties returning its economy to the path of high growth and vigorous job creation.
Thousands of people have taken to the streets of US cities, and thousands of others in Europe, to demand a fairer system.
In the eurozone, financial crises have forced out two governments, replacing elected representative with appointed technocrats charged with restoring order.
Concern about the institutional integrity of the eurozone – key to the architecture of modern Europe – continues to mount.
This uncertainty extends beyond countries and regions.
Those looking around the next corner also worry about the stability of an international economic order in which the difficulties faced by the system’s Western core are gradually eroding global public goods.
It is no coincidence that all of this is happening simultaneously.
Each development, and certainly their occurrence in tandem, points to the historic paradigm changes shaping today’s global economy – and to the anxiety that comes with the loss of once-dependable anchors, be they economic and financial or social and political.
Restoring these anchors will take time.
There is no game plan as of now, and historic precedents are only partly illuminating.
Yet two things seem clear: different countries are opting, either by choice or necessity, for different outcomes; and the global system as a whole faces challenges in reconciling them.
Some changes will be evolutionary, taking many years to manifest themselves; others will be sudden and more disruptive.
Yet, as complex as all of this sounds – and, by definition, paradigm changes are complicated affairs that, fortunately, seldom occur – a simple analytical framework may help shed light on what to look for, what to expect and where, and how best to adapt.
The framework relies on an often-used analytical shortcut: identifying a limited set of explanatory variables in what statisticians call “a reduced-form equation.”
The objective is not to account for everything, but rather to pinpoint a small number of variables than can explain key factors, albeit neither perfectly nor fully.
Using this approach, it is possible to argue that the future of many Western economies, and that of the global economy, will be shaped by their ability to navigate four inter-related financial, economic, social, and political dynamics.
The first relates to balance sheets. Many Western economies must deal with the nasty legacy of years of excessive borrowing and leveraging; those, like Germany, that do not have this problem are linked to neighbors that do.
Faced with this reality, different countries will opt for different de-leveraging options.
Indeed, differentiation is already evident.
Some, like Greece, face such a parlous situation that it is difficult to imagine any outcome other than a traumatic default and further economic turmoil; and Greece is unlikely to be the only Western economy forced to restructure its debt.
Others, like the United Kingdom, have moved quickly to take firmer control of their destiny, though their austerity drives will inevitably involve considerable sacrifices.
A third group, led by the US, has not yet made an explicit de-leveraging choice.
Having more time, they are using the less visible, and much more gradual, path of “financial repression,” under which interest rates are forced down so that creditors, including those on modest fixed incomes, subsidize debtors.
De-leveraging is closely linked to the second variable – namely, economic growth.
Simply put, the stronger a country’s ability to generate additional national income, the greater its ability to meet debt obligations while maintaining and enhancing citizens’ standards of living.
Many countries, including Italy and Spain, must overcome structural barriers to competitiveness, growth, and job creation through multi-year reforms of labor markets, pensions, housing, and economic governance.
Some, like the US, can combine structural reforms with short-term demand stimulus.
A few, led by Germany, are reaping the benefits of years of steadfast (and underappreciated) reforms.
But growth, while necessary, is insufficient by itself, given today’s high unemployment and the extent to which income and wealth inequalities have increased.
Hence the third dynamic: the West is being challenged to deliver not just growth, but “inclusive growth,” which, most critically, involves greater “social justice.”
Indeed, there is a deep sense that capitalism in the West has become unfair.
Certain players, led by big banks, extracted huge profits during the boom, and avoided the deep losses that they deserved during the bust.
Citizens no longer accept the argument that this unfortunate outcome reflects the banks’ special economic role. And why should they, given that record bailouts have not revived growth and employment?
Calls for a fairer system will not go away.
If anything, they will spread and grow louder.
The West has no choice but to strike a better balance – between capital and labor, between current and future generations, and between the financial sector and the real economy.
This leads to the final variable, the role of politicians and policymakers.
It has become fashionable in both America and Europe to point to a debilitating “lack of leadership,” which underscores the extent to which an inherently complex paradigm change is straining traditional mindsets, processes, and governance systems.
Unlike emerging economies, Western countries are not well equipped to deal with structural and secular changes – and understandably so.
After all, their histories – and certainly during what was mislabeled as the “Great Moderation” between 1980 and 2008– have been predominantly cyclical.
The longer they fail to adjust, the greater the risks.
Those on the receiving end of these four dynamics – the vast majority of us – need not be paralyzed by uncertainty and anxiety.
Instead, we can use this simple framework to monitor developments, learn from them, and adapt.
Yes, there will still be volatility, unusual strains, and historically odd outcomes.
But, remember, a global paradigm shift implies a significant change in opportunities, and not just risks.
North Korea’s Blackmail Missile
TOKYO – The Unha-3 rocket launched from Sohae in North Korea on the morning of December 12 passed through Japanese air space over the island of Okinawa 12 minutes later, and crashed into the Pacific Ocean roughly 300 kilometers east of the Philippines.
The launch could be considered a mild surprise, because South Korean intelligence sources had suggested that it had been canceled.
More surprising was the success of the launch, which makes North Korea the tenth member of the world’s “Space Club” (the ninth member was Iran, which successfully launched its Safir rocket in 2008).
The Unha-3, a three-stage rocket weighing 92 tons, follows the Unha-2, which failed spectacularly in 2009, so the evident progress that North Korea has made in its missile technology in such a short period has shocked governments around the world.
The United Nations Security Council responded by debating a resolution on strengthening sanctions against North Korea.
Only China – no surprise – opposed new sanctions, stressing that “actions that heighten tension on the Korean Peninsula should not be taken.”
China has agreed to Security Council resolutions against Iran on several occasions, but it has backed sanctions against North Korea on only two, both coming after the North conducted nuclear tests (in 2006 and 2009).
China’s leaders oppose stiffer sanctions against North Korea for a simple reason: they fear the frailty of Kim Jong-un’s regime more than they fear the international security consequences of the missile launch.
Above all, China wants to prevent the regime’s collapse, which it fears may result from stricter sanctions.
If the Kim regime timed the missile launch to have a direct impact on elections in nearby Japan and South Korea, it may have succeeded merely in boosting support for defense-oriented conservative parties.
Indeed, although it is difficult to say how large an impact the launch had on the result in Japan, the Liberal Democratic Party (of which I am a member, serving as Deputy Chair of the election campaign) won a landslide victory.
Although Park Geun-hye’s victory in South Korea, where she became the country’s first-ever female president, followed a campaign mainly focused on domestic economic issues, North Korea’s missile-guided brinkmanship probably shifted many undecided voters to the security-minded Park’s camp.
So, given the seemingly negative impact of the launch on neighboring South Korea and Japan, why didn’t the North hold its fire?
Some suggest that North Korean leaders were determined to stage the launch before the first anniversary of Kim Jong-un’s assumption of power on December 17.
Others suggest that the North Koreans prefer conservatives in power in Seoul and Tokyo, because a more robust vision of national defense in Japan and South Korea will antagonize China, which, isolated in East Asia, will then be more likely to maintain its support for the Kim regime.
After all, China’s small list of friends in Asia became even smaller in 2012, given Myanmar’s democratic transition.
So, in Kim’s perverse logic, a new push for UN sanctions, and new security-conscious governments in Japan and South Korea, will strengthen North Korea’s hold on Chinese foreign policy.
Thus, the missile launch can be viewed as an indication of how threatened the Kim dynasty feels: the regime appears to believe that it must blackmail its closest ally in order to maintain its support.
The primary cause of the regime’s fears is growing political uncertainty, which is the direct result of the failing health of Kim Kyong-hui, Kim Jong-un’s aunt and the power behind the throne.
Indeed, keen observers of North Korea suggest that Kim Jong-un ordered the missile launch as a way to strengthen his grip on power while he still has the experienced and ruthless Kim Kyong-hui’s backing.
Without it, the Kim dynasty’s hold on power would almost certainly weaken, given Kim Jong-un’s youth and inexperience, plunging the country into chaos.
One seemingly obscure political move last month – the appointment of Jang Sung-taek (Kim Kyong-hui’s husband) as the chairman of the State Physical Culture and Sports Guidance Commission – suggests that Kim Kyong-hui’s ill health is already having an impact on the regime.
Although no modern state would do so, the Sports Guidance Commission comprises the regime’s most powerful members.
Jang’s move to the post strongly suggests that the internal struggle for power is already heating up.
North Korea’s missile launch, coming amid the internal uncertainty arising from Kim Kyong-hui’s failing health, creates an extremely dangerous situation for the international community.
Only by strengthening UN sanctions to such an extent that North Korea is forced to abandon its missiles and nuclear weapons – and China to reconsider its knee-jerk support – can the regime be dissuaded from further, and more ominous, maneuvering.
But, given China’s continuing opposition to further sanctions, there is scant hope of this happening.
Until China puts its responsibilities as a modern global power ahead of its narrow national interests, the danger from North Korea will grow as the Kim regime becomes ever more unstable.
The Andean Engagé
MEXICO CITY – The role of the politically committed intellectual has a long and ubiquitous history.
The Spanish-French novelist and screenwriter Jorge Semprún, who died recently, was for many years a member of the Spanish Communist Party’s Central Committee, and subsequently served as Minister of Culture in Spain’s first post-Franco Socialist government.
Dissidents like Václav Havel had a decisive impact in the downfall of Eastern Europe’s communist regimes.
And, as recently as a few months ago, a French intellectual’s activism was crucial to initiating the so-far unsuccessful attempt to bring down Libya’s Colonel Muammar Qaddafi.
For it was Bernard-Henry Lévy who convinced French President Nicolas Sarkozy to meet with Libya’s rebel leaders, an encounter that led directly to France taking a leading role in persuading the United Nations Security Council and US President Barack Obama to back military intervention.
But perhaps no one exemplified the tradition of the intellectuel engagé better than Jean-Paul Sartre.
His point of view was quite different from that of artists and thinkers in the liberal tradition, like Octavio Paz and Isaiah Berlin.
But Octavio Paz and Pablo Neruda, Gabriel García Márquez and Carlos Fuentes, Diego Rivera and the Nueva Trova Cubana and their successors did not fade into the background as representative democracy emerged in Latin America.
On the contrary, they have continued to retain a great deal of influence, not only for their readers, but also for the broader public.
This persistence is best reflected in the role that Nobel Prize-winning novelist Mario Vargas Llosa plays in his native Peru.
He was, of course, always an engagé: in the early 1960’s, when he supported the Cuban Revolution; when he later became one of Fidel Castro’s most ferocious and effective critics; and when he ran for Peru’s presidency in 1989 (losing to Alberto Fujimori).
And he was a committed partisan in Peru’s recent presidential election.
In a sense, Vargas Llosa is a contradictory committed figure: in the European meaning of the word, he is probably the most liberal of Latin America’s public intellectuals, but also the most vocal and daring.
He put his money where his mouth was by running for Peru’s presidency, and he became a virtual king-maker by throwing his support to Ollanta Humala, who has apparently abandoned populism to embrace the tenets of the modern Latin American democratic left.
Humala drew more votes than all of his rivals in the first round of the presidential election, but had to face Fujimori’s daughter, Keiko, in a run-off.
Vargas Llosa initially declared that the choice was between AIDS and cancer, but later secured commitments from Humala on economic policy, democratic rule, and a one-term administration.
With those conditions met, the novelist endorsed the former military officer with a penchant for coups and quirky ideas.
Vargas Llosa argued – eloquently and elegantly – that he could not vote for the daughter of a corrupt and repressive former president currently serving a 25-year prison sentence for human rights violations.
But nor could he abstain or call for others to do so, since this would not only favor Keiko, but would also be a de facto abdication of the intellectuel engagé’s responsibility.
Exit polls did not measure the “Vargas Llosa effect,” so it is difficult to say whether his backing was decisive in Humala’s victory (the margin was less than 2%).
But most observers seem to believe that his support was crucial in bestowing a mantle of legitimacy and democratic disposition on Humala, who in 2007 ran on an unabashedly pro-Hugo Chávez platform.
And Alvaro Vargas Llosa, Mario’s son, has been helping Humala convince financial markets and the international community that he is now a true believer in capitalism.
The problem with all of this lies in the risk that Vargas Llosa and so many other Latin American public intellectuals run whenever they throw their considerable reputations and talents into the political arena.
Whether they actually make a difference or are mistakenly perceived to have made even a minor contribution to a given cause (my own case with Vicente Fox’s election as Mexico’s president in 2000), they are held responsible for the results, for better or for worse.
If matters turn out well, they look like statesmen and visionaries; if things go sour, it was their fault for not foreseeing the obvious and inevitable.
Ollanta Humala might keep his promises and complement Peru’s spectacular economic growth over the past decade with sensible social policies.
Or he might not.
One can admire Vargas Llosa for his courage in taking the plunge, without being entirely convinced that it was the right plunge to take.
The Anti-Hunger Imperative
BRUSSELS – There are plenty of summits to choose from this year, but the World Summit on Food Security deserves not to be lost in the crowd.
This meeting in Rome from November 16-18 provides badly needed political momentum to three linked issues that rank among the most challenging of the current era: food security, biodiversity, and climate change.
Collectively, we are failing in the fight against world hunger.
More than one billion people in the world today do not have enough food to meet their basic daily nutritional needs, and the situation in developing countries is getting worse.   
This is, first and foremost, a moral outrage.
How can it be that in the twenty-first century, when we have taken men to the Moon and back, we still cannot feed everyone on this planet?
Policymakers must recognize, moreover, that food insecurity is linked to the lasting effects of the economic crisis and ongoing climate change, and that it represents no less a threat to our global community.
To be fair, world leaders have responded.
At the recent G-8 summit in L’Aquila, Italy, we made a firm commitment “to act with the scale and urgency needed to achieve global food security,” and we collectively pledged $20 billion over three years.
This is a sizeable commitment, but it may not be enough – more needs to be done to increase agricultural production, to free up the potential of trade to address food insecurity, and to deal with the increasing impact of climate change on agriculture.
The European Commission, too, has responded, with finance for food security coming via a number of instruments.
Our European Union food facility, agreed last year, is mobilizing an additional $1.5 billion for a rapid response to rising food prices.
And we will pump in another $4 billion in the coming three years to fund activities that help countries improve food security and adapt to climate change.
Extra money to address food security problems, among other things, should be one of the key outcomes of the finance package that the EU strongly supports for the next crucial event on the summit calendar: the Copenhagen climate conference in December.
Changing weather patterns and the increasing magnitude and frequency of extreme weather events will require substantial investments if farmers are to adapt successfully.
These changes hit the poorest the hardest, and global trends mask deep regional disparities.  
Small farmers, predominantly in developing countries, will bear the brunt of climate change.
If we do not act quickly, the 40 poorest countries, predominantly in sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America, will by 2080 lose from 10% to 20% of their basic grain-growing capacity due to drought.
But answers to this problem are close to hand.
The impact of biodiversity is often insufficiently understood, which means that we have undervalued its contribution to tackling global challenges.
The more diverse the variation of life forms within a given ecosystem, the more resilient it is to change.
So biodiversity can act as a natural “insurance policy” against sudden environmental changes and a buffer against losses caused by them (as well as by pests and diseases).
Biodiversity is essential for reliable and stable long-term food production.
The famines in Ireland in the nineteenth century and in Ethiopia in the late twentieth century provide clear evidence of the vulnerability of undiversified crops to environmental changes, and the dramatic consequences of such vulnerability for the population.
Crop diversity can also deliver important ecosystem benefits.
Varieties that are tolerant to drought and flood can not only increase productivity, but also can prevent soil erosion and desertification.
In southern Ghana, for example, farmers have managed to reduce crop failures arising from rainfall variability and unpredictability by cultivating several drought-tolerant types of the same crop species.
In addition, crop diversification has reduced the need for costly and environmentally damaging pesticides.
So I am convinced that we should raise the profile of biodiversity in tackling climate change and food insecurity, and that we need more high-level attention to this subject.
Next week, when leaders meet in Rome, I hope that we will agree on the key priorities to fight hunger and food insecurity, and in particular to establish an authoritative source of advice on food security to governments and international institutions.
In fact, we need for food security what the United Nations’ Intergovernmental Panel has done for climate change: a science-based red-alert system for the planet.
And at the start of a new five-year term at the European Commission, I will continue to do all I can to promote this important issue.
But even the best and most up-to-date donor policies will remain vain exercises if governments in developed countries fail to translate their commitments into hard cash and improvements in agricultural investment worldwide.
So finally let the World Summit on Food Security provide tangible evidence of a commitment from all governments to a common objective: a world free of hunger.
History will judge us unfavorably if we fail.
The Arab Drama
PRINCETON – The Arab world has entered the most dramatic period in its modern history.
Oppressive regimes are being swept away, as Arab people finally take their fate into their own hands.
The excitement of the moment, however, does not tell us what the future holds.
At best, democracy is still off in the distance: the military still dominates in Egypt and Tunisia, tribal forces are on the rise in Libya and Yemen, and sectarian divides between Sunni and Shia are likely to dominate politics in Bahrain, as they have in Iraq since 2003.
There is no single narrative that makes sense of this all.
Regimes throughout the Middle East, the United States, and European governments, as well as Al Qaeda and other Islamist groups, are all struggling to understand what comes next.
Scholars of the region, like myself, are also recognizing that our understanding of Arab politics did not anticipate this wave of successful protest.
Until the uprising in Tunisia, we thought that political change would be led either by Islamist forces or by a coup by a group of military officers – not by disorganized, youth-led masses.
The Middle East’s demographic youth bulge is well known, but no one predicted that its members would mobilize social media and cell phones to topple long-established dictators.
The technologies of the Internet were thought to fragment societal forces rather than unite them in a common cause.
And the regimes were considered to be too brutal, as we see tragically in Libya, to go down without a fight.
By its own admission, Al Qaeda has been caught off guard, no doubt because the group’s central argument has been that the fall of oppressive Arab governments could come only through violence.
In response to recent events, Ayman al-Zawahiri, Al Qaeda’s second in command, released a tedious Powerpoint-like analysis of Egyptian constitutional law and political history.
Like Egypt’s now-deposed President Hosni Mubarak, al-Zawahiri’s tone was patronizing and condescending.
If anything, the lecture underscored how out of touch Al Qaeda’s senior leaders are with the spirit of the time.
A younger Al Qaeda ideologue is more convincing, however.
In a message dated February 16, 2011, entitled “The People’s Revolution and the Fall of the Corrupt Arab System: A New Beginning and the Shattering of the Idol of ‘Stability,’” a Libyan who goes by the name Atiyat Allah writes, “It is true that this revolution is not the ideal that we had desired….[W]e hope that this is the first step to better times yet.”
Allah goes on to argue that these revolutions did more than just topple regimes like Mubarak’s.
More importantly, they have destroyed the doctrine of “stability” that allowed the regimes and the West to exploit the region and provide security for Israel.
Admitting surprise at the speed of events, Allah advises Al Qaeda groups to engage gently with the rising forces in these countries.
Tactically, he argues, this is the only way for Al Qaeda to achieve its ultimate goal of taking power.
Other Al Qaeda thinkers have expressed admiration for the ability of young men like Wael Ghonim to mobilize thousands of his fellow Egyptians by conveying his sincere desire for change and love of country.
There is certainly a degree of envy for what others have accomplished and a sense of desperation about how Al Qaeda can capitalize on this change.
Unlike the uprisings in Egypt and Tunisia, the current fighting in Libya presents Al Qaeda with an opportunity to confirm its classic narrative about the importance of change through violence.
More troubling still is that Libya’s violence reveals certain features of the Middle East that had been forgotten after the heady success in Tunis and Cairo.
Most clearly, political change will not occur in the same fashion across the diverse countries of the Arab world.
Unlike Tunisia and Egypt, which are largely homogeneous societies, Libya has important tribal cleavages, whereas Bahrain, Yemen, and Syria are riven by sectarianism.
In the absence of strong national institutions, change in these countries risks significant bloodshed.
In addition, the excessive violence in Libya might send the message to other peoples in the region that the cost of change is too high to pay, and that the relatively peaceful transitions seen in Egypt and Tunisia might not be replicable.
Finally, the chaos in Libya has shown how dependent the rest of the world is on the political fate of Middle Eastern societies.
Should chaos of the kind witnessed in Libya occur in the Persian Gulf countries, for example, the world could literally come to a standstill, given the quantity of oil that they supply.
While unlikely anytime soon, this possibility should give everyone pause and spur us to find policies that will help Arabs find the political dignity and good governance they deserve through an ordered, peaceful process. The alternative is a world in which we remain hostage to the region’s pathologies, which provide ample opportunity for Al Qaeda to reassert its narrative and influence.
The Arab Revolutions’ Reality Check
BERLIN – Two years after popular uprisings began to convulse the Middle East, few people speak of an “Arab Spring” anymore.
Given Syria’s bloody civil war, the rise to power of Islamist forces through free elections, the ever-deepening political and economic crises in Egypt and Tunisia, increasing instability in Iraq, uncertainty about the future of Jordan and Lebanon, and the threat of war over Iran’s nuclear program, the bright hope of a new Middle East has vanished.
Add the region’s eastern and western peripheries – Afghanistan and North Africa (including the Sahel and South Sudan) – and the picture becomes even grimmer.
Indeed, Libya is increasingly unstable, al-Qaeda is actively engaged in the Sahel (as the fighting in Mali shows), and no one can foresee what will happen in Afghanistan after the US and its NATO allies withdraw in 2014.
All of us tend to make the same mistake repeatedly: we think at the beginning of a revolution that freedom and justice have prevailed over dictatorship and cruelty.
But history teaches us that what follows is usually nothing good.
A revolution not only overthrows a repressive regime; it also destroys the old order, paving the way for a mostly brutal, if not bloody, fight for power to establish a new one – a process that affects foreign and domestic policy alike.
Normally, revolutions are followed by dangerous times.
Indeed, exceptions to this pattern are rare: South Africa is one, owing to the genius of one of the century’s most outstanding statesmen, Nelson Mandela.
The alternative option can be observed in Zimbabwe.
Central and Eastern Europe after 1989, though a very interesting reference point for analysts of the Arab revolutions, is not an appropriate reference point, because the region’s new domestic and foreign order resulted from the change in external conditions stemming from the collapse of Soviet power.
Internally, nearly all of these countries had a very clear idea about what they wanted: democracy, freedom, a market economy, and protection from the return of the Russian empire.
They wanted the West, and their accession to NATO and the European Union was logical.
Nothing of the sort applies to the crisis belt of the Middle East.
No power anywhere, within the region or without, is willing and able to implement the barest vision of a new regional order – or even a vision for parts of it.
Chaos is a constant threat, with all of its accompanying risks and threats to world peace.
In addition to poverty, backwardness, repression, rapid population growth, religious and ethnic hatred, and stateless peoples (such as the Kurds and the Palestinians), the region has unstable borders.
Many were drawn by the colonial powers, Great Britain and France, after World War I, and most, with the exception of Iran’s and Egypt’s, have little legitimacy.
As if this were not enough, some countries – including Iran, Saudi Arabia, and even tiny (but very rich) Qatar – have ambitions to be regional powers.
All of this worsens an already tense situation.
All of these contradictions are currently exploding in Syria, whose population is suffering a humanitarian catastrophe, while the world stands by, up to now unwilling to intervene.
(If chemical weapons are deployed, intervention will become inevitable.) Although intervention would be temporary and technically limited, everyone seems to be avoiding it, because the stakes are very high: not only a devastating civil war and massive human suffering, but also a new order for the whole of the Middle East.
Any military intervention would entail a confrontation not only with the Syrian military (supported by Russia and China), but also with Shia Iran and its Lebanese proxy, Hezbollah.
Moreover, no one can guarantee that intervention would not quickly lead to another war with Israel.
The dangers of both action and inaction are very high.
The most likely outcome in Syria is that the human catastrophe will continue until President Bashar al-Assad’s regime collapses, after which the country very likely could be divided along ethnic and religious lines.
And Syria’s disintegration could further balkanize the Middle East, potentially unleashing new violence.
Frontline states like Lebanon, Iraq, and Jordan will not manage to remain aloof from a disintegrating Syria.
What will happen with Syria’s Kurds and Palestinians, or its Christians, Druze, and smaller Muslim minorities?
And what about the Alawites (the backbone of Assad’s regime), who could face a terrible destiny, regardless of whether the country splits up?
Unanswered questions abound.
Of course, even in the face of this misery, we should not lose hope in agreements reached by diplomatic means; but, realistically, the chances are dwindling every day.
The whole of the Middle East is in motion, and a new and stable order will take a long time to establish.
Until then, the region will remain very dangerous, not only internally, but also for its neighbors (including Europe) and the world.
The Arab Spring and Europe’s Turn
NEW HAVEN – Until now, and with few exceptions, the West has nurtured two distinct communities of foreign-policy specialists: the development community and the democratic community.
More often than not, they have had little or no connection with one another: development specialists dealt comfortably with dictatorships and democracies alike, believing that prosperity can best be created by concentrating exclusively on economic issues and institutions.
The consequences of this approach have a special resonance in the Arab world today.
But, as the recent United Nations Security Council debates on the Arab Spring have shown, it is not the major emerging countries that will influence events in the region.
Brazil has barely uttered a word in reaction to the region’s tumult, while Russia and China have little taste for sanctions against Libya in light of their own autocratic governments.
All of this adds up to a unique opportunity for the European Union to support its neighbors’ transition from revolutionary upheaval to democratic government.
At the same time, we need to promote the progress of other regimes in the region toward inclusive democracy.
Indeed, the EU is their natural partner in this endeavor.
Since the launch of the Barcelona Process in 1995, EU Mediterranean policy has been criticized for not linking financial aid to democratic reform, and for giving priority to European concerns like immigration, security, and cooperation on counter-terrorism.
At the same time, EU policy has sidelined clear southern priorities, like opening up Europe’s agriculture and textile markets.
The result is that the vision of the official Euro-Mediterranean Policy (EMP) has lagged far behind its original goals.
Europe should shift its focus on immigration and security back to policies that reflect the original objectives of the Barcelona Declaration.
The EMP’s central goals were to advance a “comprehensive partnership” and political reform, and to create “a common area of peace and stability,” together with a Euro-Mediterranean free-trade area.
Moreover, the associated MEDA funding mechanism crucially and specifically included the European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights.
This link between security, democracy, and human development has since been broken and needs to be restored through investment in good governance, regional development, and education.
The EMP evolved in 2004 into the European Neighborhood Policy framework, and in 2007, the European Neighborhood Policy Instrument (ENPI) replaced MEDA as the EU’s main financing mechanism for Euro-Mediterranean policy.
This put human rights funding into the National Indicative Program (NIP), which encompasses 17 countries: ten in the south and seven in Eastern Europe.
Although good governance and human rights remained among the ENP’s proclaimed goals, official communications of the European Commission show that it emphasized security and border control.
When the EMP was “re-launched” in 2008 under the newly established Union for the Mediterranean (UfM) to give it greater political emphasis, the result was an exercise in “realism” that further weakened the original EMP.
And, for all its high-flown language, the UfM is an empty shell.
This is partly due to unfortunate timing: the UfM’s launch coincided with the outbreak of the Gaza War and became entangled in the complexities of Arab-Israeli relations.
But the initiative also failed to gain momentum among political leaders.
To implement the far-reaching vision of the Barcelona Process, the ENP will have to revisit the way it distributes its financial support, rebalance the funding that it provides to the EU’s eastern and southern neighborhoods, and place much greater emphasis on democracy, the rule of law, and human rights.
Education remains a key area where the EU should contribute to the development of the southern neighborhood, if only because young people are a growing majority of the Arab population.
Although many Arab states have been opening new schools and universities, and are allowing more private educational institutions to flourish, the quality of education in the region still leaves much to be desired.
Religion remains a compulsory subject throughout university programs, while inquisitiveness, critical thinking, and objective analysis are all widely discouraged.
As the Jordanian intellectual and former foreign minister Marwan al-Muasher has argued, state and religious interpretations of history, science, and political values are hammered into Arab students.
Wilfried Martens, President of the European People’s Party (EPP) in the European Parliament and former Prime Minister of Belgium, recently made a similar point: “The West is not at war with Islam.
Christianity is not at war with Islam.
And neither is democracy.
All three, however, are incompatible with a certain interpretation which claims that the scripture is the basis upon which to build a state.”
Of the Arab countries receiving ENP funds, only Egypt has channeled a high proportion – nearly 50% – toward education.
In any case, Europe’s spending on education in the region is scattered among inter-regional, national, and thematic programs, which makes it difficult to see how these funds’ effectiveness might be measured.
Europe now faces key decisions that concern both its values and its interests in the Arab world, and the reconciliation of its short- and long-term objectives.
Infrastructural investment and economic reform are crucial for the Mediterranean region’s future development, but they cannot transform the region without a parallel emphasis on democracy, the rule of law, human rights, and education.
To advance both objectives, the EU must link its investment and aid programs to concrete progress on democratization, and press for much greater accountability and improvement in reforming educational systems throughout the region.
The Arab Spring’s Backward Leap for Women
CAIRO – This summer, as the dust of the Arab Spring revolutions begins to settle, women – who stood shoulder to shoulder with men in defying tyranny – are finding themselves marginalized and excluded from decision-making.
Despite the new freedoms championed by the revolutionaries, women continue to be regarded as subordinate to men.
In Tunisia, a mass protest called for all women to be veiled, which led to unveiled female religion professors being hounded off campuses.
Mobs shouted at Tunisian women demonstrators to go back to the kitchen “where they belong.”
In Egypt, too, conservative forces are on the rise, demanding policies – particularly reforms of family legislation – that would represent a step backward for women.
Angered and alarmed by these developments, Arab women have been forced to defend their rights.
In April 2011, Tunisian women successfully pressed for an electoral-parity law, thanks to which they won 49 of 217 parliamentary seats in last October’s elections.
In Egypt, though, the prospects for women seem gloomier, because they failed to retain the pre-revolution quota system that had given them 64 parliamentary seats.
That system was replaced by a new electoral law that obliges political parties to include at least one woman on their candidate lists.
But almost all of the parties put female candidates at the end of their lists; as a result, only nine women were elected to the parliament.
The Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF), the ruling junta, appointed two more women, bringing the share of women MPs to about 2%.
Islamist groups won majorities in both the Tunisian and Egyptian parliaments.
Draft legislation that reflects a restrictive interpretation of sharia (Islamic law), particularly concerning women’s status, is now being submitted for debate in Tunisia.
And there seems to be a clear intention in many Arab countries to allow unrestricted polygamy, for example, even where it was prohibited prior to the Arab Spring.
In Egypt, matters are more complicated.
SCAF, fearing an Islamist takeover ahead of the presidential election, dissolved the parliament in June, following a judicial decision that they (and the court) insist must be upheld.
But the new president, the Muslim Brotherhood’s Mohamed Morsi, has ordered the parliament to reconvene.
Previously, the parliament’s legislative committee received a proposal to lower the age of marriage for girls from 18 years to 12.
Needless to say, this would cut short girls’ education, not to mention other harmful implications.
A powerful feature of the Egyptian revolution was the equality between the very different actors who initiated it.
None tried to seize a leadership role.
The power struggle pitted the forces of Hosni Mubarak’s regime against the people, including women, who were on the streets and in the squares demanding freedom, dignity, and social justice.
But now things are strikingly different.
The once unified opposition to the Mubarak regime has become fragmented, with each faction defending its own interests and advocating its own version of the revolution’s goals.
The two most prominent actors in the new power spectrum – the military, represented by SCAF, and the Islamists, who include the Muslim Brotherhood and the Salafists – are surrounded by lesser political parties, youth coalitions, and others.
Unfortunately, women’s political position is weak.
The National Council for Women has been restructured, there is a new Egyptian Feminist Union, and a number of coalitions made up of feminist NGOs have been created.
But they are far from being sufficiently organized to work together effectively.
There now seem to be two scenarios for women’s future status in Egypt, neither of which is very hopeful.
In the first scenario, SCAF – which, aside from dissolving the parliament, stripped the presidency of most powers in order to weaken its rivals – continues to rule the country under the military system introduced in 1952 when Mohamed Naguib and then Gamel Abdel Nasser seized power.
Militarism and patriarchy are inextricably linked, and both view masculinity as the opposite of femininity.
If soldiers – and, by extension, all “real” men – are strong and daring, then real women should be the antithesis: passive, obedient, and in need of protection as “good” wives, sisters, and mothers.
The second scenario is an Islamist regime: Morsi negotiates with SCAF a transition to civilian rule; Islamists continue to dominate a restored parliament; and the new constitution establishes a theocratic state.
Most of Egypt’s Islamists, particularly those who returned from exile in Saudi Arabia, adhere to the Wahhabi sect, with its severe restrictions on women, implying that women’s status would be much worse than it was before the revolution.
Among other things, new legislation would make polygamy the rule, rather than the exception, and would deprive women of an equal right to divorce.
The Islamists could also impose the veil and later on the niqab.
An immense effort would be required of women’s-rights activists to be prevent a reign of injustice.
Unfortunately, neither SCAF nor Morsi espouses the type of liberal regime that would provide women with opportunities to take on the leadership roles that have traditionally been denied to them.
Indeed, the only glimmer of hope remaining for women’s equality and dignity in Egypt is the willingness of all who seek such a regime to unite and try yet again to fulfill the democratic promise of Egypt’s revolution.
The Arab Spring’s Balance Sheet
CAIRO – Last year’s events in Egypt and Tunisia drew the curtain on a tottering old order and delivered much of the Arab world into a long-awaited new era.&#160;But what that new era will look like remains very much an open question, given the many challenges that the region’s countries still face.
The old order that has begun to vanish extends beyond the former regimes.
The region’s entire value system – a political culture forged by autocracy – is being transformed.
Arab men and women have shed the sense of humiliation and inferiority that despotism imposed on them – and that fostered desperation, anger, violence, and insularity.
This transformation, though far from complete – indeed, it may well last years – has nonetheless started to bear fruit.
If the 2011 uprisings had not occurred, we would now be witnessing another year of autocracy, with more talk of dynastic successions.
That would mean further humiliation for ordinary people, who bear the brunt of corruption, as government officials and their crony capitalists continued to siphon off public funds.
The Arab media would still be heaping uncritical praise on the region’s presidents and their families, while development programs would be looted by them.
Education would continue to stagnate, and Arab societies, which are divided across sectarian, tribal, and regional lines, would experience rising levels of retribution and violence.
The infamous “death boats,” on which hundreds of young North African men risked their lives every year in search of employment and a better life abroad, would continue to deliver those who survived the journey onto Europe’s unwelcoming shores.&#160;And Arabs’ rage would reach unprecedented levels, causing utter mayhem and destruction.
Arab youth have rescued the Arab world from this fate.
Their conscientiousness and integrity have restored people’s self-confidence.
The old regimes’ opponents have demonstrated bravery without recklessness, and differences of opinion without bigotry.
Indeed, we have seen Islamists, liberals, and leftists standing together in defiance.
We have seen Muslims and Copts protect each other in Cairo.
In Yemen, we have seen local tribesmen follow a woman, Nobel Peace Prize winner Tawakel Karman, in the fight for freedom.
And we have seen the Arab media foster a mature debate about democracy, constitutionalism, and the role of Islam in the modern state, rather than dispensing disinformation and crass propaganda.
But the transformation must not stop here.
The new and old political forces should initiate a dialogue to create a consensus on the rules of political engagement.
As the people become their own masters, those who fail to engage in this process will eventually find themselves without political power.
Other countries in the region, and beyond, should embrace the Arab Spring.
In particular, the members of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) should abandon their hesitance to support the post-revolution governments.
Ultimately, the changes occurring in the Arab world will contribute to the entire region’s economic prosperity and political stability.
Today, Tunisia and Egypt are experiencing severe economic crises.
Before Tunisia’s revolution, for example, 500,000 of its labor force of 3.6 million were unemployed, and that number has since risen to 700,000.
Egypt has lost roughly $9 billion in capital flight in recent months.
But, according to Egypt’s prime minister, Kamal al-Ganzouri, the country’s Arab “brethren” have delivered only $1 billion of the $10.5 billion in aid and loans that they promised.
Moreover, Tunisia and Egypt have so far received none of the $35 billion promised by the G-8 countries.
And, given the current global economic crisis, the funds are not likely to be forthcoming in the near future.
The region’s emerging democracies urgently need an Arab initiative that resembles the Marshall Plan – a program to attract large-scale investment in infrastructure, industry, and agriculture (and in the region’s wealth of untapped technical skills), thereby boosting employment.
The initiative should also encourage free movement of goods and people within the region, by lifting the customs restrictions and complicated procedures that hinder bilateral and multilateral trade.
Creating regional development banks and building a Mediterranean express railway from Alexandria to Rabat would serve this goal.
But long-term investments will not solve the immediate crisis.
Egypt and Tunisia need immediate cash deposits and grants, and their newly elected leaderships should not be forced to resort to begging.
In the past, the Gulf countries have supported Egypt and Tunisia.
It is now in the GCC’s best interests to support them again as they make the transition to freedom.
Meanwhile, the United States and the European Union should recognize the nature and depth of the unfolding changes.
The Arab public is fully aware of the close alliances that existed between the West and the now-defunct despotic regimes, yet they have exhibited no desire for vengeance or retribution towards the West.
It is past time for the West to accept the Arab people’s will and to stop exaggerating the repercussions of change.
The West must support genuine democracy in the Arab world.
If the Arab Spring is aborted, the result will be not dictatorships that are loyal to the West, but rather, a tsunami of rage that will spare no one.
There is nothing more dangerous than aborted dreams, especially when those dreams may be the last chance for change.
The Arab Springtime of Nations?
JERUSALEM – Two things stand out in the Middle East since the Arab Spring began – one that happened, and one that did not.
What happened was that for the first time in modern Arab history, authoritarian regimes and rulers were toppled, or seriously challenged, by popular demonstrations, not – as in the past – through military coups.
But what did not happen might be as important as what did.
While dictators associated with military juntas were challenged overnight, the Arab Spring never came to the region’s conservative monarchies.
The dynastic rulers of Morocco, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, and the Gulf states (with the exception of Bahrain) remain more or less firmly in the saddle, even though Saudi Arabia’s regime, at least, is in many respects far more oppressive than were the former Egyptian and Tunisian regimes.
Of course, oil money helps to sustain autocracy, but this is not a factor in Morocco and Jordan.
It appears that these monarchies enjoy a form of traditional authority that the region’s secular nationalist rulers never had.
Being descendants of the Prophet, as in Morocco and Jordan, or having custodianship of the holy sites of Mecca and Medina, as in Saudi Arabia, bestows a legitimacy on the countries’ rulers that is directly linked to Islam.
The only monarchical regime that was seriously challenged during the Arab Spring was the Sunni ruling family in Shia-majority Bahrain, where precisely this sectarian divide seems to have been the crucial ingredient in the uprising, which was then brutally suppressed with Saudi military help.
Yet, for all of the success epitomized by the protests in Cairo’s Tahrir Square, bringing down a dictatorship is one thing – a drama lasting a few weeks – while the transition to a functioning, consolidated democracy is quite another.
Here, a lengthy process is involved, and its success – exemplified in the post-communist transitions in Eastern Europe – depends on key preconditions.
Where these conditions exist – for example, a vibrant and autonomous civil society, as in Poland, or a strong pre-authoritarian tradition of pluralism, representation, and tolerance, as in the Czech Republic – the transition is relatively smooth.
Where they are lacking or weak, as in Russia or Ukraine, the outcome is much more problematic.
Simply put, a rosy outlook for countries like Egypt cannot be assumed on the basis of exhilarating images on CNN or Al Jazeera, or the fact that masses of young, well-educated, English-speaking men and women are connected through Facebook and Twitter.
The great majority of Egyptians were not in Tahrir Square, and many of them lack not only access to online social networks, but also electricity and safe drinking water.
Democracy and free speech are not at the top of their agenda.
Egypt’s silent majority also identifies with the authenticity represented by various Islamic groups, while principles of democracy and civil rights seem to them to be imported Western abstractions.
So the tremendous victory of the Muslim Brotherhood and the Al-Nour Party in Egypt – as well as that of Ennahda in Tunisia – should come as no surprise.
A similar scenario could unfold in Syria, if and when President Bashar al-Assad falls from power, while both post-Qaddafi Libya and post-Saleh Yemen point to the difficulties that these countries face in constructing a coherent democratic regime.
Looking at Egypt’s prospects realistically, one should not exclude the possibility that the two strongest forces in the country – the military and the Muslim Brotherhood – ultimately will find a way to share power.
The Brotherhood’s vision of democracy is purely majoritarian, not liberal: winning an election, according to its spokespeople, permits the victor to rule according to his views.
Minority rights, institutional checks on government power, human rights – the liberal aspects of democracy – are entirely absent.
Another, more fundamental, dimension to current and future changes in the region may come into view as well.
Most international borders in the Middle East and North Africa were drawn by imperial powers – Britain, France, and Italy – either after World War I and the breakup of the Ottoman Empire (the Sykes-Picot agreements), or, as in Libya and Sudan, earlier.
But in no case did these borders correspond with local popular will, or with ethnic or historical boundaries.
In other words, none of these countries, except Egypt, had ever been a discrete political entity.
Until recently, their rulers had a common interest in keeping this Pandora’s Box of borders tightly sealed.
That has changed, and we see the region’s imperially imposed frontiers being called into question.
In Iraq, the emergence of a de facto Kurdish autonomous region in the north has put an end to Saddam Hussein’s centralized Arab-controlled state.
With South Sudan’s independence,the rest of Arab-dominated Sudan could face further division, with Darfur leaving next.
In Libya, the transitional authorities are finding it extremely challenging to create a coherent political structure that can unite two very different provinces, Cyrenaica and Tripolitania, which were held together only by the Qaddafi regime’s brutality.
In Benghazi, there are already calls for autonomy, if not outright independence.
Similarly, Yemen’s unity is far from assured.
The divisions between its south and north, which had been two different countries – with totally different histories –until Saleh’s dictatorship, are resurfacing again.
In a post-Assad Syria, the ethnic and religious fissures betweenSunnis, Alawites, Druze, Christians, and Kurdsmight equally threaten the country’s unity.
In his brutal way, Assad may be right that only his iron grip keeps the country together.
And developments in Syria will undoubtedly have an impact on neighboring Lebanon.
The end of communist autocracies in the Soviet Union, Yugoslavia, and even Czechoslovakia brought about a dramatic wave of state creation.
Likewise, no one should be surprised if democratization in the Arab world, difficult as it might be, brings in its wake a redrawing of borders.
How violent or peaceful this may be remains to be seen.
The Arab World’s Democratic Opening
Roughly 400 million Muslims currently live in non-Arab Muslim majority states – including Turkey, Indonesia, Bangladesh, Senegal, Mali, and Albania – that have held relatively free elections for their highest political offices.
These countries may not yet be full democracies, but, because they hold competitive elections, they have met a necessary condition for being a democracy.
But since Lebanon was torn apart thirty years ago by civil war and violence, exacerbated by PLO, Israeli, Syrian, French, and US military incursions, not a single Muslim has lived in an electorally competitive Arab state.
This is why it is so important for the world to think deeply about the current opportunities for democracy in Palestine and its neighbors.
Modern democracies share at least seven preconditions:
· a functioning state;
· a monopoly over the use of legitimate force;
· borders that have strong national and international recognition;
· agreement on who are its citizens;
· a government that rules from within the national territory;
· an elected government responsible to its citizens;
· a reasonably integrated legal system.
Obviously, when the PLO was headquartered in Jordan, Lebanon, or Tunisia, and there was not yet a Palestinian Authority, Palestine did not meet any of these seven prerequisites.
Indeed, partly owing to Yasir Arafat’s own actions or inactions, at his death Palestine still had none of them.
For example, while Palestine’s state capacities were destroyed by Israel, especially following the second Intifada, Arafat made matters worse by constantly bypassing and eviscerating potential mechanisms of accountability, such as the elected Palestinian Legislative Council.
He failed to do anything about Palestine’s legacy of four different and contradictory legal systems.
Moreover, Arafat contributed to the absence of a legitimate monopoly of force by ignoring the semi-autonomous armed actions of his own Fatah-based militia, as well as the Fatah-based Al–Aqsa Martyrs’ Brigades, not to mention other groups’ armed militias.
But let us imagine what was unimaginable even a few months ago: a world where the present diminution of conflict holds, and where discussions between Israel and Palestine arrive at a mutually acceptable recognition of each state’s sovereignty.
To be sure, this is possible only if the United States pushes Israel much harder than it has so far to give Palestine viable borders.
How might such a world affect prospects for peace and democracy in the Middle East?
Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas desperately wants to construct a functioning state.
With cessation of Israeli incursions, and large-scale international aid from the European Union, the US, Japan, and some Arab League countries, he could begin to make a plausible go of it.
With an effective state, and an inclusive and functioning electoral system, Abbas could then disarm his own Fatah-based militia.
With peace, and the prospect of doing well in July’s parliamentary election, in which it has agreed to participate, Hamas would have powerful incentives to transform itself from an armed movement outside the system into a political party committed to competing for power at the ballot box.
By disarming any remaining militias, Abbas could claim what Max Weber called the necessary ingredient of any state, namely a “monopoly of the legitimate use of force.”
Palestine has more elements of a vigorous civil society than virtually any other country in the Arab world, including an active human rights movement, which initially focused only on Israeli abuses, but that has increasingly criticized violations by the Palestinian Authority itself.
Palestine also has a powerful women’s movement (Palestine being the first Arab country to give women the vote, in 1946).
Finally, and ironically, because so many Palestinians have worked in Israel, spent time in Israeli prisons, often speak and read Hebrew, and are regularly exposed to the Israeli media and the rough and tumble of Israeli politics, Palestine has more young citizens than any other Arab country who have observed life in a democracy at first hand.
So democracy in an independent Palestinian state is possible.
Lebanon has had regular elections since its civil war ended in 1990.
But a country without sovereignty, or control over its domestic politics, does not have a democratically serviceable state.
Syria, bolstered by the 14,000 troops it stationed in Lebanon, has imposed its choice as Lebanon’s president and otherwise interfered with Lebanese politics.
So Lebanon cannot be considered electorally competitive.
With a just and stable Israeli-Palestinian peace, Syria might be forced not only to withdraw its troops, but also to lessen its interference in Lebanese politics.
Lebanon could return to the democratic track, and Hezbollah might use democratic, not military, politics as its survival strategy in the newly sovereign Lebanon, especially if an international peacekeeping force were consensually allowed to demilitarize the Golan Heights.
The only two Arab countries ever to recognize Israel were Egypt in 1978 and Jordan in 1994.
But this was an asymmetrical peace.
Both countries recognized Israel, but Israel did not recognize Palestine, and Israel’s construction of settlements on occupied land continued.
In Jordan and Egypt, protests against the asymmetrical peace led to growing social fragmentation and processes of regime-led domestic de-liberalization.
A symmetrical peace between Israel and Palestine would, by contrast, incite much less Islamic resistance.
A symmetrical peace agreement might also contribute to a new dynamic in Jordan and Egypt, namely re-liberalization of society.
Palestine and its immediate neighbors have their best opportunity in thirty years to produce democratic states.
They can do so if they seize the current opening, and if the international community intensifies its support for an end to the Arab-Israeli conflict.
The Arab Young and Restless
NEW YORK – Many factors underlay the ongoing upheavals in the Middle East: decades of corrupt and authoritarian rule, increasingly literate and digitally-connected societies, and skyrocketing world food prices.