So I remain skeptical that a services-led model can deliver rapid growth and good jobs in the way that manufacturing once did.
Even if the technological optimists are right, it is difficult to see how that will enable developing countries to sustain the kind of growth they experienced over the last couple of decades.
A “Reset” Button for Europe’s Backyard
STOCKHOLM – One year after the war in Georgia of last August, pushing the “reset” button on diplomatic relations is a popular endeavor nowadays.
President Barack Obama recently journeyed to Moscow in order to “reset” strained United States-Russian ties.
The European Union, though not in need of a “reset” because of strained ties with its eastern neighbors, is involved in a deep strategic reconstruction of those relations.
When the EU launched its new “Eastern Partnership” in May, the purpose was to promote further integration with the Union’s six immediate eastern neighbors – Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Moldova, and Ukraine.
The global financial crisis had made an updated and strengthened policy for the EU’s eastern neighborhood an urgent need.
Equally important was the fact that all the countries concerned expressed an ambition to move closer to the EU.
The Eastern Partnership – originating from a Polish/Swedish initiative – offers to the six countries a substantial upgrading and deepening of relations with the EU in key areas.
In trade and economic relations, it clearly sets out the objective of establishing deep and comprehensive free-trade areas between the EU and the partner countries.
It confirms full visa liberalization as a long-term goal (with visa facilitation agreements in the meantime), promises enhanced cooperation on energy security, diversification, and efficiency, and comes with dedicated programs and projects to help the neighbors in their integration and reform efforts in all these areas.
Sweden’s assumption of the EU Presidency this month should help these efforts.
However, it comes at a time when the Union’s eastern neighborhood faces severe challenges, with the financial and economic crisis hitting many of the partner countries hard.
Ukraine suffers from the sharp drop in global demand and trade, severely undermining its steel industry.
Georgia’s economic success has been largely dependent on direct foreign investment, for which there is hardly any appetite today.
Partner countries that are less integrated into the global market, such as Moldova, have seen the crisis arrive more slowly, but the real effect might be equally as bad, and they are likely to recover more slowly.
The Eastern Partnership does not offer any quick remedies to the crisis.
But it can provide a political framework and institution-building support to improve the deficiencies that made these countries so vulnerable to the crisis: imperfect market economies, weak state institutions, and continued corruption.
The Eastern Partnership’s offer of deep integration with the EU in the areas such as trade and energy carries with it considerable transformational power.
The other type of crisis that most of the partner countries are enduring is political.
In most of these countries, democratic development has not yet reached a point where a change in government is a routine part of political life and can take place without risking the country’s stability.
The Eastern Partnership is based on the profound values of democracy, human rights, and the rule of law.
Political association with the EU, and the process of integration under this Partnership, will promote reforms in these key areas.
The Swedish EU Presidency will concentrate on starting up the concrete work – the nuts and bolts – of the Partnership.
The establishment of “Comprehensive Institution-Building Programs,” designed to support reform of key institutions in each partner country, should take place before the year’s end.
Some flagship initiatives proposed by the European Commission will finally see the light of day as well, and new projects and initiatives are likely to be developed.
Here, Sweden will attach particular importance to energy efficiency programs, which will serve not only the purposes of enhancing energy security and reducing costs, but will also be an important contribution to the fight against climate change.
The Swedish Presidency, together with the European Commission, intends to organize the first meeting of the Eastern Partnership Civil Society Forum this autumn.
We hope to see the start of parliamentary cooperation, as well as exchanges between local and regional authorities of the thirty-three EU and partner countries.
At the end of the year, a meeting of EU foreign ministers and their colleagues from the six partners will assess the progress made so far and give guidance on the way ahead.
The Eastern Partnership is about EU integration, about the six countries moving closer to the EU’s values, legislation, and ways of working, and about the EU being there to support and help this convergence.
In Russia, there is a perception that is sometimes fostered which suggests that the Partnership is directed against it.
But this, of course, is untrue.
On the contrary, Russia, like Turkey, will be welcome to take part in relevant activities within the Partnership’s multilateral dimensions.
The Eastern Partnership is not an answer to all the problems and difficulties that the six partners are facing.
Nevertheless, it does represent a clear commitment by the EU to lend its political and economic support to their transition and reform – a process that should bring prosperity and stability to the whole region.
Are the Saudis Fanatics?
Terrorist attacks in Saudi Arabia have led many to question not only the ruling House of Saud's prospects for survival, but also whether the kingdom is fundamentally dysfunctional and destructive.
Somehow, it seems, Saudi society has produced a stream of violent fanaticism that draws its inspiration from extreme religious orthodoxy.
The fact that 15 of the 19 hijackers in the September 11, 2001, attacks on the United States were Saudis crystallized a long-held view of the kingdom as a bastion of authoritarianism and intolerance.
In some respects, this perception is accurate, but it cannot be applied to the broad Saudi public.
On the contrary, it would be a grave mistake to assume that fanatical Islamism fully defines Saudi attitudes toward religion.
Between 2001 and 2003, I was part of a team that undertook an extensive survey of values in Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Iran, and Jordan.
Our results provide a surprisingly nuanced picture of Saudi attitudes.
Compared to respondents in the other Middle Eastern countries, Saudis were less religious overall, and their attitudes toward democracy and arranged marriage also indicate a moderate undercurrent.
To be sure, in all four countries, religiosity is widespread, with more than 90% of respondents collectively reporting that they believe in God, in life after death, and in heaven and hell.
But the Saudis appear to be less religious than their fellow Muslims.
Sixty-two percent of Saudis described themselves as religious, compared with 82% of Iranians, 85% of Jordanians, and 98% of Egyptians.
Americans also appear to be far more religious than Saudis, with 81% describing themselves that way.
Some of this variation may be explained by cross-national differences regarding what it means to be religious. For example, Americans may define religiosity differently than Middle Easterners, with perhaps a weaker attachment to religious beliefs than is true in Islamic countries.
This might also account in part for the differences between Muslim countries.
But the gap in self-defined religiosity between Saudis, on the one hand, and Iranians, Jordanians, and Egyptians, on the other, is so great that it challenges the prevalent perception of Saudi Arabia as a highly conservative and religious society.
Indeed, actions speak louder than words: only 28% of Saudis said that they participate in weekly religious services, compared to 27% of Iranians, 44% of Jordanians, 42% of Egyptians, and 45% of Americans.
These findings, while running contrary to popular perceptions of Saudi culture, are less startling than they appear.
Sociologists of religion have long argued that in a monolithic religious environment, or when religious institutions are closely tied to the state, the overall religiosity of the public declines.
It makes sense to think that when state authorities enforce strict codes of behavior, people tend to rebel and move away from officially sanctioned religious institutions.
Little wonder, then, that Egyptians and Jordanians, who live in countries where the state does not enforce piety, are more religious than Iranians or Saudis, who must cope with local "virtue" police backed by the state.
Even on marriage, many Saudis expressed surprisingly liberal views.
Respondents were nearly evenly split on the question of arranged marriages, with half supporting the idea that marriage should be based on parental consent, while 48% preferred love as the basis of matrimony.
Given entrenched gender segregation and paternal dominance, this finding appears to reveal a strong desire for greater individual choice in what has traditionally been a family-driven decision.
Finally, the Saudis turn out to be strong supporters of democracy, once again contradicting a popular image of Saudi conservatism.
Of the Saudis polled, 58% considered democracy the best form of government, 23% disagreed, and 18% did not express an opinion.
Majority support for democracy in a country with no prior secular and nationalist history seems counter-intuitive.
In fact, support for democracy corresponds with a number of other liberal attitudes that we found in Saudi Arabia.
Supporters of democracy tend to be less religious, more secular, more tolerant of others, more critical of public-sector performance, and more concerned with Western cultural invasion.
Beyond the survey data, history has shown that liberal ideas become more popular when a despotic monarch governs people in alliance with a religious establishment.
A strong current of liberalism appeared in the late nineteenth century in Ottoman Syria in response to the religious despotism of Sultan Abdulhamid.
At the same time, an anti-clerical, secular movement on behalf of constitutionalism appeared in Iran - a reaction to the absolutist alliance between the Quajar Shahs and the religious establishment.
In view of the similarities between those historical precedents and current conditions in Saudi Arabia, we ought not to rule out the possibility of reform.
Now survey data, too, suggest that Saudis may well begin demanding a more transparent politics and a less interventionist religion.
Are US Middle-Class Incomes Really Stagnating?
CAMBRIDGE – The challenge of raising the incomes of middle-class families has emerged as an important focus of the presidential election campaign in the United States.
Everyone agrees that incomes at the top have surged ahead in recent decades, helped by soaring rewards for those with a high-tech education and rising share prices.
And there is general support for improving programs – such as food stamps and means-tested retiree benefits – that help those who would otherwise be poor.
But the public debate is largely about how to help the more numerous (and politically more important) middle class.
Here, much can be done by improving existing government programs: expanding market-relevant training, increasing opportunities for married women to join or rejoin the labor force, reducing the penalties in Social Security rules for continued employment by older workers, and changing tax rules in ways that will increase productivity and wages.
But, while strengthening such programs should be a high priority, we should not lose sight of how well middle-income families have actually done over the past few decades.
Unfortunately, the political debate is distorted by misleading statistics that grossly understate these gains.
For example, it is frequently said that the average household income has risen only slightly, or not at all, for the past few decades.
Some US Census figures seem to support that conclusion.
But more accurate government statistics imply that the real incomes of those at the middle of the income distribution have increased about 50% since 1980.
And a more appropriate adjustment for changes in the cost of living implies a substantially greater gain.
The US Census Bureau estimates the money income that households receive from all sources and identifies the income level that divides the top and bottom halves of the distribution.
This is the median household income.
To compare median household incomes over time, the authorities divide these annual dollar values by the consumer price index to create annual real median household incomes.
The resulting numbers imply that the cumulative increase from 1984 through 2013 was less than 10%, equivalent to less than 0.3% per year.
Any adult who was alive in the US during these three decades realizes that this number grossly understates the gains of the typical household.
One indication that something is wrong with this figure is that the government also estimates that real hourly compensation of employees in the non-farm business sector rose 39% from 1985 to 2015.
The official Census estimate suffers from three important problems.
For starters, it fails to recognize the changing composition of the population; the household of today is quite different from the household of 30 years ago.
Moreover, the Census Bureau’s estimate of income is too narrow, given that middle-income families have received increasing government transfers while benefiting from lower income-tax rates.
Finally, the price index used by the Census Bureau fails to capture the important contributions of new products and product improvements to Americans’ standard of living.
Consider first the changing nature of households.
From 1980 to 2010, the share of “households” that consisted of just a single man or woman rose from 26% to 33%, while the share that contained married couples declined from 60% to 50%.
When the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office (CBO) conducted a detailed study of changes in household incomes from 1979 to 2011, it expanded the definition of income to include near-cash benefits like food stamps and in-kind benefits like health care.
It also subtracted federal taxes, which fell from 19% of pretax income for middle-income households in 1980 to just 11.5% in 2010.
To convert annual incomes to real incomes, the CBO used the price deflator for consumer expenditures, which many believe is better for this purpose than the consumer price index.
The CBO also presented a separate analysis that adjusted for household size.
With the traditional definition of money income, the CBO found that real median household income rose by just 15% from 1980 to 2010, similar to the Census Bureau’s estimate.
But when they expanded the definition of income to include benefits and subtracted taxes, they found that the median household’s real income rose by 45%.
Adjusting for household size boosted this gain to 53%.
And, again, even this more substantial rise probably represents a substantial underestimate of the increase in the real standard of living.
The authorities arrive at their estimates by converting dollar incomes into a measure of real income by using a price index that reflects the changes in the prices of existing goods and services.
But that price index does not reflect new products or improvements to existing goods and services.
Thus, if everyone’s money incomes rose by 2% from one year to the next, while the prices of all goods and services also rose by 2%, the official calculation would show no change in real incomes, even if new products and important quality improvements contributed to our wellbeing.
Indeed, the US government does not count the value created by Internet services like Google and Facebook as income at all, because these services are not purchased.
No one knows how much such product innovations and improvements have added to our wellbeing.
But if the gains have been worth just 1% a year, over the past 30 years that would cumulate to a gain of 35%.
And combining that with the CBO estimate of a gain of about 50% would imply that the real income of the median household is up nearly 2.5% a year over the past 30 years.
So the US middle class has been doing much better than the statistical pessimists assert.
And with better policies, these households can do even better in the future.
Are We Five Years Wiser?
As the fifth anniversary of the September 11, 2001, attacks on the United States by al-Qaeda approaches, we should take the opportunity to assess the results of the response by the US and the international community.
The attacks and the response to them have obviously brought about a sea change in international relations, but it would be difficult to argue that further atrocities have become less likely as a result.
Why are we no more secure than we were five years ago?
Within a week of the attacks, President George W. Bush declared a “war on terrorism.”
The metaphor of war has the singular advantage that it clearly and strongly evokes the intensity of the counterattack that was called for.
Moreover, the metaphor of war constitutes an implicit appeal to intense mobilization, not only by a country that comes under attack, but also by its friends and allies.
Naturally, no one questions America’s right to defend itself.
The legitimacy of a violent counterattack has never been in doubt.
But the war metaphor also carries inevitable connotations that, when applied to terrorism, are misleading and counterproductive.
Whenever war is invoked, it implies a fight against nations, peoples, or states.
It implies that whole territories and the populations living there are to be considered hostile.
War implies armies and command structures that can be recognized, if not clearly known; in any case, war entails a military confrontation with an identifiable adversary .
On all of these points, the concept of war, to paraphrase US Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, is not helpful.
Even if the scale of the September 11 attack was of such a dimension that only the American army seemed able to face the challenge, in technical terms dealing with a threat that is extra-national rather than international is a matter of police techniques, not military tactics.
The negative consequences of this mistaken vision very quickly became apparent.
It is now widely known that the US government, perhaps partly unconsciously, embraced a deeply distorted image of al-Qaeda that portrayed it as a hierarchical organization with a seamless command structure – the prototype of a foe that the American army could attack and destroy.
But al-Qaeda – the word means “the base” or “the camp,” that is, nothing more or less than a point of gathering and training – is more like a blurred sphere of influence, comprising individuals and small local cells that act on their own initiative and cooperate very rarely, and only for large-scale operations.
It has not been proved that the attacks in London, Madrid, or Bali in the years since the September 11 plot, or the attack on America’s warship the USS Cole in 2000, reflected the existence of a “center” that coordinated the operations or gave orders to carry them out.
It is also wrong to conflate Islamic terrorism with that of the Basque ETA, Sri Lanka’s Tamil Tigers, or the Irish Republican Army.
Whereas these groups have a territorial base and are preoccupied with national aims, Islamic terrorism appears to be the work of a very small number of individuals who seek to avenge the centuries-long “humiliation” of the Muslim world, brought about by colonization, absence of economic development, and political weakness.
The goal of Islamic terrorists is nothing less than the destruction of the “hegemonic” Western world, despite most Muslim nations’ desire to live in peace within the international community and to cooperate in crafting effective development strategies.
The only viable strategy for confronting the threat of Islamic terrorism was, and continues to be, a search for agreement among Muslims, and among the leaders of Muslim nations, on the forms of mutual cooperation, including police cooperation, that are needed to isolate, weaken, or destroy the militants in their midst.
This is a long and difficult enterprise, but there remains no alternative.
Instead, the war metaphor continues to define the US response and that of several of America’s allies.
Moreover, the US response has strengthened Israel’s belief in the effectiveness of military methods, leading to the recent war in Lebanon and the ongoing invasion of Gaza.
Powerless, the international community does nothing.
The rigidity and brutality of America’s behavior – resulting in many times more civilian deaths than occurred on September 11 – have blocked any useful intervention by countries such as Algeria, Morocco, Jordan, Saudi Arabia, or the United Arab Emirates.
Likewise, the appeal of war has ruled out the prospect of serious negotiations between Israel, Syria, and Lebanon.
By attacking one Muslim country after another, the US and its allies have created the impression that Islam itself is the enemy, leading inexorably to the “clash of civilizations” that America says it wants to avoid.
But America’s strategy has failed.
Force cannot accomplish everything.
The international community must say clearly that Islam is not our enemy and that terrorism must be fought in other ways.
Muslim political leaders, for their part, should declare just as openly that terrorism is not their choice.
If both sides can stifle their murderous deviances, the hope of cultural and political reconciliation will be reborn.
Are We Running Out of Oil (Again)?
Oil prices are now running well above $50 a barrel, partly owing to short-run supply shocks, such as the Iraq conflict, Nigerian labor disputes, the conflict between Yukos Oil and the Russian government, and Florida's recent hurricanes.
Oil prices may fall once these shocks dissipate, but speculative effects could keep them relatively high, weakening the world economy and depressing stock markets.
Even a temporary spike in oil prices can have long-term effects because of the social reactions they provoke.
High oil prices fuel public discussion about the future of oil prices.
The outcome of any public discussion can never be known with certainty, but chances are that it will amplify stories that imply risks of higher oil prices.
Experts may say that short-run supply factors caused the recent price increases, but the price increases will nonetheless lend credibility to scarier long-term stories.
The scary story that is being amplified now concerns the developing world, notably China and India, where rapid economic growth - and no restrictions on emissions under the Kyoto Protocol - are seen as creating insatiable demands for oil.
The story's premise is that the world will run out of oil faster than we thought, as these billions of people chase their dreams of big houses and sport utility vehicles.
Is this plausible?
Certainly, China, India, and some other emerging countries are developing fast.
But experts find it difficult to specify the long-run implications of this for the energy market.
Too many factors remain fuzzy: the rate of growth of these countries' energy demand, discoveries of new oil reserves, developments in oil-saving technology, and the ultimate replacement of oil by other energy sources.
But what matters for oil prices now and in the foreseeable future is the perception of the story, not the ambiguities behind it.
If there is a perception that prices will be higher in the future, then prices will tend to be higher today.
That is how markets work.
If it is generally thought that oil prices will be higher in the future, owners of oil reserves will tend to postpone costly investments in exploration and expansion of production capacity, and they may pump oil at below capacity.
They would rather sell their oil and invest later, when prices are higher, so they restrain increases in supply.
Expectations become self-fulfilling, oil prices rise, a speculative bubble is born.
But if owners of oil reserves think that prices will fall in the long run, they gain an incentive to explore for oil and expand production now in order to sell as much oil as possible before the fall.
The resulting supply surge drives down prices, reinforces expectations of further declines, and produces the inverse of a speculative bubble: a collapse in prices.
All of this may seem obvious, but we tend not to think of oil prices as being determined by expectations of future prices.
For example, in January 1974, when the first world oil crisis began, oil prices doubled in just days.
The immediate cause was believed to have been Israel's stunning success in the Yom Kippur War, which led Arab oil producers to retaliate by choking off output.
The second crisis, in 1979, is usually attributed to supply disruptions from the Persian Gulf following the Islamic revolution in Iran and the subsequent start of the Iran-Iraq war.
Why, then, did real inflation-corrected oil prices remain at or above their 1974 levels until 1986?
Speculative pressures are likely to have been at work, influencing the decisions of OPEC and many others.
Although changes in market psychology are difficult to understand, the broad concerns that underlie such episodes of irrational exuberance are almost always clear.
For example, in 1972, scientists at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, including computer pioneer Jay Forrester, published The Limits to Growth .
The book launched an international debate on whether the world would soon face immense economic problems due to shortages of oil and other natural resources - problems that seemed to be presaged by OPEC's production cuts eighteen months later.
The second crisis was immediately preceded by the accident at the Three-Mile Island nuclear reactor in Pennsylvania in March 1979, which reinvigorated the anti-nuclear movement.
With nuclear power - regarded as the main technological bulwark against depletion of the world's oil supplies - suddenly suspect, oil prices doubled again by the year's end.
After 1979, fears about limits to growth and nuclear power ebbed.
Oil prices gradually fell, and the stock market began its long climb towards its peak in 2000.
But the current rise in oil prices shows that people are still eager to embrace "running out of oil" stories - this time focused on China and India - even when short-run factors are to blame.
Indeed, the International Energy Agency noted in September that the usual relationship between oil prices and inventory levels has broken down, with prices much higher than the usual relationship would suggest.
The IEA's report calls this breakdown evidence of a "structural shift in the market."
But the same pattern followed the 1973-4 and 1979-80 oil crises, when prices dropped from their highest peaks, but stayed quite high for years, representing a drag on the stock market, the housing market, and the world economy.
Let's hope that the effects of the present spike will be more short-lived.
But don't hold your breath.
Are We Still Evolving?
NEW HAVEN – Many public-policy decisions are based on implicit assumptions about “human nature,” and it is currently popular to speculate about how evolution might have shaped human behavior and psychology.
But this raises some important questions: are humans continuing to evolve –&#160;and, if so, is our basic biological nature changing – or has modern culture stopped evolution?
For some traits, we do not have to speculate – we can measure and compare on the basis of studies covering thousands of individuals over several generations.
Such studies have not yet been done on most of the traits where speculation is popular, but they have been done on some traits of medical interest.
What have we learned?
Scientists are taking two approaches. In one, they sequence the DNA of particular genes in many individuals with or without some determined health condition and look for differences between the two groups.
This genetic approach measures effects that have accumulated over hundreds to thousands of generations, and the message is clear: humans have evolved in these respects fairly recently, some in one direction, some in another, depending on their environment and other conditions encountered.
From this approach, we have learned, for example, that the ability to digest milk as adults evolved within the last 10,000 years – and several times – in cultures that domesticated sheep, goats, or cattle.
Similar studies have taught us that sensitivity to alcohol consumption and resistance to diseases like malaria and leprosy also evolved within the last several thousand years.
Some scientists, myself included, have taken a different approach.
Instead of looking for changes in genes that take many generations to accumulate until they can be detected, we have measured natural selection directly.
This method can reveal selection in action, working over periods of time as short as one generation – so that it can answer the question of whether modern culture has stopped evolution.
The message of this approach is also clear: natural selection continues to operate in modern cultures.
Whether it will operate consistently enough for a long enough time to produce significant genetic change can be answered only by future generations.
Nevertheless, it is interesting to see in what direction natural selection is starting to shape us.
Some of the answers are surprising.
We measured natural selection operating on women in Framingham, Massachusetts, where a long-term medical study on heart disease produced the data that we used.
The women were born between 1892 and 1956. We found significant selection and projected that if it continued for ten generations, the women would evolve to be about two centimeters shorter and have their first child about five months earlier.
This is a surprising result, because women in developed countries have become taller thanks to better nutrition, and are having children later in life for many reasons, some of them cultural.
So what is going on here?
Three things:
First, we know that giving birth for the first time when younger carries a cost in increased infant mortality, but modern medicine and hygiene have strikingly reduced infant mortality, reducing the cost of younger age at first birth.
We therefore expect a shift toward earlier reproduction, because the costs previously associated with doing so have disappeared – exactly what we found in Framingham.
And we expect those younger women to be shorter simply because they have had less time to grow.
In five other cases, scientists found women in developed countries maturing earlier, in two of them at smaller size (in the other three cases, size was not measured).
It is too early to say that this is a general trend, but right now, all signs point that way.
Second, we measured the effects of natural selection by noting that women who were shorter and first gave birth when younger had more children.
But genes are only one of many factors that influence height and age at first birth.
Personal decisions, nutrition, income level, education, and religious affiliation all enter the mix.
When we estimated how much of the variation among individuals could be attributed to biology, the answer was less than 5%.
That left 95% of the variation to be explained by the effects of culture and individual decisions.
But, while the effects of biology on the traits that we measured are relatively small for humans living in complex modern cultures, even small effects, when repeated consistently, will accumulate.
Third, traits like these are always the result of interactions between genes and environment.
A woman could have genes that would tend to make her taller than average but end up shorter than average if she had been poorly nourished as a child.&#160;
If evolution took its steady course and changed the genetic basis of height and age at first birth, we might not see women ten generations later who were shorter and matured earlier, for the effects of nutrition and culture could more than compensate for the genetic change. As a colleague of mine likes to put it, one good school-lunch program could be enough to obscure the biological effects.
Even when we focus on a simple physical trait like height, natural selection in humans turns out to be a multifaceted and nuanced process.
Similar studies on human behavior and psychology, where causation is more complex, remain beyond our grasp.
In such cases, silence may be wiser than speculation.
The Destructive Power of Inflation
CAMBRIDGE – When I was in Argentina last week, I was reminded of the devastating power of high inflation.
Argentina’s annual inflation rate is now about 20%, down from an estimated rate of about 40% last year.
The central bank is struggling to keep the economy on a disinflationary path, with a goal of achieving a 5% rate three years from now.
Inflation in Argentina has been much higher in the past.
For the 15 years from 1975 to 1990, the annual rate averaged a remarkable 300%, meaning that the price level doubled every few months, on average.
Prices rose at an explosive annual rate of more than 1,000% in 1989, before inflation was finally brought under control.
In fact, inflation was all but extinguished.
I remember being in Argentina in the mid-1990s, when there was virtually no inflation.
Back then, the Argentine peso was pegged to the US dollar, and both currencies were used equally for day-to-day transactions on the streets of Buenos Aires.
But the subsequent collapse of the peso’s dollar peg, and the forced conversion of dollar contracts into peso contracts at a non-market exchange rate, caused inflation to soar.
By 2003, the annual rate had increased to 40%.
It then fell to 10% for a few years.
But it rose again during the presidencies of Néstor Kirchner and his wife and successor, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, to 25%.
It finally jumped back up to 40% in 2016, propelled by the removal of distortionary price subsidies that had previously been used to disguise the true inflation rate.
The recent high rates of inflation, and the public’s memory of even higher rates in the past, have severely harmed Argentina’s economy.
Because market interest rates rise to compensate for high inflation, even the government must now pay an interest rate of about 25% to borrow in pesos for short periods.
Lenders are unwilling to provide long-term credit at fixed interest rates, because a jump in inflation would destroy the value of their bonds and loans.
Households and businesses are reluctant to finance long-term investments with short-term loans or with variable-interest-rate loans, because a jump in inflation would cause their interest payments to rise sharply.
Indeed, Argentina’s history of high and variable inflation has destroyed the domestic mortgage market, making it impossible for a household to use a mortgage to buy a home.
Businesses are also reluctant to borrow, because they recall how previous increases in inflation – and thus in interest rates – pushed otherwise healthy companies into bankruptcy.
The life insurance industry has been destroyed by high and uncertain inflation as well.
Given that no one knows what the peso will be worth when future claims are paid, why would anyone buy insurance with today’s pesos?
Economists might respond by suggesting that mortgages, insurance contracts, and other agreements could be indexed to the price level, adjusting payments to the contemporary rate of inflation.
But when the inflation rate is changing rapidly, it is hard to know what the contemporary rate even is.
The previous government tried to deceive the public by publishing inflation estimates that experts agreed were far lower than the true rate of price growth.
As one Argentine friend explained, the government fired the statisticians who had tried to provide accurate measures of inflation and replaced them with political allies who would produce artificially low numbers.
As he put it, they “changed government statistics from a technical problem to a creative art.”
In the years when the government allowed Argentinians to convert their pesos into dollars and take them out of the country, people who had financial wealth moved their money into investments in the United States.
I am told that there is much more Argentinian investment wealth in the US than in Argentina.
As a result of this outflow of funds, investment in Argentina is low, holding down productivity and growth.
Gross capital formation represents only 17% of GDP in Argentina, compared to 23% in Chile and Mexico.
Although President Mauricio Macri’s new government is determined to reduce inflation and achieve price stability, it is politically costly to do so.
Tight money and high interest rates depress demand and have caused real GDP to decline.
At the same time, the public cannot perceive a reduction of inflation from 20% to 15%.
So the government must pay a short-term political price to achieve a long-term economic gain.
Argentina’s experience holds two crucial lessons for other countries.
First, price stability is fragile, and the inflation rate can rise rapidly.
And, second, high rates of inflation remain in the public’s memory and have long-lasting adverse effects.
It is important to achieve price stability; but it is just as important to maintain it, by continually managing monetary policy to target a low rate of inflation.
Argentina’s Economic Big Bang
FRANKFURT – Last week, the government of newly elected Argentine President Mauricio Macri launched a bold plan to revitalize a bruised and beleaguered economy plagued by high inflation.
At a time of daunting crisis conditions, one should not underestimate the importance of this move not just for Argentina, but also for other countries, where leaders are watching closely for clues about how to deal with their own economic woes.
Thanks to years of economic mismanagement, Argentina’s economy has been badly underperforming for decades.
Previous governments sought to avoid difficult policy choices and obfuscate fundamental issues by implementing inefficient controls that grossly misallocated resources and undermined Argentina’s ability to generate the foreign-exchange earnings needed to cover its import bill, resulting in domestic shortages.
The recent drop in commodity prices has exacerbated the situation, depleting what little growth dynamism the economy had left, while fueling inflation, deepening poverty, and spreading economic insecurity and financial instability.
In theory, governments in such a situation have five basic options to contain crisis conditions, pending the effects of measures to reinvigorate growth and employment engines.
· Run down the financial reserves and wealth that were accumulated when the economy was doing better.
· Borrow from foreign and domestic lenders.
· Cut public-sector spending directly, while creating incentives to induce lower private-sector expenditure.
· Generate revenues through higher taxes and fees, and earn more from abroad.
· Use the price mechanism to accelerate adjustments throughout the economy, as well as in trade and financial interactions with other countries.
Through careful design and sequencing, these five measures can help not only to deal with immediate economic and financial problems, but also to create the conditions for higher growth, job creation, and financial stability in the longer term.
In this manner, they can contain the spread of economic hardship among the population, protect the most vulnerable segments, and put future generations on a better footing.
In practice, however, governments often face complications that undermine effective implementation of these measures.
If policymakers are not careful, two problems, in particular, can reinforce each other, potentially pushing the economy over the precipice.
The first problem arises when specific factors, real or perceived, block some options from the adjustment menu.
Some measures may already have been exhausted: the country may not have any wealth or reserves left to tap, and there may be a shortage of willing lenders.
Other measures, such as fiscal adjustment, must be implemented very carefully, in order to avoid torpedoing the growth objective.
The second problem is timing, with governments struggling to ensure that the measures take effect in the right sequence.
Effective implementation requires understanding key features of economic and financial interactions, including not just feedback effects, but also the behavioral aspects of private-sector responses.
And all of this must be closely coordinated with the pursuit of supply-side reforms that promote robust, durable, and inclusive growth.
Here is where the Macri government’s approach is an historical exception.
Macri took over the presidency with a bang, launching an audacious – and highly risky – strategy that places aggressive price liberalization and the removal of quantitative controls front and center, ahead of the five measures relating to demand management and financial assistance.
Already, most export taxes and currency controls have been scrapped, income taxes have been cut, and the exchange rate has been freed up, allowing for an immediate 30% depreciation of the peso.
Historically, few governments have pursued this type of sequencing, much less with such fervor; indeed, most governments have hesitated, especially when it comes to full currency liberalization.
When governments have taken similar steps, they usually have done so after – or at least alongside – the provision of financial injections and efforts to restrain demand.
The reason is clear: by taking time to set the stage for liberalization, governments hoped to limit the initial spike in price inflation, thereby avoiding a wage-price spiral and curbing capital flight.
They worried that, if these problems emerged, they would derail reform measures and erode the public support needed to press on.
To revive the Argentine economy in a durable and inclusive manner, Macri’s government needs to act fast to mobilize sizeable external financial assistance, generate additional domestic resources, and implement deeper structural reforms.
If it does, Argentina’s bold economic strategy will become a model for other countries, both now and in the future.
But if the approach falters – whether because of incorrect sequencing or a surge of popular dissatisfaction – other countries will become even more hesitant to lift controls and fully liberalize their currencies.
The resulting policy confusion would be bad for everyone.
A Fair Hearing for Sovereign Debt
NEW YORK – Last July, when United States federal judge Thomas Griesa ruled that Argentina had to repay in full the so-called vulture funds that had bought its sovereign debt at rock-bottom prices, the country was forced into default, or “Griesafault."
The decision reverberated far and wide, affecting bonds issued in a variety of jurisdictions, suggesting that US courts held sway over contracts executed in other countries.
Ever since, lawyers and economists have tried to untangle the befuddling implications of Griesa's decision.
Does the authority of US courts really extend beyond America's borders?
Now, a court in the United Kingdom has finally brought some clarity to the issue, ruling that Argentina's interest payments on bonds issued under UK law are covered by UK law, not US judicial rulings.
The decision – a welcome break from a series of decisions by American judges who do not seem to understand the complexities of global financial markets – conveys some important messages.
First and foremost, the fact that the Argentine debt negotiations were preempted by an American court – which was then contradicted by a British court – is a stark reminder that market-based solutions to sovereign-debt crises have a high potential for chaos.
Before the Griesafault, it was often mistakenly assumed that solutions to sovereign-debt repayment problems could be achieved through decentralized negotiations, without a strong legal framework.
Even afterwards, the financial community and the International Monetary Fund hoped to establish some order in sovereign-bond markets simply by tweaking debt contracts, particularly the terms of so-called collective-action clauses (which bind all creditors to a restructuring proposal approved by a supermajority).
But simple modifications like contract amendments will not overcome the system's deficiencies.
With multiple debts subject to a slew of sometimes-contradictory laws in different jurisdictions, a basic formula for adding the votes of creditors – which supporters of a market-based approach have promoted – would do little to resolve complicated bargaining problems.
Nor would it establish the exchange rates to be used to value debt issued in different currencies.
If these problems are left to markets to address, sheer bargaining power, not considerations of efficiency or equity, will determine the solutions.
The consequences of these deficiencies are not mere inconveniences.
Delays in concluding debt restructurings can make economic recessions deeper and more persistent, as the case of Greece illustrates.
This brings us to the second lesson of the British ruling.
With the stakes so high and the system so broken, debt markets have little reason to remain in the US.
America has always prided itself on the strength of its “rule of law," a selling point that has made Wall Street host to the largest sovereign-debt market.
But Griesa's ruling, based on a peculiar – and in our view, indefensible – interpretation of certain terms in Argentina's contract, showed that US commercial interests can dominate its courts' decisions.
The vaunted American rule of law no longer looks so robust.
Perversely, it protects the strong against the weak.
The Griesafault is only the latest of many decisions and legal changes that have revealed what one might call a symptom of “corruption, American-style," in which lobbying and campaign contributions compromise the entire system, even when no individual official is on the take.
The US would be wise to react before the sovereign-debt market migrates from New York.
China should stand ready to pick up the slack.
Its savings now far outstrip those of the US, and it is striving to make Shanghai a global financial center.
That ambition has become more attainable in view of the damage to the US system's credibility in the aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis.
But, if Shanghai is to emerge as a leader in sovereign lending markets, China should be aware of the shortcomings of legal frameworks elsewhere, and design a more efficient and equitable alternative.
The final, overarching message of the British court's decision is one that all countries should heed.
There is an urgent need to renew the United Nations' efforts to create a multinational legal framework for sovereign-debt restructuring.
Though the US is striving to undermine these efforts, the UK ruling reminds us that America's judges are not the world's judges.
That last revelation may not make Wall Street happy; but, for the many countries around the world that rely on sovereign debt, it is very good news indeed.
Argentina’s Bumpy Ride
SANTIAGO – “Fasten your seat belts, because it should be a bumpy ride,” the captain warned from the cockpit.
We were about to enter Argentine airspace.
Investors looking to do business in Argentina have long been issued similar warnings.
This is the country that scholars study when they want to understand financial crises.
The country’s largest such crisis, in 2001, brought down the local banking system and caused the Argentine government to default on its debts.
The economy contracted by a whopping 18%, and the unemployment rate peaked above 22%.
After a period of calm that has now lasted a decade, dire economic warnings are back.  Forecasts for the world economy are turning pessimistic, and economists in export-dependent Argentina are finding much to worry about.
Itau, Latin America’s largest bank, is predicting GDP growth in Argentina of only 3.2% next year, down sharply from 6% in 2011.
Inflation is another concern.
With official figures widely discredited, private analysts estimate that consumer prices are rising at an annual rate of 25% or more.
Those are careful estimates by serious economists. But, then again, one should take all economic forecasts about Argentina with a grain of salt.
In the decade since the last crisis, Argentine policymakers have broken almost every rule in the economic-policy playbook.
Again and again, local and international economists have issued dire warnings about what would happen if it persisted in its heterodoxy.
And yet Argentina has managed to grow fast, doubling per capita income since 2002.
Energy policy is a perfect example of a wrongheaded strategy.
The Argentine government fixed gas prices, despite ongoing inflation.
Gas became artificially cheap, consumers seldom bothered to turn the thermostat down, and producers stopped investing.
As a result Argentina, once a thriving gas exporter, had to seek imports to overcome domestic shortages.
What saved Argentina over the last decade were highly favorable external conditions: sky-high global commodity prices and technological innovations that greatly increased farm yields.
Neighboring Brazil helped by undergoing a boom of its own, which pumped up demand for a wide range of Argentine products.
With rising tax revenues and the burden of debt gone after the default a decade ago, the government went on a spending spree: real public expenditure grew at double-digit rates most years since 2002.
At the same time, the central bank kept interest rates low, so that the inflation-adjusted cost of loans is zero or negative.
In this environment, Argentine consumers naturally also went on a spending spree, and corporate profits rose accordingly.
Not long ago, I met with a group of foreign investors in Argentina.
They owned everything from paper mills to department stores and supermarket chains.
After they finished trading stories of endless red tape and arbitrary government decisions, I asked why they kept investing in Argentina.
“Because we make a lot of money,” was the unanimous answer.
The question making the rounds in Argentina nowadays is whether this period of plenty is coming to an end.
You would not feel any such anxiety in Buenos Aires shopping malls, which are as crowded as ever. Nor could you infer it from the behavior of voters, who seem poised to re-elect President Cristina Kirchner in October.
But the signs of economic deterioration are surely there.
With imports still growing strongly and commodity prices beginning to fall as a result of the world slowdown, Argentina’s large trade surplus is disappearing quickly.
Fearing a weaker peso, spooked investors demand dollars.
Capital is flowing out of the country, and official reserves are slowly being depleted.
To stem the outflow of dollars, the central bank may well be forced to raise interest rates.
That, plus the gloomy international outlook and a fiscal policy that will have to become less expansionary after the election, will slow the economy down.
A bumpy ride is acceptable as long as the landing is smooth.
Ensuring that outcome will be the number one job for a newly re-elected President Cristina Kirchner.
It will prove a difficult period at the controls.
The Vultures’ Victory
NEW YORK – A recent decision by a United States appeals court threatens to upend global sovereign-debt markets. It may even lead to the US no longer being viewed as a good place to issue sovereign debt.
At the very least, it renders non-viable all debt restructurings under the standard debt contracts.
In the process, a basic principle of modern capitalism – that when debtors cannot pay back creditors, a fresh start is needed – has been overturned.
The trouble began a dozen years ago, when Argentina had no choice but to devalue its currency and default on its debt.
Under the existing regime, the country had been on a rapid downward spiral of the kind that has now become familiar in Greece and elsewhere in Europe.
Unemployment was soaring, and austerity, rather than restoring fiscal balance, simply exacerbated the economic downturn.
Devaluation and debt restructuring worked.
In subsequent years, until the global financial crisis erupted in 2008, Argentina’s annual GDP growth was 8% or higher, one of the fastest rates in the world.
Even former creditors benefited from this rebound.
In a highly innovative move, Argentina exchanged old debt for new debt – at about 30 cents on the dollar or a little more – plus a GDP-indexed bond.
The more Argentina grew, the more it paid to its former creditors.
Argentina’s interests and those of its creditors were thus aligned: both wanted growth.
It was the equivalent of a “Chapter 11” restructuring of American corporate debt, in which debt is swapped for equity, with bondholders becoming new shareholders.
Debt restructurings often entail conflicts among different claimants.
That is why, for domestic debt disputes, countries have bankruptcy laws and courts.
But there is no such mechanism to adjudicate international debt disputes.
Once upon a time, such contracts were enforced by armed intervention, as Mexico, Venezuela, Egypt, and a host of other countries learned at great cost in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
After the Argentine crisis, President George W. Bush’s administration vetoed proposals to create a mechanism for sovereign-debt restructuring.
As a result, there is not even the pretense of attempting fair and efficient restructurings.
Poor countries are typically at a huge disadvantage in bargaining with big multinational lenders, which are usually backed by powerful home-country governments.
Often, debtor countries are squeezed so hard for payment that they are bankrupt again after a few years.
Economists applauded Argentina’s attempt to avoid this outcome through a deep restructuring accompanied by the GDP-linked bonds.
But a few “vulture” funds – most notoriously the hedge fund Elliott Management, headed by the billionaire Paul E. Singer – saw Argentina’s travails as an opportunity to make huge profits at the expense of the Argentine people.
They bought the old bonds at a fraction of their face value, and then used litigation to try to force Argentina to pay 100 cents on the dollar.
Americans have seen how financial firms put their own interests ahead of those of the country – and the world.
The vulture funds have raised greed to a new level.
Their litigation strategy took advantage of a standard contractual clause (called pari passu) intended to ensure that all claimants are treated equally.
Incredibly, the US Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in New York decided that this meant that if Argentina paid in full what it owed those who had accepted debt restructuring, it had to pay in full what it owed to the vultures.
If this principle prevails, no one would ever accept debt restructuring.
There would never be a fresh start – with all of the unpleasant consequences that this implies.
In debt crises, blame tends to fall on the debtors.
They borrowed too much.
But the creditors are equally to blame – they lent too much and imprudently.
Indeed, lenders are supposed to be experts on risk management and assessment, and in that sense, the onus should be on them.
The risk of default or debt restructuring induces creditors to be more careful in their lending decisions.
The repercussions of this miscarriage of justice may be felt for a long time.
After all, what developing country with its citizens’ long-term interests in mind will be prepared to issue bonds through the US financial system, when America’s courts – as so many other parts of its political system – seem to allow financial interests to trump the public interest?
Countries would be well advised not to include pari passu clauses in future debt contracts, at least without specifying more fully what is intended.
Such contracts should also include collective-action clauses, which make it impossible for vulture funds to hold up debt restructuring.
When a sufficient proportion of creditors agree to a restructuring plan (in the case of Argentina, the holders of more than 90% of the country’s debt did), the others can be forced to go along.
The fact that the International Monetary Fund, the US Department of Justice, and anti-poverty NGOs all joined in opposing the vulture funds is revealing.
But so, too, is the court’s decision, which evidently assigned little weight to their arguments.
For those in developing and emerging-market countries who harbor grievances against the advanced countries, there is now one more reason for discontent with a brand of globalization that has been managed to serve rich countries’ interests (especially their financial sectors’ interests).
In the aftermath of the global financial crisis, the United Nations Commission of Experts on Reforms of the International Monetary and Financial System urged that we design an efficient and fair system for the restructuring of sovereign debt.
The US court’s tendentious, economically dangerous ruling shows why we need such a system now.
Argentina’s Energy Dilemma
BUENOS AIRES –&nbsp;The expropriation of nearly all of the Spanish company Repsol’s stake in Argentina’s energy producer YPF, announced in a vehement speech by President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, has raised legal alarms worldwide.
In fact, the move will not resolve the country’s energy problems in the absence of enormous inflows of investment to the sector.
Repsol acquired complete control of YPF in 1999; in February 2008, it transferred part of its shares to the Petersen Group, which today holds 25%.
Repsol currently holds 57%, with the rest owned by stock-market investors.
The Argentine government intends to expropriate 51%, leaving Repsol with a 6% stake.
In the 2008 sale of shares, the two majority stockholders agreed to distribute at least 90% of future profits in cash.
That decision was intended to allow the Petersen Group to service the debts to banks, and to Repsol itself, that it incurred with its share purchase, for which it made no initial payment.
This is an extraordinarily high dividend in the world oil industry.
In the past decade, YPF’s reserves diminished significantly, along with those of most oil companies operating in Argentina, because investment in exploration was greatly reduced.
At the same time, natural gas accounts for 51% of energy consumption, compared to 32% for oil and barely 17% for coal, renewables, and hydroelectric and nuclear power.
Worldwide, gas accounts for barely a quarter of total energy consumption – for example, 27% in the United States and just 9% in neighboring Brazil.
Argentina has the world’s largest fleet of vehicles running on compressed natural gas; families use gas intensively; most electricity is generated with gas; and the petrochemical industry is based on it.
Of course, in a few other countries (Qatar, Algeria, the United Arab Emirates, Iran, and Russia), gas also accounts for more than half – or even more than 60% – of energy consumption.
But there is an enormous difference: all of these countries have reserves that will last another 70-100 years.
Argentina, by contrast, is a highly gas-dependent country with diminishing reserves – equivalent to less than eight years of production.
Covering this drop in reserves – more than half of gas reserves and a fifth of oil reserves have been consumed – with imports implies an annual cost of more than $300 billion.
Indeed, after two decades of cheap, abundant energy and exports of surplus output, a new cycle of expensive, scarce, and imported energy has begun, as oil production has fallen by one-third since 1998, and gas production by 15% since 2004.
Argentina’s greatest challenge today is to try to regain energy self-sufficiency through significant investment in exploration on land, as well as in the Atlantic Ocean.
At the same time, the country must modify its consumption model through greater reliance on hydroelectric, nuclear, and wind energy.
While there is great potential for new non-conventional resources, all of this is expensive, requiring annual investment of about 3% of GDP over the next five years.
It is very likely that, in the short term, growing imports of expensive liquid natural gas and other fuels will continue to exert pressure for change.
Last year, the external energy deficit was more than $3 billion, and this year it is expected to double.
The important question is whether the Argentine government’s decision to nationalize 51% of YPF’s shares is the best way to recover self-sufficiency in oil and gas production, and to attract the capital needed for exploration and development of conventional reserves.
Argentina has particularly high potential for production of non-conventional gas resources as well, given that it holds the world’s third-highest level of such reserves, after China and the United States.
But, as with the country’s conventional resources, these reserves will not produce themselves.
The closest experiment along these lines is probably Argentina’s exit in 2002 from its dollar exchange-rate peg (embodied in its currency board) to a floating regime that depreciated the peso by 300% in the first three months.
Despite Argentina’s obvious differences from the eurozone’s troubled southern economies, the Argentine currency rollercoaster provides sobering lessons for European policymakers to ponder.
Do Europeans want to return to their own version of a flexible “peso”?
At the very least, European policymakers will need to be willing to (a) “pesify” contracts, (b) impose heavy restrictions on commercial banking operations, (c) restructure debts, and (d) introduce capital and exchange controls.
Consider each facet more closely. First, a new currency needs to create its own demand as a means in which to conduct commercial transactions by displacing the euro as sole legal tender and unit of account.
This, in turn, requires the forced redenomination of prices, wages, and financial contracts, which can create serious disruptions, owing to heavy and asymmetrical balance-sheet effects, as well as a massive redistributive impact.
Argentina´s “pesification” of bank deposits and loans benefited debtors at the expense of depositors, inciting public upheaval.
Second, should any eurozone country quit the euro, the anticipation of forced pesification is likely to set off a bank panic, as depositors quickly switch their pesified holdings back into foreign exchange in order to move them out of the system and probably abroad.
In fact, in Argentina, people started to withdraw their deposits almost a year before the exit from the currency board, fueling capital flight and feeding back into market pressures to abandon the peg to the dollar – a dynamic that could be even faster and more furious in financially integrated European economies.
In these circumstances, a selective deposit freeze appears to be the only option to avoid bankrupting the banking sector.
Here, Argentina offers both a good and a bad example.
When all deposit withdrawals were capped in November 2001, the resulting liquidity crunch deepened the recession and, eventually, brought down the government.
By contrast, the restructuring of term deposits in January 2002 attenuated the bank run and kept the payments system alive, while allowing so-called “sight deposits” – which can be withdrawn immediately without penalty – to help build demand for pesos.
Third, while pesification removes balance sheet losses from domestic foreign-currency debts, external contractual obligations cannot be redenominated unilaterally.
Thus, the exit from the dollar peg requires a restructuring of external debt, both sovereign and corporate.
Indeed, Argentina’s sovereign default happened almost simultaneously with the demise of the currency board, but corporate renegotiations were a protracted affair.
Eventually, most companies avoided bankruptcy, mainly owing to the fourth ingredient in Argentina´s exit toolkit: capital controls that provided the legal umbrella to stop external corporate debt servicing.
Of course, controls are an inevitable ingredient in the exit mix.
Adopting a weaker currency is predicated on the need to regain competitiveness and improve external accounts.
But, in the short run, given the huge uncertainties involved in a regime switch, and the loss of access to capital markets that follows a debt renegotiation, foreign exchange becomes scarce, requiring a plethora of traditional restrictions – some more distorting than others – on capital movements.
In Europe, too, capital controls would be the only way to avoid the offshoring of financial settlements after the currency conversion and the freezing of bank deposits.
At any rate, experience indicates that exiting the euro while preserving the freedom of capital movements is little more than a fantasy.
Some observers suggest, based on Argentina’s precedent, that countries should introduce their own weaker currency to denominate wages and selected prices without leaving the euro.
We believe this analogy is misconstrued.
While Argentina did issue quasi-money in 2001 before abandoning the currency board, this money was conceived to meet fiscal needs and remained stable vis-à-vis the dollar.
Indeed, it is hard to imagine how this dual-currency scheme could have avoided the consequences of converting to a weaker currency if the quasi-money had depreciated, as the idea’s current promoters intend.
Argentina’s exit from its dollar peg was a traumatic experience, concentrating contract violations, wealth redistribution, defaults, bank runs, exchange restrictions, and severe limitations on capital movements into a short period of time.
Even so, it was simpler than introducing a “new drachma” would be for, say, Greece.
Because Argentina’s currency board never eliminated the peso as the main means of transactions, the basis for demand for it was there at the time of the blowup.
Euro defectors, by contrast, would need to promote demand for the new currency from scratch – a much messier and nastier process altogether.
A Rio Report Card
NEW YORK – One of the world’s pre-eminent scientific publications, Nature, has just issued a scathing report card in advance of next week’s Rio+20 summit on sustainable development.
The grades for implementation of the three great treaties signed at the first Rio Earth Summit in 1992 were as follows: Climate Change – F; Biological Diversity – F; and Combating Desertification – F. Can humanity still avoid getting itself expelled?
We have known for at least a generation that the world needs a course correction.
Instead of powering the world economy with fossil fuels, we need to mobilize much greater use of low-carbon alternatives such as wind, solar, and geothermal power.
Instead of hunting, fishing, and clearing land without regard for the impact on other species, we need to pace our agricultural production, fishing, and logging in line with the environment’s carrying capacity.
Instead of leaving the world’s most vulnerable people without access to family planning, education, and basic health care, we need to end extreme poverty and reduce the soaring fertility rates that persist in the poorest parts of the world.
In short, we need to recognize that with seven billion people today, and nine billion by mid-century, all inter-connected in a high-tech, energy-intensive global economy, our collective capacity to destroy the planet’s life-support systems is unprecedented.
Yet the consequences of our individual actions are typically so far removed from our daily awareness that we can go right over the cliff without even knowing it.
When we power our computers and lights, we are unaware of the carbon emissions that result.
When we eat our meals, we are unaware of the deforestation that has resulted from unsustainable farming.
And when billions of our actions combine to create famines and floods halfway around the world, afflicting the poorest people in drought-prone Mali and Kenya, few of us are even dimly aware of the dangerous snares of global interconnectedness.
Twenty years ago, the world tried to address these realities through treaties and international law.
The agreements that emerged in 1992 at the first Rio summit were good ones: thoughtful, far-sighted, public-spirited, and focused on global priorities.
Yet they have not saved us.
Those treaties lived in the shadow of our daily politics, imaginations, and media cycles.&nbsp; Diplomats trudged off to conferences year after year to implement them, but the main results were neglect, delay, and bickering over legalities.
Twenty years on, we have only three failing grades to show for our efforts.
Is there a different way?
The path through international law engages lawyers and diplomats, but not the engineers, scientists, and community leaders on the front lines of sustainable development.
It is littered with technical arcana about monitoring, binding obligations, annex-I and non-annex-I countries, and thousands of other legalisms, but has failed to give humanity the language to discuss our own survival.
We have thousands of documents but a failure to speak plainly to one other.
Do we want to save ourselves and our children?
Why didn’t we say so?
At Rio+20 we will have to say so, clearly, decisively, and in a way that leads to problem-solving and action, not to bickering and defensiveness.
Since politicians follow public opinion rather than lead it, it must be the public itself that demands its own survival, not elected officials who are somehow supposed to save us despite ourselves.
There are few heroes in politics; waiting for the politicians would be to wait too long.
The most important outcome in Rio, therefore, will not be a new treaty, binding clause, or political commitment. It will be a global call to action.
Around the world, the cry is rising to put sustainable development at the center of global thinking and action, especially to help young people to solve the triple-bottom-line challenge – economic well-being, environmental sustainability, and social inclusion – that will define their era.&nbsp;Rio+20 can help them to do it.