Despite the encouragement of Iran’s civil nuclear program by the US, Britain, Germany, and France, they all ultimately reneged on their contractual commitments after our revolution in 1979.
Today, some of these governments are even questioning Iran’s need for nuclear energy – a matter that was obvious to them 30 years ago.
Iran does not need nuclear weapons to protect its regional interests, and such weapons have no place in Iran’s security strategy.
It seeks to win the confidence of its neighbors and has remained within the confines of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT).
The latest report from the International Atomic Energy Agency has verified that there has been no diversion of Iran’s civil nuclear program to weapons development.
Iran has even proposed regional and multinational participation in its uranium enrichment facilities – only to be met by resounding silence from the Western powers.
Meanwhile, US policy toward nuclear non-proliferation and the NPT regime is a case in point of double standards and the lack of sensitivity to other countries’ security concerns.
While the US seeks to use unilateral and unlawful pressure to preclude Iran’s legitimate right to peaceful nuclear energy, it has assisted in developing Israel’s nuclear capabilities.
Indeed, the US has acted as a buffer to insulate Israel—whose prime minister has boasted about its nuclear weapons—from any international scrutiny, while ignoring calls by Iran and other countries to create a Middle East nuclear-free zone.
With regard to international terrorism, Iran, as a victim of terrorism, condemns it in all its forms.
But the same double standards are apparent here.
The US has used and is still using extremist organizations to promote its foreign policy goals.
This could be said of US conduct with regard to al-Qaeda’s precursors in Afghanistan in the 1980’s, and of its current dealings with terrorist groups such as the People’s Mujahadeen Organization (MKO), and the Kurdish PEJAK and PKK.
The MKO, which was once on Saddam Hussein’s payroll and responsible for the loss of many innocent lives in Iran and Iraq, is now under the protection of the US government in Iraq and operates freely in the US itself.
Iran has always considered regional stability to be in the vital interest of its own security and development.
Our efforts to establish a regional security and cooperation arrangement in the Persian Gulf date back to 1986, at the height of the war with Iraq.
We have continued to pursue these initiatives in the post-Saddam era, engaging in confidence-building measures with our immediate neighbors in order to offset extra-regional agitations.
Iran currently applies the same policy considerations to Iraq and Afghanistan, despite its opposition to the US-led invasions of these countries.
Iran has established excellent relations with post-Taliban Afghanistan and post-Saddam Iraq, and the most senior officials of both countries consistently reject US allegations of Iranian interference.
These accusations are designed to portray Iran as a threat to regional stability and frighten other countries into creating an anti-Iran coalition, with the aim of diverting attention from the consequences of failed US policies not only in Iraq, but also in Lebanon and with respect to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The world deserves better.
A just global order must be defined in terms of peace and security, alleviation of poverty, a fairer distribution of wealth, better protection of the environment, and respect for local cultural particularities.
We can build a global order based on justice, one that negates the current unipolar order by developing tolerance for diversity instead of seeking imposition and assimi lation. Such an order will be culturally inclusive and less hegemonic, encompassing states, non-state actors, and social groups to minimize violence and maximize economic well-being.
Erich Fromm, the late German psychologist and philosopher, once said that “history is a graveyard of cultures that came to their catastrophic ends because of their incapacity for planned and rational voluntary reaction to challenges.”
We cannot predict our fate, but we can be certain that security will only come through real solidarity and global partnership.
Iran’s Rattling Saber
WASHINGTON, DC – As the West ratchets up its economic pressure on Iran to halt its drive to develop nuclear weapons, the Islamic Republic’s rulers are not sitting idly by.
Since Iran lacks the soft power and the economic capacity to counter Western pressure, it is likely that its leaders will resort to threats, and even to force, to prevent the West from cracking down further, as the recent attack on the British embassy in Tehran shows.
Iranian authorities claimed that angry “students” spontaneously stormed the embassy.
While inside, they seized documents and set others alight, and took six embassy employees hostage.
It was only much later that the crowd came under police control and the hostages were set free.
The scene was quite familiar.
In 1979, the United States embassy was also attacked by angry “students,” fueling enmity between the two countries that continues to this day.
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini was not aware of the students’ plan in 1979.
But he later endorsed their actions, and made anti-Americanism a pillar of Iran’s foreign policy.
Iran today is not the revolutionary Iran of 1979.
Thirty-two years after the Islamic Republic was established, Iran’s tactics are obvious to everyone.
The so-called students are members of the Basij militia, which was ordered to attack the embassy, with the police only pretending to stop them.
In the government’s thinking, it does not have to accept responsibility for the attack, the attackers’ identity will remain a mystery, and no one will even be accused of or tried for breaking the law.
The Fars News Agency, which is affiliated with Iran’s powerful Revolutionary Guard has called the British embassy a “lair of espionage” – the same term used to describe the US embassy in 1979.
This is not the first time that a European or British embassy has been attacked by the Basij.
But the stakes are higher now than ever before.
In response to Iran’s nuclear program and Iranian banks’ money-laundering activities, Britain sanctioned the Central Bank of Iran.
As a result, Iran felt compelled to respond –&#160;and not solely with the assault on the British embassy: a few days prior to the attack, a majority in the Iranian parliament voted to downgrade the country’s diplomatic relations with Britain.
Reacting to mounting fear of Western military action against Iran’s nuclear facilities, Revolutionary Guard commanders recently sharpened their rhetoric against the US and Israel.
Amir Ali Hajizadeh, commander of the Guard’s Aerospace Division, said that, in the event of war, “NATO’s missile-defense installations will be attacked by Iran.”
Moreover, he threatened that Iran’s armed forces would not remain quiet if “economic and cultural pressures” continued.
Likewise, Yahya Rahim Safavi, Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei’s military adviser and a former commander-in-chief of the Revolutionary Guard, appealed to Iranian officials not to confine their threats to words, but rather to respond with military action.
He not only argued that Iran’s strategy should be offensive rather than defensive, but also threatened that Tel Aviv would be attacked by Hamas and Hezbollah if Israel went to war with the Islamic Republic.
Some experts argue that if covert operations against Iran’s nuclear and military programs – such as the assassination of nuclear scientists and explosions at the Revolutionary Guard’s missile arsenals – are already taking place, war has already begun.
Indeed, Khamenei and Revolutionary Guard commanders believe that covert war will inevitably become overt if Israel and the West truly believe that Iran is approaching a dangerous point in its nuclear program.
Khamenei recently stated that “we should threaten [the West and Israel] in response to their threats,” which prompted Armed Forces Deputy Chief of Staff Brigadier General Mohammad Baqeri to conclude that Khamenei’s remark meant “revising [Iran’s] defense strategy.”
Obviously, Revolutionary Guard commanders will not divulge what the new strategy is.
Instead, they hope that their own covert action might stop the West from applying more sanctions and greater pressure.
Thus, the West’s main concerns should stem not from Iran’s official responses, but from “independent elements,” like those that attacked the British embassy.
Recently, the US accused an Iranian-American of being instructed by a member of the Quds Force (a Revolutionary Guard unit tasked with carrying out foreign operations) to assassinate the Saudi ambassador in Washington.&#160;
Back in 2007, Iranian forces captured a group of British sailors in the Persian Gulf, releasing them a few weeks later under strong pressure from the United Kingdom.
With tensions much higher today, however, such acts – even if carried out by unknown or unofficial groups – can trigger war.
Indeed, Iran might become so fearful of an overt war that it starts one itself.
Iran’s Republic of Fear
WASHINGTON, DC – Iran’s clerical regime governs by a simple formula: he who is the most frightening, wins.
“Victory by terrifying” is trope that is present in many of Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei’s speeches. Indeed, it is a reliable guide to his political philosophy.
This view was not invented by Khamenei, but rather is drawn from the Koran and the Shiite tradition.
The Iranian Revolutionary Guard have uniforms bearing a Koranic verse that reads, “Make ready for them whatever force and strings of horses you can, to terrify thereby the enemy of God and your enemy, and others besides them that you know not; God knows them.”
Furthermore, in the Shiite tradition, the strategy of the Mahdi, the Shiite Messiah, will be to intimidate all his enemies upon his return to Earth.
But cultivating fear in others also makes one more susceptible to fear, and nothing is more frightening to Khamenei and the leaders of the Islamic Republic than the social dynamism unleashed by the democratic movement brewing inside the country.
The regime seems convinced that there is only a small likelihood of a military attack on its nuclear program. It does not believe that sanctions can bring about its collapse.
Thus, external forces do not appear to pose much of a threat.
What has shaken the government, and indeed threatens the existence of the ruling Islamic ideology, is the pressure of the Iranian people for human and political rights.
Hossein Saffar Harandi, a former minister of culture and Islamic guidance, expressed this fear when he said that “citizens who want the government to be accountable before the people (are) part of a soft war against the Islamic Republic.”
For 30 years, the Islamic Republic has relied on the heavy hand of the internal-security apparatus to silence dissidents and critics.
Fear is a cornerstone of the republic.
But, since Iran’s post-election crisis in June, the people have become fearless, and in turn are terrifying the government.
The extent to which Khamenei fears this social upsurge is stunning.
He is afraid of the humanities, books, arts, universities, satellites, the Internet, and even mobile phones.
For him, the state must control public access to global culture and technology. If not, these forces will work to undermine the state.
Unlike the Islamic Republic’s founder, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, Khamenei lacks charisma and deep learning.
Both his political legitimacy and religious authority are highly questionable, and the street violence and prison brutality of recent months has undermined his authority and shaken his social base.
Increasingly reliant on the Revolutionary Guard as the bulwark of his regime, Khamenei has cut himself off from the possibility of compromise.
Khamenei’s foreign policy is now completely subject to how the domestic situation in Iran develops.
As recent months have shown, he will consider a compromise with the West only when he loses his certainty that all is under control internally.
It is like a seesaw: Khamenei’s domestic weakness changes the balance of Iran’s foreign policy.
Thus, initially intimidated by the post-election crisis, the regime acceded to the October 1 proposal in Geneva that would have allowed the controlled enrichment of Iran’s uranium outside the country.
In November, when the government thought that street brutality had intimidated the protest movement, Iranian officials backed away from the compromise.
In this sense, the Iranian people can be regarded as a strategic ally of the West, not only because they want democracy at home and peace in the region, but because their continued protests offer the West the most effective leverage against the Islamic Republic’s nuclear program.
This regime cannot survive in the long term with a political crisis such as the one it now faces.
Continued crackdowns would result in a military dictatorship, while an accommodation with the protest movement would produce some kind of consensual semi-democratic government.
In either case, however, the democratic movement would not die.
It would reemerge continuously, despite heavy repression over short periods of times, raising the kinds of challenges that pose an existential threat to any non-democratic government.
Support of human rights and democracy in Iran is not only a matter of morality. It should be a strategic priority for the West.
Empowering the Iranian people means weakening Khamenei and his military allies.
And a weakened Khamenei is more likely to compromise on the nuclear front.
Iran’s Revolutionary Echoes
STONY BROOK, NY – Iran’s continued unrest, now extending through the 30th anniversary of the revolution that toppled the Shah, raises the question of whether the Islamic Republic is about to fall.
As in 1979, millions of Iranians have taken to the streets, this time to protest electoral fraud in the presidential vote last June.
The cheated presidential candidates, both veterans of the revolution, instinctively thought of a replay of history.
Mir Hossein Moussavi saw the green symbols of the demonstrators as representing the color of the House of the Prophet, and urged his supporters to continue their nightly rooftop chants of “God is Great!”
Thus, the first slogan of the opposition invoked the religious credo of the 1979 revolutionaries.
More recently, protesters chanted it during the funeral demonstrations for Grand Ayatollah Hussein Ali Montazeri in the closing days of 2009.
And yet we risk being led astray by memories of 1979. It is far too soon to predict another revolution.
But t he divide between Iran’s society and its government is much greater today than it was under the Shah 30 years ago.
Change seems just as inevitable.
Technological advances greatly favor the 2009 protesters.
Text messages, Twitter, and the Web are infinitely superior to the smuggled cassettes of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini’s speeches that fueled the opposition in 1979.
What’s missing this time, however, is a charismatic leader comparable to Khomeini.
Indeed, the striking feature of the Iranian opposition movement is the lack of effective leadership, despite the astonishing persistence of protests.
As Moussavi has readily acknowledged, neither he nor the other presidential candidate, Ahmad Karroubi, feels in charge by now.
The greatest difference between 2009 and 1979 was created by the revolution itself.
R evolutions give birth to a new political class, and Iran’s Islamic revolution was no exception.
The Iranian leadership formed after the revolution consisted of a narrow ruling stratum and a much broader supporting group that was given charge of administration and political mobilization.
In the 20 years since Khomeini’s death, the composition of this political class has changed drastically.
The clerical elite has gradually lost power to the military-security groups, from whose ranks President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad emerged.
Bureaucratic and security services dominated by the Revolutionary Guards and its militia, the Basij (Mobilization Corps), are now firmly in command.
The leader of the Islamic Republic, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, blessed the Revolutionary Guards’ decision to steal the presidential election.
By identifying squarely with the military-security apparatus headed by Ahmadinejad, Khamenei has alienated an important segment of the ruling clerical elite. He has also reduced his own status as the ultimate arbiter in Iranian society, a role that was central to Khomeini’s dominance of the system.
As a result, he has produced a rupture between the two pillars of the revolutionary regime: the clerical elite and military-security structure.
The growth of Khamenei’s personal, extra-constitutional power introduces a strong element of uncertainty into Iran’s future.
Political regimes that rely on personal power, commonly known as dictatorships, prove to be fragile in crisis.
This was the weakness of the Shah’s regime, which collapsed as he became paralyzed in his decision-making. There was nothing behind him supporting the system.
Most spokespersons of the Green protest movement advocate civil disobedience instead of revolution.
Earlier this month, Ezattolah Sahabi, who was a member of the revolutionary provisional government in 1979, issued a statement in Tehran stating categorically that “a revolution in today’s Iran is neither possible nor desirable.”
At roughly the same time, five prominent opposition intellectuals living in exile released a reformist, not revolutionary, manifesto directed against the “despotic guardians.”
But there is little chance that these children of the Islamic revolution – now graying reformists – will remain in control of the Green movement, which now reflects the aspirations of a post-revolutionary generation of young women and men and students.
The ayatollah-dictator and the Revolutionary Guards have tried their best to discredit their opponents by concocting, through forced confessions at show trials, a conspiracy of regime change based on a “velvet revolution” produced by “Western social sciences.”
Deep down, they know there is no conspiracy. Their fear is grounded in what they see in front of them: the forward march of history.   
Iran’s Young Guard
TEHRAN – Iranians will go to the polls on June 12 to elect a new president.
While some argue that President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad’s re-election is a foregone conclusion, the outcome is, in fact, not at all clear.
Iran’s Supreme Leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, has repeatedly said in public settings that he will not declare his preference among the candidates.
Indeed, in Mashad on March 21, Ayatollah Khamenei said, “There were some rumors that I support a special candidate for the presidential elections.
But I have one vote, and I would not determine a certain candidate because the people themselves should choose their candidates based on their own knowledge.”
So how will the Iranian people weigh their votes?
To answer, one needs to understand the composition of the Iranian electorate.
With the voting age set at just 16 years, Iran has roughly 48 million eligible voters.
Turnout averages 60-65% in presidential elections, implying that around 29 million votes are likely to be cast.
Analysts point to several electoral cleavages, particularly the urban-rural split and socioeconomic status.
Moreover, a key determinant of voting behavior in the upcoming elections is likely to be generational.
Some 46% of the electorate is under the age of 30.  In previous elections, younger voters have turned out in greater numbers than their elders, leading some to predict that half of the voters will be in the 16-to-29 age bracket.
The number of potential first-time voters (16 to 19 years old) is estimated at six million.
Several factors distinguish members of this group from the rest of the Iranian electorate.
They are more educated, more urbanized, and more internationally oriented than previous generations.
More of them are university educated, and, of this group, a majority is female.
They have branched out into new lines of work and social engagement, as inventors, entrepreneurs, and bloggers.
No candidate can be elected president of Iran without significant support among younger voters.
Age, not social class, will determine the outcome of June’s election. 
Like all Iranians, younger voters are focused on economic issues, particularly the difficult combination of high inflation and high unemployment.
The populist policies of the past four years have not brought economic improvement.
Younger Iranians have a particular economic concern as well.
With so many of them graduating from universities, they suffer from a mismatch between their qualifications and the jobs on offer.
Underemployment is deeply frustrating to them.
They also want a more liberal social environment that would loosen restrictions on their dress, broaden access to cultural products like film and music, and enlarge press freedoms.
They want university campuses, in particular, to be more open.
Finally, younger Iranians are tired of Iran’s international isolation.
They want Iran to succeed – and to be recognized for its success – in sports, arts, and education at an international level.
As of this writing, only two presidential candidates have declared themselves: former Prime Minister Mir Hossein Moussavi and former parliament speaker Mehdi Karroubi. Assuming that Ahmadinejad seeks re-election, this line-up lacks any candidate with clear appeal to the youth vote.
Given their dissatisfaction, it would be natural for young voters to take out their frustrations on Ahmadinejad. 
One seemingly unrelated event to watch: in the week before the presidential vote, Iran will play two critical football matches as part of the qualifying round for the 2010 World Cup.
If Iran fails to qualify, this could turn some young voters against the incumbent.  
Among the other candidates, who will pick up this slack? 
Moussavi, Iran’s prime minister between 1981 and 1989, is barely known to young voters.
However, his campaign has been hinting that, if elected, Moussavi will loosen some social and cultural restrictions.
Karroubi, too, is handicapped among the young. Many consider him to be an old, out-of-touch cleric with no feel for their concerns.
Former President Mohammad Khatami, who openly considered trying again for the office, would have been a strong candidate for young voters.
His decision not to run disappointed many of them.
Standing in the wings is one possible candidate who might take up where Khatami left off and address the economic and cultural concerns of young Iranians.
Though he has not announced his candidacy, Mohammad Baquer Qalibaf, now Mayor of Tehran and formerly the country’s chief of police, has a relatively moderate track record and an image of someone who can get things done.
But Qalibaf still has not taken the plunge. If he doesn’t, and if no younger candidate emerges, the youth bloc in Iran’s electorate may have nowhere to turn.
Without a voice for their concerns, Iran’s young people face the prospect of increased frustration, whatever the outcome of the election.
Iran, Turkey, and the Non-Arab Street
PRINCETON – To Western eyes, Middle East politics have again been stood on their head.
Iran’s theocratic mullahs allowed the election of Hassan Rowhani, a man who announced in his first speech as President-elect that his victory is “the victory of wisdom, moderation, and awareness over fanaticism and bad behavior.”
Iranians, apparently surprised that the candidate whom a majority of them had backed (over six harder-line candidates) had won, poured into the streets and hailed a victory “for the people.”
To be sure, it was a carefully controlled election: all candidates who might actually have challenged Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei’s authority were disqualified in advance.
But, within those limits, the government allowed the people’s votes to be counted.
Next door, in Turkey, the West’s favorite Islamic democrat, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, was using bulldozers, tear gas, water cannon, and rubber bullets to clear central Istanbul’s Taksim Square and Gezi Park of peaceful protesters who would not bend to his will.
Erdoğan’s theory of government seems to be that, because he was elected by a majority of Turks who still support him, anyone who opposes him is a terrorist or a pawn of sinister foreign forces.
He appears to see no room for legitimate opposition, for the idea that today’s majority can be tomorrow’s minority and that the rules of the game must allow both to be heard.
Four years ago, when hundreds of thousands of young Iranians flooded the streets of Tehran to protest outgoing President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad’s reelection, the Iranian government shot at them with live rounds.
The protests were brutally repressed, with participants rounded up, imprisoned, and reportedly raped and tortured, damaging the regime’s standing not only among Iranians, but also among the millions of young Arabs across the Middle East and North Africa who would soon rise up to demand their social and political rights.
Erdoğan was initially a hero to those same crowds.
He toured Egypt, Tunisia, and Libya in September 2011 and received a hero’s welcome.
He presented his Justice and Development Party as the Muslim equivalent of Europe’s Christian Democratic parties, combining economic growth, anti-corruption policies, and free elections.
Today, Erdoğan’s government looks much more like the governments against which young Arabs rose, targeting journalists and accusing a “high-interest-rate lobby” of speculators of seeking to harm the Turkish economy.
He has also taken a page from Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s book, not only demonizing the demonstrators, but also going after the medical personnel who care for them and the hoteliers who shelter them.
Turkey is certainly not Iran, and vice versa.
But comparing current developments in the two countries yields lessons that resonate across the Middle East and North Africa.
Most important, in a world that at least pays lip service to democracy, the voice of “the people” matters.
It confers a kind of legitimacy that simply cannot be acquired by force and that is ultimately the surest guarantee of investment and growth.
Of course, “the people” are never truly one: fickle in their loyalties and subject to demagoguery, they often unite in opposition but fracture once in command.
Nonetheless, the willingness of large numbers of people to stand up (or sit in) for their right to be heard, despite the imminent possibility of violent repression, announces to their fellow citizens and the world that something has gone very wrong.
Khamenei and his fellow guardians of Iran’s Islamic revolution were able to weather the 2009 storm, but their façade of legitimate power was collapsing.
Somewhat paradoxically, the election of Rowhani will strengthen their political hand.
And, though Erdoğan may well be able to force the protest genie back into the bottle, he will be significantly weakened until the next Turkish election.
A second lesson of recent events in Iran and Turkey is that the spectrum of government in the Middle East and North Africa runs from autocracy and theocracy to varieties of managed democracy.
No country qualifies as a full liberal democracy – that is, as a political system that combines free and fair elections with constitutional protections of individual rights for all its citizens.
Iran has long qualified as what the American foreign-policy analyst Fareed Zakaria has called an “illiberal democracy.”
Turkey, for its part, seemed to be on a path toward true liberal democracy, notwithstanding the criticism of those who pointed to Erdoğan’s jailing of journalists and generals; it is now backsliding for all the world to see.
A final lesson is that the test of a secure government is whether it can bear to hear itself criticized, even excoriated.
Erdoğan seems outraged, above all, by Turkish citizens’ temerity to speak up against him.
After Erdoğan appeared to broker a deal with the protesters regarding the fate of Gezi Park, the planned demolition of which sparked the initial demonstrations, one of my Twitter followers expressed his satisfaction at the outcome and said the demonstrators should now go home, because “three weeks is enough.”
But enough for what?
Recall that the Occupy Wall Street protesters in 2011 took over lower Manhattan for two full months.
New York City officials ultimately did shut down the protest, but largely for health and sanitary reasons and related complaints by neighborhood residents.
At a press conference on the day the protests began, New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg said: “People have a right to protest, and if they want to protest, we’ll be happy to make sure they have locations to do it.”
Meanwhile, in Syria, “the people” rose up, were fired upon, took up arms, were manipulated, and began a cycle of sectarian killing and revenge that can only fracture them further.
Neither Iran nor Turkey has reached that point.
Nonetheless, peaceful protest, lawsuits, political negotiation, compromise, and ultimately fresh elections would provide both countries – and many others in the region and beyond – a far better way to resolve their internal tensions than the approaches their leaders currently employ.
Iran v. Britain: Who Blinked?
While commentators have charged that Britain capitulated to Iran and handed them a humiliating victory in obtaining the release of the 15 British Marines last week, it would appear that something more like the opposite is actually the case.
But to understand why this is so, we have to look at the larger picture of internal Iranian politics against which the crisis played out.
Our Iranian problem is actually a problem with the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC, or in Persian Pasdaran) and allied institutions like the Basij militia.
These are the “power” agencies that serve as the political base for the conservatives inside Iran.
In return for its support, political leaders like ex-president Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani and the Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei have allowed the IRGC to grow into a semi-autonomous state-within-a-state.
Today it is a large and sprawling enterprise, that controls its own intelligence agency, manufacturing base, and import-export companies, much like the Russian FSB or the Chinese military.
Since coming to power, the current Ahmedinejad regime has awarded IRGC-affiliated companies billions in no-bid contracts, increasing the already great perception among the Iranian public of its corruption.
It is widely believed that Supreme Leader Khamenei put the current nutcase president Mahmoud Ahmedinejad into office as a means of counterbalancing former president Rafsanjani, and has been regretting this decision ever since as Ahmedinejad spouted off about the Holocaust and pushed Iran deeper and deeper into isolation.
The current president comes out of the IRGC (specifically, the Ramazan Unit of the Quds Force), and has used that organization and the Basij to help consolidate his power by moving against more liberal political opponents.
No one knows exactly why the naval wing of the IRGC took the 15 British Marines captive at the end of March.
Some have speculated that it was a matter of freelancing by the IRGC’s command, or the navy, reacting to a local target of opportunity.
The IRGC may have wanted some bargaining chips to help spring of its members captured in Iraq.
It does not seem to be an accident, though, that the capture came quickly after the Security Council passed a very specific set of sanctions against Iran that targeted not just IRGC-affiliated companies and financial institutions like the Ammunition and Metallurgy Industries Group and the Bank Sepah, organizations dealing with nuclear or ballistic missile activities, but also a series of senior IRGC commanders, including Morteza Rezaei, the Guards’ deputy commander, Vice Admiral Ali Ahmadian, chief of the Joint Staff, and Brigadier General Mohammad Hejazi, commander of the Basij.
By freezing Iranian assets outside of Iran, the UN was hitting the IRGC where it hurt, in its pocketbook.
Clearly, whoever was responsible for the decision to take the British Marines prisoner was hoping to rekindle some of the fervor of the 1979 revolution, and use that to force the rest of the leadership into a confrontation with Britain and America.
Hence the televised “confessions” that hearkened back to the taking of hostages in the American Embassy (the “nest of spies”), and the rallies against foreign embassies.
But the gambit didn’t work, and there was clearly a behind-the-scenes power struggle between different parts of the regime.
Ahmedinejad was supposed to give a major speech to a huge rally in Teheran, which he cancelled at the last moment, and when he did speak, it was to announce that the captives would soon be released.
The IRGC prisoners in Iraq were released, but Britain did not apologize or admit wrong-doing in return.
So it would appear that it was the Iranians who blinked first, before the incident could spiral into a genuine 1979-style hostage crisis.
All of this does not mean that there are necessarily “radicals” and “moderates” within the clerical regime in Teheran.
Those pulling the IRGC’s chain are themselves committed to a revolutionary agenda, and doubtless want a nuclear weapon as badly as the Pasdaran commanders.
One of the alleged reasons Khamenei didn’t want Rafsanjani as president was because he was not keen enough on the nuclear program.
The Iranian regime is not, however, a totalitarian juggernaut; there are important splits within the leadership and there is an important faction that does not want Iran to be isolated.
The IRGC has evolved into something like a mafia organization, with extensive economic interests that lead both to corruption and potential vulnerability to sanctions imposed by the international community.
It is important to remember: those who were responsible for taking the British Marines captive wanted an escalation of the confrontation, both to improve their domestic standing, and to punch back for sanctions that were beginning to bite.
This suggests that what the Bush administration has been doing – slowly ratcheting up the pressure through the use of diplomacy to create an international coalition that now includes the Russians – is the proper course to be on.
Iraq and Japanese Isolation
Every country that has sent troops to aid America's efforts in Iraq is under pressure, as the decision by the Philippines to withdraw its small contingent shows.
But for Japan, the question of whether to continue to aid in Iraq's reconstruction extends beyond the merits of this particular policy and goes to the heart of Japanese notions of security and what constitutes the national interest.
Throughout the Cold War, Japan's national security policy appeared to waver between "UN-first-ism" and an "Alliance-first" principle.
In essence, however, fostering alliance with the United States dominated Japan's course. That tendency remains dominant.
But the terrorist attacks on the US in September 2001 pressed Japan to recognize that it must begin to exercise greater autonomy and independent judgment in formulating and implementing its national security policies.
The paradigm of international security that had long dominated Japan's defense thinking had shifted and policymakers realized that they had to shift with it.
For Japan nowadays, security policy must satisfy a trinity of criteria: "national interests," "alliance," and "international cooperation."
This trinity is not something new for Japan, but has deep historical roots.
It may be helpful to look back, in particular, to Japanese actions at the time of the Boxer Rebellion (1900), as well as during World War I. Of course, there are huge differences between the situation then and what Japan faces now.
But those historic contexts shed light on Japan's response to events in Iraq and the wider world today.
At the time of the Boxer Rebellion, Japan responded to requests for help from the international community and won world trust through the sacrifices it made.
As a consequence, and despite the anti-Japanese "yellow peril" propaganda then raging in Europe, Japan entered an alliance with the most sought-after partner of the time, Great Britain.
That alliance enabled Japan to help defeat Russia in the Russo-Japanese War (1904-1905).
During the First World War, however, Japan was reluctant to send troops to Europe despite repeated requests from the Allies.
Although Japan did receive some appreciation for its dispatch of naval squadrons to the Mediterranean, it endured wide criticism for its refusal to send ground troops.
As a consequence, after the war Japan lost Britain's confidence, which eventually resulted in the end of the Anglo-Japanese Alliance.
From that time on, Japan trod a lonely path that ended with its defeat in World War II.
At the time of the Boxer Rebellion, Japan fully understood that to contribute to the world for the "emergency protection of foreign residents" was a "matter of national importance."
During World War I, on the other hand, Japan was blinded by its eagerness to protect small but immediate benefits, and failed to appreciate what a true "matter of national importance" was.
Its passivity cost Japan the trust of the international community.
In the light of this history, how should Japan's stance in Iraq be viewed?
Will Japan's humanitarian and restoration aid in Iraq secure a long-term national interest?
With the exception of international terrorists and remnants of Saddam Hussein's regime, almost everyone, including Iraqis who eye America's occupying forces with suspicion, wish to see the task of rebuilding Iraq, both politically and materially, fulfilled.
For Japan, too, there is justification in responding to such global expectations.
Of course, restoring peace and security is taking much more time than expected.
With almost daily terrorist attacks, ordinary citizens victimized by shell and gunfire or misconceived bombing, the abuses of Iraqi prisoners, and the hostility of Iraq's Shiites - on whom the US had pinned high hopes for the peace process - American policy is in jeopardy of failure.
The question for Japan is this: what will happen, both in Iraq and in the world, if America withdraws in failure?
It is in recognition of the possible consequences - a return of US isolationism, the emboldening of terrorists - that many countries sent and retain troops in Iraq.
Indeed, Russia, France, and Germany, which confronted the US and Britain at the UN over the Iraq war, and the UN itself, which withdrew early in the occupation, are all now searching for a way to assist in Iraq's rehabilitation.
In the end, they agreed on international efforts under UN Security Council Resolution 1546.
France and Germany will now participate directly by helping to train Iraqi security forces.
Considering all this, Iraq represents a decisive moment and a "matter of national importance" for Japan.
Thus, its Self Defense Forces must continue fulfilling their duties of "humanitarian and restoration efforts," while cooperating with Japan's key ally, the US, as a member of an integrated multinational force under UN leadership.
Even if dangerous situations arise, the Self-Defense Forces, and Japan itself, must not flinch.
Only by demonstrating dignified resolve will Japan's true national interests be defended.
True autonomy for Japan, as in the past, depends once more on active and cooperative engagement in containing a world crisis.
Iraqi Libya
GENEVA – As post-revolution Libya looks ahead, Iraq looms as a perilous example.
After 42 years of dictatorship, Libya, like Iraq in 2003 after the fall of Saddam Hussein, needs more than wishful thinking to become a vibrant democracy.
It needs organized state-building in Tripoli – and realistic policymaking in Western capitals.
Successful transitions depend from the start on factors that are still crucially missing in Libya – a relatively cohesive leadership, an active civil society, and national unity.
Without these, Libya will most likely fail to find its footing and, much like post-Saddam Iraq, suffer from persistent political division and volatile civil disorder, in addition to a multifaceted array of geopolitical pressures.
Avoiding that outcome presupposes a strong political center.
But, from the start of the uprising in February 2011, Libya has been politically atomized.
It lacks the sort of civil society that could have led the uprising and planted the seeds for post-authoritarian politics, as was the case in Tunisia and (more problematically) Egypt.
Libya’s transition was arguably further impeded by NATO’s intervention, as the rapid shift from a spontaneous popular uprising to an elite-led and externally supported movement prevented the revolution from following the linear course seen in Tunisia and Egypt.
Thus, despite substantial international support, the Libyan National Transitional Council (NTC) still lacks the level of consensus needed to form a viable government.
The NTC has suffered regular internal disputes, and its membership and functioning are shrouded in secrecy.
Last July, the Council’s military leader, Abdul Fatah Younis al-Obeidi, was assassinated under ambiguous circumstances.
Then, in November, the NTC’s military prosecutor named its own former deputy prime minister, Ali al-Issawi, as the prime suspect.
The conflict and opacity surrounding the case are telling signs of the country’s political fragility since Colonel Muammar el-Qaddafi’s demise.
Libya should take note of how Iraq’s post-Saddam transition has featured ceaseless power struggles and infighting.
In 2010, Iraqi political leaders’ machinations – personal, as well as tribal and sectarian – left the country without a government for 249 days.
Today, Libya appears set to undergo similar struggles, owing mostly to the presence of powerful political actors outside the NTC.
The 20,000-strong Tripoli Military Council, for example, which controls the capital, has been consistently independent of the NTC, and forced out its first foreign minister, Mahmoud Jibril.
The rival Tripoli’s Revolutionists Council, meanwhile, has warned that it would unseat any incoming government should its demands for representation not be met.
The NTC also faces pressure from Libya’s Berbers, who comprise 10% of the population and have already taken to the streets to denounce the new political arrangements and to reject any system that does not accommodate theirculture andlanguage.
This dissension may well be compounded by two additional factors.
The first is major cities’ competing sense of entitlement to the fruits of the revolution: Misurata, where Qaddafi’s body was displayed; Tripoli, which hosted the liberation ceremony; and Zintan, which is holding Qaddafi’s son, Saif al-Islam el-Qaddafi, prisoner.
And all of them, like most Libyans, share the unrealistic expectation that their newfound freedom will somehow solve their socio-economic woes.
The second complicating factor is that political power now lies in the hands of competing militias.
The internecine rivalries that began in earnest last November between fighters from Zawiya and Warshefana, and among Tripoli’s various factions, will be difficult to defuse, as the thowar (revolutionaries) have refused repeated calls by the NTC to disarm.
Tripoli is in danger of becoming like Baghdad circa 2005, with different groups controlling turf and instituting a clientelist neighborhood political economy.
Inter-urban competition and the militias’ defiant independence are all the more worrisome because Libya is awash in weapons, with unguarded caches, abandoned stockpiles, looted ammunition depots, and thousands of shoulder-fired heat-seeking surface-to-air missiles.
Last November, Mokhtar Belmokhtar, the commander of al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM), confirmed that AQIM seized the opportunity to secure some of this arsenal when the revolution started.
Meanwhile, the aims of France, the United Kingdom, the United States, the Arab League, NATO, and Qatar, all of which have played a role in Libya’s transformation, are unlikely to be the same.
In other words, external pressures, too, are likely to pull Libya in several different directions, which will only further delay an autonomous and sustainable state-building process.
Qaddafi left behind a booby-trap.
The collapse of authoritarian rule created a security vacuum with no functioning state apparatus, making Libya highly exposed to international influence, often in the service of corporate interests.
To avoid repetition of the costly mistakes made in Iraq, Libya will require adroit leadership that can elaborate a compelling new national vision with which to unify competing authorities, rein in undisciplined militias, and minimize the country’s strategic vulnerability.
Iraq, Katrina, Iraq
Four years ago, President George W. Bush was on shaky political ground.
He had barely won the controversial 2000 election, and polls showed the American people remained doubtful about him.
After the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, Bush found his voice and the American people rallied around his presidency.
Thanks to Osama Bin Laden, Bush’s popularity soared, and while his ratings had diminished by the 2004 election, his “war on terrorism” helped him win a second term.
In September 2005, another crisis, Hurricane Katrina, probably killed at least as many Americans as the terrorist attacks in 2001, but it had the opposite effect on Bush’s poll numbers, which dropped to an all-time low.
Why the startling difference?
For one thing, the September 11 attacks were by a human enemy, and despite inadequate domestic preparations for such an event, Americans’ anger was directed outward.
Katrina, on the other hand, was a terrible act of nature, but one that was predicted by the national weather service with impressive accuracy.
The inadequate preparation and slow response by the Bush administration meant that anger was directed at the president.
To be sure, some of the blame for poor preparation belongs to state and local officials.
But the Bush administration bears a significant share of the responsibility.
In the 2000 election campaign, Bush praised Bill Clinton’s Federal Emergency Management Administration (FEMA) for its effectiveness.
As president, he treated it as a source of patronage, replacing its top officials with political cronies who had little experience in managing emergencies.
To make matters worse, the administration shoehorned FEMA into its massive new bureaucracy, the Department of Homeland Security.
During the 2004 election campaign, Bush claimed that the new department had made Americans safer.
But the halting and weak response to Katrina has called this into question.
If it was difficult to evacuate and supply a small city like New Orleans, how would New York or Los Angeles fare?
Katrina has also raised questions about other items on the president’s agenda.
One of the top priorities had been the Republican plan to complete the repeal of the estate tax on the richest Americans.
But, as the costs of responding to Katrina mount, adding to the federal deficit, it seems difficult to proceed as planned. 
Moreover, rising gasoline prices have called attention to the shortcomings of the Bush administration’s energy policy, which includes recently passed legislation that contains inadequate requirements for energy conservation.  The press, meanwhile, has reported on speculation about the relationship between warmer ocean waters and the frequency of severe hurricanes, thus highlighting the low priority that the administration has given to environmental problems in general and global climate change in particular.
But Bush will survive Katrina.
The floodwaters will recede in New Orleans and reconstruction will begin.
Already the scenes of looters exploiting the chaos in the early aftermath of the storm have been replaced with stories of charitable contributions from other parts of the country, of children being accepted into schools outside the city, and of families being helped by strangers.
On the anniversary of the September 11 attacks, a unit of the New York City Police Department was helping out in New Orleans, and the city returned a fire engine that New Orleans had earlier donated as a symbol of solidarity.
Katrina is thus likely to be a footnote in the history of the Bush presidency.
The real question for Bush’s role in history remains Iraq.
The short-term effect of Katrina was to drive stories about Iraq off of television screens and newspaper front pages.
But the news from Iraq before the storm was bad and hasn’t gotten better.
The majority Shia and their Kurdish allies rejected Bush’s plea to Iraqi politicians to modify the new draft constitution to attract disgruntled Sunni Arabs.
Given that the insurgency is centered among the Sunnis, this refusal is likely to make it more difficult to establish the security that is necessary for democratic government to work.
Of course, the Sunnis comprise a minority in Iraq, so insurgents have little prospect of “winning” control of the country the way North Vietnam was able to win control of South Vietnam.
But that is little consolation, because they can still disrupt progress toward a stable constitutional government.
At worst, they may be able to foment a civil war.
Despite claims by the extreme left and right around the world, America is not an imperial nation.
Domestic public opinion will support the use of force if people feel threatened or believe that the cause is just, but Americans have little interest in ruling over other nations.
Neo-conservative appeals to the example of the British Empire are far-fetched.
The idea that American troops will stay in Iraq indefinitely – or even “just as long as necessary and not one day more,” in the clichéd language of Donald Rumsfeld – is implausible.
This means that Bush has only a relatively short time to achieve his goals in Iraq.
If he is able to produce a stable constitution, a political compromise among the contesting parties, and successful elections, he may be able to declare victory.
But right now, the prospects look dubious.
Even before the floodwaters of Katrina recede, Bush will need to focus on his Iraq conundrum, because long after Katrina has been forgotten, history will judge his presidency by how he resolves it.
Iraq: More than an American Problem
Many people around the world are indulging in what the Germans call “schadenfreude”: pleasure at the suffering of others.
The pleasure appears to be derived from the suffering the United States is enduring after four years of efforts to stabilize Iraq.
On one level, that reaction is predictable.
Resentment of the wealthy and powerful is hardly new.
But the US in the last few years has compounded this reaction by what it has done and how it has done it.
For some, it was the decision to go to war in Iraq; for others, it was Guantánamo and the perceived double standards of American justice.
For still others, it was the lack of sustained effort to bring about peace between Israelis and Palestinians or US opposition to the International Criminal Court and to the Kyoto Protocol on climate change.
The result is that anti-Americanism has grown in both reach and intensity.
Still, any satisfaction at the problems the US is undergoing in Iraq is shortsighted and sure to be short-lived.
Every government in the world has a stake in the future of Iraq and the stability of the Middle East.
Terrorism bred in Iraq will not stay there.
Those men and women who learn to make and detonate roadside bombs on the streets of Baghdad will ply their trade elsewhere in the region and beyond.
Terrorists who have tasted success in Iraq will increasingly turn on others.
Expressions of anti-Americanism will provide no protection or immunity to governments or individuals who for good reason are not prepared to endorse the terrorists’ radical agendas.
War in Iraq will only exacerbate frictions between the country’s Sunni minority and Shia majority, and such frictions could well be replicated elsewhere where Sunnis and Shia live side by side.
Even if not, the flight of millions of Sunni refugees will weaken the foundations of neighboring states, including Jordan.
Continued fighting in Iraq could also lead to regional war.
Turkey, for example, is poised to attack the Kurdish enclave in Iraq’s north.
It is also possible that resistance to Iranian efforts to dominate Iraq could lead to a wider conflict that draws in Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and others.
Such a conflict would threaten the vital flow of oil from the Middle East to the rest of the world.
Even without such a wider conflict, what happens in Iraq will affect the price of oil.
Iraq is producing oil at levels below what it produced under Saddam Hussein, and has the potential to double or even triple output.
Doing so would require significant investment, which in turn would require international confidence in Iraq’s future stability.
Absent such confidence, Iraq’s oil output will not approach its potential, which will only widen the gap between global supply and demand.
Costly oil is a tax on the poor in developing countries and a source of inflation for the developed countries.
It also provides resources to governments that in many cases are promoting foreign policies that are contrary to the interests of most other countries.
The rest of the world also has a stake in how the US emerges from Iraq.
There is a real danger that a widely-perceived failure in Iraq could lead to a serious weakening of American domestic political support for an active international role, particularly difficult but necessary deployments of military force.
The alternative to a world shaped by a strong, confident, and engaged US is not likely to be a world that is peaceful, prosperous, and free.
In strategic terms, no other country or group of countries has the capacity to replace the US.
The alternative to a US-led global order is disorder, in which terrorism, nuclear proliferation, and economic protectionism are increasingly the norm.
This suggests, first, that governments should avoid public comments describing the American presence as an occupation or as lacking legitimacy, lest they make it more likely that the US departs Iraq entirely and leaves the country and its people to a terrible fate.
Second, countries should support Iraq’s government, despite its shortcomings.
This means extending diplomatic recognition, including opening and maintaining embassies.
It also requires providing financial help, ranging from debt forgiveness to investment, loans, and other forms of aid.
There is also a moral and practical case for doing more to ease the plight of refugees and internally displaced persons.
Third, terrorism needs to be checked.
This means doing everything possible to stop infiltration of terrorists into Iraq and rethinking support for militias.
None of Iraq’s neighbors, including Iran, would benefit from sectarian conflict that grows into a regional war.
Finally, governments should consider contributing troops to help establish order, train the Iraqi police and military, and help Iraq guard its borders.
As the US inevitably reduces its role, others should be prepared to step up, lest Iraq’s government falls and the Iraqi state fails.
The reality is that Iraq’s future is not assured even if these and similar measures are taken.
Still, there is a big difference between an Iraq that struggles and one that implodes; between an Iraq that contributes to global energy security rather than undermining it; between a civil war and a regional war.
It may be too late for the US to succeed in Iraq, but it is not too late for others to increase the odds that the US does not fail.
Iraq’s Bullets and Ballots
When the Iraq war started in 2003, the Bush administration had very ambitious plans: as in post-1945 Germany and Japan, a long and peaceful occupation was envisaged, during which expanding oil production would assure rising prosperity as democratic structures were built piece by piece.
The foundation was to be a liberal, even post-modern constitution, complete with a guarantee of 25% of parliamentary seats for women. 
In today’s Iraq, there is no peace and no prosperity.
The constitution that will be voted on October 15th includes that 25% rule, but otherwise is far from liberal.
The key provision (article 2) that no law may contradict “the undisputed rules of Islam” violates the basic principle of parliamentary sovereignty, and will prevent legislation from meeting international standards.
For example, the age of sexual consent for girls cannot be set above nine, because Muhhamad himself had a nine-year-old wife.
It follows that nine-year-old girls are also adults in criminal law, and subject to capital punishment for, say, converting to another religion.
More broadly, the Shias can use this provision to place their ayatollahs over the elected parliament, as in Iran, because they alone are authorized to determine the “rules” of Islam.
Outsiders and the few Iraqi liberals worry mainly about this Islamic provision, but the widespread Sunni opposition to the constitution is aimed at other provisions: the exclusion of the “Saddamist Ba’ath Party” from political life and government, and the federalist provisions that grant autonomy to the 18 Iraqi provinces and allow them to combine into regional governments.
The exclusion rule is a personal issue for elite Sunnis – including thousands of businessmen, professionals, even artists – because, with few exceptions, they were all Ba’ath members.
In theory, the constitutional prohibition could be interpreted as applying only to the future.
But in practice administrative rules are now being applied to exclude so-called “high-ranking” Ba’ath members from any form of government employment, and thousands are affected.
The Sunnis would probably accept the federalist provisions if they applied only to the Kurds.
They know that the alternative is not a return to centralism, but secession by the three Kurdish-majority provinces of Dahuk, Arbil, and As Sulaymaniyah to form an independent Kurdistan, with its own treasury, army (the Pesh Merga), and oil production around Kirkuk – the second-largest reserves in Iraq.
Sunnis reject the same federalism for the Shias because they view them as fellow Arabs who have always accepted Sunni rule in the past, and will do so again – unless they have their own government.
That is what the new constitution would allow, because the Shia-majority provinces in the south – which contain the greater part of Iraq’s oil reserves – could form their own regional government.
In the usual style of the Middle East, disappointed Sunni leaders, unhappy with the constitution, now threaten violence.
But federalism is not the reason why Sunni supremacists and Islamists launch deadly attacks.
Their opposition is more elemental: they do not accept the principle of democratic majority rule. Instead, they seek to restore Sunni minority rule.
For the Islamists, all Shias deserve death anyway, as apostates.
One Shia leader, Moqtada Sadr, also vehemently opposes federalism.
His followers are the largely illiterate, poorest, and most violent Shias of the slums of Baghdad and beyond, whose “Mahdi militia” fought American troops in 2004, even while the Americans were protecting Shias from Sunni attackers.
As a very junior priest who derives his authority from his dead Ayatollah father – himself a populist – Sadr is opposed by Iraq’s living Ayatollahs, who despise his ignorance and violence.
Sadr cannot possibly compete with them in religious authority, so he takes an Arab-nationalist stance against them, often recalling that the highest Shia cleric, Ayatollah Sistani, is a Persian, not an Arab.
To reject the constitution and force new elections for a constitutional assembly, opponents need a two-thirds majority in at least three provinces.
The Sunnis are only likely to win in two provinces, but if Sadr orders his followers in Baghdad’s slums to vote “no” alongside local Sunnis, that would probably flip the capital to the constitution’s opponents, ensuring its defeat.
As a political thug, Sadr is, of course, willing to be bought.
Last year he was wanted for murder.
Now he wants recognition as a statesman, money, and, at least implicitly, Sistani’s and the SCIRI’s humiliation.
He might receive offers, and perhaps the bargaining has already started.
But some of the Shias whom he attacks with words and bullets have thousands under arms, and think that he should be offered only bullets.
From War of Choice to War Without End
WASHINGTON, DC – When the Bourbon monarchy was restored in 1815, the French diplomat Talleyrand is reported to have said of the Bourbons: “They have learned nothing and forgotten nothing.”
Ten years after the start of the Iraq War, the question is whether anyone – Americans, Iraqis, Iranians, other Arab states – has learned anything from this terrible experience.
By the standards of modern warfare, America’s losses were much lower than they were in other recent conflicts – more than 12 times as many American soldiers were killed in Vietnam.
Yet the Iraq war has scarred America in many ways.
It was, as many have pointed out, a war of “choice,” a formulation rarely, if ever, used to describe America’s previous wars.
In a certain way, Iraq was the first think-tank war.
To be sure, in the early 1960’s, members of President John F. Kennedy’s administration intellectualized war and debated the merits of strategies, including counterinsurgency.
But there can be no comparison to the cerebral mud wrestling that played out in Washington over Iraq.
This partly reflected the existential threat that the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, represented in so many people’s minds.
The United States, it was argued, needed to begin to think about war differently.
Former US diplomat George F. Kennan famously said that “democracy fights in anger.”
But the new strategic doctrine of “preemption,” which many argued would define war-making in the twenty-first century, suggests that democracies also fight in dread.
Indeed, another reason for the war was America’s internal divisions over what it represents as a nation – its purpose and meaning to the rest of the world.
The war did not resolve such questions.
On the contrary, in some ways, the US emerged from Iraq even more divided than it was when it entered.
For Iraq, the complexities and contradictions of the war were even more pronounced.
No one can visit Iraq and talk to Iraqis without coming away with the sense that ridding the world of Saddam Hussein was an important – even noble – accomplishment.
His tyranny rivaled the worst of the twentieth century.
Yet, in liberating Iraq, the US failed to ask how the tyrant gained power in the first place, and what, therefore, the challenges in replacing him would be.
For some, sectarianism in Iraq appeared like a summer storm, which quickly passed once the “surge” of US troops became American strategy in 2007.
But even the colossal mistakes of “de-Baathification” (the dismissal of all Iraqi officials who had been members of Saddam’s Baath Party) and the decommissioning of the Iraqi army – measures so foolish that nobody now admits to ordering them – cannot fully explain Iraq’s continuing political crisis.
To believe that sectarian fighting started because of a foolish US decision, and ended because of a subsequent wise one, is to ignore the role of sectarianism in a country that straddles the Sunni and Shia worlds and the Turkic and Arab worlds.
These divisions, obscured by Saddam’s totalitarianism, never went away.
Indeed, the Sunni-Shia divide exists in many parts of the Arab world.
While Americans saw in Bahrain’s protests in 2011 a people’s democratic aspirations, no one in the region doubted that the real source of the troubles was a restive Shia majority (perhaps inspired by Iraq, or even, as Sunni Arabs claimed, Iran) trying to remove a Sunni monarchy.
Those who argue that the surge (and its close companion, new and improved “counterinsurgency”) overcame Iraq’s sectarian fault line suggest that Iraq’s ongoing political problems are the result of Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki’s poor governance.
If only he were more democratically minded, or would reach out to the Sunni community – perhaps offering another ministerial portfolio – suicide bombings of Shia religious festivals by Sunni extremist would end.
In fact, the Middle East – buffeted by the Iraq War, the Arab Spring, and the sectarian showdown in Syria – is unsure where to go next: liberal democracy and the rule of law, or Islamist rule?
Yet, for the Sunni world, Iraq is the mistake that not only must not be repeated, but also must be reversed.
Thus, Sunni Arabs and Shia Persians alike view Iraq as still up for grabs, a question rather than a country, a “great game” of the kind with which the world is very familiar.
The Saudis and other Sunni Arab states have shown little inclination to bring Iraq into the Arab fold, leaving it to find its own way in the world.
These states contribute enormously – as they did in the 2010 national elections – to what they hope will be a Sunni restoration, when the Americans’ great error is corrected and the Arab world is made whole.
Ten years after Saddam’s removal, Iraq’s future remains where it always has been: in the hands of Iraqis, who will have to rise to the occasion.
No one can create a stable political order for them; with the Americans gone, meddlesome Arab neighbors and anxious Iranians can only lose by dooming Iraq to remain a tinderbox.
As for Americans, we need to learn from what happened in Iraq, lest our hubris doom us to similar ventures.
And, when it comes to the vision that sent us there, that means that we must also forget.
Iraq’s Critical Election
BLOOMINGTON – Iraqis go to the polls on March 7 to elect a new Parliament for the second time under the country’s permanent constitution of 2006.
Many scholars believe that it is the second general election, not the first, which is the most important test of any new democracy.
If so, these elections appear to foreshadow ominous times ahead.
The security situation in Iraq has deteriorated dramatically over the past six months.
Though much of the violence in Iraq over the past six years has been random, aimed at soft targets such as markets and restaurants, its nature changed last summer.
On August 19, 2009, the sixth anniversary of the bombing that killed the United Nations representative in Baghdad, a series of spectacular attacks were carried out.
These bombings, and others since, have targeted the Iraqi state and its infrastructure, including the ministries of finance and foreign affairs and municipal and judicial offices.
Moreover, as United States troops have lowered their profile, daily violence of the more random variety has increased.
Equally ominous, the banning of hundreds of candidates for alleged ties to the Baath Party signals a return to sectarian politics, which could reignite a sectarian civil war.
The individuals banned include the current defense minister and several members of parliament.
The message from Iran’s allies in Iraq, who control the de-Baathification process, is clear.
While some Shia who were prominent allies of the Baathist regime hold positions of great influence in the “new” Iraq, Sunnis will never know when they will be shut out of the process, especially if they become too powerful.
Some of Iraq’s Sunni leaders might thus conclude that permanent armed opposition is their only viable strategy.
True, they might not be able to topple the new regime, but they will be able to de-stabilize Iraq over the long term, in the hope of forcing a negotiated settlement of their grievances.
The new Shia elites who control Iraq have emulated their allies in Iran, creating a system that effectively chooses which of their rivals may constitute a “legitimate” opposition and which may not participate in the political process.
The struggle of Iraq’s Kurds should be instructive.
As the Iraqi political scientist Ghassan Atiyyah, has noted, the Kurds, even without regional allies, have been able to de-stabilize Iraq for 80 years.
How much more will the Sunnis be able to de-stabilize the country, he asked, enjoying as they do the support of most of the regional powers, including Saudi Arabia, Syria, and potentially Turkey?
Politics aside, the long-term damage to Iraq’s legal institutions caused by these maneuverings should not be underestimated.
After the de-Baathification order was issued (by a commission that does not actually have any sitting members) a panel of the Iraqi Court of Appeal essentially invalidated it.
The prime minister then met with Iraq’s chief justice, following which the court’s decision was reversed.
There will be several ways to gauge the election’s relative success.
The first of these will be the length of time that it takes the victors to form a new government.
If, as occurred after the last elections, months go by without the formation of a government, this will be confirmation that Iraq’s political elites will continue to subordinate the desperate needs of the country – for security, electricity, water, and basic services – to their political futures as they haggle over positions.
Whether competent technocrats, or as has happened in the past, party hacks are appointed to the ministries will be a telling sign.
Another sign will be the extent to which the newly elected leadership, which is likely to be largely the same as the current leadership, reaches out to real Sunni leaders.
Doing so might well mean a retreat from the pre-election banning of candidates, and would demonstrate a maturity among the Shia political elites that they have not yet shown.
Finally, the reaction of the election’s losers will be key.
That includes not only those who have been banned from running for office, but others as well.
For example, it is likely that the current prime minister will not be able to form a new government.
Even the principal Kurdish parties are facing a challenge from an independent party, Goran, and are likely to incur some losses to it.
If these losers engage in post-election jockeying to cheat opponents of their fair allotment of seats, that will tell much about the future.
Whether Iraq achieves stability or is once again ripped apart by sectarian violence now depends, as it always has, on the new political elites.
If the past is an indication of their future performance, there is reason for deep concern.
Iraq’s Economic Divide
Everyone who looks at Iraq sees a nation divided between Shia, Sunni, and Kurd communities.