The interdependencies in the global economy (in areas as diverse as financial markets, product safety, infectious diseases, natural resource dependency, and global warming) have outrun our collective capacity to manage them and coordinate policy responses.
Restoring that balance will take time, leadership, a shift in attitudes, and creativity. 
In the interim, the mismatch creates risks for everyone, including developing countries.
It creates skepticism about whether the net benefits of openness are positive, and uncertainty about what adaptations are needed in the regulation of free markets to achieve a reasonable balance between their benefits and risks.
Influential developing countries share a joint responsibility with the G-8 for the stability of the global financial and economic systems.
But they currently have limited channels for discharging that responsibility and influencing global policies.
In addition, collectively we must do a better job of anticipating problems rather than being in reactive mode in the face of crises.
The global economy and its increasing openness made it possible for three billion people to enjoy the fruits of growth in the postwar period.
It may also provide an economic springboard for another two billion people to fulfill their aspirations in the coming decades.
But openness brings risks, many unanticipated and most under-managed.
People are skeptical for understandable reasons, and in the case of the credit crisis, angry.
Openness needs protecting and the best way to protect it is to manage the areas of growing interdependence effectively, pragmatically and inclusively.  
From Great Game to Grand Bargain
LAHORE – The “Great Game” is no fun anymore.
Nineteenth-century British imperialists used that term to describe the British-Russian struggle for mastery in Afghanistan and Central Asia.
More than a century later, the game continues.
But now, the number of players has exploded, those living on the chessboard have become players, and the intensity of the violence and the threats that it produces affect the entire globe.
Afghanistan has been at war for three decades, and that war is spreading to Pakistan and beyond.
A time-out needs to be called so that the players, including President-elect Barack Obama, can negotiate a new bargain for the region.
Securing Afghanistan and its region will require an international presence for many years.
Building up Afghanistan’s security forces is at most a stopgap measure, as the country cannot sustain forces of the size that it now needs.
Only a regional and global agreement to place Afghanistan’s stability above other objectives can make long-term stability possible by enabling Afghanistan to survive with security forces that it can afford.
Such agreement, however, will require political and diplomatic initiatives both inside and outside of the country.
In Afghanistan, the United States and NATO must make clear that they are at war with al-Qaeda and those who support its global objectives, but have no objection if either the Afghan or Pakistani government negotiates with insurgents who renounce ties to Osama bin Laden.
In exchange for such guarantees, international forces could largely withdraw, leaving a force to secure a political agreement and to train Afghan security forces.
But a political settlement within Afghanistan cannot succeed without a regional grand bargain.
The first Great Game was resolved a century ago by making Afghanistan a buffer state in which outsiders did not interfere.
Today, however, Afghanistan is the scene not only of the War on Terror, but also of longstanding Afghan-Pakistani disputes, the India-Pakistan conflict, domestic struggles in Pakistan, US-Iranian antagonism, Russian concerns about NATO, Sunni-Shia rivalry, and struggles over regional energy infrastructure.
These conflicts will continue as long as the US treats stabilizing Afghanistan as subordinate to other goals, accompanied by all the risks entailed by terrorist resurgence and a regional security crisis.
This is why Obama must adopt a bold diplomatic initiative that encompasses the entire region and help resolve longstanding disputes between Afghanistan’s neighbors.
Such an initiative must include a comprehensive regional aid and development package.
In addition, the US must rebalance its regional posture by reducing its dependence on Pakistan’s military.
Obama will need firmly to support Pakistan’s fragile elected government as it tries to gain control over the army and intelligence apparatus and thus reverse decades of support for militants.
Dialogue with Iran and Russia over common interests in Afghanistan – both helped the US in 2001 – would place more pressure on Pakistan.
At the same time, the US and other powers with a stake in Afghanistan must seek to reduce Indian activities in Afghanistan that Pakistan sees as threatening, or, if those policies are not threatening, assure greater transparency for them.
This objective requires more than “pressuring” Pakistan.
The Pakistani security establishment believes that it faces a US-Indian-Afghan alliance aimed at undermining Pakistani influence in Afghanistan and even dismembering the Pakistani state. Civilian leaders evaluate Pakistan’s national interests differently, but they, too, cannot be indifferent to Pakistan’s chronic sense of insecurity.
Pakistan does not have border agreements with either India, with whom it disputes the incorporation of Kashmir, or Afghanistan, which has never explicitly recognized the Durand Line, the frontier between Pakistan and Afghanistan.
Pakistan also claims that the Northern Alliance, part of the anti-Taliban resistance in Afghanistan, is working with India from within Afghanistan’s security services.
And the US-India nuclear deal effectively recognizes India’s legitimacy as a nuclear power while continuing to treat Pakistan, with its record of proliferation, as a pariah.
Pressure will not work if Pakistan’s leaders believe that their country’s survival is at stake.
Instead, the new US administration should help to create a broad multilateral framework for the region, one aimed at building a genuine consensus on the goal of achieving Afghan stability by addressing the legitimate sources of Pakistan’s insecurity while strengthening opposition to disruptive Pakistani behavior.
A first step could be establishing a contact group for the region, authorized by the United Nations Security Council.
This contact group could promote dialogue between India and Pakistan about their respective interests in Afghanistan and about finding a solution to the Kashmir dispute; seek a long-term political strategy from the Pakistani government for the future of the tribal agencies; move Afghanistan and Pakistan toward discussions on frontier issues, and promote a regional plan for economic development and integration.
China, the largest investor in both Pakistan and Afghanistan, could help finance projects of common interest.
A successful initiative will require exploratory talks and an evolving road map.
Today, such suggestions may seem audacious, naive, or impossible; but, without such audacity, there is little hope for Afghanistan, Pakistan, or the region as a whole.
From Hubris to Nemesis in the EU
Paris – The European Union’s Lisbon treaty was initially greeted with enthusiasm, pride, and even hubris.
It promised a more realistic and reasonable way forward than the ill-fated constitutional treaty that it replaced, and many of its supporters also hoped that a central feature of its predecessor – the notion of “constitutional patriotism” – was still alive.
But the Lisbon treaty has instead brought chaos to the Union.
What went wrong?
Constitutional patriotism, a concept developed by two German philosophers, Dolf Sternberger and Karl Jaspers, was intended to replace the nationalism that had been discredited in Germany by the country’s Nazi past.
After all, European integration may meet obstacles, but it is still moving forward.
As France’s Robert Schuman, one of the EU’s founding fathers, said in 1950, “Europe will neither happen in one go, nor as a whole construct: it will happen through concrete achievements, first by creating a de facto solidarity.”
Many thought that this solidarity had been achieved in October 2004, with the signing of the Nice treaty, which outlined an EU constitution.
But only 18 member states then approved it, before France and the Netherlands rejected it in referenda and the seven other member states then halted the ratification process.
Faced with this situation, the European Council had only two choices.
First, it could stick with the Nice treaty as the basis of the Union’s operation.
But that admission of failure would have weakened the political dynamic of the European project and severely constrained its scope for the future.
The second option was to search for a compromise – the Lisbon treaty.
It bears repeating that the Lisbon treaty constitutes real, if modest, progress for the European project.
Under its terms, the European Council’s presidency would have far greater stability; in place of the current six-month rotating presidency, a European political leader who could command the necessary support would be elected to serve as President for two and a half years.
Council decisions that now require unanimity would be taken by majority vote.
The EU’s “high representative” would straddle the European Commission and the European Council to look after foreign affairs and security, and the European Parliament would have more power.
Over and above these considerable advances, the treaty aims to make the EU more democratic.
A group of citizens would be able to “invite” the European Commission to propose new legislation.
National parliaments would be given a say in EU lawmaking, as the treaty recognizes the roles of parliaments in the “adequate workings of the Union.”
Yet, despite its undeniable importance and its contribution to the EU’s development, the Lisbon treaty is far from being the key to everything.
Instead, it is a simplified treaty replete with protocols, dispensations, and opt-out causes.
Former Belgian Prime Minister Guy Verhofstadt was right when he spoke of the treaty as a set of “footnotes.”
Meanwhile, with the Lisbon treaty blocked and no institutional step forward in sight, the underlying question remains: What type of Europe do we want?
The Lisbon treaty is content with clearing pathways rather than creating new horizons.
It mainly gives member states’ leaders the responsibility of implementing various EU advances, and sketches only tantalizing glimpses of Europe’s full potential.
It doesn’t condemn the EU, but as French President Nicolas Sarkozy likes to say, it doesn’t save it, either.
A final point worth emphasizing is that the Lisbon treaty moves away from many of the ideas that could serve as the foundations of a European federal super-state.
The disappearance from the treaty of such terms as “constitution” and “minister of foreign affairs” clearly show that the constitutional treaty’s ambitions have been scaled back.
To move forward without Ireland by establishing a new Union with only 26 countries is legally impossible.
But starting a new cycle of institutional negotiations also seems improbable.
Europe’s citizens are tired of these recurrent discussions – since 1995, there have been treaties of Amsterdam, Nice, Rome, and Lisbon, none of which has entirely succeeded.
Some believe that we will ultimately find a compromise, some ruse to make the Irish succumb, that gives the EU a treaty.
But it will all take time, and if the new arrangement lacks a qualified majority vote, fails to reform the Commission, and includes an opt-out on the charter of fundamental rights, it will not resolve the EU’s essential problems or its estrangement from European public opinion.
Perhaps hubris has finally delivered nemesis in the form of a Union without people, where treaties have replaced the spirit of Europe.
From Karl Popper to Karl Rove – and Back
NEW YORK &#45;&#45; In his novel 1984 , George Orwell chillingly described a totalitarian regime in which all communica­tion is controlled by a Ministry of Truth and dissidents are persecuted by political police.
The United States remains a democracy governed by a constitution and the rule of law, with pluralistic media, yet there are disturbing signs that the propaganda methods Orwell described have taken root here.
Indeed, techniques of deception have undergone enormous improvements since Orwell’s time.
Many of these techniques were developed in connection with the advertising and marketing of commercial products and services, and then adapted to politics.
Their distinguishing fea­ture is that they can be bought for money.
More recently, cogni­tive science has helped to make the techniques of deception even more effective, giving rise to political professionals who concentrate only on “get­ting results.”
These professionals take pride in their ac­complishments, and may even enjoy the respect of an American public that admires success no matter how it is achieved.
That fact casts doubt on Karl Popper’s concept of open society, which is based on the recognition that, while perfect knowledge is unattainable, we can gain a better understanding of reality by engaging in critical thinking.
Popper failed to recognize that in democratic politics, gathering public support takes prece­dence over the pursuit of truth.
In other areas, such as science and industry, the impulse to impose one’s views on the world encounters the resistance of external reality.
But in politics the electorate’s perception of reality can be easily manipulated.
As a result, political discourse, even in democratic societies, does not necessarily lead to a better understanding of reality.
The reason democratic politics leads to manipulation is that politicians do not aspire to tell the truth.
They want to win elections, and the best way to do that is to skew reality to their own benefit.
This insight should lead us not to abandon the concept of open society, but to revise and reaffirm the case for it.
We must abandon Popper’s tacit assumption that political discourse aims at a better understanding of reality and reintroduce it as an explicit requirement.
The separation of powers, free speech, and free elections alone cannot ensure open society; a strong commitment to the pursuit of truth is also required.
We need to introduce new ground rules for political discourse.
These cannot be identi­cal to scientific method, but they should be similar in character, enshrining the pursuit of truth as the criteria on which political views are to be judged.
Politicians will respect, rather than manipulate, reality only if the public cares about the truth and punishes politicians when it catches them in deliber­ate deception.
And the public should care about the truth because deception misleads people in choosing their representatives, distorts policy choices, undermines ac­countability, and destroys trust in democracy.
Recent history provides convincing evidence that policies based on a misrepresenting reality backfire.
The Bush administration’s response to the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001 – declaring a War on Terror and treating criticism as unpatriotic – succeeded in gathering public support, yet the results were the exact opposite to what the Bush administration intended, both for itself and the United States.
The practical difficulty is in recognizing when political profes­sionals are distorting reality.
There is an important role here for the media, the political elite, and the educational system, which must all act as watchdogs.
In addition, the public needs to be inoculated against the various tech­niques of deception.
The most ef­fective techniques operate at the subconscious level.
When emotions can be aroused by methods that bypass consciousness, the public is left largely defenseless.
But if the public is made aware of the various techniques, it is likely to reject them.
One influential technique – which Republican pollster Frank Luntz says that he learned from 1984 - simply reverses meanings and turns reality on its head.
Thus, Fox News calls itself “fair and balanced,” and Karl Rove and his acolytes turn their opponents’ strongest traits into their Achilles’ heels, using insinuations and lies to portray the opponents’ achievements as phony.
That is how insinuations of cowardice and foul play helped defeat two highly decorated Vietnam War veterans, Senator Max Cleland in 2002, and John Kerry in 2004, while Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney – both of whom avoided military service ­– were portrayed as true patriots.
Another technique is transference: accusing opponents of having motives or using methods that characterize the accuser himself.
For example, David Horowitz, who accuses me of being “the Lenin of the anti-American conspiracy,” is a former Trotskyite for whom opponents are never adversaries to be debated, but rather enemies to be crushed.
The American public has proven remarkably susceptible to the manipulation of truth, which increasingly dominates the country’s political discourse.
Indeed, a whole net­work of publications, some of which manage to parade as mainstream media, is devoted to the task.
Yet I believe that it is possible to inoculate the public against false arguments by arousing resent­ment against Orwellian Newspeak.
What is needed is a concerted effort to iden­tify the techniques of manipulation – and to name and shame those who use them.
Now is an ideal time to begin that effort.
Americans are now awakening, as if from a bad dream.
What we have learned from recent years’ experience – what we should have known all along – is that the supremacy of critical thought in political dis­course cannot be taken for granted.
It can be ensured only by an electorate that respects reality and punishes politicians who lie or engage in other forms of deception.
These two phenomena are closely related.
Almost from her first appearance in the public eye, Michelle Obama has used clothing, etiquette, and such cues as where she shops and entertains to send out a subtle but radical message to American voters and to the world.
For the first time since the days of Andrew Jackson, the White House is aggressively “democratizing” the highest office in the land, and symbolically inviting in the common man – and now the common woman.
In other words, Mrs. Obama is managing to set herself up, unprecedentedly, as the “people’s First Lady.”
She has carefully studied not only Jackie Kennedy – a comparison obvious from her sheath dresses, boat collars, and page-boy haircut – but also the triumphs and failures of that other glamorous but underestimated stealth radical, Princess Diana.
Princess Di’s legacy in generating iconography that opened the way to tremendous social change is grossly underappreciated.
In her brief lifetime, she was often lauded for qualities (her beauty and style) that were secondary to her life’s work, and derided for other aspects of her character (her emotionality and chaotic personal life) that were equally beside the point.
As a result, few people noticed how genuinely, powerfully transformative her agenda was, how well she had thought it out, and how audaciously she sought to manage it.
Without a formal education, Diana self-consciously set about pushing open the doors of an encrusted monarchy, challenging the sanctities of a long-established class structure, and affirming the value and immediacy of a Britain that was more diverse and socially mobile than ever before.
Sometimes her efforts were heavy-handed, as when she embraced AIDS victims physically as a metaphor for social inclusion; sometimes they backfired, as when her shared intimacies with servants provided fodder for a flood of posthumous tell-all books.
But, again and again, by showing up for Elton John and not just for the ballet, or by taking her sons away from the hunting preserve of Balmoral to careen down a waterslide at a tacky amusement park, she told ordinary Britons that their world was as important as any other.
She told them that she wanted to know them, and that she wanted her sons to know them, too.
It was this radical popularizing/democratizing mission –�not her knowledge of her former husband’s secrets or her later intimate relationship with a Muslim – that made her such a threat to the British establishment.
And she was successful: she taught leaders that they would have to invite the people in – and treat them with basic respect – if they were to maintain their position.
So, what Michelle Obama is doing is not trivial.
It was not an earth-shattering policy revelation when she astutely followed reports of Sarah Palin’s $150,000 wardrobe by remarking casually on a late-night talk show that she was wearing a chain-store brand, and that “you can get lots of cute things online.”
But it was nonetheless a powerful statement, especially to women, that said: I am not Nancy Reagan, dressed in Galliano, living in a gated community; I am not Mrs. Clinton, disregarding such things because I must argue major cases or run states; I am you – busy, on a budget, overworked, shrewd, cute, clever, finding a way.
Likewise, her invitations to the White House are being used for populist messaging.
Who came over to watch the White House chef with Mrs. Obama?
Local cooking school students.
Who sang at a White House event?
Local public high school students.
Again, “secretaries and policy makers,” not “policy makers and secretaries,” are coming over for film night.
She is deliberately, coolly signaling that secretaries are just as good and important as policy makers, if not more so.
This is a guest list that says to an anxious electorate: I respect you, wherever you are on the socioeconomic scale.
Many White House speechwriters have used that rhetoric, but almost no First Ladies have walked the talk and passed the popcorn.
When I worked on messaging for Al Gore’s 2000 presidential campaign, I often argued with white, older, affluent, male advisers who cared intensely about what was said in the elite media but ignored the popular venues to which most Americans pay attention.
They had learned nothing from the right, whose candidates knew how powerful the right colors, clothing, imagery, and even lighting can be, and how strongly personal narratives – Ronald Reagan in riding boots, or George W. Bush in a flight suit – resonate with voters.
Meanwhile, the nerdy, wonky left kept issuing data points, policy summaries, and white papers –�and generally, since Clinton, kept losing – until a young couple showed up and understood that Americans don’t just read; they watch.
You can tell the nation more about your values by saying where you will seek a dog for your daughters than you can through reams of unread position papers.
At a time of crisis, the Obamas are sending a powerful message, and Mrs. Obama, as the female archetype who has picked up Princess Di’s dropped baton, is instrumental in crafting it: no matter who you are, how stressed, how broke, there is, figuratively speaking, a seat in the White House with your name on it.
From Middle Israel to Middle Palestine
Haifa – Americans speak of “Middle America” and Britons of “Middle England.”  Both are near mythic places that supposedly embody the authentic character of the nation.
Israel, too, has its “Middle Israel,” but it is very different from the place that Americans and Britons describe.
Rather than being somewhat provincial, Middle Israel is educated, bilingual or multilingual, and extremely well connected to the wider world.
It has provided Israel with the high-tech success that it has enjoyed over the last decade.
Middle Israel is mostly secular, though it also includes the moderately religious.
It is liberal, and despises any sort of fanaticism, whether orthodox or nationalist.
It is based on a strong, legally entrenched (though never perfect) ethos of gender equality that has typified Zionism from its start.
Middle Israel is also gay-friendly and distinctly non-xenophobic.
It is mostly Jewish, though a young Arab professional class is now coming out of the universities and making its way – with difficulties – into the heartland of civil society.
And, lest we forget, Middle Israel is earning the money and paying the taxes that support a wide assortment of traditionalists, fundamentalists, chauvinists, and other extremists – Jewish and Muslim – from Gaza to Jerusalem to the West Bank.
This quiet majority is under-represented in the Knesset because its members steer clear of political careers.
It is far too large to be considered an elite.
It is not exclusively urban, and it includes people of different cultural origins.
It has a powerful common identity, shared memories, and a rich culture.
It is neither inward-looking nor atavistic.
Some Palestinians hope to become, one day, something like Middle Israel.
They, too, would like life, pragmatism, creativity, and even joy to gain the upper hand.
They, too, want moderation and modernity, if perhaps not full secularization, to prevail.
These Palestinians are Middle Israel’s natural allies.
Fed by a meager diet of media reporting and some coarse think-tank buzz, European and American friends often ask me why our universities are awash with self-hating, anti-Israel “post-Zionists.”
But they are not.
Post-Zionism is a much hyped phantom, a term flourished in the mid-1990’s, when it seemed that Israeli and Palestinian leaders were building a peace process.
In response, Israelis quickly developed their own “End of History” thesis, suggesting that soon Zionism would be a thing of the past, primarily because there would no longer be a need for any ideology to support what would be a normal modern state, at peace with its neighbors and with its past traumas.
Back then, historians and sociologists dug into Zionism supposed “sins” – for example, that Israel’s Arab citizens have never, to this day, enjoyed equal civil rights.
Others looked at crimes against Palestinians in the wake of our self-defensive War of Independence.
Many people denied these facts; many others looked them in the eye.
Those of us who were not post-Zionists, but liberal Zionists, were even proud of the way our society had entered this phase of self-inspection and self-critique.
The gravest problem for Middle Israel is the Palestinian predicament in the occupied West Bank and in deadlocked Gaza.
Our leaders, from Levy Eshkol (and much more so Golda Meir) to Yitzhak Shamir, erred gravely in not seizing the earliest opportunity to arrange a territorial separation and a horizon of sovereignty for the post-1967 Palestinians.
They erred gravely in allowing Jewish settlers to have their way on the Biblical mountaintops, while Middle Israel looked the other way.
They erred gravely – and this is less often recognized – in discouraging the moderate Palestinian middle class, many of whom have quit the occupied territories, leaving behind a generation of young, ignorant, hungry, and angry warriors.
But there is a solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
It is geographical: a division of territory and a separation of homelands that involves painful but conceivable compromises on both sides.
Jerusalem will be divided, Palestinian refugees will not return to their ancestral homes, and Jewish settlements in the West Bank will, like their Gaza counterparts, be dismantled or (inconceivably) left to fend for themselves.
Of course, extremists will hate it.
By contrast, moderates – all moderates – will accept it, albeit unhappily.
If the moderates win, then a “Middle Palestine” will at last rise to prominence.
Paralleling Middle Israel, though perhaps not initially befriending it or liking it very much, this kind of Palestine will be the best news that the Middle East will have had for a long time.
For now, we in Middle Israel must curb our own extremists and hold out for the Palestinian moderates to prevail.
From Neoliberalism to No Liberalism?
WASHINGTON, DC – The era of free-market capitalism launched in the 1980’s by Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan – often called “neoliberalism” by its opponents – is over.
This ideological wave has crashed with the ongoing financial market crisis, but its decline was a long time coming.
In the last few years, while American leaders continued to ride the neoliberal wave, much of the rest of the world was already standing on the shore.
Disenchantment with “neoliberal,” pro-market ideas began in developing countries that had once been their ardent admirers.
Latin American countries that embraced free-market policies in the 1990’s rejected them in the mid-2000’s, as a new wave of left-leaning leaders came to power.
Russia, which adopted market-oriented reforms in the 1990’s, moved to a managed form of state capitalism in the 2000’s with “oligarchs” forced to submit to state control.
As a result, the United States, the European Commission, and the multilateral development banks have become increasingly isolated in their efforts to advance free-market thought and policies worldwide.
The deepening financial crisis weakens their position further.
After all, how can the US or the Western multilateral institutions advocate bank privatization now?
The decline of free-market orthodoxy in the rest of the world was caused by two factors: its failures as an approach to economic policy and the decline of US prestige and “soft power.”
“Neoliberalism” grew in popularity as a result of its successes in jump-starting economic growth in the US, the United Kingdom, and some developing countries in the 1980’s and 1990’s.
However, its weaknesses also became apparent during the mid- to late-1990’s.
The attempt to implant free-market philosophy in Russia, for instance, proved catastrophic.
Whereas the Russian experience clearly demonstrated the importance of strong state institutions in regulating a market economy, the free-market model’s fierce ideological opposition to a large state role in the economy offered a poor guide to building them.
After some successes, most notably in Chile, “neoliberal” advice in Latin America also failed, most dramatically in the case of Argentina’s currency board, but most damagingly by increasing inequality, which worsened the continent’s central political-economic problem.
In Brazil, President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva showed that significant departures from free-market prescriptions worked better.
Worldwide, most of the high-growth countries of the 1990’s and 2000’s broke with free-market orthodoxy by maintaining a stronger state hand in the economy.
Belief in “neoliberalism” also was based on the success of the US economy, which for much of the 1990’s seemed to demonstrate the superiority of free markets.
But the rapid decline of US prestige and “soft power” during the 2000’s sowed doubt outside the US.
As the global agenda shifted to concerns about global warming, inequality, and the stability of the international system, the US no longer seemed to be a shining example, but rather an immovable obstacle on many of these issues.
America’s elites turned a blind eye to these developments, rejecting all criticism, together with the crude anti-Americanism with which it was often expressed.
Today, the story is different.
A massive reassessment is finally in progress, with US elites now recognizing that market capitalism is in crisis, and that the world will not blindly follow their lead.
But that leaves some large questions unresolved.
If “neoliberalism” has failed, what comes next?
And what must the US do to regain its stature and influence in the international economy?
As New York and London lose their undisputed claim to being the world’s financial capitals, the rising centers of the global economy will gain an increasing say in international economic policy.
Most, if not all, are located in countries that have a stronger tradition of state involvement in the economy.
Jeffrey Garten, the dean of Yale’s School of Management, got it right when he labeled this the era of “state capitalism.”
The state is on its way back as an economic player – not least in the US.
But is that a good thing?
While many critics will be tempted to celebrate the end of “neoliberalism,” it remains to be seen whether or not what succeeds it represents an improvement.
Various forms of statism have been tried before; all have been found lacking.
After all, while “neoliberalism” was criticized as technocratic and elitist, it was nonetheless a form of liberalism, and it was also consistent with the spread of democratic governance worldwide.
The new era may not be so propitious for political liberties.
As rising authoritarian powers, China or Russia, for example, have no reason to use their growing international influence to promote democracy; on the contrary, they increasingly counterbalance the efforts of Western countries to promote political liberty.
As statist models of economic development become more appealing, democratic governance will become less so.
Nor is it clear that “state capitalism” can generate the same degree of innovation and entrepreneurship as the liberal models did in their prime.
In order to redeem the liberal project, American and European leaders will need to reformulate it in such a way that it can provide convincing solutions to problems such as environmental degradation and economic inequality.
This will be no easy task, and one that may be far from policymakers’ minds as they grapple with the current crisis.
But, unless they do, the emphasis on economic and political freedom that lies at the heart of liberalism may not survive.
From Oil to Information
Sheikh Yamani, Saudi Arabia’s former oil minister and a founding architect of OPEC, once said, “The stone age came to an end not for a lack of stones, and the oil age will end, but not for a lack of oil.”
Humans stopped using stone because bronze and iron were superior materials.
But will we really stop using oil when other energy technologies similarly provide superior benefits?
The threat of depleting the world’s scarce energy resources has maintained a powerful hold on popular thinking ever since the oil shocks of the 1970’s.
Nor is our fear limited to oil.
For example, the classic 1972 bestseller Limits to Growth predicted that the world would run out of gold in 1981, silver and mercury in 1985, and zinc in 1990.
We have the benefit of hindsight today, but even now most discussions of the issue are predicated on the logic of Limits to Growth .
Moreover, the issue is not merely that we have not run out of natural resources.
The American economist Julian Simon allegedly issued a challenge in 1980 to a group of environmentalists, saying that if scarcity were to be measured in terms of higher prices, they should invest in stocks of any raw metal.
The environmentalists put their money on chromium, copper, nickel, tin, and tungsten, and picked a time frame of 10 years.
By September 1990, each of the metals had dropped in price: chromium by 5%, tin by a whopping 74%.
The doom-mongers lost.
More importantly, they could not have won even if they had invested in petroleum, foodstuffs, sugar, coffee, cotton, wool, minerals, or phosphates: all of these commodities had become cheaper.
Today, oil is the most important and valuable internationally traded commodity, and its significance to our civilization is underscored by the recurrent worry that we are running out of it.
However, statistical estimates of its depletion hide much more than they reveal.
A typical oilfield yields only 20% of the reservoir, with close to 63% remaining buried in the earth even when the most advanced technologies are used.
Moreover, economists contend that energy consumption per capita is declining, owing to more efficient use.
Fuel efficiencies in the automotive sector have increased by more than 60% in the past three decades, while overall wealth produced per unit of energy has doubled during the same period.
But, whereas metal prices have fallen, oil prices are reaching record highs.
The reason is simple: metal usage has been substituted by many alternatives, but most still require petroleum products as inputs, and decades-long efforts to develop sufficient alternative energy sources have yielded little success.
So, if oil substitutes are not easily available, modern societies should focus on the sources of demand, most of which is attributable to the transport sector.
Indeed, more than 80% of modern societies’ consumption of energy generated by oil, either in the form of electricity or fuel, is used to move commuters.
Is all of this oil consumption really necessary?
With the rising contribution of services to global GDP, now is the time to reassess the need for travel to work.
Service-sector workers commute daily, only to be present in an environment that has no economic need for them, for they are facilitating information exchange far more than exchange of physical goods.
Do we really need to bring together so many people for so little gain and at such a high cost?
The cost is not merely in terms of natural resources, which should be sustained and passed on to future generations, not exhausted by our own.
The rise in the amount of time spent commuting is a drag on both national productivity and the quality of life in modern cities.
A survey conducted in the Indian city of Mumbai revealed that railway commuters’ average daily journey was 22 kilometers, while rapid urbanization there and in much of the developing world is only likely to increase the length of commutes.
Likewise, passenger air transport is dominated by business travel.
But, given the high-speed data transmission capacities of current telecommunications and information technology, it is now possible to reduce business travel significantly.
Whereas the outsourcing phenomenon is attenuating the need for labor migration, domestic migration can be limited further by the use of home offices, which can eventually reduce stress on real estate, public transport networks, roads, and airports.
Indeed, human travel in general should become increasingly limited to tourism and pleasure trips.
We now have the technological infrastructure to bring most job-related information to workers while allowing them to collaborate closely.
This requires a lifestyle change – one that governments should begin encouraging employers and workers to embrace.
If they do, the age of oil will not end.
But the age of worrying about it just might.
From Opportunity to Reality in the Middle East
It has been a long time since the words “opportunity” and “Middle East” appeared in the same sentence.
But now they are.
Even better, this optimism may have some basis in reality.
One important reason for this change in attitude is, of course, Yasir Arafat’s disappearance from the scene.
Like the Thane of Cawdor in Shakespeare’s Macbeth, “Nothing in his life became him like the leaving it.”
Arafat never grew beyond the man who appeared at the United Nations decades ago with both an olive branch and a gun.
His unwillingness to jettison terror and choose diplomacy proved his undoing, as he lost legitimacy in the eyes of both Israel and the United States.
The result was the failure to create a Palestinian state.
But it is not simply Arafat’s passing that provides cause for optimism.
We now have a Palestinian leadership legitimized by elections, one that appears to be opposed to using terrorism as a tool to achieve political aims.
Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen) has a good record of questioning the wisdom of the intifada that has taken too many lives and caused only misery and destruction on all sides of this enduring conflict.
Changes in Israel are also contributing to the mood swing.
There is a growing awareness in Israel that the current situation – one of open-ended Israeli occupation of lands mostly populated by Palestinians – is inconsistent with Israel’s determination to remain a secure, prosperous, Jewish, and democratic state.
The formation of a new Israeli government, one more centrist in its composition and support, is another positive development.
Israel is now led by a prime minister who has the ability to make historic choices and a government inclined to support him.
But opportunity is just that.
Middle East history is replete with examples of missed and lost chances to make peace.
The challenge now is to break this pattern and turn today’s opportunity into reality.
This requires that the promised Israeli disengagement from Gaza and parts of the West Bank succeed.
But “success” entails more than departing Israelis. It also requires that Palestinians demonstrate that they can govern responsibly and that they can put an end to terrorist violence emanating from Palestinian soil.
What happens in Gaza after Israel leaves will have a profound impact on Israeli politics.
If Gaza turns into a lawless failed state, one that is a base for attacks on Israelis, it will be extremely difficult to persuade Israel to withdraw from other areas that it now occupies.
But if Palestinians in Gaza demonstrate that they can rule themselves and be a good neighbor, a key justification for Israel’s continuing occupation elsewhere will weaken.
Palestinians will need help if things are to turn out right in Gaza.
The US, Europe, and Arab states such as Egypt, along with Russia and the UN, all have a responsibility to assist Abu Mazen.
Palestinians need financial and technical help to build up a unified and capable security establishment, to revive a moribund economy, and to build a modern, transparent political system.
It is also important that the Gaza withdrawal be a beginning, not an end, to the political process.
There must be a link between what takes place in Gaza and a comprehensive settlement to the Palestinian question if Mazen is to persuade a majority of his people that diplomacy and compromise deliver more than violence and confrontation.
Here, too, there is an important role for America to play.
In fact, the US has already begun to do what is required.
In a September 2004 letter to Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, President George W. Bush reassured Israelis that it was “unrealistic to expect that the outcome of final status negotiations will be a full and complete return to the armistice lines of 1949.”
The framework for a solution to the Palestinian refugee issue “will need to be found through the establishment of a Palestinian state, and the settling of Palestinian refugees there, rather than in Israel.”
These promises meant a great deal to Sharon as he faced domestic political challenges.
What is needed now is a parallel letter from Bush to Abu Mazen.
Such a letter could spell out the US commitment to a viable, contiguous, sovereign, and independent Palestinian state based on the 1967 lines, with compensation provided by Israel wherever territorial adjustments are agreed.
The US would also commit itself to provide resources to help construct a modern society and economy.
Help would also be extended to settle the Palestinian refugees, whether in Palestine, other Arab countries, or, in special cases where Israel agrees for humanitarian reasons, in Israel itself.
In return, Palestinians would need to pledge to reject the use of violence and terror once and for all.
The US should not, however, make the establishment of a full Palestinian democracy a prerequisite for territorial return and peace.
To delay negotiations until Palestinian democracy matured would only persuade Palestinians that diplomacy was a ruse and give many a reason to turn to violence.
After more than a half-century of Israeli-Palestinian conflict, translating opportunity into reality will be difficult enough without introducing new requirements that, however desirable, are not essential.
From People Power to Putin Power
As I attended a small but dignified memorial ceremony in Paris last week in honor of the Russian journalist Anna Politkovskaya – a woman “brave beyond limits,” in the words of her French editor – I was reminded of another posthumous tribute I participated in nearly 17 years ago in Moscow.
Unlike Politkovskaya, the great scientist and human right activist Andrei Sakharov had not been murdered, and the tribute given to him then looked like the celebration of a new era.
A new page was being turned, one that was full of uncertainty but also of hope that Russia was on its way to becoming a “normal country.”
It is this page that has been probably fully closed with the assassination of Politkovskaya.
What the small crowd of intellectuals gathered in Paris was mourning was their hope for a different Russia.
We were burying the collective dream of intellectuals and democrats for a Russia where freedom and the rule of law would, after a long and cold Soviet winter, take root and bloom.
The portraits of Politkovskaya, like a multitude of mirrors, were calling us back to a much darker reality.
The dream was over.
It had, most likely, never been realizable.
What we are witnessing today is a totally different story.
Russia is literally buying its way back into the international system as a preeminent actor, one that is regaining power and clout by replacing nuclear weapons with oil and gas and substituting greed for fear.
The balance of terror of the Soviet era has given way to unilateral energy dependency in favor of Russia.
With their enormous cash flow, Russian billionaires are buying sumptuous properties all over the world, and Russia is buying prominent Germans like the former Chancellor, Gerhard Schroeder, if not the support of Germany as such.
Whatever the enormous differences that may separate them, post-communist Russia and fundamentalist Iran have much in common.
Energy wealth gives them a sense of unique opportunity, the conviction that time is playing in their favor, and that they can now redress the humiliations they have suffered from the outside world.
It is as if they were combining the Arab/Islamic world’s culture of humiliation and Asia’s culture of hope.
Both are marked by a defiant nationalism, and both feel irresistible, all the more so because they sense that the United States is in decline as a result of the quagmire in Iraq, if not in Afghanistan as well.
Of course, the differences between Russia and Iran are enormous.
The Iranian regime is highly ideological and animated by an open passion to destroy Israel.
It does not enjoy the massive backing of its society, except when it comes to national pride and the quest for nuclear status.
Russia’s regime, by contrast, is animated by money, not ideology.
In its quest to rebuild Russia’s geopolitical power and influence, Presdient Vladimir Putin has the support of the immense majority of the population.
His motto, “Get rich and keep quiet,” sounds like Guizot’s priorities in mid-nineteenth century France, even if it is “seasoned” with a strong touch of imperial pride.
As long as the oil money keeps flowing, most Russians will express no nostalgia for the democratic opening of the Yeltsin years, with its accompanying combination of chaos, corruption, international weakness, and disrespect for the state.
Are Russians so different from us in the western democratic world, or is democracy a luxury that only old, stable, prosperous, and satisfied societies can afford?
In their quest for post-Soviet stability, Russians seem to have found reassurance in Putin.
He does not match Peter the Great in physical stature, but he has proven to be a gifted politician, capable of grasping, then controlling, the mood of the Russian people.
For a majority of Russian citizens, economic prosperity and televised entertainment have become the modern equivalent of the panem et circenses formula of Roman times.
The war in Chechnya may contribute to the moral corruption of Russia as a whole, to its frightening descent into a culture of violence.
But it is also feeding a patriotic emotion – a popular longing for the restoration of Russia’s imperial status and prestige – that Putin’s regime has shrewdly exploited.
Meanwhile, ordinary Russians have gained little.
The multiplication of assassinations of political opponents and economic rivals, the mafia practice of contract murders, cannot be seen as signs of a regained stability.
Nor can the Putin regime’s manipulation of popular xenophobia against citizens of the former Soviet empire, such as Georgians.
Russia may have recovered its status as a strong power, but is it a respected, or even a happy one?
Russia is rich, but Russians, at least most of them, remain poor, with a life expectancy that is closer to Africa than to Western Europe.
Eventually, they will have to recognize that modern nations cannot live by power alone.
From Prague Spring to Velvet Revolution
WARSAW – What was the Prague Spring, or the events of 1968 more generally?
Their meaning, it seems, has become more, not less, debatable with the passage of time.
My generation was forged by protests and police truncheons, by the hopes generated not only by the Prague Spring, but also by the Polish student movement that March, the Paris events of May, and the first signs of Russian democracy voiced in the early books of Sakharov and Solzhenitsyn.
For those of us imprisoned in Poland, the Prague Spring was a harbinger of hope.
Even Poland’s communist newspapers, read behind bars, somehow conveyed news of the great changes taking place in our neighbor to the south.
So I remember my shock when I learned about the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia in August, and the trauma that lingered long after.
On the tenth anniversary of that invasion, Václav Havel, Jacek Kuron, and I, along with other dissidents, met on the Czech-Polish border.
There is a photograph of that occasion: future presidents, ministers, and parliamentarians who were at that time pursued by the police like common criminals.
These encounters were an extension of the climate of the Prague Spring.
We all felt that we were creating something new, something that might, one day, turn out to be an important component of democracy in our countries.
And so it was.
In August 1989, I proposed in the Polish Diet a draft resolution apologizing to the Czechs and Slovaks for Polish involvement in the 1968 invasion.
I felt that a historical circle was being closed: the ideas of the Polish March and the Prague Spring, the ideas of our mountain meetings, were becoming political facts.
Three months later, the Velvet Revolution began in Prague.
The main difference between the Prague Spring and the Velvet Revolution was that the former was mostly the work of Communist Party members and others who wanted to bring about “socialism with a human face.”
As a result, some people nowadays dismiss the Prague Spring as a power struggle between communists.
But there were many roads to – and through – communism, and many of them converged with national traditions.
Indeed, communism was attractive for many reasons, including the idea of universal justice and humanized social relations; a response to the great spiritual crisis after World War I and, later, to the Nazis’ genocide; and the conviction that Western dominance of the world was nearing its end.
Finally, in a world divided by Yalta, communism was, for some, the only realistic choice for central Europe.
In Czechoslovakia in 1968, communist reformers appealed to democratic ideals that were deeply rooted in the country’s pre-World War II past.
Alexander Dubcek, the leader of the Czechoslovak communists and the symbol of the Prague Spring, personified hope for democratic evolution, real pluralism, and a peaceful way to a state governed by law and respectful of human rights.
By contrast, in Poland, which had witnessed its own tentative opening in the March student movement, a nationalist-authoritarian faction exploited all that was intolerant and ignorant in Polish tradition, employing xenophobia and anti-intellectual rhetoric.
Polish Interior Minister Mieczyslaw Moczar, the leader of the nationalist faction, combined communist rhetoric with a language proper to fascist movements in order to mobilize the masses against the “cosmopolitan-liberal intelligentsia.”
The Polish freedom movement of 1968 lost its confrontation with police violence; the Prague Spring was crushed by the armies of five Warsaw Pact members.
But in both countries, 1968 gave birth to a new political consciousness.
The Polish and Czech opposition movements that emerged only a few years later had their roots in the events of 1968.
The Prague Spring was provoked by a crisis in the Communist Party, but the claim that it was merely a result of political squabbles among Party members falsifies history and rejects a significant fragment of the national heritage.
Attitudes towards communism were always a controversial subject for the anticommunist opposition.
Some rejected communism in all its forms.
The majority though, in one way or another, had some contact with communism, through intellectual fascination, participation in state institutions, or the cold conviction that only by accepting the reality of life under communism could one do something useful for one’s country.
These people, “tainted by communism,” constituted the majority of the participants in all revolts against the communist dictatorships.
There was, however, another, category of people: the “careful and untainted,” who absented themselves from the world of politics.
They hated communism, but, convinced that the system could not be reformed, they avoided the democratic opposition.
While others took risks or sat in jails, they functioned in official and legal structures.
One should not blame anyone today for such behavior.
But it is surprising when these people accuse participants in the Prague Spring and the democratic opposition of links with communism.
Communism was obviously an instrument of Soviet domination over conquered societies, but it was also a modus vivendi for large parts of these nations under the conditions in which they were obliged to live.
Imre Nagy, the leader of the Hungarian revolt in 1956, and Dubcek became parts of their national legends, which belies the claim that communism was exclusively a foreign imposition.
The Prague Spring appealed to elementary values: freedom, pluralism, tolerance, sovereignty, and rejection of the dictates of communist orthodoxy.
When I recall these events after 40 years, I see not only revolt, but also the great illusion that it might be possible to outfox the Kremlin and painlessly move society from communism to democracy.
This belief was naïve, but it also underpinned a national awakening in which the potential for freedom found its voice.
From Resource Curse to Blessing
KAMPALA – New discoveries of natural resources in several African countries – including Ghana, Uganda, Tanzania, and Mozambique – raise an important question: Will these windfalls be a blessing that brings prosperity and hope, or a political and economic curse, as has been the case in so many countries?
On average, resource-rich countries have done even more poorly than countries without resources.
They have grown more slowly, and with greater inequality – just the opposite of what one would expect.
After all, taxing natural resources at high rates will not cause them to disappear, which means that countries whose major source of revenue is natural resources can use them to finance education, health care, development, and redistribution.
Political dysfunction exacerbates the problem, as conflict over access to resource rents gives rise to corrupt and undemocratic governments.
There are well known antidotes to each of these problems: a low exchange rate, a stabilization fund, careful investment of resource revenues (including in the country’s people), a ban on borrowing, and transparency (so citizens can at least see the money coming in and going out).
But there is a growing consensus that these measures, while necessary, are insufficient.
Newly enriched countries need to take several more steps in order to increase the likelihood of a “resource blessing.”
First, these countries must do more to ensure that their citizens get the full value of the resources.
There is an unavoidable conflict of interest between (usually foreign) natural-resource companies and host countries: the former want to minimize what they pay, while the latter need to maximize it.
Well designed, competitive, transparent auctions can generate much more revenue than sweetheart deals.
Contracts, too, should be transparent, and should ensure that if prices soar –&#160;as they have repeatedly –&#160;the windfall gain does not go only to the company.
Unfortunately, many countries have already signed bad contracts that give a disproportionate share of the resources’ value to private foreign companies.
But there is a simple answer: renegotiate; if that is impossible, impose a windfall-profit tax.
All over the world, countries have been doing this.
Of course, natural-resource companies will push back, emphasize the sanctity of contracts, and threaten to leave.
But the outcome is typically otherwise.
A fair renegotiation can be the basis of a better long-term relationship.
Botswana's renegotiations of such contracts laid the foundations of its remarkable growth for the last four decades.
Moreover, it is not only developing countries, such as Bolivia and Venezuela, that renegotiate; developed countries like Israel and Australia have done so as well.
Even the United States has imposed a windfall-profits tax.
Equally important, the money gained through natural resources must be used to promote development.
The old colonial powers regarded Africa simply as a place from which to extract resources.
Some of the new purchasers have a similar attitude.
Infrastructure (roads, railroads, and ports) has been built with one goal in mind: getting the resources out of the country at as low a price as possible, with no effort to process the resources in the country, let alone to develop local industries based on them.
Real development requires exploring all possible linkages: training local workers, developing small and medium-size enterprises to provide inputs for mining operations and oil and gas companies, domestic processing, and integrating the natural resources into the country’s economic structure.
Of course, today, these countries may not have a comparative advantage in many of these activities, and some will argue that countries should stick to their strengths.
From this perspective, these countries’ comparative advantage is having other countries exploit their resources.
That is wrong.
What matters is dynamic comparative advantage, or comparative advantage in the long run, which can be shaped.
Forty years ago, South Korea had a comparative advantage in growing rice.
Had it stuck to that strength, it would not be the industrial giant that it is today.
It might be the world’s most efficient rice grower, but it would still be poor.
Companies will tell Ghana, Uganda, Tanzania, and Mozambique to act quickly, but there is good reason for them to move more deliberately.
The resources will not disappear, and commodity prices have been rising.
In the meantime, these countries can put in place the institutions, policies, and laws needed to ensure that the resources benefit all of their citizens.
Resources should be a blessing, not a curse.
They can be, but it will not happen on its own. And it will not happen easily.
From Rome to Moscow
One of the late Pope John Paul II’s unfulfilled dreams was to visit Moscow and forge a rapprochement with the Orthodox Church.
But, although he was invited to Moscow by Russia’s three most recent presidents – Vladimir Putin, Boris Yeltsin, and Mikhail Gorbachev – opposition to the visit by Orthodox Patriarch Alexi prevented the Pope from making the journey before he died.
Will Pope Benedict XVI achieve the breakthrough that his friend and predecessor failed to realize?
Despite the recent return to Russia of the icon of Our Lady of Kazan that once hung in John Paul’s bedroom, relations between the Vatican and the Patriarchate remain strained.
So Putin, who usually seems omnipotent, remains wary of issuing an invitation to Pope Benedict.
That wariness is reinforced by a new political factor: a defense of Orthodoxy has become a pillar of the national idea on which Putin seeks to base the legitimacy of his regime.
This is one reason why Putin was one of the few leading heads of state to miss attending Pope John Paul’s funeral.
Although the Orthodox Church did send a delegation, immediately after the funeral Patriarch Alexi warned that the disagreements between the two branches of Christianity go much deeper than the former Pope’s Polish nationality, which was always a particular sore spot for Russian Orthodox Slavs.
Russians saw John Paul’s Polish nationality as linking him to a long history of perceived oppression of Russian Orthodoxy.
No less a figure than Alexander Pushkin wrote in 1836 that “Orthodoxy has always been persecuted by Catholic fanaticism….Their missionaries cursed the Orthodox Church, with hypocrisy and threats tried to recruit into Catholicism not only ordinary people but Orthodox priests as well.”
Those Russians who continue to view the Catholic Church as a threat regularly quote these lines.
Recently, another key Vatican figure, Cardinal Walter Casper, the head of the Council for Christian Unity, called for a Catholic-Orthodox high level meeting that would address unifying both branches of Christianity.
Cardinal Casper is well regarded in Russia for being the man who returned Our Lady of Kazan to its homeland.
In his public speeches, Casper more than once suggested that the Vatican considers Christian unification its main goal, and – most important from the Orthodox perspective -- that “unity does not have to mean sameness.”
The fact that Pope Benedict and Cardinal Casper are both Germans is important, because Russian-German relations are perhaps warmer now than they have ever been.
Putin, in particular, is at home in the German language, having spent many years in East Germany during his days as a KGB agent.
Moreover, unlike Pope John Paul II, who, as a Pole, always saw communist Russia as an oppressor, Benedict carries the German sense of guilt stemming from the country’s Nazi past and its brutal invasion of Russia.
In both Rome and Moscow, there is growing hope that a road to Christian unity can be built, but it is increasingly clear that the road can be completed only by passing through Berlin.
From Shock Therapy to Sleep Therapy
If the 1990’s was the era of economic shock therapy, the present decade may be remembered for economic reform paralysis.
Although the reasons for gridlock differ across countries, the bottom line is that few politicians anywhere are having much success in limbering up their economies.
The problem is not just in emerging markets such as Indonesia, Mexico, and Brazil, where an ascendant left has failed to find a viable alternative to the much reviled “Washington Consensus” of economic liberalization.
One sees the same phenomenon across many rich countries as well.
In a remarkable coincidence of timing, Japanese Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi and German Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder called for early elections in the hope of energizing reform.
In Germany, the most urgent needs are for tax and labor-market reform. In Japan, the Koizumi government wants to privatize the behemoth postal service, whose giant financial arm is wrapped like a python around the country’s banking system.
Even in the United States, one of the few places where economic liberalization is not a dirty word, President George W. Bush has his own frustrations.
Despite a huge investment of time and energy, he has failed to marshal even his own troops in support of a relatively modest proposal to stave off collapse of the nation’s old-age insurance program.
Indeed, Bush’s popularity has taken a beating over pension reform.
Some people ascribe the global collapse of reform efforts to a peculiarly ineffective collection of leaders.
This view is nonsense, and besides, if the public is so unhappy with its leaders’ performance, why does it keep electing and re-electing them? 
No, the problems run deeper.
The fact is that people everywhere are having trouble coming to terms with the rapid changes resulting from technology and globalization.
For, although globalization spins off a lot more winners than losers, many people are worried, and worried people press their leaders to slow things down.
You can tell Americans and Europeans that they should rejoice over the boundless cheap goods and cheap credit that trade with Asia has supplied. But all their politicians seem to worry about is how some farmer or textile worker may lose their job.
You can tell Latin Americans or Africans that Asia’s unquenchable thirst for natural resources will keep pushing up the prices of their commodity and agricultural exports in perpetuity, turning wheat fields into gold mines.
But all their politicians seem to want to worry about is protecting doomed domestic manufacturers against low-wage Asian competition.
Outgoing US Federal Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan preaches flexibility as a way of dealing with globalization.
At some level, of course, he is right.
Today’s world is one of fast-changing currents, where a region flourishes one day, and the next its factories collapse economically as if hit by hurricane Katrina.
If change is inevitable, we must make our economies more flexible and prepare to live with the consequences.
There is no other way.
So why doesn’t the public accept this need for flexibility, which, in the end, is what market-based economic liberalization is all about?
The problem is that most people are not thrilled to live in a world of blindingly fast change.
Most people are creatures of habit; they crave predictability.
German workers who make high-end machine tools are proud of their craft, and they don’t want to be told that the same work can be done for much less in Poland and Slovakia.
Clothing makers in Italy have long been the envy of the world.
These craftsmen don’t want to be told that they should start retraining as tour guides to service the inevitable horde of middle-income Chinese tourists, as that country takes over high-end light manufacturing like tailoring.
With such resistance to change, it is no wonder that so many political leaders try to lull their subjects to sleep, hoping that when everyone wakes up, it will all have proven a dream.
Asia, of course, is different.
China is developing at a dizzying pace.
Whole cities are rising out of desert sands overnight.
China is building more roads, airports, and bridges every five years than Europe and the US combined build in 20.
With a long history of cataclysmic, often violent change, Chinese society is perhaps more adaptable than most.
In India, which is said to have “a strong consensus for weak reform,” things are moving far more slowly – but always forward.
Whereas India is not yet nearly the factor in global trade that China has become, its 1.2 billion people are pushing inexorably onto the scene.
Will today’s reform paralysis outside Asia continue?
Will the political winds shift to reinvigorate economic liberalization, with politicians reminiscent of Britain’s Margaret Thatcher or the US’s Ronald Reagan coming to the fore, breathing the fire of change?
Will politicians finally tell their citizens that if their economies continue to sleep, they may not wake up?
I believe that in most countries, the era of sleep therapy will come to an early end.
But I fear that change might cause a global economic crisis resulting from, say, an ugly unwinding of extravagant US borrowing trends.
Only then may people start waking up and voting for politicians who insist on re-energizing economic reform.
From Solidarity to Freedom