reformasi pendidikan akan memetik hasilnya setelah satu generasi atau lebih.
Singapura pada akhirnya berhasil mengembangkan basis SDM lokal yang berketerampilan tinggi melalui investasi-investasi besar pada pendidikan dan menetapkan kelulusan dari pendidikan jenjang universitas sebagai prioritas nasional.
City-state ini sekarang meraih posisi atas dalam nilai hasil ujian internasional di bidang sains dan matematika.
Model ABS menjelaskan ketahanan ekonomi Dubai dan pemulihan cepat pasca krisis keuangan global.
Model ini juga membantu emirat menyesuaikan strateginya untuk menghadapi tantangan-tantangan baru.
Sama seperti sebuah mobil, model ABS mempermudah pengemudinya untuk mengurangi laju atau mengubah arah untuk menghindari rintangan, dan perangkat pembangunan yang dimotori negara/pemerintah bisa menyelaraskan daya tarik dan pemerekan sesuai dengan tujuan pembangunan dan perubahan kondisi di dalam dan luar Timur Tengah.
Di sisi lain, jika pemerintah gagal memperbaiki masalah struktural – modal manusia dalam negeri yang lemah – Dubai akan mengendarai mobil yang lebih berbahaya, yang mana sulit atau mustahil menghindari rintangan tanpa rodanya mengunci.
Dump the Lisbon Agenda
As soon as he takes office as President of the European Commission, Durao Barroso - Portugal's former Prime Minister - should devote urgent attention to restoring order and focus to the European Union's economic policies.
The thickest file on his desk concerns the Lisbon agenda, an ambitious programme approved in 2000 by the EU heads of state and government with the goal of making the Union "the most competitive and dynamic knowledge economy" by 2010.
All major fields of economic policy are covered: innovation and entrepreneurship, welfare reform and social inclusion, skills and employability, gender equality, labour and product market liberalisation, and "sustainable" development.
All of these are worthy goals, to be sure, but they belong intrinsically to the sphere of national political decisions.
Indeed, under the European Treaties, the Union has no competence to enact legislation and policy in these domains, nor powers to enforce them.
But the European Council, spurred by the European Commission, invented a new policy approach - called "open coordination" - in order to impinge on these fields.
Open coordination entails the definition of common goals at the EU level, voluntary compliance by the member states, and peer review of results within the European Council.
Inevitably, open coordination has failed to deliver on its promises.
Moreover, the delusion that the European Council can somehow call growth and productivity into being has provided a diversion to national politicians who are unwilling to push for unpopular decisions back home.
My first suggestion to Barroso, therefore, is to scrap the Lisbon agenda.
Only this will make it clear that responsibility for national economic performance lies with national policy-makers.
This brings me to the subject of macroeconomic coordination at the EU level.
The Maastricht Treaty envisaged a simple policy framework for economic and monetary union.
Monetary policy was centralized and entrusted to an independent central bank, while fiscal policy was left to the member states.
National governments were made subject - under the excessive-deficit procedure - to the twin constraints that fiscal deficits should not exceed 3% of GDP and government debt should remain below 60% of GDP (or at least tend towards that value).
Later on, the Stability and Growth Pact added a requirement that, over the medium term, government accounts should be "close to balance."
Essentially, this aimed to prevent irresponsible budgetary policies after the euro's launch, while leaving sufficient room for cyclical oscillations of the deficit within the 3% limit.
The credibility of this apparatus was badly damaged by the November 2003 public controversy between the Commission and the Ecofin Council over the application of the excessive-deficit procedure to France and Germany.
This does not mean that it should be abandoned.
On the contrary, a common external constraint on fiscal behavior is needed as a joint safeguard against an unsustainable accumulation of public debt that could affect financial stability and inflation throughout the EU - a risk aggravated by the impact of aging populations on pension systems.
Such a constraint also provides a welcome anchor for domestic decision-making in member states with weaker political systems.
But the system needs to be reviewed.
I would not listen to those who advocate excluding investment from fiscal deficits: this would only offer new incentives for creative accounting and unsustainable accumulation of debt.
Instead, the emphasis should shift from annual deficits to debt sustainability. 
The debt criterion, for example, could be supplemented by a limit on the (trend) growth rate of public spending, which would be kept below that of nominal GDP.
The Commission's powers to initiate action when there is a risk of excessive deficits should be strengthened - provided, of course, that the Commission never again forgets that surveillance of national policies is a task that requires political judgment and cannot be left to accountants and lawyers.
Finally, top priority should be assigned to completing the Single European Market, in which the Union has powerful legal instruments to pry open markets and sustain competition.
The best therapy for reinvigorating growth is both direct, by increasing competitive pressure, and indirect, by triggering the necessary adaptation in national employment, welfare, and education policies. 
The job is far from finished.
State aid to ailing companies remains ubiquitous, and common rules designed to ensure free circulation of goods and services are not fully respected by the member states - public procurement and energy markets being prime examples.
Moreover, most markets for services - securities trading, wholesale and retail distribution, business services, and local utilities - remain sheltered from competition and free circulation rules.
Empirical evidence indicates that these distortions in the market for services, which account for about two thirds of GDP, underlie most of the EU's productivity gap with the United States.
In recent years the European Council has not devoted sufficient attention to these tasks, which require full and continuing commitment by member states to transpose and implement Community directives.
All too often, the Commission has favored enacting new legislation and creating new spending programs over the effective administration of what already exists.
So Barroso should forget the high-flying platitudes of the Lisbon agenda and focus instead on effective completion of the Single Market and keeping the member states' fiscal policies in order.
Let national governments take responsibility for their countries' economic performance.
Dying in Court
UTRECHT – Gloria Taylor, a Canadian, has amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), also known as Lou Gehrig’s disease.
Over a period of a few years, her muscles will weaken until she can no longer walk, use her hands, chew, swallow, speak, and ultimately, breathe. Then she will die.
Taylor does not want to go through all of that. She wants to die at a time of her own choosing.
Suicide is not a crime in Canada, so, as Taylor put it: “I simply cannot understand why the law holds that the able-bodied who are terminally ill are allowed to shoot themselves when they have had enough because they are able to hold a gun steady, but because my illness affects my ability to move and control my body, I cannot be allowed compassionate help to allow me to commit an equivalent act using lethal medication.”
Taylor sees the law as offering her a cruel choice: either end her life when she still finds it enjoyable, but is capable of killing herself, or give up the right that others have to end their lives when they choose.
She went to court, arguing that the provisions of the Criminal Code that prevent her from receiving assistance in dying are inconsistent with the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, which gives Canadians rights to life, liberty, personal security, and equality.
The court hearing was remarkable for the thoroughness with which Justice Lynn Smith examined the ethical questions before her.
She received expert opinions from leading figures on both sides of the issue, not only Canadians, but also authorities in Australia, Belgium, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
The range of expertise included general medicine, palliative care, neurology, disability studies, gerontology, psychiatry, psychology, law, philosophy, and bioethics.
Many of these experts were cross-examined in court.
Along with Taylor’s right to die, decades of debate about assistance in dying came under scrutiny.
Last month, Smith issued her judgment.
The case, Carter v. Canada, could serve as a textbook on the facts, law, and ethics of assistance in dying.
For example, there has been much debate about the difference between the accepted practice of withholding life support or some other treatment, knowing that the patient is likely to die without it, and the contested practice of actively helping a patient to die.
Smith’s ruling finds that “a bright-line ethical distinction is elusive,” and that the view that there is no such ethical distinction is “persuasive.”
She considers, and accepts, an argument advanced by Wayne Sumner, a distinguished Canadian philosopher: if the patient’s circumstances are such that suicide would be ethically permissible were the patient able to do it, then it is also ethically permissible for the physician to provide the means for the patient to do it.
Smith also had to assess whether there are public-policy considerations that count against the legalization of physician assistance in dying.
Her decision focuses mainly on the risk that vulnerable people – for example, the aged or those with disabilities – will be pressured into accepting assistance in dying when they do not really want it.
There are conflicting views about whether legalization of voluntary euthanasia in the Netherlands, and of physician assistance in dying in Oregon, has led to an increase in the number of vulnerable people being killed or assisted in dying withouttheirfull, informed consent.
For many years, Herbert Hendin, a psychiatrist and suicide expert, has asserted that the safeguards incorporated in these laws fail to protect the vulnerable.
He gave evidence at the trial.
So, too, on the other side, did Hans van Delden, a Dutch nursing home physician and bioethicist who for the past 20 years has been involved in all of the major empirical studies of end-of-life decisions in his country. Peggy Battin, the most prominent American bioethicist working on assisted dying and euthanasia, also took the stand.
In this dispute, Smith comes down firmly on the side of van Delden and Battin, finding that “the empirical evidence gathered in the two jurisdictions does not support the hypothesis that physician-assisted death has imposed a particular risk to socially vulnerable populations.”
Instead, she says, “The evidence does support Dr. van Delden’s position that it is possible for a state to design a system that both permits some individuals to access physician-assisted death and socially protects vulnerable individuals and groups.”
(The most recent Dutch report, released after Smith handed down her judgment, confirms that there has been no dramatic increase in euthanasia cases in the Netherlands.)
Smith then declared, after considering the applicable law, that the provisions of the Criminal Code preventing physician assistance in dying violate disabled people’s right not only to equality, but also to life, liberty, and security.
She thus opened the door for physician assistance in dying for any grievously and irremediably ill competent adult, under conditions not very different from those that apply in other jurisdictions where physician assistance in dying is legal.
The decision will almost certainly be appealed, and the final outcome seems likely to depend on the appellate judges’ interpretations of Canadian law.
But Smith’s verdict on the ethics of assistance in dying – and of the facts regarding jurisdictions, like the Netherlands and Oregon, that have it – seems likely to stand for a long time to come.
Dying to Grow?
STANFORD – We are constantly bombarded with information about the purported risks or protective effects of one or another food, dietary supplement, chemical, drug, or activity.&#160; In July, for example, an article in The Annals of Internal Medicine reported that people who work at least 11 hours a day have a 67% higher risk of having a heart attack or dying from heart disease than those who work 7-8 hours a day.
However, the study cannot conclude that long work hours cause cardiac disease.
In fact, one of the most common misunderstandings about scientific studies is the critical difference between correlation and causation.
Working long days might be only a marker for being at higher risk of heart disease.
For example, it could be that highly stressed people with Type A personality who think that bacon cheeseburgers and creamy sauces are staple foods, and who already have an increased, long-term risk of heart disease, also tend to work longer hours.
Studies that show an association between a factor and a health effect should be regarded as no more than a preliminary result that points researchers toward further research and analysis.
This brings us back to the conundrum of correlation versus causation.
Turner syndrome, a chromosomal abnormality in which all or part of one of the sex chromosomes is absent, manifests itself in several ways.
These include characteristic physical abnormalities (most often non-functioning ovaries, which results in the absence of menstrual cycles and sterility) and various other health problems, such as congenital heart disease, low thyroid hormone levels, and autoimmune diseases.
Similarly, Noonan syndrome, a relatively common genetic disorder, is marked by abnormal development in various systems of the body that causes unusual facial characteristics, short stature, and cardiac abnormalities.
Prader-Willi syndrome is characterized by poor muscle tone, low levels of sex hormones, and a defect in the part of the brain that controls feelings of satiety or hunger, which leads to overeating and obesity.
Thus, to expect the same death rate in such patients as in the general population would be like blaming insulin for decreased longevity in diabetics (who suffer cardiac and renal disease more frequently than non-diabetics).
In fact, it would be big medical news if there were no increase in deaths in patients treated with growth hormone, because that would imply that the drug actually provides a life-prolonging effect in a population expected to die prematurely.
Another finding in the SAGhE study arouses skepticism about a cause-and-effect relationship between the drug and the increased death rate: the mortality came from causes that are mechanistically and physiologically quite different – mainly bone cancers, cardiovascular diseases, and cerebrovascular events.
A more narrow, unimodal manifestation of toxicity would be more persuasive in establishing causation.
American regulators jumped the gun.
The European Medicines Agency was more measured, saying in a statement, “Based on this observational study alone, the risk cannot be associated with certainty to the growth hormone treatment.
The results need to be confirmed and complemented with further analyses.”
There is a reproducible, undeniable association between fires and fire engines, but that doesn’t mean that the latter cause the former.
If you or a loved one has taken (or is taking) human growth hormone under a physician’s supervision, you shouldn’t lose sleep over it.
Bob Dylan and the Literary Idiot Wind
PARIS – Oh, the anger of the fusty at the announcement of Bob Dylan’s Nobel Prize!
What an outcry from the academy – not the Swedish one, mind you, but that of the world church of literaturology.
The panic of the literary bureaucracy, ensnared in its certainties and steeped in its petty calculations, its half-baked prognostications, its crafty shifts of position, has been palpable.
Was the choice of Dylan political or non-political?
Why an American? Why not a woman?
Or a voice, any voice, of a visible minority?
Or this one, who’s been waiting 20 years?
But, confronted with those who have been shouting, “That’s not literature!
It’s just not!” one is tempted to side with Francis Ponge who, citing Lautréamont, defined the poet (he would say “proet”) as a bard or troubadour who, by expressing the “voice of things,” becomes “the most useful citizen of his tribe.”
And to whom does that definition apply better than to the author of “Chimes of Freedom” or “Long and Wasted Years,” which bring to life and to music what the critic Greil Marcus has called the “invisible republic” of American culture?
One is tempted to side also with Mallarmé, who urged us, in more or less the same terms, to “give a purer meaning to the words of the tribe.”
Again, who better than this collage artist, this chameleon of citation and intertextuality, this laconic lyricist, this verbal alchemist who spent his life reinventing others’ words and his own, uncovering the embers of the era beneath the ashes of the day’s defeats, and transmuting into gold the lead he heard on the radio?
Or consider the familiar distinction between scribes, who make instrumental use of language, and writers, who spin it into silk.
Wasn’t Dylan alluding to something similar when, after years of struggle for civil rights, resistance to the war in Vietnam, and support for the feminist revolution, he titled one of his most beautiful songs “I’m Not There,” as in, I’m not here anymore, no longer your servant, goodbye to all that, so long?
But the true question lies elsewhere.
The most conclusive exercise would be to compare apples with apples and the author of “Blonde on Blonde” with those who were and remain his key contemporaries.
Dylan is a Kerouac who can sing. He’s a Burroughs who put to music the great parade of the Beat generation, with its wild parties and naked lunches.
He is what Allen Ginsberg said in describing his shock upon first hearing “A Hard Rain’s A-Gonna Fall” in 1963, a song in which the accents and pacing, the abrupt changes in emphasis, the voyage to the very heart of words and the imagination all echo the best literature of the time – but with music as well!
Are we going to hold that against Dylan, charge him with the sin of having grafted the rhythms of the blues, soul, and country music onto those of the Bible, William Blake, and Walt Whitman?
Why should we withhold from the trouper of the Never Ending Tour (more than two thousand performances!) the dignity accorded without hesitation to the author of On the Road?
It was Louis Aragon, I think, who said that setting a poem to music was like moving from black and white to color.
Aragon, the poet sung by Léo Ferré and others, believed that a poem unsung was half dead.
Well, then, it seems that Dylan was the only one of his era to have been able to embody fully the musicality that is essential to great poetry, the second voice that haunts every poet, but which he generally delegates to those who recite or read him, the power of song that is his ultimate and secret truth and that some have gone mad – literally and tragically mad – trying to pull from cage into canto.
Bard and rhapsodist both.
A poetico-musical revolution in one man and one body of work.
I like to think that it is this tour de force – this prolonged stroke of genius that is forever young – that the Nobel committee has recognized in its selection.
Dysfunctional Disarmament
GENEVA – As the United Nations Conference on Disarmament begins a seven-week session in Geneva, its future is on the line.
Whereas countries and civil-society initiatives are on the move, the Conference has stagnated.
Its credibility – indeed, its very legitimacy – is at risk.
The “CD,” as it is informally known, has long served as the world’s only multilateral forum for negotiating disarmament.
Its many impressive accomplishments include the Biological and Chemical Weapons Conventions, the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, and the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
Much of this progress was achieved during the Cold War, proving that it is possible to create global legal norms even in times of deep political division.
Yet today, all is not well at the CD.
It operates under a consensus rule, and its member states have different priorities.
Some want negotiations on nuclear disarmament; others want to ban the production of fissile material for weapon purposes; and still others insist that such a treaty should also cover existing stocks.
Some want a treaty on security guarantees for non-nuclear-weapon states to assure them against the threat or use of nuclear weapons; others want a treaty to prevent an arms race in outer space.
But, instead of compromise and the give-and-take of good-faith discussions, there has been paralysis.
There was a brief glimmer of hope in 2009, when the sense of paralysis led the Conference to consensus on a program of work.
Unfortunately, that agenda was never implemented.
As a result, the CD has failed to make any substantive progress for 15 years.
We simply must not let one lost decade turn into a second.
The CD’s future is in the hands of its member states.
But the disarmament and non-proliferation agenda is too important to let the CD lapse into irrelevancy as states consider other negotiating arenas.
Last September, I convened a high-level meeting at the UN to consider ways to revitalize the CD’s work and to advance multilateral disarmament negotiations.
The participants – who included dozens of foreign ministers – were unanimous in stressing that membership of the CD is a privilege. So is the consensus rule.
Just one or two countries should not be able to block the organization’s work indefinitely.
The message was clear: no more business as usual.
The CD’s member states must recognize that the Conference’s future is at a critical juncture.
Continued stalemate increases the risk that some like-minded countries might take up the matter elsewhere.
After all, the deadlock has ominous implications for international security; the longer it persists, the graver the nuclear threat – from existing arsenals, from the proliferation of such weapons, and from their possible acquisition by terrorists.
I have urged the CD to adopt an agenda based either on the consensus that was forged in 2009, or on an alternative arrangement.
Upon my request, the UN’s entire membership will take up the matter in a first-of-its-kind General Assembly meeting this July.
That schedule makes the CD’s current session crucial to its future.
Reaffirming the CD’s agenda offers the prospect of renewed negotiations on disarmament issues.
Prior agreement on the scope or outcome should not be a precondition for talks – or an excuse to avoid them – but rather a subject of the negotiations themselves.
The current stalemate is all the more troubling in view of recent momentum on other disarmament tracks, including last year’s successful NPT Review Conference and heightened attention to nuclear security.
With the world focused so intently on advancing disarmament goals, the CD should seize the moment.
Shakespeare once wrote that “there is a tide in the affairs of men.”
The tide of disarmament is rising, yet the CD is in danger of sinking.
And it will sink unless it fulfills its responsibility to act.
Preschool Confidential
BERKELEY – High-quality early childhood education is one of those rare issues that unites people of all social strata and across the political spectrum.
But the consensus about the benefits – both for the children and society – does not extend to delivery and funding.
The good news is that, with an impressive array of new models being implemented, important lessons are emerging about how to shape, finance, and scale future early education programs.
To understand what these models are trying to achieve, it is useful to consider the science that underlies them.
The evidence is increasingly clear that the early years of life are crucial to brain development, with 700-1,000 new neural connections occurring every second during the first three years of life.
The number of words a child hears during that critical time has a huge impact on his or her future intellectual abilities.
Yet there is a major discrepancy between the number of words heard by children of professional parents and those of working-class families – three million per year in the United States.
Whereas high-income households have an average of 12 books per child, more than half of the day-care centers for the lowest-income children do not have a single book.
Some programs are helping to level the playing field.
For example, an initiative in the US called First 5 California funds programs that educate parents, grandparents, caregivers, and teachers about the critical role they play during a child’s first five years.
But what a child learns at home is just part of the issue (albeit a very important part).
Children, the evidence suggests, also need school.
Such data have spurred a flurry of initiatives to improve early education.
In 2014, the United Kingdom expanded public support for families earning less than £16,190 ($23,648) per year to enable two-year-olds to receive 15 hours of education per week for 38 weeks per year.
Today, nearly three-quarters of two-year-olds are enrolled in preschool, giving their mothers the opportunity to work or study.
But the public sector is not alone in pursuing such investment.
Business leaders have also gotten involved, driven by concerns that education is failing to keep up with the demands of the changing economy.
In Tennessee, for example, business leaders were among the first to invest in early education.
Their experiences reinforced the need not just to get more kids in school, but to focus on providing high-quality education that is well-governed, involves student’s families, and is linked to subsequent schooling.
Efforts to link the public and the private have also emerged.
Warren Buffett’s daughter, Susan Buffett, created the Alliance for Early Success, which brings together various stakeholders to encourage investments and policies that lead to improved health, learning, and economic outcomes for children in the first eight years of life.
The link between education and health has shaped other programs.
California’s First 5 Commission (which is funded by a tobacco tax) has galvanized pediatricians – a group that parents are predisposed to trust – to help parents understand the importance of engaging with their children in ways that advance their health and cognitive development.
Important initiatives have also been implemented at the municipal level.
San Antonio, Texas, made investment in early education a priority.
For a Democrat-led city in a Republican-dominated state, bipartisan agreement – achieved through the efforts of former Mayor Julián Castro and Governor Greg Abbott – was essential.
New York City’s early-education program is perhaps America’s largest, with over 65,000 children enrolled in preschool at an annual cost exceeding $300 million.
Educational quality is also emphasized, with three qualified applicants for every open teaching position.
But critics point out a lapse in the program: low enrollment rates among children from poorer zip codes.
Given that disadvantaged children benefit the most from early childhood education, this is a serious shortcoming.
One of the more ambitious initiatives being implemented today in the US is the Big Lift in San Mateo County, California, which is working to ensure that all children in the county read at grade level by third grade (the current rate is 43%).
The program focuses on building capacity for early education and improving support for the children who need the most help.
Initiated by a broad coalition of county leaders and funded by a combination of county sales tax, federal grants, and philanthropy, the Big Lift has raised $28 million and gotten more than 200 organizations involved.
Clearly, there is no shortage of models for improving the delivery of early education.
Given the clear economic case for it – not to mention citizens’ demonstrated willingness to invest in it – the goal now must be to figure out what works and adapt it to different contexts.
Tahun Bumi
STOCKHOLM – Tanggal 22 April dunia akan memperingati 45 tahun perayaan Hari Bumi, hari yang ditetapkan pada tahun 1970 untuk menarik perhatian atas kesulitan-kesulitan dalam bidang lingkungan hidup.
Kita belum pernah menemui tantangan yang sedemikian besarnya atau lebih mendesak dibandingkan dengan kondisi terkini.
Gabungan antara perubahan iklim, hilangnya keanekaragaman hayati dan pengikisan sumber daya alam mendorong planet bumi menuju titik kritis, bahkan melebihi titik dimana tujuan-tujuan seperti pembangunan berkelanjutan dan pengentasan kemiskinan akan jauh lebih sulit untuk diwujudkan.
Sejak tahun 1970, ilmuwan sudah mengetahui bahwa aktivitas manusia tidak hanya menjadi pemicu utama perubahan lingkungan hidup di bumi, tetapi juga mendorong planet melebihi batas kemampuan alaminya.
Jika kita tidak membuat perubahan besar secara cepat, dampaknya akan sangat buruk.
Pemimpin global nampaknya sudah mengakuinya ketika mereka mencapai kesepakatan pada lima tahun yang lalu untuk membatasi pemanasan global abad ini pada suhu 2º Celsius di atas tingkat pra-industrial – melebihi itu maka kita berisiko menciptakan dampak perubahan iklim yang lebih dahsyat.
Namun belum ada tindakan tegas yang diambil untuk mengurangi emisi gas rumah kaca.
Di sisi lain, nyata sekali bahwa emisi meningkat tajam; sebagai akibatnya, tahun lalu merupakan tahun terpanas yang pernah tercatat dalam sejarah.
Bumi kita saat ini berjalan pada jalurnya untuk menghabiskan sisa “anggaran” emisi karbon dioksida, dimana jumlahnya sekarang kurang dari satu triliun ton, hanya dalam 25 tahun.
Dampaknya adalah perubahan yang merupakan malapetaka seperti kenaikan permukaan laut yang tidak dapat dikendalikan. gelombang panas yang membahayakan, dan kemarau panjang yang mengakibatkan kesulitan-kesulitan yang belum pernah terjadi sebelumnya dalam hal keamanan pangan, ekosistem, kesehatan, dan infrastruktur.
Tentunya tidak mengherankan lagi bahwa penduduk miskin dan paling rentan yang akan terkena dampak terburuk.
Kita perlu mengubah kecenderungan ini.
Hari Bumi harus menjadi peringatan – bahkan sebagai pemicu – atas kebutuhan planet bumi, yaitu tindakan tegas dan berkesinambungan.
Untungnya tahun 2015 ini menandai awal perubahan menuju perbaikan.
Tahun ini, pemimpin negara-negara dunia akan menghadiri tiga pertemuan untuk memetakan jalur baru bagi planet kita.
Bulan Juli nanti, mereka akan bertemu di Addis Ababa, Ethiopia untuk menghadiri Konferensi untuk Pendanaan bagi Pembangunan (Conference on Financing for Development).
Pada bulan September akan diselenggarakan pertemuan untuk menyepakati Tujuan-tujuan Pembangunan Berkelanjutan (Sustainable Development Goals), yang akan mempedomani upaya-upaya pembangunan hingga tahun 2030.
Pada bulan Desember, pemimpin negara akan bertemu di Paris untuk merundingkan perjanjian perubahan iklim global yang baru.
Hasil yang diperoleh dari ketiga pertemuan tersebut akan membentuk warisan dari generasi ini, baik untuk lingkungan hidup maupun terhadap pertumbuhan ekonomi dan pembangunan.
Dengan menerapkan dekarbonisasi perekonomian global dan membatasi perubahan iklim, pemimpin negara-negara dunia dapat membuka gerbang inovasi, mendukung kebangkitan industri dan penciptaan lapangan pekerjaan baru, serta menciptakan peluang-peluang ekonomi yang luas.
Semuanya tergantung pada kita untuk mendorong pemimpin politik agar melakukan tindakan yang diperlukan demi menjamin pencapaian hasil.
Sama halnya dengan kita menuntut pemerintah untuk menangani risiko-risiko terkait dengan terorisme atau epidemi, kita pun harus memberikan tekanan besar pada pemerintah supaya bertindak sekarang demi menjaga lingkungan hidup dan mengendalikan perubahan iklim.
Dalam hal ini komunitas ilmiah memiliki tanggung jawab khusus untuk berbagi penelitian mereka dan dampak-dampak potensial yang termuat di dalamnya.
Ini lah alasan mengapa saya dan 16 orang peneliti lainnya di Earth League – mewakili beberapa lembaga akademik terkemuka dunia seperti Potsdam Institute on Climate Impact Research, Earth Institute, Tsinghua University, dan Stockholm Resilience Centre – telah menerbitkan “Earth Statement”, rumusan yang memuat delapan unsur penting dalam keberhasilan perjanjian iklim global yang akan disepakati di Paris pada bulan Desember nanti.
·       Pertama, perjanjian harus menegaskan komitmen negara untuk membatasi pemanasan global di bawah suhu 2°C.
·       Kedua, perjanjian perlu mengakui sisa anggaran global atas emisi karbon dioksida.
·       Ketiga, perjanjian harus menetapkan landasan bagi transformasi ekonomi secara fundamental, dengan segera memulai deep decarbonization untuk membentuk masyarakat nihil karbon pada tahun 2050.
·       Keempat, keseluruhan 196 negara dalam Konvensi PBB tentang Perubahan Iklim harus merumuskan rencana aksi emisi yang sejalan dengan deep decarbonization melalui kepemimpinan negara-negara yang lebih maju.
·       Kelima, negara harus mengembangkan inovasi dalam teknologi bersih dan menjamin akses universal bagi solusi teknologi yang ada.
·       Keenam, pemerintah harus sepakat untuk mendukung adaptasi perubahan iklim dan mengatasi kerugian dan kerusakan yang terkait.
·       Ketujuh, perjanjian harus memuat ketentuan-ketentuan untuk melindungi carbon sinks dan ekosistem yang vital.
·       Kedelapan, guna membantu negara-negara berkembang melawan perubahan iklim, donor harus menyediakan dukungan tambahan pada tingkat yang setidaknya sebanding dengan bantuan pembangunan global yang sekarang.
Kabar baiknya adalah kedelapan tujuan ini sifatnya realistis dan dapat diwujudkan; bahkan sejumlah kemajuan sudah dicapai.
Tahun lalu, total emisi karbon dioksida year on year dari sektor energi untuk pertama kalinya tidak berubah (karena ketiadaan krisis ekonomi).
Laporan terkini menunjukkan bahwa emisi di Tiongkok, sebagai emitor terbesar emisi gas rumah kaca dunia, juga tidak bertambah dari tahun 2013 hingga 2014.
Kini arusnya mulai berbalik.
Dekarbonisasi sudah dimulai dan tuntutan akan terciptanya dunia yang bebas dari bahan bakar fosil semakin besar – karena tidak hanya hal itu dapat mengendalikan perubahan iklim tetapi juga menjadikannya lebih maju secara teknologi, demokratis, berdaya tahan, sehat dan dinamis secara ekonomi.
Sekarang adalah waktu yang tepat untuk beralih menuju jalur yang lebih berkesinambungan, nihil karbon (zero-carbon).
Melalui perjanjian internasional yang tepat, dunia akan dapat mencapainya.
Demi planet kita dan semua orang yang hidup di dalamnya, mari jadikan tahun 2015 sebagai Tahun Bumi.
Blinded by the Light
NEW YORK – On the evening of March 23, 1.3 billion people will go without light at 8:30, and at 9:30, and at 10:30, and for the rest of the night – just like every other night of the year.
With no access to electricity, darkness after sunset is a constant reality for these people.
On the same evening, another billion will participate in the environmental event “Earth Hour” by turning off their lights from 8:30-9:30.
The organizers say that they are providing a way to demonstrate one’s desire to “do something” about global warming.
But the stark reality is that Earth Hour teaches all the wrong lessons, and actually increases CO2 emissions.
It may inspire virtuous feelings, but its vain symbolism reveals exactly what is wrong with today’s feel-good environmentalism.
Earth Hour teaches us that tackling global warming is easy.
Yet, by switching off the lights, all we are doing is making it harder to see.
Notice that you have not been asked to switch off anything really inconvenient, like your heating or air conditioning, television, computer, mobile phone, or any of the myriad technologies that depend on affordable, plentiful energy electricity and make modern life possible.
If switching off the lights for one hour per year really were beneficial, why would we not do it for the other 8,759?
Hypothetically, switching off the lights for an hour would cut CO2 emissions from power plants around the world.
But, even if everyone in the entire world cut all residential lighting, and this translated entirely into CO2 reduction, it would be the equivalent of China pausing its CO2 emissions for less than four minutes.
In fact, Earth Hour will cause emissions to increase.
As the United Kingdom’s National Grid operators have found, a small decline in electricity consumption does not translate into less energy being pumped into the grid, and therefore will not reduce emissions.
Moreover, during Earth Hour, any significant drop in electricity demand will entail a reduction in CO2 emissions during the hour, but it will be offset by the surge from firing up coal or gas stations to restore electricity supplies afterwards.
And the cozy candles that many participants will light, which seem so natural and environmentally friendly, are still fossil fuels – and almost 100 times less efficient than incandescent light bulbs.
Using one candle for each switched-off bulb cancels out even the theoretical CO2 reduction; using two candles means that you emit more CO2.
Electricity has given humanity huge benefits.
Almost three billion people still burn dung, twigs, and other traditional fuels indoors to cook and keep warm, generating noxious fumes that kill an estimated two million people each year, mostly women and children.
Likewise, just a hundred years ago, the average American family spent six hours each week during cold months shoveling six tons of coal into the furnace (not to mention cleaning the coal dust from carpets, furniture, curtains, and bedclothes).
In the developed world today, electric stoves and heaters have banished indoor air pollution.
Similarly, electricity has allowed us to mechanize much of our world, ending most backbreaking work.
The washing machine liberated women from spending endless hours carrying water and beating clothing on scrub boards.
The refrigerator made it possible for almost everyone to eat more fruits and vegetables, and simply to stop eating rotten food, which is the main reason why the most prevalent cancer for men in the United States in 1930, stomach cancer, is the least prevalent now.
Electricity has allowed us to irrigate fields and synthesize fertilizer from air.
The light that it powers has enabled us to have active, productive lives past sunset.
The electricity that people in rich countries consume is, on average, equivalent to the energy of 56 servants helping them.
Even people in Sub-Saharan Africa have electricity equivalent to about three servants.
They need more of it, not less.
This is relevant not only for the world’s poor.
Because of rising energy prices from green subsidies, 800,000 German households can no longer pay their electricity bills.
In the UK, there are now over five million fuel-poor people, and the country’s electricity regulator now publicly worries that environmental targets could lead to blackouts in less than nine months.
Today, we produce only a small fraction of the energy that we need from solar and wind – 0.7% from wind and just 0.1% from solar.
These technologies currently are too expensive.
If we really want a sustainable future for all of humanity and our planet, we shouldn’t plunge ourselves back into darkness.
Tackling climate change by turning off the lights and eating dinner by candlelight smacks of the “let them eat cake” approach to the world’s problems that appeals only to well-electrified, comfortable elites.
Focusing on green R&amp;D might not feel as good as participating in a global gabfest with flashlights and good intentions, but it is a much brighter idea.
East Asia\u0027s Historical Shackles
TOKYO – Diplomatic relationships in East Asia have long been held hostage by history.
But the region’s “history problem” has been intensifying lately, with growing nationalism among major actors like China, Japan, and South Korea fueling disputes over everything from territory and natural resources to war memorials and textbooks.
Can East Asian countries overcome their legacy of conflict to forge a common future that benefits all?
Consider the relationship between America’s closest East Asian allies, Japan and South Korea.
Though historical disagreements have long hampered bilateral ties, the increasingly nationalistic stance of Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe and South Korean President Park Geun-hye has aggravated festering tensions.
If they fail to work together to stem the revival of bitter historical disputes, their relationship will remain frozen, playing into China’s hands.
And nobody plays the history card with quite as much relish as China, where President Xi Jinping is also relying on nationalism to legitimize his rule.
Last year, China introduced two new national memorial days to commemorate China’s long battle against Japanese aggression in World War II: “War against Japanese Aggression Victory Day” on September 3 and “Nanjing Massacre Day” on December 13.
What would happen if countries like Vietnam and India dedicated days to remembering China’s aggression toward them since 1949?
By reinforcing negative stereotypes of rival countries, such squabbles over history and remembrance sow fragmentation and instability, and have certainly fueled the region’s recent territorial disputes.
Indeed, the politicization of history remains the principal obstacle to reconciliation in East Asia.
Repeated attempts to rewrite history –&nbsp;sometimes literally, through textbook revisions – along nationalist lines make it nearly impossible to establish regional institutions.
This should not be the case.
Japan and South Korea, for example, are vibrant democracies and export-oriented economic powerhouses, with traditionally close cultural ties and many shared values.
In other words, they are ideal candidates for collaboration.
US President Barack Obama recognizes this potential, and has promoted increased strategic cooperation between South Korea and Japan in order to underpin a stronger trilateral security alliance with the US that can balance a rising China.
But Japan and South Korea refuse to let go of history.
To be sure, there is some truth to South Korea’s accusation that Japan is denying some of its past behavior.
But it is also true that Park&nbsp;– who has refused to meet formally with Abe until he addresses lingering issues over Japan’s annexation of Korea –&nbsp;has used history to pander to domestic nationalist sentiment.
Indeed, adopting a hardline stance has enabled her to whitewash some inconvenient family history: Her father, the dictator Park Chung-hee, collaborated with the Japanese military while Korea was under colonial rule.
Abe, too, has stoked tensions, particularly by visiting Tokyo’s Yasukuni Shrine – a controversial memorial that honors, among others, Class A war criminals from World War II.
Though Abe visited the shrine only once – in December 2013 – he felt compelled to do so in response to China’s unilateral declaration of an air-defense identification zone, covering territories that it claims but does not control.
Of course, the divergences between Japanese and South Korean historical narratives go back further than WWII.
More than a century ago, the Korean activist Ahn Jung-geun assassinated Japan’s first prime minister, Hirobumi Ito, at the railway station in the Chinese city of Harbin, cementing Ahn’s status as a hero in Korea and a terrorist in Japan.
Ito’s image can be seen on Japan’s 1,000-yen note; Ahn has appeared on a 200-won postage stamp in South Korea.
Last year, Park asked Xi to honor Ahn.
Xi seized the opportunity to drive a wedge between America’s two main Asian allies, and built a memorial to Ahn.
Japan responded by blasting China for glorifying a terrorist and propagating a “one-sided” view of history – a move that, Japan asserted, was “not conducive to building peace and stability.”
Such conflicts have a clear catalyst: Asia’s rising prosperity.
As their economies have expanded, Asian countries have gained the confidence to construct and exalt a new past, in which they either downplay their own aggressions or highlight their steadfastness in the face of brutal victimization.
All countries’ legitimizing narratives blend historical fact and myth.
But, in some cases, historical legacies can gain excessive influence, overwhelming leaders’ capacity to make rational policy choices.
That explains why Park has sought closer ties with China, even though South Korea’s natural regional partner is democratic Japan.
One source of hope stems from Abe’s landslide victory in the recent snap general election, which gives him the political capital to reach out to Park with a grand bargain: If Japan expresses remorse more clearly for its militaristic past, South Korea will agree to leave historical grievances out of official policy.
Japan and South Korea cannot change the past.
Witness East Asia’s rising nationalism, territorial disputes, and lack of effective institutional mechanisms for security cooperation.
While economic interdependence among China, Japan, South Korea, and the members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations continues to deepen, their diplomatic relations are as burdened by rivalry and mistrust as relations among European countries were in the decades prior to World War I.
One common characteristic, then and now, is a power shift.
Back then, Great Britain’s relative power was in decline, while Germany’s had been rising since German unification in 1871.
Similarly, at least in terms of economic, if not military, capability, the United States and Japan seem to have begun a process of decline relative to China.
Of course, this process is not irreversible: Effective political leadership and successful domestic reforms in the US and Japan, together with China’s failure to manage political pressure from below, could yet halt this seemingly inexorable power shift.
Major power shifts define eras in which key political leaders are likely to make serious foreign-policy mistakes.
Indeed, poor management of international relations at such critical junctures has often led to major wars.
Rising powers tend to demand a greater role in international politics, declining powers tend to be reluctant to adjust, and key policymakers are likely to misunderstand the intentions of other countries’ leaders and overreact to their actions.
Historically, rising powers tend to become too confident too soon, leading them to behave imprudently, which frightens their neighbors.
For example, Kaiser Wilhelm II dismissed Otto von Bismarck as chancellor in 1890, less than 20 years after the formation of the Second Reich, and began to destroy Bismarck’s carefully crafted alliance network.
His rough diplomacy frightened France, Britain, and Russia, making it easier for them to unite against Germany.
China’s new diplomatic assertiveness in 2010 – closely following the eruption of the worst financial crisis since the 1930’s – recalled that of Wilhelmine Germany.
In both cases, insecurity resulted not from an external threat, but from top policymakers’ own actions.
In late 2010, I was relieved – somewhat – when a key Chinese leader, State Councilor Dai Bingguo, announced that China would adhere to the path of peaceful development.
But the rhetoric of some Chinese, particularly in the military, concerning the South China Sea and other disputed Chinese sovereignty claims suggests that not everyone in the country’s leadership is committed wholeheartedly to such a path.
The extent to which policymaking by the country’s new leader, Xi Jinping, takes into account the insecurity felt by China’s neighbors – and abandons a quest for absolute security for China – will be one of the key variables influencing East Asia’s security environment in the years ahead.
America’s foreign policy will be another key factor.
If the US pursues a predominantly confrontational approach, East Asian politics will inevitably become polarized, just as multipolar nineteenth-century Europe gave way to an increasingly bipolar order in lockstep with rising tensions between Germany and Britain.
America’s so-called “pivot to Asia” might have been necessary from its point of view, given the concerns of its Asian allies about China.
But, unless the US wants a Cold War-style confrontation in Asia, it must try harder to engage China in shaping a viable regional security structure.
A confrontational US approach toward China, moreover, would imply an additional destabilizing factor: Japan might become much bolder than necessary in its foreign policy.
After Wilhelm II stopped engaging Russia in the 1890’s, bilateral relations worsened, which provided his ally, Austria, diplomatic carte blanche in dealing with Serbia – and, more important, Serbia’s Russian patron.
Thus, Wilhelm unintentionally contributed to the outbreak of war in 1914.
There are already some worrying signs of a Japanese miscalculation.
Japan’s new prime minister, Shinzo Abe, reportedly said that he is considering renouncing the Kono Statement of 1993, which acknowledged that the Japanese military had raped and enslaved Asian and European women during World War II.
If Abe does so, Japan’s relations with South Korea and China will suffer serious damage.
That is in no one’s interest, including Japan’s, given that the Japanese share many security concerns with South Korea.
So US diplomacy will need to be dexterous.
It must ease Japan’s sense of insecurity in the wake of China’s rise, while persuading Japan’s new leaders to behave prudently and refrain from excessively nationalist behavior.
Frankly, with two decades of economic stagnation already behind it, Japan has more important matters to pursue.
In contrast to its multilateral efforts in Europe, the US created a hub-and-spoke security framework – formed by US-centered bilateral alliances – in Asia following WWII.
One result is that no direct channel for security cooperation among Asian countries was ever established, which has contributed to the low level of trust in East Asia, even among close US allies like Japan and South Korea.
And it is precisely here that South Korea, a medium-sized ally of the US, will be in a better position than Northeast Asia’s bigger powers to act as a facilitator.
There is much to learn from the diplomatic failures that led to WWI.
A new history, by Christopher Clark, of the diplomatic prelude to that war is called, fittingly, The Sleepwalkers.
The question for the US and East Asia’s leaders today is whether they will wake up and develop effective multilateral mechanisms for security cooperation before doing themselves serious harm.
East Asia’s Nationalist Fantasy Islands
TOKYO – They don’t look like much, those few uninhabited rocks in the East China Sea between Okinawa and Taiwan, and a couple of tiny islets in the Sea of Japan, inhabited by a few token fishermen and some South Korean Coast Guard officials.
The former, called the Senkaku Islands in Japan, and the Diaoyu Islands in China, are claimed by China, Japan, and Taiwan; the latter, called Takeshima in Japan, and Dokdo in Korea, are claimed by South Korea and Japan.
These tiny outcroppings have little material value, and yet the dispute over their ownership has led to a major international dustup.
Ambassadors have been recalled.
Massive anti-Japanese demonstrations have been held all over China, causing damage to Japanese people and properties.
Threats fly back and forth between Tokyo and Seoul. There has even been talk of military action.
The historical facts actually appear quite simple.
Japan grabbed the islands as part of its empire-building project after the Sino-Japanese war in 1895 and the annexation of Korea in 1905.
Prior sovereignty is unclear; there were fishermen from Japan in Takeshima/Dokdo, and some awareness of the Senkaku/Diaoyu in imperial China.
But no formal claims were made by any state.
Things became more complicated after World War II.
Japan was supposed to return its colonial possessions, but the United States took over the Senkaku Islands along with Okinawa, before returning both to Japan in 1972.
The Koreans, still enraged at Japan for almost a half-century of colonization, took the Dokdo islands without worrying about the move’s legality.
Given the brutality of the Japanese occupations of Korea and China, one is naturally inclined to sympathize with Japan’s former victims.
The fiery emotions inspired by this dispute – some Koreans even mutilated themselves in protest against Japan – suggest that the wounds of the Japanese war in Asia are still fresh.
Indeed, South Korean President Lee Myung-bak has used the occasion to demand a formal apology for the war from the Japanese emperor, and financial compensation for Korean women who were forced to serve Japanese soldiers in military brothels during the war.
Unfortunately, the Japanese government, despite much circumstantial and even documentary evidence supplied by Japanese historians, now chooses to deny the wartime regime’s responsibility for this ghastly project.
Not surprisingly, that stance has further inflamed Korean emotions.
And yet it would be too simple to ascribe the current dispute entirely to the open wounds of the last world war.
Nationalist feelings, deliberately stirred up in China, Korea, and Japan, are linked to recent history, to be sure, but the politics behind them is different in each country.
Since the press in all three countries is almost autistic in its refusal to reflect anything but the “national” point of view, these politics are never properly explained.
The Communist government in China can no longer derive any legitimacy from Marxist, let alone Maoist, ideology.
China is an authoritarian capitalist country, open for business with other capitalist countries (including deep economic relations with Japan).
Since the 1990’s, therefore, nationalism has replaced Communism as the justification for the one-party state, which requires stirring up anti-Western – above all, anti-Japanese – sentiment.
This is never difficult in China, given the painful past, and it usefully deflects public attention from the failings and frustrations of living in a dictatorship.
In South Korea, one of the most painful legacies of the Japanese colonial period stems from the Korean elite’s widespread collaboration at the time.
Their offspring still play an important part in conservative politics in the country, which is why Korean leftists periodically call for purges and retribution.
President Lee is a conservative, and relatively pro-Japanese.
As a result, the Japanese view his recent demands for apologies, money, and recognition of Korean sovereignty over the islands in the Sea of Japan as a kind of betrayal.
But, precisely because Lee is regarded as a pro-Japanese conservative, he needs to burnish his nationalist credentials.
He cannot afford to be tainted with collaboration.
His political opponents are not the Japanese, but the Korean left.
The use of the war to stoke anti-Japanese feelings in China and Korea is annoying to the Japanese, and triggers defensive reactions.
But Japanese nationalism is also fed by anxieties and frustrations – specifically, fear of rising Chinese power and Japan’s total dependency on the US for its national security.
Japanese conservatives view their country’s post-war pacifist constitution, written by Americans in 1946, as a humiliating assault on Japanese sovereignty.
Now that China is testing its growing power by claiming territories, not just in the East China Sea, but also in the South China Sea, Japanese nationalists insist that Japan must act as a big power, and be seen as a serious player, fully prepared to defend its sovereignty, even over a few insignificant rocks.
China, Korea, and Japan, whose economic interests are closely entwined, have every reason to avoid a serious conflict.
And yet all three are doing their best to bring one about.
For entirely domestic reasons, each country is manipulating the history of a devastating war, triggering passions that can only cause more damage.
Politicians, commentators, activists, and journalists in each country are talking endlessly about the past.
But they are manipulating memories for political ends.
The last thing that interests any of them is the truth.
Eastern Europe’s Authoritarian Return
MADRID – The European Union is a remarkable achievement of modern statecraft.
By building on shared values, it created a space of peace, progress, and freedom that overcame national enmities rooted in decades, if not centuries, of conflict.
But the emerging political rift between the EU’s Eastern and Western members, together with resurgent nationalism throughout the continent, is putting those values – and thus the future of European integration – to their most severe test yet.
In Eastern Europe, democracy is becoming increasingly illiberal.
Leading the way is Hungary under Prime Minister Viktor Orbán, who has been implementing his declared vision of an “illiberal state” for the last six years.
Now Poland is following suit, with Jarosław Kaczyński’s right-wing Law and Justice (PiS) party having moved swiftly to assert control over public broadcasting, the civil service, and the Constitutional Court since its election in October.
Already, the EU has launched an official inquiry into potential violations of its rule-of-law standards.
The move toward authoritarianism in Eastern Europe has been accompanied by outright defiance of EU-wide quotas for migrants, aimed at easing the massive refugee crisis that Europe now faces.
Meanwhile, Germany registered about a million asylum-seekers last year alone.
This split reflects a fundamental divergence in the two sides’ response to history.
Germany’s enlightened approach in matters like migration and civil liberties amounts to a direct rejection of its actions during World War II.
Though, as the Yale historian Timothy Snyder points out, collaborators in the “bloodlands” between Berlin and Moscow often supported the Nazis’ crimes, these societies lack Germany’s guilt complex.
One reason for this is that Eastern Europeans do not share in the legacy of colonialism.
The stepchild of empire – migration – is thus a problem to be handled by those who produced it: the old European colonial powers.
The countries of Eastern Europe – insecure newcomers to the fragile economic progress offered by EU membership – do not believe that they have any obligations in this regard.
But Eastern Europe does not simply lack the will to welcome migrants; it is actively opposed to doing so, in line with Władysław Gomułka’s maxim that “countries are built on national lines, not multinational ones.”
This stance, too, stems at least partly from World War II, as first the Holocaust and then the postwar ethnic cleansing of more than 30 million people, including virtually all Germans in the region, reinforced an aversion to multiethnicity.
Indeed, multinational states like Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia disintegrated without dictatorships to hold them together.
Historical memories die hard.
Poles and others who fell under Soviet rule after 1945 cannot forgive Western Europe for sacrificing them to Stalin at Yalta.
Nor do they see their liberation from totalitarianism as a Western European achievement.
Eastern Europeans’ gratitude lies elsewhere.
The Jewish Hungarian Nobel laureate Imre Kertész spoke for many in the region when he admitted an inability to shake off his emotional attachment to the United States, which liberated him from Buchenwald and later helped to free Hungary from Soviet Communism.
In Eastern Europe, the resurgence of authoritarianism – which prevailed in the region even before the Communist era – is propelled by an ingrained fear of being sandwiched between two traditional enemies, Germany and Russia, both of which are still viewed with apprehension.
To the PiS and the Polish right, the new Poland’s foundations do not lie in the non-violent Solidarity movement’s struggle for freedom in the 1980’s, which caught the imagination of the West; it lies in Poles’ heroic fight against the Asian Bolsheviks and the German hordes during WWII.
As Polish Foreign Minister Witold Waszczykowski put it, the “Europe of cyclists and vegetarians,” with its naive culture of political correctness and liberalism, represents a threat, not a model.
Conspicuously, when Germany’s EU Commissioner for the Digital Economy and Society Günther Oettinger first threatened to put Poland’s government under supervision for its takeover of the media and the Constitutional Court, Poland’s justice minister compared the scrutiny to the Nazi occupation.
And Kaczyński defiantly insisted on staying the course while dismissing threats, “particularly by Germans.”
This represents a sea change from the last several years, during which Poland emerged as the poster child for the EU’s eastern expansion.
If Poland leads an axis of wayward member states, the EU’s capacity to protect civil liberties within its borders, much less sway other countries, such as Russia – will be severely diminished.
And, given the lack of binding instruments to stop member states from moving toward authoritarianism, avoiding such an outcome will not be easy.
Europe is a continent saturated by history, and haunted by the specter of its repetition.
But if, as Mark Twain supposedly observed, history rhymes rather than repeating itself, the memory of the past should guide Eastern Europe, not take it hostage.
The past is a warning, not a destination.
Eastern Europe’s Crisis of Shame
BERLIN – As thousands of refugees pour into Europe to escape the horrors of war, with many dying along the way, a different sort of tragedy has played out in many of the European Union’s newest member states.
The states known collectively as “Eastern Europe,” including my native Poland, have revealed themselves to be intolerant, illiberal, xenophobic, and incapable of remembering the spirit of solidarity that carried them to freedom a quarter-century ago.
These are the same societies that clamored before and after the fall of communism for a “return to Europe,” proudly proclaiming that they shared its values.
But what did they think Europe stands for?
Since 1989 – and particularly since 2004, when they joined the EU – they have benefited from massive financial transfers in the form of European structural and cohesion funds.
Today, they are unwilling to contribute anything to resolve the greatest refugee crisis facing Europe since World War II.
Indeed, before the eyes of the entire world, the government of Hungary, an EU member state, has mistreated thousands of refugees.
Prime Minister Viktor Orbán sees no reason to behave otherwise: the refugees are not a European problem, he insists; they are a German problem.
Orbán is not alone in this view.
Even Hungary’s Catholic bishops are following Orbán’s line, with Laszlo Kiss-Rigo, Bishop of Szeged-Csanad, saying that Muslim migrants “want to take over,” and that the Pope, who has called on every Catholic parish in Europe to take in a refugee family, “doesn’t know the situation.”
In Poland, a country of 40 million people, the government initially expressed a readiness to accept 2,000 refugees – but only Christians (Slovakia proposed a similar stipulation).
Refugees are not an Eastern European problem, a Polish journalist told National Public Radio in the United States, because these countries did not participate in the decision to bomb Libya (neither did Germany).
Have Eastern Europeans no sense of shame?
For centuries, their ancestors emigrated in droves, seeking relief from material hardships and political persecution.
And today their leaders’ heartless behavior and callous rhetoric play to popular sentiment.
Indeed, the electronic version of Poland’s largest newspaper, Gazeta Wyborcza, now publishes a stunning notice at the end of every article about refugees: “Because of the extraordinarily aggressive content of remarks advocating violence, contrary to the law, and calling for racial, ethnic, and religious hatred, we will not allow readers to publish comments.”
Not so long ago, in the immediate postwar years, Eastern European Jewish Holocaust survivors fled from the murderous anti-Semitism of their Polish, Hungarian, Slovak, or Romanian neighbors to the safety of displaced persons camps in, of all places, Germany.
“Safe Among the Germans” proclaimed the title of an important book by the historian Ruth Gay about these 250,000 survivors.
Now Muslim refugees and survivors of other wars, having found no refuge in Eastern Europe, also are fleeing to safety among the Germans.
In this case, history is not a metaphor.
On the contrary, the root cause of the Eastern European attitudes now on grim display is to be found in World War II and its aftermath.
Consider the Poles, who, deservedly proud of their society’s anti-Nazi resistance, actually killed more Jews than Germans during the war.
Although Poland’s Catholics were cruelly victimized during the Nazi occupation, they could find little compassion for the fate of Nazism’s ultimate victims.
In the words of Józef Mackiewicz, a conservative, anti-Communist Polish writer with impeccable patriotic credentials: “During the occupation there was not, literally, a single person who would not have heard the saying – ‘One thing Hitler has done correctly is to wipe out the Jews.’
But one should not talk about this openly.”
Of course, there were Poles who helped Jews during the war.
Indeed, the number of Polish “Righteous Among Nations,” recognized by Israel’s Yad Vashem for their wartime heroism, is the largest among all European countries (unsurprisingly, given that prewar Poland had Europe’s largest Jewish population by far).
But these remarkable individuals typically acted on their own, against prevailing social norms.
They were misfits who, long after the war had ended, insisted on keeping their wartime heroism a secret from their neighbors – afraid, it seems, that their own communities would otherwise shun, threaten, and ostracize them.
All occupied European societies were complicit to some degree in the Nazi effort to destroy the Jews.
Each made a different contribution, depending on country-specific circumstances and conditions of German rule.
But the Holocaust played out most gruesomely in Eastern Europe, owing to the sheer number of Jews in the region and the incomparable ruthlessness of the Nazi occupation regimes.
When the war ended, Germany – because of the victors’ denazification policies and its responsibility for instigating and carrying out the Holocaust – had no choice but to “work through” its murderous past.
This was a long, difficult process; but German society, mindful of its historical misdeeds, has become capable of confronting moral and political challenges of the type posed by the influx of refugees today.
And Chancellor Angela Merkel has set an example of leadership on migrants that puts all of Eastern Europe’s leaders to shame.
Eastern Europe, by contrast, has yet to come to terms with its murderous past.
Only when it does will its people be able to recognize their obligation to save those fleeing in the face of evil.
Eastern Europe’s Ostrich Policy on HIV
CARDIFF, CALIFORNIA – Russia and Ukraine account for roughly 90% of the 1.5 million people estimated to be infected with HIV in Central and Eastern Europe.
On a recent trip to these countries, and despite repeated requests, no politician or public-health official in either country would meet with me. None returned the phone calls, faxes, or e-mails that I sent after I returned home.
Both countries have epidemics driven by injecting drug users (IDUs) who share needles and syringes, the most efficient way to transmit HIV. Yet proven methods exist to slow the spread of HIV by IDUs.
If IDUs inject heroin or related opiates – as is primarily the case in Eastern Europe – establishing opiate substitution programs with methadone or buprenorphine can dramatically slow HIV transmission.
The success of such programs also depends on establishing needle/syringe exchanges at convenient locations, both to provide clean equipment and to draw users into the healthcare system.
As the third leg of the stool, IDUs need counseling.
This trio of policies forms the foundation of what’s known among health-care professionals as the “harm-reduction package.” Russia and Ukraine, however, spend no money on harm reduction.
International aid supports harm-reduction efforts in both countries on a modest scale: most of the money comes from the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria.
But Russia, owing to a rise in its national income, no longer is eligible for HIV/AIDS Global Fund grants.
A group of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) in Russia that has run a harm-reduction effort with Global Fund money received assurances from the government that it would continue to bankroll the work once that money ran out. But last fall the government reneged, and the Global Fund issued the group an emergency grant for two years.
Cash-strapped Ukraine, which remains eligible for Global Fund help to combat HIV/AIDS, also relies entirely on NGOs – most created by affected communities –&#160;to run its harm-reduction programs.
Aside from shaky funding, the harm-reduction efforts in Russia, and to a large degree in Ukraine, lack a fundamental tool: opiate-substitution treatment.
Russia bans the use of methadone outright.
“There is no evidence that use of methadone and buprenorphinefacilitates treatment of drug addicts,” declared Olga Krivonos, head of the Department of Medical Aid and Healthcare Development at Russia’s Ministry of Healthcare and Social Development, in March 2009.
Ukraine, which legalized the import of methadone only in December 2007, had a mere 5,000 people receiving it when I visited.
“There is a large body of scientific evidence on the effectiveness of substitution treatment vis-à-vis HIV/AIDS,” concluded the World Health Organization, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, and the Joint United Nations Program on HIV/AIDS in a 2004 policy brief.
The US Institute of Medicine weighed in on the issue in a 2007 report: “Given the strong evidence of its effectiveness in treating opioid dependence, opioid agonist maintenance treatment should be made widely available where feasible.”
The popular explanation for lack of action in Russia and Ukraine is that their governments view IDUs as criminals, rather than people with a disease, and adopt an informal let-them-rot policy.
Indeed, police regularly harass users (and people who help them), making matters worse.
Many countries outside the region take a similar stance.
But it’s more complicated in Eastern Europe.
A leftover Soviet distrust of outsiders colors many opinions, and there’s an oft-repeated claim that the culture is different: an intervention that works in the West might fail in the East.
There is also a suspicion that dirty capitalist pigs want to profit from the sale of opiate substitutes, regardless of whether they work.
This is as silly as contending that antiretroviral drugs won’t work in the region, and that treating HIV is all a giant plot on the part of big pharmaceutical companies.
Humans are humans. Harm reduction works everywhere, and the main financial benefactors are the countries themselves, which see reduced spread of HIV, drops in crime, and people returning to work.
Playing ostrich about harm reduction does not harm only IDUs. HIV-infected IDUs of course have sex with non-users.
Pregnant HIV-infected IDUs transmit the virus to their babies, and sometimes – shockingly often in Russia – abandon their newborns, relinquishing them to the state.
The people infected by IDUs also can infect others sexually, further fortifying the bridge into the “general” population.
In July, Vienna hosted the 18th International AIDS Conference, attracting nearly 20,000 people.
Speakers included Austrian President Heinz Fischer, Bill Clinton, Bill Gates, and South Africa’s Deputy President Kgalema Motlanthe.
Organizers held the meeting in Vienna specifically because it is “the gateway to Eastern Europe,” and they hoped to involve the region more than ever.
For the first time, all proceedings were translated into Russian. But no high-level Russian or Ukrainian official attended.
A “Vienna Declaration,” endorsing harm reduction – and emphasizing drug policy based on science, not ideology – was launched at the meeting, and gathered more than 10,000 signatories.
But the most influential Eastern European signatory was the First Lady of Georgia, a country whose estimated 2,700 HIV-infected people account for just 0.018% of the regional total.
Judging by their governments’ indifference, the remaining 99.982% of the HIV-infected people in Eastern Europe – and all those they place at risk of harm – can just rot.
But France has dragged its feet on easing visa requirements for Ukrainians, and EU negotiators are frustrated with the total lack of progress towards a Deep Free Trade Agreement, which they blame, rightly, on the Ukrainian “oligarchs” who have returned to power since Viktor Yanukovych became President in February.
One problem has long been the lack of enthusiasm on the EU side for further expansion into the region.
More recently, the EU has also had to face the reality of competing with Russia in what President Dmitri Medvedev calls Russia’s “sphere of privileged interests.” Increasingly, however, the problem is with Eastern Europe’s states themselves.