It is tempting to conclude that the Fed’s eagerness to tighten monetary policy – despite unfavorable historical precedents and ongoing economic uncertainty – is driven by commercial banks with excessive influence in official policymaking.
After all, commercial banks’ business model works only when the banks can earn (via passive and relatively safe long-term investments) at least 3% a year more than they pay depositors.
And that is possible only if US Treasury rates are higher than they are now.
If this is true, it would reflect a failure by bankers to understand their industry’s material interests.
What would most benefit commercial banks is not an immediate increase in interest rates, but a monetary policy that contributes to ensuring that the economy is capable of supporting higher interest rates in the future.
If history is any guide, tightening monetary policy in the near term will only lead to further economic turbulence, followed by a rapid retreat to low interest rates.
Embarking on that path should be a cause of concern for everyone.
The Fed’s Risk to Emerging Economies
MILAN – The US Federal Reserve has finally, after almost a decade of steadfast adherence to very low interest rates, hiked its federal funds rate – the rate from which all other interest rates in the economy take their cue – by 25 basis points.
That brings the new rate up to a still-minimal 0.5%, and Fed Chair Janet Yellen has wisely promised that any future increases will be gradual.
Given the state of the US economy – real growth of 2%, a tightening labor market, and little evidence of inflation rising toward the Fed’s 2% target – I view the rate rise as a reasonable and cautious first step toward normality (defined as a better balance between borrowers and lenders).
However, other central banks, particularly in economies where the output gap is larger than in the United States, will not be keen to follow the Fed’s lead.
That implies a coming period of monetary-policy divergence, with uncertain consequences for the global economy.
On the face of it, a tiny change in the US rate should not trigger dramatic shifts in global capital flows.
But, as US monetary policy follows the path of interest-rate normalization, there could well be knock-on effects, both economic and financial, especially in the form of currency volatility and destabilizing outflows from emerging economies.
The reason we should fear this possibility is that the world’s economic equilibrium is both fragile and unstable – and could wobble dangerously without determined and coordinated policy intervention.
A Fed rate hike might not tip it over, but some other seemingly innocuous event could.
One doesn’t need a long memory to understand how even relatively modest policy shifts can trigger outsize market reactions.
Consider, for example, the “taper tantrum” that roiled financial markets in the spring of 2013, after then-Fed Chair Ben Bernanke said only that policymakers were thinking of gradually ending quantitative easing.
But that announcement came as a surprise (as did the devaluation of China’s renminbi this past summer).
Capital that had flooded into emerging markets seeking yields no longer available in developed economies abruptly reversed course.
No investor wanted to be the last one out.
A jittery global financial system, like the one we have now, does not tolerate unwelcome surprises well.
Unlike the taper tantrum and the devaluation of the renminbi, the Fed’s rate-hike announcement on December 16 certainly was no surprise.
So one might argue that if the Fed’s move does lead to volatility in international capital flows, the process must have already started.
In fact, near-universal anticipation of a US rate rise did not produce a spike in capital flows or asset prices.
Yet widespread concerns persist.
The International Monetary Fund for example, has argued that any rate hike by the Fed would need an “effective monetary policy communication strategy” – a polite way of saying that any monetary tightening in the US and other advanced economies would be premature.
The reasoning is that emerging economies have become dangerously dependent on low interest rates and high commodity prices.
Many emerging-market companies are in the highly vulnerable position of having borrowed heavily in foreign currencies.
If capital flight occurs, the consequences will be dire: tightened credit, balance-of-payments difficulties, inflation, rising interest rates, fiscal stress, and downgrades by the major credit-rating agencies – all of which implies more capital flight.
Europeans, too, have become dependent on low interest rates, with the European Central Bank as the key stabilizing force.
Without the ECB’s commitment, in place since 2012, to prevent sovereign-debt yields from soaring, there would be a persistent risk to the eurozone – and, indeed, to the entire edifice of the European Union – of sovereign-debt defaults.
But at least Europe has benefited from falling commodity prices.
By contrast, many emerging economies, highly dependent on commodity export earnings, have been stressed by the commodity-price reset, sluggish growth in developed economies, and slower growth in China.
Capital flight would materially add to their plight – in some cases disastrously so.
Since the 2008 financial crisis, the world has become accustomed to such linkages and spillovers.
And yet policy responses to crises remain decentralized.
There is no ECB for the emerging economies.
They cannot be confident of appropriate reactions by their policymakers to rapid capital outflows, or of their capacity in terms of policy tools, reserves, and balance sheets.
And they cannot be fully certain of the speed and effectiveness of the international policy responses that might otherwise act as “circuit breakers.”
The reality is that emerging markets that benefited after the 2008 crisis from China’s economic growth, rising commodity prices, and cheap foreign capital must now adjust to reversals in all of these factors.
The necessary transitions for these markets will be complex, risky, and not entirely within their control.
While the Fed’s rate hike, prudently accompanied by an emphasis on small and gradual steps, may not turn out to be a trigger, the concerns about the knock-on effects are legitimate.
It would be unwise to assume that, with the initial hike now behind us, systemic risk has somehow disappeared.
In the long run, of course, emerging markets will benefit from interest-rate normalization, because they will no longer suffer the distortions and imbalances that lead to unsustainable growth patterns.
But the hard part will be getting from here to there without an accident.
Felipe Calderón’s Two Faces
MEXICO CITY – Mexican President Felipe Calderón has finally gotten what he wanted: the resignation of United States Ambassador Carlos Pascual.
Calderón shot the messenger for delivering bad news through confidential cables released by WikiLeaks.
Pascual’s harsh assessments of the “war on drugs” that Calderón unleashed four years ago infuriated the president.
The revelations also annoyed the Mexican army, for they pointed out that the military frequently doesn’t act on intelligence provided by the US, and displays a strong aversion to risk.
Moreover, Pascual’s candid assessments described a dysfunctional situation in which Mexican security agencies fight each other more than they fight organized crime.
Essentially, Pascual was forced to leave for describing a reality that Calderón does not want to face, and that his government would prefer to ignore.
In other words, he lost his job for doing it properly.
But the stubborn truth revealed by the US diplomat emerges every day, despite the impact of drug kingpins who are arrested, the number of weapons discovered, or the amount of cocaine seized.
Mexico is not winning the “war” against drug trafficking and organized crime: Pascual’s forced resignation cannot hide the 34,000 dead, the growing number of Mexicans addicted to drugs, the surge in kidnappings and executions, and widespread impunity.
The official narrative is that violence is an inevitable consequence of taking on the drug cartels.
But other countries have managed to prevent drug gangs from unleashing their fury on innocent civilians.
And, while Mexicans are told that the violence is only between rival gangs, executions transcend the realm of drug trafficking.
Citizens are exhorted by their government to denounce criminals, though 98.5% of criminal investigations are never solved.
A recent poll showed that 59% of Mexicans believe that the government is losing the war that it declared, while only 23% support the government’s current course.
As Sun Tzu wrote in The Art of War, all wars entail deception.
Mexico has become its latest victim.
The Mexican government has not been sufficiently honest about the scale of the challenges that it faces, the measures that it has taken, and the level of US support, involvement, and collaboration that it has sought.
Therein lie the contradictions, evasiveness, and lack of transparency regarding the terms on which Calderón’s war is being conducted.
Everyone on his team demands that the US devote more attention and resources to Calderón’s effort, but publicly denies doing so when evidence of heightened US presence in Mexico becomes public.
In recent weeks, the Calderón administration has twisted itself into knots trying to explain how and why it authorized US drone planes to fly over Mexican territory for intelligence-gathering purposes.
And yet, while Calderón insists that the US assume its bilateral responsibilities, he also demands the US Ambassador’s head for revealing his own tactical and strategic mistakes in the war he insists on prosecuting.
Calderón’s contradictory stance is rooted in the reflexive habits of a Mexican political class trained to gain points by kicking the US.
Calderón, too, has sought refuge behind the folds of the Mexican flag and in diatribes about sovereignty under siege.
In other words, Calderón accuses the US of intervention, even as he assiduously seeks it.
He criticizes the US for meddling, after his government promoted that meddling.
Pascual is accused of behaving like a “Proconsul,” after Mexican authorities – due to incompetence or irresponsibility – assigned him that role.
In a recent interview, Calderón lambasted Pascual for his “ignorance,” after the ambassador sent incontrovertible cables describing the real situation on the ground.
They’re painful to read, but difficult to refute.
Rather than shooting the messenger, Calderón should reflect on the message itself, and rethink not only the war but the terms on which he has decided to wage it.
The cables should lead Calderón to rectify a strategy that so far has increased the level of violence without decreasing drug trafficking.
The “success” of the war needs to be measured by the reduction in its toll of violence.
Moreover, Pascual’s conclusions should force Calderón to redefine Mexico’s relationship with the US in a more honest fashion.
Because if all of this does not happen, Calderón’s ability to force out the US ambassador, and any short-term political gain he obtained in doing so, will be irrelevant.
Indeed, after the “ugly American” has packed his bags, Ciudad Juárez will still be the most dangerous city in the world.
The homicide rate in the country will continue to soar, and public security agencies will remain incapable of preventing, detecting, or punishing the vast majority of violent events that have placed the country on edge.
The Mexican government will continue to request US aid in a surreptitious fashion, and deny doing so when it becomes public.
The message is clear.
If we Mexicans don’t end this war – so ill-conceived, so poorly executed, and so badly explained – it will end us.
One does not have to read Carlos Pascual’s leaked cables to understand that.
Feminism and the Male Brain
NEW YORK – North Americans of my generation grew up with the 1970’s children’s record “Free to Be...You and Me,” on which Rosey Grier, an immense former football star, sang “It’s Alright to Cry.”
The message: girls could be tough, and boys were allowed not to be.
For almost 40 years, that era’s Western feminist critique of rigid sex-role stereotyping has prevailed.
In many ways, it has eroded or even eliminated the kind of arbitrary constraints that turned peaceable boys into aggressive men and stuck ambitious girls in low-paying jobs.
Feminists understandably have often shied away from scientific evidence that challenges this critique of sex roles.
After all, because biology-based arguments about gender difference have historically been used to justify women’s subjugation, women have been reluctant to concede any innate difference, lest it be used against them.
But, in view of recent scientific discoveries, has feminist resistance to accepting any signs of innate gender difference only created new biases?
The feminist critique, for example, has totally remade elementary-level education, where female decision-makers prevail: the construction of male hierarchies in the schoolyard is often redirected nowadays for fear of “bullying,” with boys and girls alike expected to “share” and “process” their emotions.
But many educators have begun to argue that such intervention in what may be a hardwired aspect of “boy-ness” can lead to boys’ academic underperformance relative to girls, and to more frequent diagnoses of behavioral problems, attention deficit disorder, and so on.
And education is just the beginning.
An entire academic discipline emerged out of the wholesale critique of the male tendency to create hierarchy, engage in territoriality, and be drawn to conflict.
When I was in college, the feminist solution to “patriarchy” was an imagined world without hierarchy, where people verbalized all day long and created emotional bonds.
This critique of “masculinity” also dramatically affected intimate relationships: women were encouraged to express their dissatisfaction with men’s refusal to “share” their inner lives.
Women complained of not being heard, of men disappearing after work to tinker in the garage or zone out in front of the TV.
But, however heartfelt, such complaints assumed that men choose all of their behavior.
Now a spate of scientific analyses, based on brain imaging technology and new anthropological and evolutionary discoveries, suggests that we may have had our heads in the sand, and that we must be willing to grapple with what seem to be at least some genuine, measurable differences between the sexes.
The most famous of these studies, anthropologist Helen Fisher’s The Anatomy of Love , explains the evolutionary impetus for human tendencies in courtship, marriage, adultery, divorce, and childrearing.
Some of her findings are provocative: it seems, for example, that we are hard-wired for serial monogamy and must work very hard to maintain pair-bonds; that highly orgasmic women enjoy an evolutionary advantage; and that flirtation among primates closely resembles the way young men and women in a bar show their sexual interest today.
Moreover, in her description of our evolution, Fisher notes that males who could tolerate long periods of silence (waiting for animals while in hunt mode) survived to pass on their genes, thus genetically selecting to prefer “space.”
By contrast, females survived best by bonding with others and building community, since such groups were needed to gather roots, nuts, and berries, while caring for small children.
Reading Fisher, one is more inclined to leave boys alone to challenge one another and test their environment, and to accept that, as she puts it, nature designed men and women to collaborate for survival.
“Collaboration” implies free will and choice; even primate males do not succeed by dominating or controlling females.
In her analysis, it serves everyone for men and women to share their sometimes different but often complementary strengths – a conclusion that seems reassuring, not oppressive.
What Could He Be Thinking? , by Michael Gurian, a consultant in the field of neurobiology, takes this set of insights further.
Gurian argues that men’s brains can actually feel invaded and overwhelmed by too much verbal processing of emotion, so that men’s need to zone out or do something mechanical rather than emote is often not a rejection of their spouses, but a neural need.
Gurian even posits that the male brain actually can’t “see” dust or laundry piling up as the female brain often can, which explains why men and women tend to perform household tasks in different ways.
Men often can’t hear women’s lower tones, and their brains, unlike women’s, have a “rest” state (he actually is sometimes thinking about “nothing”!).
Moreover, Gurian argues that men tend to rear children differently from women for similarly neurological reasons, encouraging more risk-taking and independence and with less awareness of the details of their nurture.
One can see the advantages to children of having both parenting styles.
He urges women to try side-by-side activities, not only face-to-face verbalization, to experience closeness with their mates.
Somehow, all this is liberating rather than infuriating.
So much that enrages women, or leads them to feel rejected or unheard, may not reflect men’s conscious neglect or even sexism, but simply their brains’ wiring!
According to Gurian, if women accept these biological differences and work around them in relationships, men respond with great appreciation and devotion (often expressed nonverbally).
Women who have embraced these findings report that relations with the men in their lives become much smoother and, paradoxically, more intimate.
None of this means that men and women should not try to adjust to each other's wishes, ask for shared responsibility with housework, or expect to be “heard.”
But it may mean we can understand each other a bit better and be more patient as we seek communication.
Nor does recent scientific research imply that men (or women) are superior, much less justify invidious discrimination.
But it does suggest that a more pluralistic society, open to all kinds of difference, can learn, work, and love better.
Fictional Sovereignties
LONDON – A year ago, tiny Georgia tried to regain control over its breakaway enclave of South Ossetia.
The Russians quickly expelled the Georgian army, to almost universal opprobrium from the West.
South Ossetia, together with Abkhazia (combined population 300,000), promptly declared their “independence,” creating two new fictional sovereignties, and acquiring in the process all the official trappings of statehood: national heroes, colorful uniforms, anthems, flags, frontier posts, military forces, presidents, parliaments, and, most important, new opportunities for smuggling and corruption.
So far, only Russia and Nicaragua recognize the independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
Russian recognition was widely seen as retaliation for Western recognition of Kosovo (population two million), the breakaway province of Serbia, earlier last year.
A thousand miles to the west of Georgia is Moldova (population 3.5 million), which lies between Romania and Ukraine.
Annexed by Tsarist Russia in 1812, joined to Romania in 1918, and re-annexed by the Soviet Union in 1940, it seized its independence from Moscow in 1991.
It is a member of the United Nations, the Council of Europe, the World Trade Organization, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, and various other prestigious international bodies.
Moldova’s main claim to fame is King Stephen the Great, who defeated the Ottomans in a great fifteenth century battle.
It also produces rather good wine.
An enduring memory from my own recent visit to its capital Chisinau is the election poster of a local politician called Lupu, who holds a pair of spectacles to his eyes, whether to suggest visions or wisdom isn’t clear.
To get to Moldova from Odessa (now in Ukraine) one must drive through the self-proclaimed “republic” of Transdniestria (population 700,000), a sliver of land on the north shore of the Dniester river.
A clump of peeling buildings, rusting wire, and a filthy lavatory mark the start of Transdniestrian sovereignty.
Progress through this squalid, but well manned, frontier post involved the stamping of lots of documents and a liberal scattering of bribes, a process repeated on leaving the “republic.”
A shadowy mafia-style company, Sheriff, owns most of the economy.
It is said to have close links to the president and his family.
It has built a giant football stadium in the capital, Tiraspol, which seems to be some kind of symbol of Transdniestrian virility.
Unrecognized by the rest of the world, Transdniestrian “independence” is secured by a Russian garrison.
The world’s population is about six billion.
Suppose it was divided into independent political units of two million people each. That would mean 3,000 micro-states, each refusing to accept any sovereignty superior to its own.
Of course, this would be a recipe for global anarchy.
Yet the trend over the past century has been towards a continuous increase in the number of small states, mainly owing to nationalist revolts against multi-national empires: the latest bout of state creation followed the disintegration of the USSR.
Even long-established states like the United Kingdom now have strong separatist movements.
In its political life, the world has been regressing to a form of tribalism, even as its economic life has become increasingly globalized.
The equation of state with nation is the arch-heresy of our time.
A “nation” is, at root, an ethno-linguistic – occasionally religious – entity, and because it is through language and liturgy that culture is transmitted, each nation will have its own distinctive cultural history, available for use and misuse, invention and discovery.
The state, however, is a political construction, designed to keep the peace in an economically viable territory.
There are simply too many “nations,” actual or potential, to form the basis of a world system of states, not least because so many of them, having been jumbled up for centuries, cannot now be disentangled.
Micro-states can never be made small enough to satisfy their advocates’ exalted standards of cultural integrity.
So the unraveling of multi-national states is a false path.
The way forward lies in democratic forms of federalism, which can preserve sufficient central authority for the purposes of statehood, while respecting local and regional cultures.
Today’s upsurge of micro-nationalism is not just a consequence of the revolt against empires: it is also a revolt against globalization.
There is widespread resistance to the idea that the chief function of modern states is to slot their peoples into a global market dominated by the imperatives of efficiency and cheapness, heedless of the damage to non-economic activities.
This feeling is strengthened when the global economy turns out to be a global casino.
National assertion is a way of combating impersonal forces and remote authorities.
Globalization promises too much in terms of welfare gains, particularly to developing countries, to be abandoned.
But the lesson from the current crisis is that we will have to develop styles of global economic governance to manage, regulate, and mitigate the creative, but often disruptive forces unleashed by the global market.
In the absence of an actual world government, this can be done only through cooperation among states.
The fewer “sovereigns” there are, the easier it will be to secure the necessary cooperation.
The Bretton Woods Agreement of 1944, which laid the institutional foundation for the post-war World War II economy, was made possible because the United States and Britain called the shots.
When objections were raised to Cuba being put on the drafting committee, Harry Dexter White, the American representative, remarked that Cuba’s function was to provide cigars.
Such a cavalier attitude to the demands of lesser powers to be heard is no longer possible.
But all this means is that the facades will have to be more subtle and the fictions more elaborate.
Provided we do not deceive ourselves about where real power lies, let presidents and parliaments be three a penny if that is what makes people feel good about themselves.
Fiddling at the Fire
PARIS – Financial markets have rallied since July on the hope that the global economic and geopolitical outlook will not worsen, or, if it does, that central banks stand ready to backstop economies and markets with additional rounds of liquidity provision and quantitative easing.
So, not only has good – or better-than-expected – economic news boosted the markets, but even bad news has been good news, because it increases the probability that central-banking firefighters like US Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke and European Central Bank President Mario Draghi will douse the markets with buckets of cash.
But markets that rise on both good and bad news are not stable markets.
“Risk-off” episodes, in which investor sentiment sours, are likely to return if economic news worsens and confidence in policymakers’ effectiveness drops.
In the eurozone, euphoria followed the ECB’s decision to provide support with potentially unlimited purchases of distressed countries’ bonds.
But the move is not a game changer; it only buys time for policymakers to implement the tough measures needed to resolve the crisis.
And the policy challenges are daunting: the eurozone’s recession is deepening as front-loaded fiscal consolidation and severe credit rationing continues.
And, as eurozone banks and public-debt markets become increasingly balkanized, establishing a banking union, a fiscal union, and an economic union while pursuing macroeconomic policies that restore growth, external balance, and competitiveness will be extremely difficult.
Even the ECB’s support is not obvious.
Monetary hawks – the Bundesbank and several other core central banks – who were worried about a new open-ended ECB mandate pushed successfully for strict and effective conditionality for countries benefiting from the bond purchases.
As a result, they can pull the plug on the program if its stringent criteria are not met.
Moreover, Greece could exit the eurozone in 2013, before Spain and Italy are successfully ring-fenced; Spain – like Greece – is spiraling into depression, and may need a full-scale bailout by the “troika” (the ECB, the European Commission, and the International Monetary Fund).
Meanwhile, austerity fatigue in the eurozone periphery is increasingly clashing with bailout fatigue in the core.
Small wonder, then, that Germany, politically unable to vote on more bailout resources, has outsourced that job to the ECB, the only institution that can bypass democratically elected parliaments.
But, again, liquidity provision alone – without policies to restore growth soon – would merely delay, not prevent, the breakup of the monetary union, ultimately taking down the economic/trade union and leading to the destruction of the single market.
In the United States, the latest economic data – including a weak labor market – confirm that growth is anemic, with output in the second half of 2012 unlikely to be significantly stronger than the 1.6% annual gain recorded in January-June.
And, given America’s political polarization and policy gridlock, we can expect more fights on the budget and the debt ceiling, another rating downgrade, and no agreement on a path toward medium-term fiscal consolidation and sustainability – regardless of whether President Barack Obama is reelected in November.
On the contrary, we should expect agreement only on the path of least political resistance: avoidance of tough fiscal choices until the bond vigilantes eventually wake up, spike long rates, and force fiscal adjustment on the political system.
In China, a hard economic landing looks increasingly likely as the investment bubble deflates and net exports shrink.
Meanwhile, the reforms necessary to reduce savings and increase private consumption are being delayed.
As in Europe and the US, the worst will be avoided in 2012 only by kicking the can down the road with more monetary, fiscal, and credit stimulus.
But a hard landing becomes more likely in 2013, as the stimulus fades, non-performing loans rise, the investment bust accelerates, and the problem of rolling over the debts of provincial governments and their special investment vehicles can no longer be papered over.
And, given a new leadership’s caution as it establishes its power, reforms will occur at a snail’s pace, making social and political unrest more likely.
Meanwhile, Brazil, India, Russia, and other emerging economies are playing the same game.
Many have not adjusted as advanced economies’ weakness reduces the room for export-led growth; and many delayed structural reforms needed to boost private-sector development and productivity growth, while embracing a model of state capitalism that will soon reveal its limits.
So the recent slowdown of growth in emerging markets is not just cyclical, owing to weak growth or outright recession in advanced economies; it is also structural.
Similar dithering is apparent at the geopolitical level as well.
The major global powers are still trying negotiations and sanctions to induce Iran to abandon its efforts to develop nuclear weapons.
But Iran is playing for time and hoping to reach a zone of immunity.
By 2013, an Israel that – rightly or wrongly – perceives Iran’s nuclear program to be an existential threat, and/or the US, which has rejected containment of a nuclear Iran, may decide to strike, leading to a war and a massive spike in oil prices.
Ineffective governments with weak leadership are at the root of the problem.
In democracies, repeated elections lead to short-term policy choices.
In autocracies like China and Russia, leaders resist the radical reforms that would reduce the power of entrenched lobbies and interests, thereby fueling social unrest as resentment against corruption and rent-seeking boils over into protest.
But, as everyone kicks the can down the road, the can is getting heavier and, in the major emerging markets and advanced economies alike, is approaching a brick wall.
Policymakers can either crash into that wall, or they can show the leadership and vision needed to dismantle it safely.
The FIFA Syndrome
LONDON – The arrest of FIFA executives on a raft of fraud and corruption charges has been front-page news in recent days.
But the charges brought by the Swiss and American authorities focus on bribery and embezzlement, and do not address another egregious injustice: the treatment of the migrant workers in Qatar who are building the stadiums for the 2022 FIFA Football World Cup.
Amnesty International recently released a report on the abysmal conditions in Qatar.
The workers are subject to unsafe construction sites, exploitative recruitment agencies, and little recourse to formal justice.
Recently, Nepal’s labor minister publicly spoke out about the government of Qatar not allowing his country’s migrant workers to return home to mourn relatives who died in the April 2015 earthquake.
As Amnesty International notes, the responsibility lies primarily with the Qatari authorities.
But FIFA had – and still has – a responsibility to act.
There have also been calls for sponsors, including McDonalds, Visa, Coca-Cola, Adidas, Budweiser, Gazprom, KIA, and Hyundai, to place pressure on FIFA and Qatar to improve working conditions.
Such issues have arisen in recent years in other sectors as well.
In April, Human Rights Watch issued a report on the treatment of garment workers in Bangladesh.
The report, prompted by the 2013 Rana Plaza collapse, in which more than 1,100 people died and over 2,000 were injured, highlighted poor working conditions, inadequate building inspections, weak labor laws, and the need for fairer wage practices and legal benefits.
Beyond these examples, there have been many others.
In technology, Apple and Foxconn have faced criticism for working conditions at their Chinese production sites.
Even educational institutions, such as New York University’s new campus in Abu Dhabi, have been tainted by episodes of workplace exploitation and abuse.
These are not isolated cases.
For every disaster and high-profile case that hits the headlines, there are many more that we never hear about.
Nonetheless, one hopes that the treatment of those who make the goods, produce the services, and build the things that make us happy and productive – from clothing and technology to sports stadiums and college campuses – continues to come under scrutiny.
Globalization should force managers – and all of us – to do some serious thinking about labor practices around the world.
Here is where it gets complicated.
What counts as a company’s workforce?
Are “its” workers only those people on its own payroll?
Are companies responsible for their products’ entire supply chains?
To what extent can – and should – a company be held to account for the choices of those who may be several links removed?
When a serious issue has been brought to a company’s attention, are its managers obliged to address it, even if it involves the subcontractor of a subcontractor?
The larger and more complex the company, the harder it is to track all of the firms with which it does business, the firms that they then subcontract to, and so on.
Companies, not surprisingly, say that their responsibility extends only so far.
But that is not an answer; it is a choice.
Organizations can decide to extend their reach.
They can even decide that they want to know the full provenance of all materials and components in their products, and that they will hold their extended suppliers to account.
In this sense, the larger the company, the greater its responsibility.
But larger companies also have a larger ability to become a force for good, both locally and globally.
If a company the size of US retailer Walmart decides that it will not allow wasteful packaging, its purchasing power will lead to changes in packaging for the entire retail sector.
The same is true of wages and labor practices.
When the world’s biggest companies and most well recognized brands take seriously their responsibility as buyers, sellers, and manufacturers and make a firm commitment to act on core values, others tend to follow – or risk being left behind.
Those that operate in an ethical manner and seek to improve the lives of all who are associated with the manufacture, marketing, and distribution of their products will benefit from kudos, more business, or simply not being singled out as a bad actor.
By contrast, companies whose managers believe that a competitive marketplace is no place for ethical behavior will suffer if and when consumers take their business elsewhere; government regulation and fines force them to act; or they become unable to attract an educated and ever-more discerning workforce.
All of it – the constant scrutiny, the bad press, the tarnished reputation – will hit their long-term stock prices.
Much the same is true for organizations like FIFA.
When sponsors like Coca-Cola or Adidas believe that their reputations will be tarnished by association with an organization engaged in corrupt practices, they will take their brand-management dollars elsewhere.
Companies are made up of people.
Paying fair wages, adopting ethical sourcing practices, and upholding the dignity of workers should be a part of the way they calculate their success.
Those who disconnect themselves from the fate of others, who act without conscience or a sense of right and wrong, and who spurn ordinary human decency have no place running organizations or sitting on company boards.
The things that make us happy must not come at an unforgivably high price.
The Soccer Mafia
NEW YORK – The only surprise about the arrest of seven FIFA officials in a Swiss hotel in the early morning of May 27 is that it happened at all.
Most people assumed that these pampered men in expensive suits, governing the world’s soccer federation, were beyond the reach of the law.
Whatever rumors flew or reports were made on bribes, kickbacks, vote-rigging, and other dodgy practices, FIFA President Joseph “Sepp” Blatter and his colleagues and associates always seemed to emerge without a scratch.
So far, 14 men, including nine current or former FIFA executives (but not Blatter), have been charged with a range of fraud and corruption offenses in the United States, where prosecutors accuse them, among other things, of pocketing $150 million in bribes and kickbacks.
And Swiss federal prosecutors are looking into shady deals behind the decisions to award the World Cup competitions in 2018 and 2022 to Russia and Qatar, respectively.
There is, of course, a long tradition of racketeering in professional sports.
American mobsters have had a major interest in boxing, for example.
Even the once gentlemanly game of cricket has been tainted by the infiltration of gambling networks and other crooked dealers.
FIFA is just the richest, most powerful, most global milk cow of all.
Some have likened FIFA to the Mafia, and Blatter, born in a small Swiss village, has been called “Don Blatterone.”
This is not entirely fair.
So far as we know, no murder contracts have ever been issued from FIFA’s head office in Zürich.
But the organization’s secrecy, its intimidation of the rivals to those who run it, and its reliance on favors, bribes, and called debts do show disturbing parallels to the world of organized crime.
One could, of course, choose to see FIFA as a dysfunctional organization, rather than a criminal enterprise.
But even in this more charitable scenario, much of the malfeasance is a direct result of the federation’s total lack of transparency.
The entire operation is run by a close-knit group of men (women play no part in this murky business), all of whom are beholden to the boss.
This did not start under Blatter.
It was his predecessor, the sinister Brazilian João Havelange, who turned FIFA into a corrupt and vastly rich empire by incorporating more and more developing countries, whose votes for the bosses were bought with all manner of lucrative marketing and media deals.
Huge amounts of corporate money from Coca-Cola and Adidas went sloshing through the system, all the way to the roomy pockets of Third World potentates and, allegedly, of Havelange himself.
Coke was the main sponsor of the 1978 World Cup in Argentina, ruled in those days by a brutal military junta.
Blatter is not quite as uncouth as Havelange.
Unlike the Brazilian, he does not openly associate with mobsters.
But his power, too, relies on the votes of countries outside Western Europe, and their loyalty, too, is secured by the promise of TV rights and commercial franchises.
In the case of Qatar, this meant the right to stage the World Cup in an utterly unsuitable climate, in stadiums hastily built under terrible conditions by underpaid foreign workers with few rights.
Complaints from slightly more fastidious Europeans are often met with accusations of neo-colonialist attitudes or even racism.
Indeed, this is what makes Blatter a typical man of our times.
He is a ruthless operator who presents himself as the champion of the developing world, protecting the interests of Africans, Asians, Arabs, and South Americans against the arrogant West.
Things have changed since the days when venal men from poor countries were paid off to further Western political or commercial interests.
This still occurs, of course.
But the really big money now, more often than not, is made outside the West, in China, the Persian Gulf, and even Russia.
Western businessmen, architects, artists, university presidents, and museum directors – or anyone who needs large amounts of cash to fund their expensive projects – now have to deal with non-Western autocrats.
So do democratically elected politicians, of course.
And some – think of Tony Blair – turn it into a post-government career.
Pandering to authoritarian regimes and opaque business interests is not a wholesome enterprise.
The contemporary alliance of Western interests – in the arts and higher education no less than in sports – with rich, undemocratic powers involves compromises that might easily damage established reputations.
One way to deflect the attention is to borrow the old anti-imperialist rhetoric of the left.
Dealing with despots and shady tycoons is no longer venal, but noble.
Selling the franchise of a university or a museum to a Gulf state, building yet another enormous stadium in China, or making a fortune out of soccer favors to Russia or Qatar is progressive, anti-racist, and a triumph of global fraternity and universal values.
This is the most irritating aspect of Blatter’s FIFA.
The corruption, the vote-buying, the absurd thirst of soccer bosses for international prestige, the puffed-out chests festooned with medals and decorations – all of that is par for the course.
It is the hypocrisy that rankles.
To lament the shift in global power and influence away from the heartlands of Europe and the US is useless.
And we cannot accurately predict this shift’s political consequences.
But if the sorry story of FIFA is any indication, we can be sure that, whatever forms government might take, money still rules.
Kembali ke Dasar Penanganan Penyakit
LONDON – Upaya mengatasi resistansi antimikroba memerlukan terobosan solusi teknologi.
Untuk mencegah bakteri super menelan korban dengan jumlah yang diperkirakan sebesar sepuluh juta jiwa dalam setahun pada tahun 2050, maka perlu ditemukan jenis obat antimikroba baru serta perlu dikembangkan tes diagnostik cepat guna menghindari pengobatan yang tidak diperlukan dan mengurangi kelebihan penggunaan antibiotik dalam jumlah besar.
Meskipun kontribusi teknologi tingkat tinggi ini sangat penting, sesungguhnya ini belum mencukupi untuk mengatasi permasalahan yang ada.
Untuk mengatasi masalah secara permanen, satu-satunya pilihan yang ada adalah mencegah terjadinya infeksi – melalui peningkatan kebersihan, sanitasi dan surveilans penyakit.
Hanya dengan memfokuskan pada bidang-bidang ini maka permintaan atas obat baru akan berkurang dalam jangka panjang.
Sesungguhnya, di abat ke Sembilan belas, jauh sebelum obat modern tersedia, kota besar di Barat menangani penyakit dengan mencegah terjadinya infeksi.
Pendekatan ini tetap menjadi solusi terbaik bagi kota besar yang populasinya semakin bertambah.
Pertimbangkan London pada tahun 1950-an: Kondisi hidup orang miskin sangat suram.
Harapan hidup laki-laki adalah sekitar 40 tahun.
Penyakit seperti kolera dan tuberkulosis sangat marak, serta belum ditemukan cara untuk mengatasinya.
Pada September 1954, wabah kolera melanda masyarakat miskin kota, distrik Soho pusat, menelan korban jiwa 500 orang hanya dalam waktu sepuluh hari.
Kemudian, seorang dokter perintis yang bernama John Snow menduga bahwa kolera tidak disebarkan melalui udara, sebagaimana dipercaya selama ini, melainkan melalui air.
Snow memantau perkembangan wabah Soho dengan sangat rinci yaitu dengan memetakan setiap kasus, belum ada yang sebelumnya melakukan dengan begitu terinci.
Penelitian Snow meyakinkan dirinya bahwa sumber wabah adalah pompa air umum yang berada di pusat distrik.
Ketika pegangan pompa diganti, laju wabah segera melambat secara drastis.
Beberapa metode Snow dapat langsung diterapkan dalam masalah saat ini yang terkait dengan resistansi antimikroba.
Sebagai permulaan, upaya Snow menunjukan keampuhan penggunaan data untuk memahami krisis kesehatan masyarakat.
Pemetaan dan analisis statistik telah membantu pengidentifikasian pusat wabah sehingga menunjukan akar masalanya.
Penekanan Snow terhadap penggunaan data sebagai panduan dalam pembuatan intervensinya merupakan sebuah prinsip yang harus dipegang teguh oleh lembaga seperti Bill &amp; Melinda Gates Foundation pada masa sekarang.
Wabah ebola terakhir di Afrika Barat dengan tragis menunjukan pentingnya keberadaan data yang baik.
Epidemi menyebar paling dramatis di daerah di mana infrastruktur dan sistem surveilans dasar tidak bekerja.
Akibatnya, bahkan ketika Ebola telah dinyatakan menimbulkan keadaan darurat terhadap kesehatan masyarakat dan pendanaan telah disediakan, selama beberapa minggu sumber daya yang tersedia masih sulit untuk disalurkan ke tempat yang paling membutuhkan.
Yang mengkhawatirkan, menurut dokumen terbaru dari Ulasan saya mengenai Resistansi Antimikroba telah memperingatkan bahwa saat ini belum ada sistem surveilans yang terkoordinasi untuk memantau timbulnya dan penyebaran bakteri super di seluruh dunia.
Kesenjangan dasar tetap terdapat pada bagaimana data dikumpulkan dan dibagikan, bahkan di antara negara-negara terkaya di dunia.  Hal ini menyebabkan timbulnya serangkaian tempat yang tidak terpantau yang mengakibatkan kita kehilangan informasi yang krusial dan sistem peringatan dini yang sesungguhnya diperlukan dalam upaya menyediakan tanggapan yang efektif.
Kontribusi besar lain dari Snow adalah masukan untuk mengidentifikasi peran penting yang dipegang air dalam penyebaran penyakit seperti kolera, otoritas terkemuka di Eropa perlu berinvestasi dalam pengembangan sistem saluran pembuangan dan sanitasi.
Beberapa abad sebelum ditemukannya obat seperti penisilin, tidak ada pilihan selain untuk berinvestasi pada pencegahan yang dimaksudkan untuk mengatasi penyakit menular dan melindungi populasi kota yang semakin bertambah.
Pembangunan infrastruktur ini sangat berhasil: Wabah kolera perkotaan terakhir terjadi di Eropa Barat pada tahun 1892, dan ketika pecah Perang Dunia I, penyakit menular tidak lagi menjadi penyebab utama kematian di banyak benua.
Meskipun demikian, bersamaan dengan semakin meningkatnya ketersediaan obat antimikroba, fokus penanganan telah bergeser dari upaya pencegahan.
Hal ini tidak hanya menimbulkan dampak yang buruk bagi masyarakat kota karena terpaksa hidup dalam kondisi yang tidak bersih; hal ini juga berkontribusi pada meningkatnya resistansi terhadap obat.
Saat ini, tidak mencukupinya akses terhadap air bersih dan sanitasi menjadi salah satu penyebab utama penyakit diare – penyebab utama kematian dan penyebab ratusan juta orang menggunakan obat antibiotik setiap tahunnya.
Namun, sebagian besar penggunaan ini tidak diperlukan karena penyebab diare umumnya adalah virus; menggunakan antibiotik dalam kasus ini hanya berkontribusi pada berkembangnya bakteri resistan.
Perkiraan yang diberikan kepada tim saya menunjukan bahwa di India, Nigeria, Brasil dan Indonesia saja, terdapat sekitar setengah milyar kasus diare yang diobati setiap tahunnya dengan antibiotik.
Apabila keempat negara ini menyediakan akses universal terhadap air bersih dan sanitasi, penggunaan antibiotik dapat dikurangi setidaknya hingga 60%.
Infrastruktur seperti ini membutuhkan biaya yang besar, dan seluruh negara harus membuat prioritas dalam mengalokasikan anggaran negaranya.
Tetapi, investasi kepada infrastruktur merupakan investasi yang paling baik yang dapat dibuat oleh negara berpenghasilan menengah.
Ketika negara mengendalikan pemasukan, meningkatkan akses masyarakat terhadap sanitasi hingga 50% berkorelasi dengan lebih dari sembilan tahun harapan hidup tambahan.
John Snow dengan senang hati akan mendukung pilihan investasi tersebut.
Salah satu kontribusinya yang paling signifikan terhadap bidang layanan kesehatan – penggunaan data dengan bijak – telah mengkonfirmasi pentingnya investasi tambahan untuk meningkatkan kebersihan dan sanitasi.
Terkadang, mereka yang mempelajari sejarah mendapatkan kesempatan untuk menerapkan hal yang telah dipelajari.
Fighting Biopiracy
OTTAWA– In April 1999 Larry Proctor, a United States citizen and owner of a seed company, won a patent at the US Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO), claiming a Mexican yellow bean.
The patent conferred Proctor exclusive rights over a bean variety he called “Enola.”
That decision is one of the most outrageous examples of biopiracy in the history of intellectual property systems.
The bean for which Proctor was granted a patent is a farmers’ variety, originally from Mexico and in the public domain for centuries.
The bean is consumed throughout Mexico and by Mexicans and Mexican-Americans in the US who know it by the names Mayocoba, Canario, or Peruano.
Although the bean variety existed in publicly available seed collections, it took ten years, hundreds of thousands of dollars, massive protest by farmers and civil society, the intervention of international agencies, and five consecutive legal decisions before the USPTO finally annulled the patent in July 2009.
By then, Proctor had exercised a complete monopoly over the production, distribution, and marketing of the bean for more than half of the patent’s lifespan.
The story began in 1994, when Proctor purchased a bag of beans in Mexico.
He planted the beans, selected seeds from the same plants, and planted them again, repeating the procedure two more times.
In late 1996, after barely two years, he stated that he had invented a “unique” variety, and applied for a patent.
As soon as Proctor was awarded the patent, he sued two importers of the yellow beans, demanding that they pay royalties.
Although the importers knew that Proctor’s invention was ludicrous (because they had been importing the bean from Mexico for years), they had no choice but to accept the patent’s legality, causing 22,000 Mexican farmers and their families to lose 90% of their export incomes in just the first year.
In January 2000, the Action Group on Erosion, Technology and Concentration (ETC Group, then known as RAFI) published the first denunciation of the Enola patent as technically invalid and morally unacceptable.
To obtain a patent, an applicant must demonstrate that an invention meets three criteria: newness, non-obviousness (that there is an inventive step), and utility (the invention does what it claims to do).
In the case of the Enola bean, there was nothing at all new: the yellow bean is the result of centuries of collective work and ingenuity on the part of Mexican farmers and indigenous peoples.
Moreover, the bean was incorporated into public collections held by INIFAP, the Mexican national agricultural research institute.
ETC Group took the case to the Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT) in Cali, Colombia.
CIAT is one of the international centers of the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR).
The CGIAR system maintains more than 600,000 samples of crop varieties in gene banks, mostly collected from peasant fields.
Acknowledging this, CGIAR signed a Trust Agreement with the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) in 1994, pledging to keep the seeds in their collections free of any intellectual property claims.
Joachim Voss, then CIAT’s director, confirmed that the yellow beans were present in CIAT’s gene bank, and that they had originated in Mexico.
At the end of 2000, CIAT, supported by the FAO, requested that the USPTO re-examine the patent.
Geneticists then performed genetic fingerprinting on the yellow beans, and concluded that Proctor’s Enola bean was identical to the Mexican beans covered by the Trust Agreement.
Meanwhile, in 2001, taking advantage of the USPTO’s slow response, Proctor sued 16 small seed companies in Colorado for patent-infringement.
Only in December 2003 did the USPTO announce its first “non-final” rejection of the patent.
Proctor appealed, and the USPTO issues its final rejection of the patent in April 2005.
But that was not the end of the Enola bean issue.
Proctor requested that the patent examination be continued, submitting additional patent claims and even changing his lawyers several times (allowing more bureaucratic delay).
In total, the patent was rejected and appealed four times within a decade, until the US Court of Appeals rejected it for the fifth time this summer.
For more than a decade, a single patent owner disrupted the bean market in the US and Mexico.
Importers stopped importing not only the yellow bean, but also other Mexican beans, fearing lawsuits.
Although the patent was eventually rescinded, the Enola case shows how the intellectual property system facilitates the monopolization of public and collective resources, favoring those who can pay expensive lawyers’ fees.
The Enola patent was wrong from the outset, yet it remained enforceable for half its life, despite the active efforts of international institutions, governments, and civil-society organizations. 
It may be tempting to dismiss the Enola patent as an aberration, but there are hundreds of examples of such biopiracy.
Mexican beans, South Asian basmati rice, Bolivian quinoa, Amazonian ayahuasca, Indian chickpeas, Peruvian nuña beans, Andean maca – all have been subject to predatory intellectual property claims.
The Enola controversy is a stark illustration of the danger of patenting life, and the power of patents to block agricultural imports, disrupt or destroy developing countries’ export markets, hijack staple food crops that are the cultural heritage of millennia, plunder collective knowledge, and threaten food security.
The Enola case demonstrates that being right is not enough: small farmers, indigenous people, and the poor can’t out-last a decade of lawsuits and monopoly.
Undoubtedly, international institutions and countries in the global South have far more urgent goals than to spend resources suing greedy companies.
It is high time to question the very existence of an intellectual property system that privileges monopoly ownership over the common good.
Cancer’s Dangerous Mythology
GENEVA – This year, World Cancer Day will focus on dispelling damaging myths about the disease.
The theme – illustrated in the tagline “Cancer – Did you know?” – offers an opportunity to reflect on cancer’s true consequences and enhance global prevention and treatment efforts.
One prevailing myth is that cancer is primarily a developed-country problem.
But, while it is true that cancer is pervasive in wealthy countries, people in the world’s poorest countries lose more years of life to the disease.
As medical advances and technological developments have helped cancer patients in high-income countries to live longer – to the extent that some forms of cancer have effectively become chronic conditions – those in low-income countries continue to die young.
Besides being unjust, this is deeply tragic.
Having eluded killers like malaria and AIDS, one should not then be killed prematurely by cancer – especially a form of cancer that could have been prevented with something as simple and as affordable as a vaccine.
The often-overlooked link between vaccines and cancer highlights a second common misconception: fate alone (and perhaps smoking) determines who gets cancer.
In fact, one in six cancer cases worldwide is caused by a known infectious agent, with the proportion rising to one-third in some countries in Sub-Saharan Africa.
The four main culprits are hepatitis B and C (hepB and hepC), human papillomavirus (HPV), and Helicobacter pylori, which are collectively responsible for 1.9 million cases of liver, cervical, and gastric cancer annually.
Cervical cancer now kills more women than childbirth, claiming a life every two minutes.
Of the 275,000 women who die of cervical cancer annually, 85% live in the world’s poorest countries.
After all, cervical cancer tends to target the most vulnerable in particular, such as women infected with HIV.
If left unchecked, the number of cervical cancer deaths is set to rise to 430,000 annually by 2030.
Then there is hepB, which is over 50 times more infectious than HIV and often passed from mother to child before or shortly after birth, increasing the likelihood of liver cancer later in life.
An estimated two billion people alive today have been infected with hepB, while 350 million people are chronically infected.
Of these, roughly one-quarter will die from hepB-related liver cancer or cirrhosis (a consequence of chronic liver disease).
The good news is that powerful tools are available to avert many of these deaths.
Existing HPV vaccines can prevent up to 70% of cervical cancer cases, and new vaccines are in the pipeline that will improve this record further.
Likewise, hepB vaccines are 95% effective at preventing infection and its chronic consequences.
Vaccines protecting against Helicobacter pylori and hepC are in development (although the latter is proving particularly challenging).
Even an Epstein-Barr virus vaccine, which would protect against some kinds of lymphoma, is achieving promising results.
But paying for and delivering these vaccines to the most vulnerable citizens of low-income countries poses a significant challenge.
Although the World Health Organization (WHO) has recommended including the hepB vaccine in routine immunization since 1992, its high price initially hindered its uptake in some developing countries.
More recently, the same problem threatened to hinder the adoption of HPV vaccines.
But the GAVI Alliance intervened to ensure that this is no longer a concern with hepB, and it is unlikely to occur with HPV.
Since its launch in 2000, the GAVI Alliance has sought to increase access to life-saving vaccines for the world’s poorest children.
In partnership with the World Bank, the WHO, UNICEF, and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, it has used innovative financing tools to raise funds for global immunization programs, while working with industry to lower the prices of vaccines.
By including the hepB vaccine as part of a pentavalent (five in one) vaccine, the Alliance has already facilitated its delivery to children in 70 countries as part of routine immunizations.
The Alliance is now working to make the HPV vaccine available to more than 30 million of the world’s poorest women and girls by 2020; as part of this effort, and coinciding with World Cancer Day, it has launched demonstration programs in eight developing countries.
A growing body of evidence shows that vaccines’ benefits extend beyond preventing illness and death.
They have also been found to aid infants’ cognitive development and children’s educational attainment, thus boosting countries’ economic-growth potential.
In the fight against cancer, medical advances can shave precious percentage points off of mortality rates, which implies that improved access to vaccines can have a massive impact, slashing the number of future cases in developing countries for just a few dollars per dose.
People in rich countries are undoubtedly familiar with the maxim that prevention is better than cure.
But, given the ready availability of vaccines in developed countries, the focus of prevention efforts has shifted to changing cancer-causing lifestyles.
Meanwhile, people in developing countries lack access to simple and effective tools for preventing several of the most common cancers.
Improving access to vaccines is crucial to addressing this global inequity and reducing the widening gap between rich and poor.
This requires, first and foremost, dispelling the myth that one cannot “catch” cancer.
Fighting Corruption Won’t End Poverty
CAMBRIDGE – Countries are poor because governments are corrupt.
And, unless they ensure that public resources are not stolen, and that public power is not used for private gain, they will remain poor, right?
It certainly is tempting to believe so.
Here, after all, is a narrative that neatly aligns the promise of prosperity with the struggle against injustice.
As Pope Francis said on his recent trip to Latin America: “corruption is the moth, the gangrene of a people.”
The corrupt deserve to be “tied to a rock and cast into the sea.”
Perhaps they do.
But that won’t necessarily make their countries more prosperous.
Consider the data.
Probably the best measure of corruption is the World Bank’s Control of Corruption Indicator, which has been published since 1996 for over 180 countries.
The CCI shows that while rich countries tend to be less corrupt than poor ones, countries that are relatively less corrupt, for their level of development, such as Ghana, Costa Rica, or Denmark, do not grow any faster than others.
Nor do countries that improve in their CCI score, such as Zambia, Macedonia, Uruguay, or New Zealand, grow faster.
By contrast, the World Bank’s Government Effectiveness Indicator suggests that countries that, given their income level, have relatively effective governments or improve their performance, do tend to grow faster.
For some reason – probably related to the nature of what NYU’s Jonathan Haidt calls our “righteous minds” – our moral sentiments are strongly related to feelings of empathy in the face of harm and unfairness.
It is easier to mobilize against injustice than for justice.
We are more enthusiastic to fight the bad – say, hunger and poverty – than to fight for, say, the kind of growth and development that makes food and sustainable livelihoods plentiful.
Sometimes switching from the “bad” to the corresponding “good” is simply a matter of semantics: to fight against racism is to fight for nondiscrimination.
But, in the case of corruption, which is a bad that is caused by the absence of a good, attacking the bad is very different from creating the good.
The good is a capable state: a bureaucracy that can protect the country and its people, keep the peace, enforce rules and contracts, provide infrastructure and social services, regulate economic activity, credibly enter into inter-temporal obligations, and tax society to pay for it all.
It is the absence of a capable state that causes corruption (the inability to prevent public officials, often in collusion with other members of society, from subverting decision-making for private gain), as well as poverty and backwardness.
Some might argue that reducing corruption entails the creation of a capable state; the good is created out of the fight against the bad.
But is it?
Teachers and nurses often do not show up for work, but that does not mean that performance would improve much if they did.
Policemen may stop asking for bribes, but that will not make them any better at catching criminals and preventing crime.
Curtailing side-payments does not imply the ability to manage concession contracts or collect taxes.
Aside from prosecuting some bad apples, measures to fight corruption typically involve reforming procurement rules, public financial-management systems, and anti-corruption legislation.
The underlying assumption is that the new rules, unlike the previous rules, will be enforced.
That has not been Uganda’s experience.
In 2009, under pressure from the aid community, the government enacted what was billed at the time as the best anti-corruption legislation in the world; and yet all corruption indicators have continued to worsen.
Uganda is not an exception.
My colleague at Harvard, Matt Andrews, has documented the failure of public financial management reforms designed to prevent graft.
And the reasons for these failures are not specific to financial management.
All organizations need to be perceived as legitimate.
They can create this perception by actually performing the function for which they were created, which is difficult.
Alternatively, they can borrow from the natural world a strategy called isomorphic mimicry: just as non-poisonous snakes evolve to resemble a poisonous species, organizations can make themselves look like institutions in other places that are perceived as legitimate.
And this is what the anti-corruption agenda often ends up stimulating: the creation of organizations that are more obsessed with abiding by the new and burdensome processes than they are with achieving their stated goals.
As Harvard’s Lant Pritchett, Michael Woolcock, and Andrews argue, when inept organizations adopt “best practices” such as financial management systems and procurement rules, they become too distracted by decision-distorting protocols to do what they were established to do.
As Francis Fukuyama has pointed out, the development of a capable state that is accountable and ruled by law is one of the crowning achievements of human civilization.
It involves the creation of a shared sense of “us,” an imagined community on whose behalf the state acts.
This is not an easy task when societies are deeply divided by ethnicity, religion, or social status.
After all, who is the state for?
All Iraqis or just the Shia among them?
All Kenyans or just the Kikuyu?
What is to prevent the ethnic group currently in power from diverting resources to itself on the argument that “it’s our turn to eat?”
Why shouldn’t those currently in control of the state transform it into their patrimony, as in Venezuela, where, more than two years after former President Hugo Chávez’s death, his daughters still occupy the presidential residence?
The fight against corruption mobilizes all of us because we want to do away with evil and injustice.
But we should remember that casting the bad into the sea does not imply the sudden appearance on our shores of the good that we need.
Fighting Poverty in America
BERKELEY – From 2005 to 2014, the real income of two-thirds of households in 25 developed economies was flat or fell.
Only after very aggressive government intervention in taxes and transfers have some countries been able to hold families at least even.
This experience holds lessons for countries like the United States, where inequality and income distribution loom large in the run-up to November’s presidential and congressional elections.
What can the US learn from what works?
The US is a global outlier in tying much of its social safety net to employment.
Social-welfare spending averages 23% of GDP in Europe, but only 16% in the US.
And the US is an especially distant outlier when it comes to families: only three other countries – Tonga, Suriname, and Papua New Guinea – lack a national policy on paid family leave.
There are, however, many successful policy initiatives in the US.
For example, Pete Weber, a retired business executive from Fresno and a member of the California Republican Party’s executive committee, is at the forefront of a nationwide movement of efforts to think boldly about how to move families out of poverty and into self-sufficiency.
The Fresno Bridge Academy, founded by Weber in 2010, has received statewide and national acclaim for its results – not only its success with individuals in need, but also its cost effectiveness.
The program is an 18-month employment-training program that also provides support services for families – including computer-literacy classes, résumé assistance, parenting classes, and tutoring for children – through its non-profit umbrella agency, Reading and Beyond.
Located in the poorest postal code in California, the program has helped 1,200 families who enrolled voluntarily and is funded to serve an additional 2,300 families over the next two years.
To date, 80% of enrolled families have gained employment or significant wage growth, and 80% of those that do, retain these gains a year later.
Thirty percent have achieved full self-reliance within just 18 months.
The Fresno scheme, funded by an innovation grant from the SNAP (formerly food stamps) program, is rigorously outcome-based and quantitatively assessed.
It has generated $22 of benefit for every dollar invested, with $16 going to the families and $5 going to taxpayers (mainly in the form of higher revenues and reduced outlays for food stamps).
While the circumstances in Fresno are particular to the agricultural economy there, Weber believes the program is scalable and is already extending it to two other California counties (San Joaquin and Napa).
Through a broader effort with California Forward’s Economic Summit, Weber is embedding the lessons from Fresno in an effort to move a million families out of poverty in the state by 2025.
New approaches such as that taken by the Fresno Bridge Academy come at a time when both the left and the right are questioning current anti-poverty programs.
By some estimates, since President Lyndon B. Johnson launched his “War on Poverty” in 1964, total spending on the fight has exceeded $22 trillion.
Yet the front isn’t moving. The official poverty rate in the US seems stuck at roughly 15%.
On the right, Speaker of the US House of Representatives Paul Ryan’s Expanding Opportunity in America anchors the view that America already spends enough and just needs to spend it better.
Ryan’s plan focuses on integrating programs into an “opportunity grant,” expanding the earned income tax credit (EITC), and criminal justice reform – all while encouraging economic growth, so that job creation does the heavy lifting.
On the left, organizations like the Opportunity Institute (full disclosure: we both sit on its board of directors) argue for targeted spending, particularly in early education; linking college to careers; and reducing criminal recidivism.
Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton’s policy platform proposes new programs to address these issues, with a particular focus on family leave and early childhood and college education.
Many if not most scholars who have explored the topic, such as a joint effort by the Brookings Institution and the American Enterprise Institute, include elements from the left and the right – particularly strategies aimed at strengthening families, improving the quality and quantity of work available, and breaking the cycle of recidivism.
The EITC also has broad backing (more than three-quarters of economists surveyed by the American Economic Association support expanding it).
There is also broad consensus on the need for better quantitative assessment of what works.
Others, especially many in Silicon Valley’s technology world and some in the labor movement, are concerned that technology will outpace job creation and leave many out of work.
They would prefer a universal basic income (UBI), which would sever the link between employment and income.
Swiss citizens roundly rejected that approach in a recent referendum, but the energy devoted to more radical approaches to help those who need it is welcome, even if the specifics of UBI and its cost have yet to proven.
Examples like the Bridge Academy – and others, such as the Federal Home Visiting Program– show that initiatives that are deeply rooted in and tailored to the needs of the communities they serve, and that are driven by evidence of effective outcomes, can work.
Unfortunately, we too often embrace the opposite approach: broad-brush national programs with no focus on outcomes.
Consider the US Department of Agriculture’s Food and Nutrition Service.
Approximately 88% of its $82 billion in annual spending goes to direct aid (SNAP, or “food stamps”) while only 0.33% goes to providing people the skills they need to avoid government assistance.
Even worse, none of the skills-focused programs have data to evaluate them.