In Hawaii, Obama and the other assembled Asian leaders – particularly the Chinese – must begin to choose between these two Asian futures.
Obama and Global Warming
COPENHAGEN – In one of his first public policy statements as America’s president-elect, Barack Obama focused on climate change, and clearly stated both his priorities and the facts on which these priorities rest.
Unfortunately, both are weak, or even wrong.
Obama’s policy outline was presented via video to California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger’s Governors’ Global Warming Summit, and has again been shown in Poznan, Poland, to leaders assembled to flesh out a global warming roadmap.
According to Obama, “few challenges facing America and the world are more urgent than combating climate change.”
Such a statement is now commonplace for most political leaders around the world, even though it neglects to address the question of how much we can do to help America and the world through climate policies versus other policies.
Consider, for example, hurricanes in America.
Clearly, a policy of reducing CO2 emissions would have had zero consequence on Katrina’s devastating impact on New Orleans, where such a disaster was long expected.
Over the next half-century, even large reductions in CO2 emissions would have only a negligible impact.
Instead, direct policies to address New Orleans’ vulnerabilities could have avoided the huge and unnecessary cost in human misery and economic loss.
These should have included stricter building codes, smarter evacuation policies, and better preservation of wetlands (which could have reduced the ferociousness of the hurricane).
Most importantly, a greater focus on upkeep and restoration of the levees could have spared the city entirely.
Perhaps these types of preventive actions should be Obama’s priority.
Likewise, consider world hunger.
Pleas for action on climate change reflect fears that global warming might undermine agricultural production, especially in the developing world.
But global agricultural/economic models indicate that even under the most pessimistic assumptions, global warming would reduce agricultural production by just 1.4% by the end of the century.
Because agricultural output will more than double over this period, climate change would at worst cause global food production to double not in 2080 but in 2081.
Moreover, by implementing the Kyoto Protocol at a cost of $180 billion annually would keep two million people from going hungry only by the end of the century.
Yet by spending just $10 billion annually, the United Nations estimates that we could help 229 million hungry people today .
Every time spending on climate policies saves one person from hunger in a hundred years, the same amount could have saved 5,000 people now.
Arguably, this should be among Obama’s top priorities.
Obama went on to say why he wants to prioritize global warming policies: “The science is beyond dispute and the facts are clear.
Sea levels are rising.
Coastlines are shrinking.
We’ve seen record drought, spreading famine, and storms that are growing stronger with each passing hurricane season.”
Yes, global warming is happening, and mankind is partly responsible, but these statements are – however eloquent – seriously wrong or misleading.
Sea levels are rising, but they have been rising at least since the early 1800’s.
In the era of satellite measurements, the rise has not accelerated (actually we’ve seen a sea-level fall over the past two years).
The UN expects about a 30-centimeter sea-level rise over this century – about what we saw over the past 150 years.
In that period, many coastlines increased , most obviously in Holland, because rich countries can easily protect and even expand their territory.
But even for oft-cited Bangladesh, scientists just this year showed that the country grows by 20 square kilometers each year, because river sedimentation win out over rising sea levels.
Obama’s claim about record droughts similarly fails even on a cursory level – the United States has in all academic estimates been getting wetter over the century (with the 1930’s “dust bowl” setting the drought high point).
This is even true globally over the past half-century, as one of the most recent scientific studies of actual soil moisture shows: “there is an overall small wetting trend in global soil moisture.”
Furthermore, famine has rapidly declined over the past half century.
The main deviation has been the past two years of record-high food prices, caused not by climate change but by the policies designed to combat it: the dash for ethanol, which put food into cars and thus upward pressure on food prices.
The World Bank estimates that this policy has driven at least 30 million more people into hunger.
To cite policy-driven famine as an argument for more of the same policy seems unreasonable, to say the least.
Finally, it is simply wrong to say that storms are growing stronger every hurricane season.
Even for the Atlantic hurricane basin, which we tend to hear about the most, the total hurricane energy (ACE) as measured by the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration has declined by two-thirds since the record was set in 2005.
For the world, this trend has been more decisive: maximum ACE was reached in 1994, and has plummeted for the past three years, while hurricanes around the world have for the past year been about as inactive as at any time since records began being kept.
Global warming should be tackled, but smartly through research and development of low-carbon alternatives.
If we are to get our policies right, it is crucial that we get our facts right.
Obama and Iran
NEW YORK – While talking to an Iranian official in Tehran earlier this year, he reminded me of Ayatollah Khomeini’s fondness for comparing the relationship between the United States and Iran to that between a wolf and a lamb.
But the official went on to add his own twist, “Nearly 30 years have passed, and we are not that lamb anymore, and maybe the US is not the same wolf it once was.”
His point was that Iran no longer feels the deep inequality with the US that it did in the past, and that it may be time to try engagement.
Over the past three decades, five American presidents have struggled to figure out what to do about Iran.
All five failed.
As US President-elect Barack Obama and his advisers assess their foreign-policy priorities, they will encounter the immediate challenge of addressing Iran’s nuclear program and the country’s growing strategic importance in the Middle East and South Asia.
They will need quickly to face up to the reality that in order to pursue US interests in the region, including stabilizing Iraq and Afghanistan, the current standoff with Iran cannot continue, and that a greater degree of cooperation is unavoidable.
If they do not want to repeat the failures of past administrations, they will be well advised to do what none of Obama’s predecessors have tried.
They should make a strategic decision to engage Iran – without any pre-conditions – in discussions on a broad range of issues of significance to both sides. During his candidacy, Obama said of Iran that, “For us not to be in a conversation with them doesn’t make sense.”
Now, he has the opportunity to follow through.  
Such an approach does not mean having Obama sit down with Iranian Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei or President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad anytime soon.
A great deal of preparatory work will be required first.
This can be carried out by a small team, which would hammer out the details of a mutually acceptable framework for a wide-ranging and unconditional dialogue that enables both governments to produce some modest initial successes, and gradually build the confidence and trust required to imagine solutions to larger problems.
The process could include appointing a US envoy to Iran.
Ultimately, direct dialogue at the highest levels should be a key objective.
This will not be easy.
At the heart of the American-Iranian conflict is a deep mistrust about each nation’s readiness to tolerate the presence of the other on the world stage.
Each nation feels that it has been humiliated and demonized by the other.
Instead, the full range of issues that are significant to US-Iran relationship must be on the table.
Such an approach will require that each side exercise broad restraint and live with the ambiguity of working with a strong adversary to manage profound differences.
Distrust will continue, signals will be confused, setbacks will be frequent, but the results could well lead over time to greater mutual understanding and a learned capacity to work on some of the most pressing problems, just as the US learned to do with the Soviet Union and China.
Direct diplomatic and strategic engagement between the US and Iran at the highest levels is a proposition yet to be tested.
By pursuing this route after he takes office, Obama will force Iran to make a choice: does it want to be a state that is fully integrated into the global economy, or does it want to be an “ideology” with rogue status?
It is time that the world found out.
Obama and the Rise of the Rest
NEW YORK – American elections usually produce a brief euphoria; the public sense of renewal, of future possibilities, acts as a shot of adrenaline.
This year, however, the palpable relief and celebration will be tempered by the widely shared sense that all is not well in America.
The economic data are almost uniformly bleak and will not improve soon, and, while national security issues appear less pressing because of the financial crisis, they have hardly disappeared, given the tenuous situation in Afghanistan and Pakistan and the unresolved problems in Iraq, Iran, and North Korea.
Moreover, the power of America’s presidency, and of the United States, has undergone dramatic shifts in recent years, making our era unlike earlier periods when the world was in flux and a new American president faced deep challenges.
Until recently, it was possible to speak of “the rise of the rest” without forecasting a decrease in American power.
Now, with the US military at its limit in Iraq and Afghanistan and the US fiscal position weakening, America is confronted with stark choices.
That is an unfamiliar position for a new US president.
Even in the dark years after Vietnam in the late 1970’s and early 1980’s, there was a sense that America could still make its economic choices without much reference to the wider world.
That was the privilege of having the largest, most dynamic economy – and one that acted as a world creditor.
No more.
There is no small irony in the fact that on November 15, America’s lame duck president, the unilateralist George W. Bush, is hosting a multilateral conference to discuss reshaping the global economic system.
It also speaks to America’s relative position that even the less-than-organized ministers of the European Union acted more quickly to create a floor for the financial crisis than did the US president and congress.
And it speaks volumes to the changing world that, as panic recedes and the wreckage is revealed, Asia in general and China in particular are emerging as clear winners.
The credit crisis exposed the flimsy foundations of the sustained growth that the US and Europe enjoyed during the past four to five years.
While many had noted the extraordinary wealth transfer to oil-producing states and China, the implications of this were not fully appreciated.
It is not just that the US has become a debtor nation; it is that large pools of capital and liquidity now reside in places like the Gulf region and China, with no sign of that trend reversing.
In fact, the current crisis has even put Japan, which has spent nearly two decades in the doldrums, in a position of relative strength, given its large currency reserves and the clean-up of its major banks’ balance sheets.
There was a brief period in the 1970’s when a similar transfer took place.
But, unlike then, the countries that are accumulating the capital today are not spending it on consumption – remember the endless pictures of Saudi princes buying up real estate on the French Riviera – but on investment, infrastructure, and education.
Yes, there are bubbles here and there, whether it is real estate in Shanghai and Dubai or stocks in Mumbai, but there has also been serious long-range planning that is likely to give these countries a strong position for years to come.
Even China, which is trying to shift its economy more toward consumption in order to reduce its dependence on capital spending, has put in place an infrastructure of roads, power grids, ports, and railways that will serve its domestic economy for decades.
Meanwhile, it can use its $2 trillion of reserves as a cushion when the US and global economy sag.
China’s economic growth may slow as its exports to the US and Europe weaken, but it is less dependent on these markets than most people assume.
The talk now is of a global recession that will be steep and prolonged.
Perhaps, but the more likely scenario is continued stagnation in the US and Europe and a more accelerated shift in economic power toward Asia.
Few parts of Asia are structurally exposed to the credit implosion, and the balance sheets of Asian banks and companies are on the whole cleaner than their counterparts elsewhere.
Yes, many companies took on too much debt, and some countries, such as Korea, are more compromised than others.
But China, which is Asia’s anchor, is not, and in a world where everyone else is falling down, the one left standing is that much taller.
The US will remain a powerful part of the global system, but the task of the new president is to recognize lasting strengths and accept new limits.
President-elect Obama has shown pragmatism and realism, and seems to understand that accepting limitations is not weakness; refusal to acknowledge reality is.
Obama Versus Obamacare
NEW YORK – The US Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, President Barack Obama’s signature 2010 health-care reform, has succeeded in extending insurance coverage to millions of Americans who would not otherwise have it.
And, contrary to critics’ warnings, it has not pushed up health-care costs; in fact, there is some hope that the cost curve may finally be bending downward.
But whether “Obamacare” succeeds in curbing excessively high health-care costs is not assured.
That will depend on the Obama administration’s other policies, particularly in an area that might seem unrelated: the United States’ ongoing discussions with India over intellectual property.
And here, Obama appears determined to undermine his own signature reform, owing to pressure from the powerful US pharmaceutical lobby.
Pharmaceutical costs account for an increasingly large component of US health-care spending.
Indeed, outlays for prescription drugs, as a share of GDP, have nearly tripled in just 20 years.
Lowering health-care costs thus requires greater competition in the pharmaceutical industry – and that means allowing the manufacture and distribution of generic drugs.
Instead, the Obama administration is seeking a trade deal with India that would weaken competition from generics, thereby making lifesaving drugs unaffordable for billions of people – in India and elsewhere.
This is not an unintended consequence of an otherwise well-intentioned policy; it is the explicit goal of US trade policy.
Major multinational pharmaceutical companies have long been working to block competition from generics.
But the multilateral approach, using the World Trade Organization, has proved less effective than they hoped, so now they are attempting to achieve this goal through bilateral and regional agreements.
The latest negotiations with India – the leading source of generic drugs for developing countries – are a key part of this strategy.
In the 1970s, India abolished pharmaceutical patents, creating an advanced and efficient generics industry capable of providing affordable medicines to people throughout the developing world.
That changed in 2005, when the WTO’s Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) forced India to allow drug patents.
But, in the view of America’s pharmaceutical industry, TRIPS did not go far enough.
The Indian government’s desire to enhance its trade relations with the US thus provides the industry an ideal opportunity to pick up where TRIPS left off, by compelling India to make patents easier to obtain and to reduce the availability of low-cost generics.
So far, the plan seems to be working.
Last fall, during his visit to the US, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi agreed to establish a working group to reevaluate the country’s patent policy.
The US participants in the group will be led by the Office of the US Trade Representative, which serves the pharmaceutical companies’ interests, rather than, say, the National Academy of Sciences, the National Science Foundation, or the National Institutes of Health.
How might India tighten its patent system?
For starters, it could lower its standards for what is considered a “novel” product, and thus one that merits intellectual-property protection.
As it stands, India sets the bar quite high, resulting in its refusal to grant patents for new combinations of existing drugs.
India could also stop issuing compulsory licenses to allow other companies to produce a patent holder’s drug, in exchange for a fee – an arrangement permitted under TRIPS, but anathema to the drug industry.
India’s current policies allow drugs to be sold at a small fraction of the monopoly prices commanded by patent holders.
For example, the Hepatitis-C drug&nbsp;Sovaldi&nbsp;is sold for $84,000 per treatment in the US; Indian manufacturers are able to sell the generic version profitably for less than $1,000 per treatment.
The generic price is still a huge expense for people living on a few dollars a day; but, unlike the US price, it is manageable for many governments and aid organizations.
This is hardly an isolated example.
Low-cost generics have made it possible to treat tens of millions of HIV/AIDS patients in the developing world.
In fact, the threat of competition from Indian generics is partly responsible for major pharmaceutical companies’ decision to make some of their drugs available to the world’s poor at low prices.
If the US compels India to tighten its patent rules substantially, so that they resemble US rules more closely, this outcome could be jeopardized.
Of course, if America’s strong patent regime were, as its proponents claim, the best way to foster innovation in the pharmaceutical industry, the Obama administration’s policy toward India could perhaps be justified.
But that is not the case.
Because patents are essentially government-granted monopolies, they lead to the same inefficiencies and rent-seeking behavior as any other such market distortion.
A patent that raises the price of a drug a hundred-fold has the same effect on the market as a 10,000% tariff.
In such cases, drug companies gain a powerful incentive to mislead doctors and the public about their products’ safety and effectiveness, and even to promote their drugs for inappropriate uses, often using innovative side-payments to persuade doctors to prescribe them.
Furthermore, patent-supported research encourages secrecy, as companies disclose only the information needed to acquire patents.
Yet openness is crucial for efficient scientific progress.
Many economists, including the authors, have suggested a variety of alternatives to&nbsp;patent-supported R&amp;D and testing that avoid these problems.
If the Obama administration succeeds in forcing India to strengthen its patent laws, the change would harm not only India and other developing countries; it would also enshrine a grossly corrupt and inefficient patent system in the US, in which companies increase their profits by driving out the competition – both at home and abroad.
After all, generic drugs from India often provide the lowest-cost option in the US market once patent terms have expired.
Obama was right to push for a health-care reform that would increase the sector’s efficiency and accessibility.
In its dealings with India, the Obama administration is pursuing a policy that flouts these goals, with consequences not just for India and the US, but for the entire world.
The Unmaking of the President
WASHINGTON, DC – Barack Obama was widely considered an exciting new figure when he was first elected President of the United States in 2008.
His increasing unpopularity and virtual abandonment by his own party in his second term in 2014 stems largely from that fact: Expectations exceeded reality.
But, more important, reality changed – in several ways.
Obama is not a failed president.
He has in fact accomplished much in nearly impossible circumstances.
In his first two years in office, when his Democratic Party controlled both houses of Congress, he took numerous steps to stem the worst economic downturn since the Great Depression.
Likewise, he got his landmark health-care reform, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, passed.
Even now, despite opposition from Republican politicians and major interest groups, he has begun to turn energy policy toward dealing with climate change and curbing greenhouse gases.
He has also taken significant steps to uphold the rights of women and sexual minorities, and has used his executive power to loosen immigration restrictions on families amid congressional paralysis.
An assessment of Obama’s presidency must focus not just on him, but also on the Republicans’ unprecedented hostility.
Even before Obama took office, Republican leaders were plotting to oppose his every proposal, so he could not claim bipartisan support.
No Republican voted for Obama’s health-care legislation, even though it was modeled on schemes backed by some Republican officials and prominent think tanks.
The Republicans’ most ingenious trick was to use procedural measures to keep bills from being brought to a vote in the Senate, so that the public would ultimately blame “the stalemate in Washington” on Obama.
As his poll ratings began to drop, reaching the low forties, Democrats made the tactical error of running away from him.
Voters concluded that even his own party no longer supported him, and his popularity fell further.
As a result, in November’s midterm congressional election, the Democrats, unwilling to support any Obama-associated policy, waged a campaign about nothing, contributing to low turnout among their party’s voters.
Republican candidates, running highly charged anti-Obama campaigns, trounced their opponents.
Of course, no honest discussion of Obama’s presidency can ignore the role of his race.
America, it turned out, was far less ready for a black president than his supporters expected (or hoped), exemplified in virulent attacks that exceed the norm for a president.
Moreover, Obama’s approach to issues involving race has been fettered by his fear, expressed in his early memoir Dreams From My Father, of being perceived (even by his white mother) as an “angry black.”
To his credit, however, he has been effective in navigating the racial thicket of Ferguson, Missouri, by turning the killing of an unarmed teenager into a focal point for national action to improve police methods.
Obama’s personality has also contributed to his problems.
In his astonishingly swift rise, he was virtually alone – a Democrat, but not a creature of the Democratic Party, a politician of progressive instincts, but not an ideologue.
His tendency toward solitude, however, left him disinclined to build new ties and allies in Washington, leaning instead on his family and close friends from Chicago.
Moreover, he has little use for small talk or the grubbier side of politics, and his overweening pride in his exceptional intelligence makes him impatient with others’ ideas.
As a result, members of Congress, business figures, and others have felt put off in his presence – even insulted by his remoteness.
More broadly, Obama’s approach to governing has run counter to his early claim that he wanted to create a “team of rivals” that would offer competing views.
His preference for surrounding himself with people who have proved their loyalty has produced a White House staff that is widely considered, even by some cabinet officials, to be less than stellar.
It is also a staff that has exercised tight control over policy.
Cabinet members have chafed at their proposals being subjected to lengthy review by White House committees, whose reports are often opaque.
The emphasis on loyalty is particularly glaring on the national-security front.
National Security Adviser Susan Rice, who has been with Obama since 2008, is said to be intelligent but lacking in strategic vision.
That, together with her avowed combativeness, has impaired coherent policymaking on critical issues like the Syrian crisis.
Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel could not penetrate the bastion around Rice, and his dissent on policy toward Syria, which he often took directly to Obama, was not appreciated.
After the midterm elections, Hagel – Obama’s third defense secretary in six years – became the floundering administration’s sacrificial lamb.
He was not even afforded the dignity of a simple resignation, untainted by leaked statements from White House officials that he “wasn’t up to the job.”
Given Hagel’s good standing in Washington, the move reflected poorly on the administration.
Obama is unlikely to find much refuge from domestic struggles in the last redoubt of previous lame-duck presidents: foreign policy.
Obama should not be blamed for the foreign-policy challenges that the US now faces.
He did not create the messes in Iraq and Afghanistan, and it is not his fault that conducting foreign policy is far more difficult in today’s fragmented world than it was during the Cold War.
It would be a tough time for any US president to try to assert global leadership – a fact that the Republicans choose to overlook.
But, brilliant as Obama is, he has been prone to making odd mistakes.
With a seemingly out-of-control John McCain taking over as Chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, the situation is likely to become even more complicated.
As American politics becomes more polarized, and as Obama struggles to manage the challenges posed by epochal global developments, large domestic programs to address rising income inequality are probably beyond his administration’s reach.
And, though there is no shortage of candidates lining up to succeed him in 2016, one might wonder, after his experience, why anyone would want the job.
Obama Joins the Greek Chorus
PRINCETON – US President Barack Obama’s&nbsp;recent call to ease the austerity imposed on Greece is remarkable – and not only for his endorsement of the newly elected Greek government’s negotiating position in the face of its official creditors.
Obama’s comments represent a break with the long-standing tradition of official American silence on European monetary affairs.
While scholars in the United States have frequently denounced the policies of Europe’s monetary union, their government has looked the other way.
Those who criticize the euro or how it is managed have long run the risk of being dismissed as Anglo-Saxons or, worse, anti-Europeans.
British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher accurately foresaw the folly of a European monetary union.
Gordon Brown, as British Chancellor of the Exchequer, followed in Thatcher’s footsteps.
When his staff presented carefully researched reasons for not joining the euro, many Europeans sneered.
And that is why Obama’s statement was such a breath of fresh air.
It came a day after German Chancellor Angela Merkel said that Greece should not expect more debt relief and must maintain austerity.
Meanwhile, after days of not-so-veiled threats, the European Central Bank is on the verge of cutting funding to Greek banks.
The guardians of financial stability are amplifying a destabilizing bank run.
Obama’s breach of Europe’s intellectual insularity is all the more remarkable because even the International Monetary Fund has acquiesced in German-imposed orthodoxy.
As IMF Managing Director Christine Lagarde told the Irish Times: “A debt is a debt, and it is a contract.
Defaulting, restructuring, changing the terms has consequences.”
The Fund stood by in the 1990s, when the eurozone misadventure was concocted.
In 2002, the director of the IMF’s European Department described the fiscal rules that institutionalized the culture of persistent austerity as a “sound framework.”
And, in May 2010, the IMF endorsed the European authorities’ decision not to impose losses on Greece’s private creditors – a move that was reversed only after unprecedented fiscal belt-tightening sent the Greek economy into a tailspin.
The delays and errors in managing the Greek crisis started early.
In July 2010, Lagarde, who was France’s finance minister at the time, recognized the damage incurred by those initial delays, “If we had been able to address [Greece’s debt] right from the start, say in February, I think we would have been able to prevent it from snowballing the way that it did.”
Even the IMF acknowledged that it had been a mistake not to impose losses on private creditors preemptively; it finally did so only in June 2013, when the damage had already been done.
There is plenty of blame to go around.
Former US Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner championed a hardline stance against debt restructuring during a crisis.
As a result, despite warnings by several IMF Directors in May 2010 that restructuring was inevitable, the US supported the European position that private creditors needed to be paid in full. &nbsp;
Lee Buchheit, a leading sovereign-debt attorney and the man who managed the eventual Greek debt restructuring in 2012, was harshly critical of the authorities’ failure to face up to reality.
As he put it, “I find it hard to imagine they will now man up to the proposition that they delayed – at appalling cost to Greece, its creditors, and its official-sector sponsors – an essential debt restructuring.”
Obama may have arrived late to the right conclusion, but he expressed what should be an obvious truth: “You cannot keep on squeezing countries that are in the midst of depression.”
If Obama’s words are to count, he must continue to push for the kind of deal Greece needs – one that errs on the side of too much debt forgiveness, rather than too little.
Recent analysis shows that forgiveness of Greece’s official debt is unambiguously desirable, as another bogus deal will keep the Greek economy depressed, ensuring that the problem soon recurs.
If European sensitivities must be assuaged, Greece’s debt repayment could be drawn out over 100 years.
At the end of the day, debt forgiveness benefits creditors as much as it helps debtors.
Creditors have known this since at least the sixteenth century, when Spain’s King Philip II became the world’s first known serial sovereign defaulter.
As Jesus put it, “It is more blessed to give than to receive.”
European authorities must come to understand that the next act of the Greek tragedy will not be confined to Greece.
If relief fails to materialize, political discontent will spread, extremist forces will gain strength, and the survival of the European Union itself could be endangered.
Obama Steps Up
WASHINGTON, DC – For the past six years, US President Barack Obama's administration has, more often than not, sided with the interests of big banks on financial-sector policy.
But this week, announcing a new proposal to prevent conflicts of interest in financial advising, Obama seemed to turn an important corner.
From the outset of his first presidential term, Obama maintained the approach taken by George W. Bush's administration.
Large financial firms benefited from the provision of massive government support in early 2009, and their executives and shareholders received generous terms.
Citigroup, in particular, benefited from this approach, which allowed it to carry on with substantially the same business model and management team.
And the Dodd-Frank financial-reform legislation of 2010 could have done much more to curtail large banks' power and limit the damage they can cause.
Most recently, in December 2014, the administration abandoned an important part of the Dodd-Frank reforms – a move that directly benefited Citigroup by allowing its management team to take on more risk (of the kind that almost broke the financial system in 2007-08).
Among financial-industry lobbyists and House Republicans, the knives are out to roll back more of the constraints imposed on Citigroup and other big banks.
But now, in an abrupt and commendable turnabout, the Obama administration put the issue of conflicts of interest in the financial sector firmly on the table.
The specific context involves the investment advice given to people saving for retirement.
The decisions these savers must make are complex and can have profound consequences.
Getting it right is difficult even under the best of circumstances.
What will interest rates be?
How long will you and your spouse live?
What will your commitments to your children be, and for how long?
But perhaps the most important question is whether you can trust your financial adviser.
Some financial advisers in the United States are paid not on the basis of how their clients do, but according to what financial products they persuade them to buy.
Dennis Kelleher of Better Markets, a pro-reform group, recently summed up the current situation well: “[A]dvisers can recommend investments that generate lucrative commissions for them, even though their clients get stuck with high fees, subpar performance, and unacceptably risky products."
(The actual impact will also depend on what happens to equity prices in the coming years.)
The CEA report provides a useful primer on the issues and data.
I wish they weighed in more frequently on finance-related issues, rather than deferring to the US Treasury.
Or they could just listen to Senator Elizabeth Warren as she speaks out repeatedly on a broad range of financial-reform issues.
(Warren joined Obama in unveiling the proposal to protect retirement savers.)
Not surprisingly, at least some people at the US Securities and Exchange Commission have reacted negatively – this is stepping onto their turf, after all.
And the lobbyists are, naturally, out in full force.
But with sufficient White House willpower, the administration can see this through.
What is needed is a change in the rules set by the Department of Labor, which has jurisdiction over retirement-related issues.
No doubt industry defenders will claim that current practices benefit small investors – a point disputed directly by the CEA.
The broader and more interesting question is: Where are the statesmen in the financial industry?
Where are the leaders who push for a race to the top, by better serving their clients' best interests?
Jack Bogle, who built his investment-management company, the Vanguard Group, on exactly this principle, with a clear focus on lower fees at every opportunity, has come out strongly in favor of the administration's proposal.
Unfortunately, his remains a lonely voice.
Everyone who provides investment advice to retirement savers should act solely in their clients' best interests.
And, judging by the high number of distinguished and honorable professionals in the industry, many advisers, if not most, already do.
But there also are too many people being exploited, which harms them individually and discourages savings more broadly.
That is why the law should be amended to eliminate as many potential conflicts of interest as possible, by requiring all retirement advisers to act in their clients' best interests at all times.
Such a requirement would be a promising start, but there is still a long way to go.
All retail investors, not just retirement savers, deserve the same legal protection.
Until they get it, the best investment advice may be to assess your adviser carefully, bearing in mind a well-tested performance metric: “Where are the customers' yachts?"
Obama’s Real Mistake in Syria
DENVER – As US President Barack Obama’s eight-year term winds down, he has been facing intensifying criticism for failing to stop the carnage in Syria – what many call his “worst mistake.” But the alternatives his critics tout would have been just as problematic.
Obama’s detractors condemn his decision not to launch a forceful military intervention to remove Syrian President Bashar al-Assad early in the conflict, when the US could have backed more moderate forces that were supposedly in play.
At the very least, the critics maintain, Obama should have enforced the so-called “red lines” that he set, such as intervening in the event that the Assad regime deployed chemical weapons.
In failing to intervene early and decisively, it is said, Obama shirked his United Nations-backed “Responsibility to Protect” civilian populations from governments committing war crimes against them.
Moreover, he left space for external powers that support Assad – especially Russia, which has sent trainers and strike aircraft to help Assad’s forces – to intervene in the conflict.
This criticism misses the mark.
While Obama certainly made mistakes in his Syria policy – mistakes that contributed to the crisis spiraling out of control – the interventionism that is increasingly being championed by liberal and neo-conservative pundits alike has proved destructive on more than one occasion, including in Iraq and Libya.
What pundits, politicians, and the public should be advocating is a more integrated foreign policy.
Combining leverage and logic, such an approach would advance short- and long-term objectives, selected and prioritized according to their capacity to benefit American interests, not to mention the rest of the world, in a sustainable way.
In Syria, a central element of such an approach would have been engagement with Assad.
The initial decision to break off all ties and call for him to step down represents failure of analysis, the effects of which the Obama administration has never been able to escape.
In 2011, the Obama administration determined that, like in Tunisia and Egypt, the “Arab Spring” uprising in Syria – widely viewed as a broad-based democratic movement – would topple Assad.
Even when the regime launched brutal counter-attacks in places like Hama, Homs, and, most dramatically, in Aleppo, US officials seemed convinced that Assad’s fall was only a matter of time.
He was cornered, it was believed, and merely flailing desperately against the inexorable tide of history.
Based on this assessment, the US and others sought to isolate the Assad regime.
They worked to unite the opposition groups, often offering significant support. And they called for the establishment of a provisional government and a democratic election.
The assessment was wrong.
And, because good policy is impossible without good analysis, so were the policies.
The flaws in the Obama administration’s appraisal of the Syrian crisis soon became apparent.
Most obvious, Sunni radicals with foreign support quickly dominated the “popular democratic movement.”
The entity that emerged – the so-called Islamic State (ISIS) – was not trying to take down a brutal dictator, but to suppress nonbelievers and apostates and establish an extreme Sunni Islamist caliphate.
To be sure, many outsiders claim that radicalization was not inevitable, and that it occurred precisely because external powers like the US failed to intervene earlier and more forcefully.
But studies indicate that the shift happened very early on.
Indeed, the anti-Assad movement may never have been the enlightened democratic coalition that its international supporters claimed it was, at least not completely.
Beyond misreading the opposition, the Obama administration made another fateful mistake in Syria: failing to take into account the interests of other powers.
Russia, in particular, has a considerable strategic stake in Syria and serious concerns about its takeover by jihadists, which by many accounts include radical elements from Chechnya.
The US dismissed all of this, seemingly unable to take to heart anything members of Russian President Vladimir Putin’s government had to say.
Instead, American officials often delivered to their Russian counterparts lectures on the evils of the Assad regime.
Russia, they declared, simply needed to get on the right side of history.
But would overthrowing a sovereign government – even an appalling dictatorship like Assad’s – really place the US or Russia on the right side of history?
If nothing else, Syria remains a United Nations member.
And it is worth remembering, yet again, how previous attempts at forcible regime change, such as in Libya, turned out.
Yet in the US and elsewhere (tellingly, far from the frontlines), the chattering classes continue to agonize about supposed lost opportunities to intervene militarily and protect civilians.
Few seem willing to consider the possibility that the real lost opportunity actually lies in the failure to help spearhead the negotiation of a viable, peace-enhancing settlement.
Perhaps it is a matter of simple political self-preservation: in the US, maybe more than elsewhere, changing one’s mind is derided as flip-flopping, and considered a worse option than sticking to a failed policy.
Nonetheless, some promising adjustments are, it seems, being made.
Now that ISIS is losing ground, the US and Russia have begun to deepen discussions on greater military coordination.
One hopes that this cooperation extends to planning how a complex and devastated society can be administered in the future.
Of course, at this point, it is impossible to say what will emerge from the Syrian crisis.
A new Sunni-led state?
Multiple new states?
Even a re-drawn map of the Middle East is a possibility.
What is certain is that the outcome will have a major impact on Syria’s neighbors and the broader international community.
Their interests, together with the interests of the Syrian people, must inform any effort to end the carnage and create conditions for long-term peace.
Rapprochements with Rogue States
SEOUL – In his State of the Union address to the US Congress in 2002, President George W. Bush famously described Iraq, Iran, and North Korea as an “axis of evil.”
In the years since, however, America has not treated each in the same way.
The differences are highly instructive.
Bush and his hardline advisers believed that only force or “regime change” would stop these “rogue” states’ terrorism or their programs to acquire “weapons of mass destruction.”
So, in March 2003, the United States invaded Iraq, resulting in a state of near-constant civil war for over a decade; an ineffectual central government in Baghdad; and now the rise of the Islamic State.
In Iran, then-President Mohammad Khatami, a political moderate, offered what might have been a reasonable deal to curb the country’s nuclear program.
But Bush and his team preferred to pressure Iran with sanctions and military threats, and any hope for a negotiated solution vanished when Mahmoud Ahmadinejad succeeded Khatami in 2005.
It was only when another moderate president, Hassan Rouhani, took office in 2013 that hope for a negotiated solution could be revived.
Fortunately, US President Barack Obama has not missed the opportunities that were presented to him.
Indeed, the recent agreement with Iran, coming after diplomatic breakthroughs with Myanmar and Cuba, should make those who speak of an America in decline think again.
But what of North Korea, the last member of that notorious axis?
For the Bush administration, the Geneva Agreed Framework, signed in 1994 by North Korea and the US with the aim of freezing the North’s nuclear activity and gradually decommissioning its graphite-moderated reactors, was an act of appeasement by the “naive” administration of President Bill Clinton.
Bush’s administration preferred a harder line, using the so-called six-party talks, begun in 2003 and involving the US, China, Russia, Japan, and North and South Korea, to act almost as a pressure-cooker.
Though not publicly declared, it was widely believed that key American policymakers wanted regime change.
But, though Bush maintained America’s hard line toward Iran, in 2006 he changed tack in dealing with North Korea and began seeking a deal – doubtless influenced by the North’s first nuclear test, carried out in October of that year.
An eventual agreement, reached in the fifth round of the six-party talks in February 2007, could not be implemented because of North Korea’s refusal to agree on a verification protocol.
When Obama entered office in January 2009 and offered to “extend a hand” to Bush’s rogue states, optimists hoped for the negotiated denuclearization of North Korea.
Sadly, North Korea has betrayed the US at least three times since then: it conducted a second nuclear test in May 2009; launched a satellite in April 2012 in defiance of UN Security Council Resolutions 1718 and 1874; and carried out a third nuclear test in February 2013.
Given the North Korean regime’s frequent threats to turn American targets, from Hawaii to Washington, into “a sea of fire,” optimism is hard to sustain.
What should experience with the “axis of evil” trio since 2002 tell US policymakers?
First, aiming for “policy change” makes more sense than striving for regime change.
The Bush administration changed the regime in Iraq, but at a monumental cost that is still being paid.
In contrast, Obama’s goal concerning Iran was modest and focused on denuclearization. It has borne fruit.
What, then, does this imply with respect to North Korea?
Given the Kim regime’s past negotiating tactics, Obama is understandably reluctant to launch any new diplomatic initiative and may well believe that negotiating with North Korea would provide his domestic political opponents with ammunition to ruin his Iran deal.
So the wait-and-see approach is likely to continue.
Yet just waiting for North Korea to collapse is a regime-change strategy by default – and the cost of a chaotic or violent collapse could be frighteningly high.
Indeed, the fear of this cost is what keeps China so passive where its North Korean client is concerned.
But time is not on America’s side.
North Korea continues to enlarge its nuclear stockpile and develop long-range missile technologies (it can already launch a ballistic missile capable of hitting America’s west coast).
In short, the country is becoming a direct security threat to the US.
Accordingly, US policymakers should have only limited aims in dealing with North Korea, and they should recognize that they will be achieved only by linking them to economic benefits for the Kim regime.
Libya’s decision to abandon its nuclear option in December 2003 and the Iran deal this year were both possible for precisely this reason.
North Korea, of course, is neither Libya nor Iran.
But it is also not the hermit state of the 1950s, having moved significantly toward a market economy in recent years.
Indeed, by the early 2000s, more than four-fifths of an average North Korean’s household income comprised unofficial earnings from market activities.
At the same time, the regime depends on taxes on international trade to support itself.
North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, is no reformist like China’s Deng Xiaoping; but his regime is becoming more like China’s every day, owing to the irreversible expansion of market forces.
This will certainly change the context in which Kim calculates the cost and benefits of his nuclear program.
The West should facilitate this change in his calculus.
Moreover, the fact that the US, China, and Russia could cooperate on the Iran deal might prove helpful.
In particular, Chinese President Xi Jinping’s position on North Korea’s nuclear program is closer to America’s than that of any of his predecessors.
Given North Korea’s economic dependence on China – which accounts for some 90% of its trade nowadays – it is critical to take advantage of this policy convergence.
The best way to do that would be to forgo “strategic patience” and begin informal contact with the North to probe Kim’s intentions.
After all, with a regime as volatile as North Korea’s, patience is never a virtue.
Leading By Engaging
WASHINGTON, DC – In his first inaugural address, US President Barack Obama offered an invitation to the world’s most closed countries.
“We will extend a hand,” he said, “if you are willing to unclench your fist.”
This statement encapsulated the foreign policy of “engagement” that he endorsed during his first term – an approach that, despite some shortcomings, has a lot of merit.
Obama rejected his predecessor George W. Bush’s policy of isolating “rogue states,” recognizing that America’s only hope for influencing isolated countries’ behavior was to engage directly with them in a bilateral context.
And, as a bilateral strategy, engagement has proved to be astonishingly successful, having led to historic openings, first to Myanmar and now to Cuba, while driving progress toward an enduring nuclear agreement with Iran.
From the beginning, however, the Obama administration has made clear that engagement is not an end in itself, but a means to various goals, both bilateral and regional.
In Myanmar, the bilateral goal was to nudge the government toward greater openness and democracy – something that has unquestionably happened.
The pro-democracy leader and Nobel laureate Aung San Suu Kyi was released from house arrest; her party won seats in parliament; and millions of Burmese are now studying their country’s constitution and have petitioned for amendments.
To be sure, much remains to be done.
The journalist Martin Woolacott describes Myanmar as a “halfway house between military and civilian rule,” observing that the country’s generals have been promising to complete the transition to democracy for several years now, yet remain unwilling to allow Suu Kyi to run for President.
But this should not obscure the progress that has been made; compared to 2009, when Obama took office, Myanmar and its politics are unrecognizable.
While Obama would likely acknowledge that US policy did not bring about these changes (which resulted from an internal process of recalculation by the president, General Thein Sein), the US was responsive and flexible enough to encourage them.
On the regional front, Obama hoped that an opening with Myanmar would ensure that the country did not become wholly dependent on China, while enabling the US to deepen its relationship with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
The resumption of diplomatic relations with Myanmar was a critical feature of the Obama administration’s “rebalancing” toward Asia.
As for Cuba, Obama’s primary goal seems to be to bolster respect for ordinary Cubans’ human rights, not to bring about regime change.
While it is too soon to assess the opening’s impact in terms of reducing repression, the opportunity it presents for Cubans to engage with Americans – first family to family, then business to business – is significant.
In regional terms, Obama’s restoration of relations with Cuba merits a place in the history books alongside Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger’s opening to China.
As grandiose as that claim may seem, the fact is that crossing the straits to Cuba signals a new, more open, and far more productive approach to relations with all of Latin America.
Over the last decade, US leaders’ efforts to establish productive frameworks for multilateral cooperation with Latin America – including attempts to reinvigorate the Organization of American States and build up new forums like the Summit of the Americas – have run aground on their continued isolation of Cuba.
Indeed, the 2012 Summit of the Americas in Cartagena became an exercise in America-bashing, with countries threatening to boycott the 2015 summit if Cuba was not invited.
Fortunately, the US stepped up to the challenge, and, with Cuba at the table, the summit was held in Panama this month.
As a result, the Summit of the Americas and other regional organizations are better positioned to address regional crises, like the coming meltdown in Venezuela, and opportunities, such as the establishment of a hemispheric energy, trade, and law-enforcement infrastructure.
A nuclear deal with Iran would have similarly important implications in the Middle East and Southwest Asia – a prospect that largely explains fervent opposition to negotiations by Israel and Saudi Arabia.
While the deal will stand or fall on the extent to which it pulls Iran back from the nuclear brink, it can also open the door to further bilateral negotiations on matters of common interest, from ending the war in Syria to cracking down on drug-running in Afghanistan.
Already, Obama’s policy of engagement has led to the most bilateral interaction since the Iranian revolution and hostage crisis in 1979.
Whatever America’s Republican Party tries to claim during the 2016 presidential election campaign, Obama’s policy of engagement has worked, enabling the US to shape events in even the most closed countries.
So why do pundits continue to debate America’s supposedly declining global influence?
(Just last week, the topic made the front page of the New York Times, in an article that quoted a former treasury official as saying, “We’re withdrawing from the central place we held on the international stage.”)
One answer is that domestic political dysfunction has severely handicapped the president in international negotiations.
For example, the US Congress has blocked changes to countries’ quota allocations at the International Monetary Fund.
And a group of 47 Republican senators wrote a letter to Iran’s leaders announcing that the next Congress may not honor whatever nuclear deal they reach with Obama.
Another source of doubt about America’s enduring influence lies in the fact that multilateral engagement is still needed, and this is always more difficult than bilateral engagement.
Indeed, multilateral leadership requires not only clearer and bolder rules, but also a demonstrated willingness to bear the costs of those rules, whether by creating safe zones to uphold the “responsibility to protect” civilians or taking concrete steps to reduce – and eventually eliminate – nuclear arsenals.
Bilateral engagement will prove to be one of Obama’s most important foreign-policy legacies.
But ensuring that the US can continue to lead in the twenty-first century will require a different kind of engagement.
That will be a critical task for America’s next president.
Obama Gets It Right
NEW YORK – US President Barack Obama has been much criticized for the way he has handled revolutionary changes in North Africa and the Middle East.
Actually, he has not handled them very much, at least not in public.
That is precisely the problem for armchair warriors watching events unfold on their computer and television screens in Washington and New York.
They want Obama to handle things more.
Instead of taking a cautious approach, and letting the demonstrators in Iran, Tunisia, Egypt, Libya, Bahrain, Yemen, and other places do the shouting, they want him to talk tough, or, better yet, to send in the US Air Force and blast Qaddafi’s jet fighters and helicopter gunships out of the sky.
They want Obama to tell those dictators to quit right now, or else…
Or else what, exactly?
To be sure, the US government has coddled too many brutal dictators over the last half-century.
During the Cold War, dictators benefitted from American largesse as long as they were anti-Communist (“our bastards”).
Middle Eastern dictators were showered with money and arms if they refrained from attacking Israel and kept the Islamists down.
In both cases, these cozy relationships were maintained for far too long.
In Arab countries, they only helped to inflame Islamic extremism.
And yet, in order to begin a transition to more democratic forms of government, it helps to be a client state of the US.
During the 1980’s, South Korea, the Philippines, and Taiwan managed to ditch their dictators, partly because they were utterly dependent on US arms and money.
When the Cold War was drawing to a close, anti-Communism no longer guaranteed US protection.
So, when Koreans, Filipinos, and Taiwanese rose up against their rulers, the US, albeit belatedly, was in a position to tell their military clients to back off.
In a discreet way, something like this probably happened in Egypt as well.
Unfortunately, this type of pressure could not work in China when its people demanded what other Asians had won.
Both the Chinese Communist Party and the People’s Liberation Army could survive without US patronage.
The same is true of the semi-theocratic regime in Iran.
If Qaddafi finally goes, it will not be because his army is dependent on the US.
But there is another problem with the US taking a leading role in political revolts in the Middle East.
Some of the same people who accuse Obama today of being “soft” were keen promoters of the war in Iraq.
Back then, they expected that the “shock and awe” of US force would not only topple the dictator (which turned out to be true), but also that the US-led invasion would be greeted with enthusiasm by the liberated Iraqis, who would then herald a new democratic era in the Middle East.
One casualty of that brutal enterprise, apart from the roughly 100,000 Iraqis who have died and the millions more who have become refugees, is trust in the US as a force for good.
Operation Iraqi Freedom, not to mention Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan, gave American efforts to promote democracy a terrible name.
People want freedom, but not when it comes from the barrel of a US gun.
So far, anti-American rhetoric has been remarkably muted in the uprisings sweeping the Middle East.
The cynical way in which despots try to discredit all opposition as the work of foreign agents no doubt plays a part in this silence.
But so does Obama’s public discretion.
His conciliatory speech in Cairo on June 4, 2009, much derided by hawks in the US, together with his general lack of bluster, created enough space for the opponents of Middle Eastern dictators to rebel without being tainted in any way by foreign intervention.
It is their show, and so it should be.
But that is not to say that the US must always be passive.
In fact, it has not been.
Where America’s influence counts, as in the case of the Egyptian military, it has been used.
And Obama has made his support of democratic aspirations clear, to the dismay of allies like Israel and Saudi Arabia.
However, as recent history has shown, toppling strongmen is only the beginning of the democratization process.
Building institutions that guarantee not only political liberties, but also the protection of minorities, as well as other liberal conditions, is difficult enough in countries where such institutions had once existed, as in post-communist Central Europe.
It will be harder in countries where they did not, or where the economy remains largely in the hands of the armed forces.
Armed Anglo-American intervention, especially if it is not sanctioned by the United Nations, would do much to undermine liberals and democrats, who need all the credibility they can get.
There are no doubt some among the demonstrators who would like Obama to be more strident in his support of their aims.
Some even call for more active US assistance.
There may be things that Western powers can do to alleviate the suffering, by offering aid to refugees, for example, or use the latest technology to keep lines of information open.
But American hawks want what most opposition leaders in Libya have expressly rejected.
They want the US to show leadership, which is the last thing aspiring democrats need right now.
People in the Middle East and North Africa have been led by the West, or by Western-backed dictators, for long enough.
They must find their own way to freedom.
Obama seems to understand this.
Which is why he has done all right.
The Domestic Threat to US Leadership
CAMBRIDGE – US President Barack Obama has racked up a series of foreign-policy triumphs over the last 12 months.
But one that has gained less attention than others was the passage last December of legislation to reform the International Monetary Fund, after five years of obstruction by the US Congress.
As the IMF convenes in Washington, DC, for its annual spring meetings on April 15-17, we should pause to savor the importance of this achievement.
After all, if the United States had let yet another year go by without ratifying the IMF quota reform, it would have essentially handed over the keys of global economic leadership to China.
The IMF reform was crucial: The allocation of monetary contributions and voting power among member countries had to be updated to reflect the shifts in global economic power in recent decades.
Specifically, emerging-market economies like Brazil, China, and India gained a larger role, primarily at the expense of European and Persian Gulf countries.
Obama managed to persuade the leaders of the other G-20 countries to agree to the reform at a 2010 summit in Seoul.
The deal’s subsequent approval should have been a no-brainer for Congress, as it neither increased America’s financial obligations nor took away its voting dominance.
More important, the reform represented a golden opportunity for the US to demonstrate global leadership, by recognizing that the existing international order must accommodate changing economic-power dynamics.
Instead, Congress attempted to block IMF reform, effectively denying China its rightful place at the table of global governance.
“Moving the goal posts” could succeed only in driving the Chinese to establish their own institutions.
In this sense, Congressional intransigence may have undermined America’s position in its competition with China for global power and influence.
To most Asians, the US is a more attractive regional hegemon than a China that has been aggressively pursuing territorial claims in the East and South China Seas.
But recent US behavior has caused some Asian countries to begin to question America’s commitment to supporting regional security and prosperity.
Against this background, many countries, both inside and outside Asia, were happy to join the China-led Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, which promised to meet some of the region’s financing needs.
The AIIB’s establishment in December was widely viewed as a severe diplomatic setback for the US.
Fortunately, thanks to Obama’s recent string of successes in terms of global engagement, the US now has a chance to get back into the game.
Last April, his administration oversaw a breakthrough agreement with Iran over its nuclear program.
Moreover, in October, Congress was persuaded to give it Trade Promotion Authority, enabling the completion of the 12-country Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP).
More recently, the US has reestablished diplomatic relations with Cuba, ending a 55-year policy of isolation that succeeded only in giving Cuba’s leaders an excuse for economic failure and handicapping America’s relationships throughout Latin America.
Finally, representatives of the 195 parties to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change reached an agreement in Paris last December to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions, spurred in no small part by earlier action by Obama and Chinese President Xi Jinping.
The two leaders are scheduled to sign the Paris agreement on April 22 on behalf of their respective countries, the world’s two largest emitters of greenhouse gases.
Add to that the ratification, at long last, of IMF reform, and the US does seem to be on a global winning streak.
None of these five achievements could have been predicted a year ago.
With the Republicans having taken full control of the Congress in November 2014, the overwhelming conventional wisdom was that the administration would be blocked from accomplishing much in its final two years.
Making matters worse, internationalism attracts opposition from the far left as well as the far right.
Though trade is the most obvious example, it is not the only one.
Beyond opposing the TPP, US presidential candidate Bernie Sanders has historically joined with congressional Republicans in trying to block efforts to rescue emerging-market countries in Latin America and Asia at times of financial crisis.
These rescues are invariably called “bailouts,” even when they cost the US nothing – the US Treasury actually made a profit on the 1995 loan to Mexico that Sanders opposed – and help sustain economic growth.
Similarly, New York Senator Chuck Schumer joined the Republicans in trying to block the Iran nuclear agreement.
Obama’s recent international successes are not unassailable.
Although the IMF deal is done, Obama’s other key initiatives could still be derailed by US politics, especially if the political extremes unite.
Congress could reject the TPP, in effect telling Asia it is on its own.
It could undermine the emerging relationship with Cuba; after all, it has yet to repeal the embargo.
As for the Paris agreement, a federal appeals court will first hear a challenge to the administration’s implementation strategy, the Clean Power Plan, on June 2.
The Republican presidential campaign adds another element of uncertainty.
The two leading candidates for the party’s nomination, Donald Trump and Ted Cruz, both say that they would tear up the Iran nuclear deal, if elected.
It is worth recalling the outcome of President George W. Bush’s analogous decision to tear up Bill Clinton’s “framework agreement” with North Korea: the Kim regime promptly and predictably developed a nuclear bomb.
Whether the US will continue to lead the world remains unclear.
What is clear is that US politics, not global developments, will be the main determinant.
Obama in Africa
BERKELEY – On July 10, one very important descendant of black Africa will make a triumphant return to the motherland.
Scholars speak of “the empire striking back,” referring to former colonized peoples, such as immigrants from Africa and India, settling in Europe and North America and then challenging norms of race and identity.
In his first official trip to Africa, US President Barack Obama is striking back in a novel way.
His visit to Ghana highlights the desirability of prominent people from the diaspora making a positive contribution to African affairs.
But Obama’s visit, while heavy on symbolism, reveals the limits of his power.
Burdened by economic problems in America and wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, he can’t act boldly in Africa or make big promises.
Indeed, six months into his presidency, he has already undercut expectations.
He has approached with great caution the task of settling the region’s violent conflicts – in Darfur, eastern Congo, and Somalia.
He has also kept a safe distance from Africa’s political failures, notably in Zimbabwe, where he has resisted calls to assist in the removal of Robert Mugabe.
Obama’s caution is reasonable.
He doesn’t want to be pigeon-holed, after all, as “the president of Africa.”
But, in choosing restraint over intervention, he has disappointed ordinary Africans and international activists alike.
Like his predecessors, George W. Bush and Bill Clinton, Obama wants to avoid messy entanglements in Africa’s internal politics.
Bush did nothing to stop the killings in Darfur or hasten Mugabe’s exit from power.
Clinton, meanwhile, shamefully abandoned Somalia after the deaths of American soldiers in Mogadishu – and did nothing in the face of Rwanda’s genocide.
For Obama, Africa so far chiefly remains a backdrop against which he defines his American identity.