Carved in the cliff side or protected in small beautiful museums, these remarkable objects were the pride and joy of local Muslims, followers of the faith for more than a millennium.
As a non-Muslim, Indian woman, I was able to travel through the region without any fear and received warm support from local residents.
People of all stripes welcomed me, and were often willing to take me to important Buddhist sites. Today, little over a decade later, the atmosphere is so poisoned that neither local community leaders nor the local police came forward to protect these monuments or claim them as their own.
Even sadder is that while Pakistani newspapers widely condemned these attacks and criticized local officials’ indifference, there has been almost no coverage in the international press.
Can it be that after the Iraq war, and the dismaying images of looting at the National Museum in Baghdad, we have lost our capacity to be outraged?
Or is it that we have become so inured to bad news surrounding the war on terror that we have no desire to know more?
There is a vast number of important Buddhist sites in Swat and other areas of northwest Pakistan.
At this point, all of them are under threat of destruction, thanks to the influential voice of the Islamist leader Mullah Fazlullah, whose father-in-law, Sufi Mohammad, founded one of the extremist orders.
This order was responsible for bringing more than 10,000 jihadi fighters to Afghanistan to fight alongside Taliban soldiers against the United States in 2001.
While Mohammad is believed to be languishing in a regional jail, Mullah Fazlullah operates with impunity, using the radio to spread a message of hatred and intolerance. It is time that the world community not only registers its outrage against such destruction of cultural treasures, but also joins those Pakistanis who are desperately trying to pressure their government to preserve – for their sake and ours – their pre-Islamic cultural heritage.
If the world does not act this time, we risk losing one of the most precious legacies of early Buddhist history.
Another Failed British Experiment
FLORENCE – British politics has always been something of an experimental laboratory for the industrialized world.
In the 1970’s, Britain was where the preeminent postwar model of how to manage the economy collapsed.
That model had been based politically on the creation of consensus, and economically on Keynesian demand management.
Today, the equivalent collapse has been of the “regulation-lite” regime in which a party that styled itself as “New Labour” accepted a powerful role for markets – particularly for largely deregulated financial markets.
In the 1960’s, Keynesian policies delivered the illusion that everyone was benefiting, with high levels of employment and significant wage growth.
Britain was the coolest place on earth, boasting the Beatles and the Rolling Stones and the pastel fashions of Carnaby Street.
But Keynesianism involved continued fiscal expansion, with no offsetting monetary contraction.
By the 1970’s, it had brought to the United Kingdom large and ultimately unsustainable current-account deficits, high levels of inflation, and then political gridlock over what to do.
Which group should be the first to make a sacrifice?
In early 1974, Edward Heath’s Conservative government was locked in a struggle with the powerful coal miners’ union over “who rules Britain.”
He called a premature election in February, in which there was no clear winner.
Heath was deeply unpopular.
But the opposition Labour Party was not convincing either, and had little in the way of an intellectual alternative.
It simply sought to avoid confrontation with the unions.
The election produced a political stalemate.
The centrist Liberal Democrats appeared to hold the balance of power, and stories circulated of how Heath was prepared to concede a reformed voting system. He held out the promise of proportional representation, which would ensure a greater number of parliamentary seats for the Liberal Democrats in future elections, in exchange for the party’s support for a new Conservative government.
There appears to be an overwhelming likelihood that the 1974 stalemate will be repeated in the upcoming general election on May 6.
The political maneuvering has already started, with the unpopular incumbent prime minister, Gordon Brown, today’s equivalent of Heath, bidding for the Liberal Democrats’ support by promising a constitutional reform that would give the party major advantages.
In 1974, the touted Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition never materialized, as the Liberal Democrats were wary of hitching their fortunes to an unpopular and discredited politician.
The result was a minority government that struggled for support and legitimacy, and in the end offered only policies that provided no real answer to the country’s underlying problems.
Britain today resembles 1974 much more than it resembles 1979, when the Thatcher revolution set the country on a new path.
There is again a major economic problem, the end of a credit-driven boom, and a threat to the banks (except that it all looks much bigger, owing to the financial system’s massive growth and internationalization).
Both major political parties look tired, and at the same time as if they are competing to imitate each other.
The choice appalls voters.
There is also an ominous resemblance to Italy in 1992, when both major parties of the previous 40 years, the Christian Democrats and the Communists, simply melted away in a mixture of corruption and intellectual failure.
In the 2000’s boom, as in the 1960’s, it looked as if everyone could live on the never-never.
In 1960’s, it was counter-cyclical fiscal policy that held out the promise of prosperity for all; in the 2000’s, it was that individuals rather than the state piled up debt.
The magic of markets made possible an individualization of borrowing and consumption.
As in the meltdown of the 1970’s, it is easy to see how everyone benefited from the recent boom: homeowners saw their houses rising in price, social-welfare payments were expanded, and people seemed swept up in a new wave of 1960’s-style “Cool Britannia.”
But now, as then, Britain’s future is bleak and overshadowed by debt.
Major adjustments are needed.
At the same time, the main parties find it hard to address the country’s problems, because they are reluctant to call for sacrifice before an election.
And, because the party programs of the Labour government and the Conservative opposition are not clearly distinguishable, they find it hard to differentiate themselves from the Liberal Democrats.
Both major parties are appealing to the political center, but they will never be as convincing as a political party that really is in the political center, and that is unencumbered by the scandals attached to the past exercise of power.
The course of the electoral struggle so far indicates that the Liberal Democrats will do very well.
Their leader outshines his Conservative and Labour counterparts in television debates and on the campaign trail.
Moreover, Labour and the Conservatives are in a political trap.
The moment they start to disagree with the Liberal Democrats, they will make themselves look extreme and will forfeit voter sympathies.
But this demand for political moderation impedes the search for the radical and painful solutions that Britain needs.
Little wonder, then, that currency markets are treating the likely outcome in Britain – a hung parliament, with no clear majority for any party – as a repeat of the mid-1970’s, with no clear solution to the country’s underlying economic problems on offer.
Another Roller Coaster Ride for Exchange Rates in 2009?
CAMBRIDGE – 2008 has been an exceptionally tumultuous year for exchange rates.
The American dollar soared, the Japanese yen went into orbit, the euro fell to earth, and the British pound crashed, leaving a giant crater.
Emerging-market currencies were hammered, as were “commodity currencies” such as the Canadian, Australian, and New Zealand dollars, and the South African rand.
Indeed, the currency of any country that is significantly dependent on commodity exports has suffered.
So, what will the New Year bring for exchange rates?
While the only safe bet is continuing high volatility, we are at an unusual juncture where the short- and long-term trends appear to be very different.
In the short run, the yen and the dollar continue to benefit from a flight to safety, as panicked investors seek a place to hide.
The yen and dollar are also being bolstered as central banks elsewhere continue to cut interest rates towards zero, territory that the yen and dollar policy rates already occupy.
Thus, even though the United States and Japan will not be raising interest rates anytime soon, lower foreign rates still make the dollar and yen relatively more attractive.
Commodity prices will continue to be soft, pulling down commodity currencies, and bolstering the yen especially, since resource-poor Japan is so reliant on commodity imports.
Normally, short-run and long-run exchange-rate trends point in the same direction.
Indeed, a huge body of research shows that for most major currencies, the best forecast of next week’s exchange rate, next month’s exchange rate, or even next year’s exchange rate is simply today’s exchange rate.
But times are hardly normal.
The continuing financial crisis is putting steady upward pressure on the dollar thanks to its safe haven status.
Commodity prices are plumbing new depths.
Yet the financial crisis will eventually end, as will the global recession.
Neither will end soon, mind you, perhaps not for another seven or eight months, if not longer.
But, when more normal growth does resume, the recent trends underpinning dollar and yen appreciation will disappear.
Perhaps international investors will be grateful to the US for its aggressive monetary and fiscal stimulus, which will accelerate sharply when President-elect Barack Obama takes office on January 20.
But investors will still worry about what happens when the bills come due.
Many emerging markets will also want to engage in countercyclical macroeconomic policy, but they are hemmed in by concerns of fiscal sustainability and fear of rampant inflation.
European fiscal policy is constrained by the Maastricht Treaty, while European monetary policy is rather single-mindedly devoted to price stability.ampnbsp; 
True, China, with its vast foreign exchange reserves, has the wherewithal to spend as much on countercyclical macroeconomic policy as anyone.
But China’s rulers know that their highly repressed banking system is vulnerable as the country continues to pursue gradual financial liberalization, and that foreign currency reserves may be needed for recapitalization.
Thus perhaps no region will be as expansionary as the US.
For the moment, global investors cannot get enough of US treasury bills, as collapsing interest rates for short-term US securities demonstrates.
But a lot of this demand is driven by short-term, crisis-fueled fear.
As markets normalize, surely investors will look around and realize that the US has vastly increased its debt in fighting the downturn, possibly by several trillion dollars.
At the same time, today’s falling prices (or “deflation”) will eventually morph into inflation as aggressive monetary easing takes its toll on price stability.
Admittedly, some of the major currency’s movements during the past year can be regarded as normalizing.
On a purchasing power basis (a crude measure of what different currencies can buy in terms of real goods), the euro was absurdly overvalued at $1.60, just as the yen was absurdly undervalued at over ¥120 to the dollar.
Commodity currencies had to come off their meteoric highs.
Thus, the past year’s currency alignments have, to some extent, simply brought relative domestic price levels and exchange rates into better balance.
But by now, emerging-market countries’ exchange rates, and even more so commodity currencies, have probably overshot on the downside.ampnbsp; 
Over the long run, globalization and economic convergence will resume, and emerging market and commodity currencies will have to strengthen.
At the same time, the prospect of higher US inflation and massively higher US public debt levels must eventually weigh on the dollar, as does the still worrisome US trade deficit.
As for the yen, it, too, will suffer from the continuing rise in Japan’s public debt levels, which are already among the highest in the world.
Continuing weakness in the Japanese economy will eventually hit the yen.
If today’s constellation of exchange rates represents some excessive dollar and yen appreciation, especially against emerging-market currencies, when it will unwind?
That depends on when you think the financial crisis will abate, and the timing of that is as hard to predict as exchange rates.
But come it will.
Then watch for the dollar and yen to boomerang.
Answering Iran
NEW YORK – We know quite a bit about Iran’s nuclear program, and what we know is not encouraging.
Iran is reported to be enriching uranium at two sites – some of it to levels of 20%, far beyond what is required for civilian purposes.
The International Atomic Energy Agency also reports that Iran is carrying out research to develop designs for nuclear warheads.
In short, Iranian officials’ claims that their nuclear program is aimed solely at power generation or medical research lacks all plausibility.
Yet there is still much that the world does not know.
For example, we do not know whether Iran is conducting secret activities at undisclosed sites, or when Iran could develop a crude nuclear weapon, with estimates ranging from several months to several years.
We also do not know whether Iran’s divided leadership has decided to develop nuclear weapons, or to stop just short, calculating that the country could derive many of the benefits of possessing nuclear weapons without running the risks or incurring the costs of actually doing so.
Either way, Iran’s activities confront the world with difficult choices.
None is costless or risk-free.
Moreover, neither the costs nor the risks are possible to calculate with precision.
One option would be to accept and live with a nuclear or near-nuclear Iran.
This assumes that Iran could be deterred from using its weapons, much as the Soviet Union was during the Cold War.
Missile defenses could be expanded; the United States could extend security guarantees so that Iran would understand that the threat or use of nuclear weapons would be met with a decisive American response.
But there are significant drawbacks to acquiescing to a nuclear-armed Iran.
Given its use of subversion and terrorism against its adversaries, a nuclear-armed Iran might be even more assertive.
It might also transfer nuclear-related material, technology, or weapons to allies (Hugo Chávez’s Venezuela, for example) or radical organizations such as Hezbollah and Hamas.
And, rather than promoting caution and stability in the region, Iran or Israel could be tempted to strike first in a crisis.
Nor can it be assumed that Iran’s divided and radical leadership would always act rationally, or that proliferation would stop with the Islamic Republic.
If Iran develops its nuclear weapons, countries such as Saudi Arabia, Turkey, and Egypt would be tempted to purchase or develop nuclear weapons of their own.
A Middle East with multiple fingers on multiple triggers is as good a definition of a nightmare as there is.
At the opposite end of the spectrum of policy choices is a preventive attack: a military strike (most likely by Israel, the US, or both) against sites in Iran associated with its nuclear program.
The core objective would be to interrupt the emergence of a threat that is still gathering.
Here, again, there are considerable drawbacks.
Even a successful preventive attack would at most set back Iran’s nuclear program a few years.
It would almost certainly be rebuilt, presumably in underground, fortified sites that would make future attacks far more difficult to carry out.
Moreover, Iran could well retaliate immediately against targets that could include Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Afghanistan, and other US interests worldwide – as well as sites on American territory.
Hezbollah could attack Israel.
If all of this happened, the price of oil would skyrocket owing to shortages and fears, possibly driving much of the world economy, already in a precarious position, into recession.
An armed attack could also cause the Iranian public to rally around the government, reducing the chances that a more responsible leadership might emerge.
It thus comes as little surprise that the US and much of the world have explored alternatives, including regime change in Iran.
But, however desirable that might be, no policy can assuredly bring it about.
As a result, the principal policy toward Iran centers on the imposition of increasingly painful economic sanctions.
The rationale underlying this policy is that Iran’s leaders, fearful of losing political control as popular discontent increases over the sanctions’ effects, will recalculate the costs and benefits of their nuclear activities and become receptive to negotiated constraints in exchange for removal of sanctions.
That could happen.
International support for sanctions is considerable and increasing.
It is becoming more difficult for Iran (whose economy depends to a large extent on oil exports of more than two million barrels a day) to find customers – and especially customers willing to pay full price.
Meanwhile, Iran’s currency is weakening, pricing imported goods out of many Iranians’ reach.
Additional elements of current policy that seem to be having an effect are clandestine efforts aimed at impeding Iran’s ability to import sensitive technologies.
Viruses have infiltrated computers in Iran, reducing the efficiency of the centrifuges central to enriching uranium.
It is also possible that the assassination of selected individuals has slowed the advance of Iranian nuclear efforts.
But slowing Iran’s efforts is not the same as stopping them.
So one question is whether existing sanctions can be extended and tightened; here, China and Russia must determine their priorities.
Another question is whether any sanctions will be enough to persuade Iran’s leaders to accept verifiable limits on their nuclear program.
And a third unsettled issue is how long Israel or the US will tolerate Iranian efforts before striking militarily.
Indeed, the only certainty may be that Iran’s nuclear program will be a major international issue in 2012 – quite possibly the most important one.
Birth in a Time of Antibiotic-Resistant Bacteria
GENEVA/NEW YORK – King Henry VIII, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, and Mary Shelley, author of Frankenstein, all lost their mothers to infections following childbirth, and literature abounds with tragic stories of maternal death, from A Christmas Carol to Wuthering Heights, Far From the Madding Crowd, A Farewell to Arms, Revolutionary Road, Lolita, and Harry Potter.
But maternal and infant mortality is not confined to the past, much less to fiction.
More than 30,000 women and 400,000 newborns die each year from infections around the time of birth.
Most of these deaths occur in low-income countries, and the situation will only worsen as the antibiotics available for treating infections become less effective, owing to the emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria.
According to current estimates, more than 200,000 newborns die each year from infections that do not respond to available drugs.
And studies using data from larger hospitals – where microbes are more likely to develop antibiotic resistance – estimate that about 40% of infections in newborns resist standard treatments.
Childbirth can be risky.
Infants – especially if they are premature – do not have fully developed immune systems, so they are more susceptible to illnesses, either from bugs their mother is already carrying, or from infections they pick up in the hospital.
That likelihood naturally increases when health facilities lack toilets, running water, and other basic sanitary conditions, as is often the case in low-income countries.
While these countries have made some progress, through clean-water and sanitation initiatives, immunization, and antibiotic use, the gains are fragile.
In high-income countries, maternal and infant mortality is now rare, owing to a century of improvements in hygiene and infection control.
For example, when antibacterial sulphonamides became available after 1934, infections could be treated quickly and easily on the spot, and mortality rates plummeted.
However, antibiotics’ effectiveness led many healthcare providers to overprescribe them, and people now frequently take them when they shouldn’t, such as when they have a viral infection like the flu.
Antibiotics are also being fed indiscriminately to livestock and fish to boost food production.
According to some estimates, less than half of all the antibiotics taken by humans are actually needed, and there is even more needless use in animals.
As we now know, this is a recipe for disaster.
More frequent antibiotic use accelerates the process whereby exposed microbes build resistance.
Soon enough, the antibiotic becomes ineffective.
Worse still, very few pharmaceutical companies are developing new antibiotics to replace those that are losing their effectiveness.
This points to the dual nature of the problem.
While antibiotics are used excessively in some places, they are unavailable in others.
More children in Africa die from a lack of access to antibiotics than from antibiotic-resistant infections.
Indeed, many still die from infections, such as bacterial pneumonia, that should be easily treatable.
Saving the lives of mothers and infants will require us to address the problem of access as well as excess.
Simply put, those who need lifesaving antibiotics must get them, and those who do not must not.
The most important step is to stop the spread of infection, so that antibiotics don’t have to be used in the first place.
All health-care facilities, at a minimum, must have clean running water and sanitation services, and health-care professionals must follow good hygienic practices such as hand washing.
Facilities should also implement policies to discharge mothers and newborns sooner rather than later, in order to reduce the potential for exposure to infectious microbes, and to educate mothers on the importance of breastfeeding in strengthening newborns’ immune systems.
Finally, when antibiotics are used, health-care providers should confirm that they are truly needed and prescribe responsible doses.
Fortunately, policymakers around the world have started to pay attention to this issue.
In 2015, the World Health Assembly, the World Health Organization’s decision-making body, adopted a global action plan to address antimicrobial resistance.
The plan establishes a framework for raising awareness of the problem, collecting more data, developing new drugs and diagnostic tools, encouraging practices to reduce infections, optimizing antibiotic usage, and investing in countries’ health-care and sanitation capacities.
World leaders will address antibiotic resistance at next month’s G20 summit in China, and then at a high-level United Nations General Assembly meeting.
This is as it should be, because no border or wall will keep out drug-resistant bacteria.
A real commitment from all governments is necessary for tackling a problem that threatens the lives and health of mothers and infants worldwide.
Antibiotik yang Manjur
MEXICO CITY – Sejak ditemukannya penisilin di tahun 1928 hingga dikenalkannya golongan utama antibiotik terakhir di tahun 1960-an, kapasitas manusia untuk melawan bakteri patogen telah berkembang pesat.
Akan tetapi, seiring perkembangan zaman, jumlah antibiotik yang dapat menangkal bakteri semakin menurun, dan beberapa bakteri patogen menjadi kebal terhadap hampir semua obat-obatan yang ada.
Akibatnya, infeksi yang dahulu dapat diobati sekarang kembali berbahaya.
Kekebalan terhadap antibiotik menyebabkan sekitar 700.000 kematian setiap tahunnya, dengan biaya mencapai puluhan miliar dolar Amerika.
Angka tersebut hanya akan terus bertambah seiring berkurangnya kemampuan kita untuk mengobati kanker, transplantasi organ, dan pemasangan alat prosthesis karena kekebalan terhadap antibiotik.
Banyak faktor yang berkontribusi terhadap peningkatan kekebalan antibiotik.
Bakteri dapat berkembang biak dan bermutasi dengan cepat, serta menciptakan sesuatu bernama “jaringan genetik” atau “genetic Internet” yang memungkinkan bakteri patogen tertentu untuk “mengunduh” gen kekebalan antibiotik.
Selain itu, kebanyakan antibiotik merupakan produk alami dari bakteri tanah, di mana kekebalan antibiotik dapat terjadi secara alami.
Ketika antibiotik buatan manusia diperkenalkan dalam skala besar, bakteri dengan kekebalan menjadi lazim.
Saat ini, manusia mengeluarkan sekitar 100.000 ton antibiotik setiap tahunnya.
Jika antibiotik tersebut digunakan dengan tepat untuk menyelamatkan kehidupan, analisis manfaat biaya yang benar mungkin dapat dilakukan.
Namun, sekitar 70% dari antibiotik tersebut digunakan untuk membantu hewan ternak tumbuh lebih cepat.
Sedangkan 30% lainnya, selain untuk mengobati manusia, sering diberikan dalam resep obat secara tidak benar atau sia-sia.
Dan karena sebagian besar obat yang telah digunakan dibuang ke lingkungan melalui air limbah dan kotoran, kelompok bakteri dalam tanah, air, dan satwa liar juga ikut terkena dampaknya.
Jika penyalahgunaan antibiotik ini tidak dihentikan, kita akan segera menghadapi kekurangan obat untuk mengobati infeksi bakteri secara efektif.
Meskipun beberapa langkah sedang diambil, seperti proposal tindakan internasional yang dihasilkan dalam pertemuan tingkat tinggi Perserikatan Bangsa-Bangsa (PBB) pada bulan September lalu, langkah-langkah tersebut masih jauh dari cukup.
Yang sebenarnya dibutuhkan sekarang adalah pelarangan segera di seluruh dunia atas penggunaan antibiotik di sektor pertanian.
Selain itu, pedoman penggunaan antibiotik secara klinis, yang saat ini tidak dihiraukan oleh masyarakat medis, harus ditinjau kembali dan ditegakkan secara ketat.
Kedua tindakan ini saja — yang keduanya dapat ditetapkan oleh badan peraturan pemerintah — akan mengurangi penggunaan antibiotik hingga 80%, yang akan memperlambat peningkatan kekebalan antibiotik secara signifikan.
Tentunya, upaya agar pemerintah menerapkan langkah tersebut tidak mudah karena akan membahayakan kepentingan ekonomi yang kuat, terutama industri farmasi yang menghasilkan $40 milar dari antibiotik setiap tahun.
Selama industri farmasi memiliki kepentingan yang besar dalam penyalahgunaan antibiotik secara terus menerus, tidak akan ada minat untuk mengembangkan antibiotik baru untuk mengatasi bakteri yang kebal terhadap obat-obatan.
Obat untuk penyakit kronis dan kanker dinilai lebih baik bagi keuntungan mereka.
Alhasil, infustri farmasi mencari “insentif” untuk melakukan penelitian dan pengembangan antibiotik baru, seperti perpanjangan hak paten atau keringanan pajak; alternative lainnya hanya meningkatkan harga obat baru secara gila-gilaan.
Namun, keuntungan dari insentif tersebut bagi perusahaan farmasi akan jauh melampaui biaya aktual penelitian dan pengembangan yang dilakukan sehingga akan menjadi alat untuk menyalurkan dana publik ke pihak swasta – pihak yang justru menyebabkan masalah dari awal.
Meski demikian, di luar semua keuntungan ini, masyarakat harus tetap mempertimbangkan ‘hukuman’ bagi perusahaan-perusahaan tersebut.
Saya mengusulkan sebuah inisiatif yang menilai perusahaan farmasi sesuai dengan kontribusinya terhadap pemecahan masalah kekebalan antibiotik ini; perusahaan yang tidak berkontribusi harus dihukum dengan penjualan yang lebih sedikit.
Saya menamakannya NANBU (No Antibiotics, No Business – Tanpa Antibiotik Tidak Ada Usaha).
NANBU akan memberikan poin kepada perusahaan dengan program penelitian yang besar atau yang terus mengembangkan antibiotik baru.
Perusahaan yang tidak memproduksi atau menjual antibiotik untuk tujuan pertanian, atau yang menolak mempromosikan penggunaan antibiotik untuk penyakit yang tidak membutuhkan obat tersebut juga akan mendapatkan poin.
Sedangkan perusahaan yang terlibat dalam perilaku sebaliknya, dengan menjual antibiotik sebagai pendorong pertumbuhan ternak atau aktif mendorong dokter untuk meresepkan obat tersebut, akan kehilangan poin.
Pada awalnya, semua perusahaan obat-obatan sebenarnya akan memiliki skor negatif.
Akan tetapi, dari waktu ke waktu, penilaian dapat disesuaikan, selalu menurut saran ilmiah dari kelompok ahli independen.
Penilaian kemudian dapat digunakan untuk menuntun keputusan pembelian obat-obatan.
Untuk berbagai jenis obat-obatan terkait, ada beberapa pilihan yang memberikan hasil dan tingkat keamanan yang sama, yang diproduksi oleh berbagai perusahaan.
Jadi para dokter dapat meresepkan sebagian besar obat dari perusahaan dengan penilaian tinggi, dan meghindari obat-obatan dari perusahaan dengan penilaian rendah.
Pasien dapat mendorong pengambilan keputusan tersebut, dan melakukan hal yang sama ketika membeli obat tanpa resep dokter.
Seiring berjalannya waktu, antibiotik dapat kembali memberikan keuntungan lebih karena perusahaan yang terlibat akan menjual lebih banyak obat mereka lainnya dan kebutuhan akan insentif yang mahal akan berkurang.
Kunci keberhasilan NANBU adalah untuk memastikan penyebaran pemahaman mengenai ancaman kekebalan antibiotik dan apa yang diperlukan untuk melawan ancaman tersebut secara luas.
Hal ini akan memberikan dorongan kepada pasien dan dokter untuk memperhatikan penilaian NANBU dalam pembuatan keputusan atas obat-obatan, serta untuk menekan pemerintah mereka untuk mengambil tindakan yang lebih kuat.
Penggunaan kampanye kesadaran masyarakat untuk meningkatkan tekanan pada pemerintah untuk mengambil langkah yang penting namun sulit telah memberikan hasil sebelumnya — contohnya dalam memajukan keberlangsungan hutan dan perikanan.
Kesadaran masyarakat merupakan salah satu prioritas yang ditonjolkan dalam pertemuan PBB.
Akan tetapi, untuk melaksanakan upaya global tersebut, kita membutuhkan lembaga global baru yang benar-benar mampu menjalankan upaya tersebut.
NANBU, sebagai LSM internasional, akan mampu mengatasi sifat transnasional kebanyakan perusahan obat-obatan, namun terlindung dari pengaruh lobi tingkat nasional atau tekanan politik.
Bakteri yang kebal terhadap antibiotik merupakan ancaman global, dan maka dari itu tidak dapat diatasi dengan langkah-langkah nasional saja.
Masyarakat dunia harus mulai berpikir dan bertindak bersama untuk mempertahankan kemajuan besar dalam kesehatan dan kesejahteraan manusia yang telah dihasilkan oleh antibiotik.
A Fair Fight Against Antimicrobial Resistance
BRIGHTON – Existing anti-microbial drugs are becoming ineffective.
If current trends continue, we could end up reliving conditions before the discovery of antibiotics, when infectious diseases were major killers.
Meeting the challenge of drug-resistant microbes will be difficult. It will require not only major investments in research and development of new anti-microbial drugs, but also a system to control and restrict new treatments, in order to preserve their efficacy.
As with the response to climate change, an effective strategy will require international coordination.
In particular, the needs of pharmaceutical companies must be reconciled with those of government payers and the global poor.
Indeed, engaging the poor will be crucial to any effort.
Low- and middle-income countries are an important source of drug-resistant organisms.
Crowded housing, poor sanitation, and compromised immune systems, whether owing to malnutrition or chronic infections such as HIV, provide fertile ground for contagion.
Antibiotics are often misused or low-quality, providing bacteria the opportunity to develop resistance.
Large volumes of antibiotics are also used in animal husbandry.
Meanwhile, greatly improved transportation infrastructure – between rural and urban areas and between countries – means that resistant genes quickly become part of a global pool.
In many vulnerable countries, the government health-care system cannot meet demand, and a variety of providers are attempting to bridge the gap. These range from medical specialists to informal providers, who work largely outside the regulatory framework.
These patchwork systems do have benefits.
A recent study in Bangladesh, for example, concluded that antibiotics provided by so-called “village doctors,” often operating from market stalls, contributed to declines in mortality from post-natal sepsis and childhood pneumonia.
But there is also considerable evidence that the drugs being provided are of varying quality and are frequently taken unnecessarily.
Too often, patients do not purchase a full course of treatment.
One response could be to enact and enforce laws that make antibiotics available only on a doctor’s prescription.
However, this could end up severely limiting poor people’s access to antibiotics, leading to higher death rates from infections, making it politically unacceptable and thus difficult to enforce.
A better alternative would be to develop new strategies to improve antibiotic treatments that are provided through informal channels.
For starters, investment is needed to generate reliable surveillance data on the drugs that are effective against common infections.
Treatment guidelines must incorporate this information and be given to all providers of antibiotics.
Meanwhile, high-quality antibiotics must be made available at affordable prices.
Counterfeit products must be identified and removed from the marketplace, and a regulatory partnership between governments, the pharmaceutical sector, and citizens’ groups must be developed to control for quality.
Prices must be kept low through bulk procurement; in some cases, public subsidies may be necessary.
Measures to reduce prices will need to be complemented by efforts to discourage overuse.
Innovations in packaging, perhaps providing full courses of appropriate combinations of drugs, could simplify treatment decisions.
Likewise, development of low-cost diagnostic technologies could help diminish the need to provide treatment on the basis of symptoms alone.
The biggest challenge will be to encourage providers of antibiotics to change their behavior.
This will require measures such as accreditation, modification of payment mechanisms, and the involvement of intermediary organizations to give technical support and monitor performance.
These organizations could include NGOs, religious organizations, social entrepreneurs, and companies that distribute drugs.
These activities are unlikely to be commercially sustainable, and thus will require support from governments, philanthropies, and perhaps drug producers.
In the meantime, the public must receive reliable information and advice on the proper use of antibiotics.
This is particularly important where citizens rely largely on their own resources to cope with health problems.
Implementing a system-wide change in the use of antibiotics will require the creation of national and global coalitions.
One core aim must be to establish basic standards of conduct for health workers and drug companies that reflect the needs of patients and communities.
Governments will need to build their capacity to play an effective role in this process, and companies that develop, produce, and distribute drugs and diagnostic technologies will have to contribute actively to the search for collaborative solutions.
Only if we manage antiobiotics in a fair and sustainable way will we be able to benefit from them at all.
The Anti-Democratic Heart of Populism
SANTIAGO – Many of the men and women who turned out for the annual meeting of the International Monetary Fund in early October were saying something like this: “Imagine if the Republicans had nominated someone with the same anti-trade views as Trump, minus the insults and the sexual harassment.
A populist protectionist would be headed to the White House.”
The underlying view is that rising populism on the right and the left, both in the United States and in Europe, is a straightforward consequence of globalization and its unwanted effects: lost jobs and stagnant middle-class incomes.
Davos men and women hate this conclusion, but they have embraced it with all the fervor of new converts.
Yet there is an alternative – and more persuasive – view: while economic stagnation helps push upset voters into the populist camp, bad economics is neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for bad politics.
On the contrary, argues Princeton political scientist Jan-Werner Mueller in his new book: populism is a “permanent shadow” on representative democracy.
Populism is not about taxation (or jobs or income inequality).
It is about representation – who gets to speak for the people and how.
Advocates of democracy make some exalted claims on its behalf.
As Abraham Lincoln put it at Gettysburg, it is “government of the people, by the people, for the people.”
But modern representative democracy – or any democracy, for that matter – inevitably falls short of these claims.
Populists speak and act, claims Mueller, “as if the people could develop a singular judgment,...as if the people were one,...as if the people, if only they empowered the right representatives, could fully master their fates.”
Populism rests on a toxic triad: denial of complexity, anti-pluralism, and a crooked version of representation.
Most of us believe that social choices (Build more schools or hospitals?
Stimulate or discourage international trade?
Liberalize or restrict abortion?) are complex, and that the existence of a plurality of views about what to do is both natural and legitimate.
Populists deny this.
As Ralf Dahrendorf once put it, populism is simple; democracy is complex. To populists, there is only one right view – that of the people.
If so, the complex mechanisms of liberal democracy, with its emphasis on delegation and representation, are all unnecessary.
No need for parliaments endlessly debating: the unitary will of the people can easily be expressed in a single vote.
Hence populists’ love affair with plebiscites and referenda.
Brexit, anyone?
And not just anyone can represent the people.
The claim is to exclusive representation.
Remember Trump’s boast in his address to the Republican National Convention: “I alone can fix it.”
Politics is always about morality, Aristotle told us.
But populists favor what Mueller calls a particular moralistic interpretation of politics.
Those who hold the right view about the world are moral; the rest are immoral, lackeys of a corrupt elite.
That was exactly the rhetoric of the late Venezuelan ruler Hugo Chávez.
When that failed, and when Chávez’s sank his country’s economy, there was always US imperialism to blame.
So populism is a kind of identity politics.
It is always us against them.
Viewed in this light, populism is not a useful corrective to a democracy captured by technocrats and elites, as Marine Le Pen, Rafael Correa, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, or assorted Western intellectuals want you to believe.
On the contrary, it is profoundly anti-democratic, and hence a threat to democracy itself.
What is to be done?
My take (the prescription is my own, not Mueller’s) is that democrats must (and can) beat populists at their own game.
The toxic triad can become salutary.
First, acknowledge complexity.
The only thing that upsets voters as much as being lied to is being treated like babies.
People who lead challenging lives know that the world is complex.
They do not mind being told that.
They appreciate being spoken to as the grownups they are.
Second, do not treat diversity of views and identities as a problem calling for a technocratic solution.
Rather, make respect for such diversity a profoundly moral feature of society.
The fact that we are not all the same and we can still get along is a tremendous democratic achievement.
Make the case for it.
And do not fall for the tired cliché that reason is for democrats and emotion is for populists.
Make the case for pluralistic democracy in a way that inspires and stirs emotion.
Third, defend – and update – representation.
Leave delegation to complex technical matters.
Take advantage of modern technologies to bring other choices – particularly those having to do with the fabric of daily life – closer to voters.
Tighten campaign finance laws, regulate lobbying better, and enforce affirmative-action measures to ensure that representatives are of the people and work for the people.
These measures alone will not ensure that all of democracy’s broken promises are fulfilled.
But we cannot expect a single set of simple actions to solve a complex problem.
Nor can we believe that we alone can fix it.
If we believed that, we would be populists.
For the sake of democracy, that is precisely what we should not be.
The Abdication of the Left
RONDA, SPAIN – As the world reels from the Brexit shock, it is dawning on economists and policymakers that they severely underestimated the political fragility of the current form of globalization.
The popular revolt that appears to be underway is taking diverse, overlapping forms: reassertion of local and national identities, demand for greater democratic control and accountability, rejection of centrist political parties, and distrust of elites and experts.
This backlash was predictable.
Some economists, including me, did warn about the consequences of pushing economic globalization beyond the boundaries of institutions that regulate, stabilize, and legitimize markets.
Hyper-globalization in trade and finance, intended to create seamlessly integrated world markets, tore domestic societies apart.
The bigger surprise is the decidedly right-wing tilt the political reaction has taken.
In Europe, it is predominantly nationalists and nativist populists that have risen to prominence, with the left advancing only in a few places such as Greece and Spain.
In the United States, the right-wing demagogue Donald Trump has managed to displace the Republican establishment, while the leftist Bernie Sanders was unable to overtake the centrist Hillary Clinton.
As an emerging new establishment consensus grudgingly concedes, globalization accentuates class divisions between those who have the skills and resources to take advantage of global markets and those who don’t.
Income and class cleavages, in contrast to identity cleavages based on race, ethnicity, or religion, have traditionally strengthened the political left.
So why has the left been unable to mount a significant political challenge to globalization?
One answer is that immigration has overshadowed other globalization “shocks.”
The perceived threat of mass inflows of migrants and refugees from poor countries with very different cultural traditions aggravates identity cleavages that far-right politicians are exceptionally well placed to exploit.
So it is not a surprise that rightist politicians from Trump to Marine Le Pen lace their message of national reassertion with a rich dose of anti-Muslim symbolism.
Latin American democracies provide a telling contrast.
These countries experienced globalization mostly as a trade and foreign-investment shock, rather than as an immigration shock.
Globalization became synonymous with so-called Washington Consensus policies and financial opening.
Immigration from the Middle East or Africa remained limited and had little political salience.
So the populist backlash in Latin America – in Brazil, Bolivia, Ecuador, and, most disastrously, Venezuela – took a left-wing form.
The story is similar in the main two exceptions to right-wing resurgence in Europe – Greece and Spain.
In Greece, the main political fault line has been austerity policies imposed by European institutions and the International Monetary Fund.
In Spain, most immigrants until recently came from culturally similar Latin American countries.
In both countries, the far right lacked the breeding ground it had elsewhere.
But the experience in Latin America and southern Europe reveals perhaps a greater weakness of the left: the absence of a clear program to refashion capitalism and globalization for the twenty-first century.
From Greece’s Syriza to Brazil’s Workers’ Party, the left has failed to come up with ideas that are economically sound and politically popular, beyond ameliorative policies such as income transfers.
Economists and technocrats on the left bear a large part of the blame.
Instead of contributing to such a program, they abdicated too easily to market fundamentalism and bought in to its central tenets.
Worse still, they led the hyper-globalization movement at crucial junctures.
The enthroning of free capital mobility – especially of the short-term kind – as a policy norm by the European Union, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, and the IMF was arguably the most fateful decision for the global economy in recent decades.
As Harvard Business School professor Rawi Abdelal has shown, this effort was spearheaded in the late 1980s and early 1990s not by free-market ideologues, but by French technocrats such as Jacques Delors (at the European Commission) and Henri Chavranski (at the OECD), who were closely associated with the Socialist Party in France.
Similarly, in the US, it was technocrats associated with the more Keynesian Democratic Party, such as Lawrence Summers, who led the charge for financial deregulation.
France’s Socialist technocrats appear to have concluded from the failed Mitterrand experiment with Keynesianism in the early 1980s that domestic economic management was no longer possible, and that there was no real alternative to financial globalization.
The best that could be done was to enact Europe-wide and global rules, instead of allowing powerful countries like Germany or the US to impose their own.
A crucial difference between the right and the left is that the right thrives on deepening divisions in society – “us” versus “them” – while the left, when successful, overcomes these cleavages through reforms that bridge them.
Hence the paradox that earlier waves of reforms from the left – Keynesianism, social democracy, the welfare state – both saved capitalism from itself and effectively rendered themselves superfluous.
Absent such a response again, the field will be left wide open for populists and far-right groups, who will lead the world – as they always have – to deeper division and more frequent conflict.
Immigration and the New Class Divide
SINGAPORE – The British shadow minister for Europe, Pat McFadden, recently warned members of his Labour Party that they should try to make the most of the global economy and not treat immigration like a disease.
As he put it, “You can feed on people’s grievances or you can give people a chance.
And I think our policies should be around giving people a chance.”
In a world increasingly dominated by grievances – against immigrants, bankers, Muslims, “liberal elites,” “Eurocrats,” cosmopolitans, or anything else that seems vaguely alien – such wise words are rare.
Leaders worldwide should take note.
In the United States, Republicans – backed by their Tea Party activists – are threatening to close the government down just because President Barack Obama has offered undocumented immigrants who have lived and worked in the US for many years a chance to gain citizenship.
The United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP) wants to introduce a five-year ban on immigration for permanent settlement.
Russia’s deputy prime minister, Dmitry Rogozin, once released a video promising to “clean the rubbish” – meaning migrant workers, mostly from former Soviet republics – “away from Moscow.”
Even the once famously tolerant Dutch and Danes are increasingly voting for parties that fulminate against the scourge of immigration.
Always keen to assert the freedom to insult Muslims, the Dutch Freedom Party wants to ban all mosques.
And the tiny and much-harassed opposition parties in Singapore – a country where almost everyone is descended from immigrants – are gaining traction by appealing to popular gripes about immigrants (mostly from India and China) who are supposedly taking jobs from “natives.”
What can American Tea Party enthusiasts, Russian chauvinists, fearful Dutch and Danes, and Singaporean leftists possibly have in common that is driving this anti-immigrant sentiment?
Retaining one’s job in a tightening economy is undoubtedly a serious concern.
But the livelihoods of most of the middle-aged rural white Americans who support the Tea Party are hardly threatened by poor Mexican migrants.
UKIP is popular in some parts of England where immigrants are rarely seen.
And many of the Dutch Freedom Party’s voters live nowhere near a mosque.
Anti-immigrant sentiment cuts across the old left-right divide.
One thing Tea Party or UKIP supporters share with working-class voters who genuinely fear losing their jobs to low-paid foreigners is anxiety about being left behind in a world of easy mobility, supranational organizations, and global networking.
On the right, support for conservative parties is split between business interests that benefit from immigration or supranational institutions, and groups that feel threatened by them.
That is why the British Tories are so afraid of UKIP.
Nigel Farage, UKIP’s leader, is less concerned with economic growth than with pursuing his extreme conception of national independence.
On the left, opinion is split between those who oppose racism and intolerance above all and those who want to protect employment and preserve “solidarity” for what is left of the native-born working class.
It would be a mistake to dismiss anxiety about immigration as mere bigotry or apprehension about the globalized economy as simply reactionary.
National, religious, and cultural identities (for lack of a better word) are being transformed, though less by immigration than by the development of globalized capitalism.
In the new global economy, there are clear winners and losers.
Educated men and women who can communicate effectively in varied international contexts are benefiting.
People who lack the needed education or experience – and there are many of them – are struggling.
In other words, the new class divisions run less between the rich and the poor than between educated metropolitan elites and less sophisticated, less flexible, and, in every sense, less connected provincials.
It is irrelevant that the provincials’ political leaders (and their backers) are sometimes wealthier than the resented metropolitan elites.
They still feel looked down upon.
And so they share the bitterness of those who feel alienated in a world they find bewildering and hateful.
Populist rabble-rousers like to stir up such resentments by ranting about foreigners who work for a pittance or not at all.
But it is the relative success of ethnic minorities and immigrants that is more upsetting to indigenous populations.
This explains the popular hostility toward Obama.
Americans know that, before too long, whites will be just another minority, and people of color will increasingly be in positions of power.
At this point, all Tea Partiers and others like them can do is declare, “We want our country back!”
Of course, this is an impossible demand.
Short of unleashing massive and bloody ethnic cleansing – Bosnia, on a continental scale – Americans and others have no choice but to get used to living in increasingly diverse societies.
Likewise, economic globalization cannot be undone.
But regulation can and should be improved.
After all, some things are still worth protecting.
There are good reasons not to leave culture, education, lifestyles, or jobs completely exposed to the creative destruction of market forces.
McFadden has pinpointed the central solution to globalization’s challenges: giving people “the tools to reap the benefits” of the globalized world, thereby making the “connected world work better for people.”
The problem is that this call is more likely to appeal to the highly educated, already privileged classes than to those who feel disenfranchised in today’s global economy.
This is a serious problem for political parties on the left, which increasingly seem to be speaking for the metropolitan elites, while provincial populists are pushing traditional conservatives further to the right by fishing in the dark waters of popular resentment.
Kerjasama Global bagai Persoalan Hidup dan Mati
LONDON – Ketidakpastian yang lahir dari hasil referendum Inggris untuk meninggalkan Uni Eropa baru-baru ini – yang memicu goncangan di seluruh pasar global – telah mendominasi berita.
Namun, seiring kita mempersiapkan diri untuk menghadapi tantangan politik baru, kita tidak bisa melupakan tantangan-tantangan yang sudah di depan mata, terutama tantangan kesehatan global seperti munculnya resistensi antimikroba (AMR), yang tidak membeda-bedakan performa ekonomi ataupun stabilitas politik.
Kini, sekitar 700.000 orang kehilangan nyawa akibat infeksi yang kebal terhadap obat.
Pada tahun 2050, jumlah ini dapat melonjak menjadi sepuluh juta jiwa per tahun, dengan kerugian terhadap GDP dunia sebesar 100 triliun dolar AS.
Untuk menghindari situasi itu, bulan Mei lalu Review AMR yang saya pimpin mengeluarkan strategi untuk mengatasi infeksi tersebut, memaparkan usulan-usulan untuk memastikan pengembangan antibiotik baru yang diperlukan, dan untuk menggunakan antibiotik yang sudah ada secara lebih efisien bagi manusia dan di bidang pertanian.
Dari sepuluh intervensi utama yang kami usulkan, empat berikut sangat penting:
·       Luncurkan kampanye global, disesuaikan bagi berbagai daerah, untuk meningkatkan kesadaran masyarakat atas AMR.
·       Atasi kegagalan pasar dalam pengembangan antibiotik baru dengan cara memperkenalkan imbalan masuk pasar yang dibayar di muka bagi pengembang obat-obat baru, seiring memastikan akses global.
·       Majukan inovasi dan tingkatkan penggunaan teknologi diagnostik untuk penggunaan antibiotik secara lebih efisien.
·       Laksanakan target nasional yang berfokus pada pengurangan pengunaan antibiotik yang tidak perlu di bidang pertanian dan untuk manusia.
Dengan selesainya laporan akhir kami, Review kami akan terus mendorong aksi internasional secara langsung terhadap para pimpinan politik.
Contohnya, sebagai Ketua Review, saya baru-baru ini membahas rekomendasi kami di Majelis Kesehatan Dunia di Jenewa, dan dengan para pembuat kebijakan PBB dan Amerika Serikat di New York dan Washington, DC. 
Dalam perbincangan tersebut, naiknya kesadaran para pembuat kebijakan atas bahaya AMR mencolok.
Hanya dua tahun yang lalu, masalah infeksi resistensi obat biasanya ditanggapi dengan pertanyaan-pertanyaan seperti "Apakah itu AMR?" atau, "Mengapa menteri keuangan mengambil alih krisis kesehatan?"
Sedikit dari mereka memahami skala dan sifat multifaset dari tantangan ini, di situlah perlunya pendekatan komprehensif.
Saya sendiri menanyakan hal-hal yang sama ketika Perdana Menteri Inggris David Cameron pertama meminta saya untuk memimpin Review AMR.
Situasinya sudah banyak berubah sejak itu.
Pembuat kebijakan dari berbagai negara dengan beragam sistem ekonomi dan politik menghadapi masalah AMR, dan beberapa negara sudah mengambil langkah untuk mengatasinya.
Semua ini memberi harapan bahwa 2016 dapat menjadi tahun ketika perubahan sesungguhnya dimulai.
Namun, harapan adalah satu hal; tindakan adalah urusan lain.
Walaupun pertemuan tingkat tinggi dan pidato-pidato tentang AMR mengirimkan pesan yang tepat, mereka tidak berarti apa-apa jika kita tidak berhasil menjadikan momentum ini tindakan nyata, dimulai dari pertemuan G20 dan PBB September ini.
Sementara hasil diskusi terbaru saya mengesankan bahwa perjanjian kemungkinan akan tercapai dalam kedua pertemuan ini, masih jauh dari pasti bahwa perjanjian tersebut akan cocok dengan skala masalah.
Pada pertemuan G20, perjanjian yang dibutuhkan harus fokus pada mengembangkan mekanisme global untuk memugarkan pasar untuk antibiotik baru yang terjangkau, mudah diakses, dan efisien secara global.
Pada pertemuan PBB, sasarannya harus mengubah mantra pentingya “akses, bukan kelebihan” (access, not excess) menjadi kenyataan, melalui kesepakatan mengurangi penggunaan antibiotik tidak perlu dalam bidang pertanian, dan meluncurkan kampanye peningkatan kesadaran global.
Peningkatan dana untuk penelitian dan pengembangan antibiotik dan diagnostik baru untuk melawan AMR juga penting.
Pentingnya, perjanjian-perjanjian tersebut harus ampuh.
Setiap negara harus menetapkan target mereka yang sesuai dengan keadaan dan kebutuhan mereka, tetapi harus ada pula beberapa ketentuan untuk memastikan bahwa semua menanggung beban bersama.
Sebagai permulaan, upaya melawan AMR harus dimasukkan ke dalam strategi pembangunan ekonomi, termasuk Tujuan Pembangunan Berkelanjutan PBB.
Selanjutnya, kemajuan harus diukur, tidak hanya agar para pembuat kebijakan, perusahaan, dan sistem kesehatan dapat dipertanggungjawabkan, namun juga agar yang lain dapat meniru keberhasilan tersebut.
Untuk tujuan ini, kita mungkin perlu standar pengukuran baru untuk menilai dampak AMR.
Walaupun terdengar teknis (hal ini memang teknis), para ilmuwan senior AMR berpikir bahwa menyepakati pengukuran umum dapat mengubah cara masing-masing negara menetapkan target mereka dan meningkatkan kemampuan kita untuk mengukur kemajuan dalam tahun-tahun mendatang.
Akhirnya, guna memperhitungkan perubahan prioritas dan kepribadian politik, kita perlu pembela (champion) yang konstan dalam memerangi AMR.
Misalnya, dengan menunjuk utusan PBB untuk AMR, untuk dapat terus memperjuangkan pengatasan masalah ini dan untuk menantang negara-negara untuk mencapai target mereka.
Tanpa pengingat atas perlunya mengatasi AMR, belum lagi masalah transparansi seputar kemajuan, dunia dapat teralih dan kehilangan kesempatan yang segera lenyap untuk memberikan perubahan yang diperlukan demi menghentikan kenaikan infeksi resistensi obat.
Dalam beberapa tahun terakhir, pemerintah, industri, dan organisasi internasional telah mengambil langkah-langkah penting dalam menghadapi ancaman AMR.
Namun keputusan sulit harus diambil sekarang.
Jika kita ingin mencegah kecelakaan beruntun yaitu kenaikan AMR, pemimpin kita harus mengambil tindakan sekarang.
Kita tahu apa yang harus dilakukan; sekarang waktunya bertindak.
The Social Science of Medicine
DAVOS – When I was a medical student in the mid-1980s, I contracted malaria in Papua New Guinea. It was a miserable experience.
My head ached.
My temperature soared. I became anemic.
But I took my medicine, and I got better.
The experience wasn’t pleasant, but thanks to cheap, effective malaria drugs I was never in very much danger.
The pills that cured me, chloroquine tablets, do not work anymore.
Even at the time I was taking them, the parasite that causes malaria had already become resistant to chloroquine in many parts of the world; Papua New Guinea was one of the last places where the pills continued to be effective, and even there they were losing their potency.
Today, chloroquine has basically disappeared from our medical arsenal.
The growing capacity of pathogens to resist antibiotics and other antimicrobial drugs is turning into the greatest emerging crisis in contemporary health care – and it is a crisis that cannot be solved by science alone.
Other pharmaceuticals are following in chloroquine’s wake.
Multi-drug-resistant strains of tuberculosis, E. coli, and salmonella are now commonplace.
Most gonorrhea infections are untreatable.
Superbugs, like methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and Clostridium difficile, are proliferating.
In India, antibiotic-resistant infections killed more than 58,000 newborns in 2013.
Today, malaria is often treated with a combination of artemisinin – a drug derived from a Chinese herb – and other antimalarial drugs.
But these revolutionary medicines are now in danger of following chloroquine into obsolescence; resistant strains of malaria have been documented in Southeast Asia.
This is more than a medical problem; it is a potential economic disaster.
Research commissioned by the Review on Antimicrobial Resistance, headed by the economist Jim O’Neill, has calculated that if current trends continue, drug-resistant infections will kill ten million people a year by 2050 and cost the global economy some $100 trillion over the next 35 years.
Even that dramatic prediction may be a substantial underestimate, as it includes only the direct costs in terms of lives and wellbeing lost to infections. Many other aspects of modern medicine also rely on antibiotics.
Cancer patients receiving chemotherapy take them to suppress bacteria that would otherwise overwhelm their weakened immune systems.
Many surgical operations now considered routine, including joint replacements and Caesarean sections, can be performed safely only when antibiotics prevent opportunistic infections.
The origins of drug resistance are a well-understood matter of evolution.
If pathogens are exposed to the selective pressure of toxic drugs, eventually they will adapt.
The Wellcome Trust, which I lead, has invested hundreds of millions of dollars into researching these mechanisms, improving diagnoses, and creating new drugs.
In order to address the problem effectively, this effort must be extended beyond the realm of biological science to areas not traditionally associated with medicine.
In rich and poor countries alike, we have become systematic abusers of antibiotics.
The key to combating resistance is to delay the rate at which the pathogens can adapt.
But, by overprescribing antibiotics and failing to complete the required courses of treatment, we are exposing germs to just enough medicine to encourage resistance.
In effect, we are vaccinating germs against the drugs we want to use against them.
That is because we have come to regard antibiotics almost as consumer goods – ours to demand from doctors, and ours to take or stop taking as we see fit.
Even the most informed patients misuse these wonder drugs.
Research in the United Kingdom has found that even people who understand how resistance develops often contribute to the problem by taking antibiotics without a prescription or giving their drugs to members of their family.
Changing such destructive behavior will require that we better understand the social and cultural factors that drive it.
Disciplines like history, psychology, sociology, anthropology, economics, market research, and social marketing can help.
This is true not only for antimicrobial resistance.
It also applies to outbreaks like the Ebola epidemic.
Combating the virus requires knowledge about its biology, the epidemiology of its transmission, and the drugs and vaccines that could potentially be deployed against it.
But it also requires an understanding of the behaviors that have allowed infection to spread in Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Guinea.
Explaining what made these societies so vulnerable requires learning about the region’s recent history and understanding why people there are deeply distrustful of public authorities.
Isolation of patients and safe burial of the dead are crucial to containing Ebola, but both need to be introduced with cultural sensitivity – not just explanations of the science behind them.
Today’s great public-health threats have profound economic consequences.
Minimizing the risks they pose requires recognizing that they are intertwined with the social, behavioral, and cultural landscape.
Science provides powerful tools.
But we need more than science to use these tools effectively.
Pengendalian Resistensi Antimikroba, Sekarang atau Tidak Sama Sekali
LONDON – Orang umumnya beranggapan setiap penyakit bisa disembuhkan dan pengobatan modern yang ampuh pasti bisa menyelamatkan orang.
Namun bayangkan skenario lain. Anda didiagnosis menderita penyakit menular yang mematikan yang sebelumnya bisa diobati dalam hitungan minggu atau bulan, tapi anda diberitahu bahwa pengobatan anda memerlukan setidaknya dua tahun, suntikan harian dan konsumsi pil sebanyak 14.000 buah selama berbulan-bulan, berikut efek sampingnya.
Anda salah satu dari segelintir orang yang “beruntung” bisa didiagnosis dan diobati, tapi kemungkinan sembuhnya masih 50-50.
Kebanyakan dari kita tidak mengaitkan skenario tersebut dengan “pengobatan modern” tapi ini merupakan kenyataan pahit bagi banyak orang – 500.000 jiwa dan lebih – yang mengalami multi-drug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) atau pasien tuberkolosis dengan resistensi ganda.
MDR-TB terjadi ketika khasiat obat tidak ampuh melawan strain baru dari infeksi yang dahulu bisa diobati.
Tuberkolosis (TB) kini menempati peringkat teratas pembunuh utama akibat penyakit menular, penyebab utama kematian 1 juta orang setiap tahun, sementara itu MDR-TB terus menyebar di negara-negara berpendapatan rendah dan menengah dan pengendaliannya terus menyulitkan penyedia layanan kesehatan.
MDR-TB menimbulkan beban besar pada sistem kesehatan masyarakat dan perekonomian negara dan merupakan pertanda buruk ketika resistensi antimikroba (AMR) semakin merajalela di negara-negara maju dan miskin.
Tanpa upaya gabungan, strain yang resisten obat dari jenis infeksi lain seperti Staphylococcus Aureus atau E. coli akan semakin menyebar, sehingga konsekuensinya terhadap kesehatan global dan sistem pelayanan kesehatan di seluruh dunia bisa mematikan.
Ketika AMR berdampak pada hilangnya efektivitas antibiotik, infeksi tak terobati akan membuat prosedur-prosedur yang relatif rutin seperti transplantasi organ atau kemoterapi kanker jauh lebih berisiko.
Kerugian pada perekonomian dan korban jiwa akibat meningkatnya AMR bisa meroket di luar kendali: jika dibiarkan, infeksi akibat resistensi obat dapat menyebabkan kematian 10 juta jiwa per tahun pada akhir tahun 2050, sementara kerugian total dalam PDB dunia diperkirakan mencapai 100 triliun dolar AS.
Respon segera dan efektif ialah satu-satunya solusi untuk memutarbalikkan masa depan yang suram.
Beruntungnya, pada pertemuan G-20 di Hangzhou, Cina awal bulan ini, para pemimpin dunia menempatkan isu AMR ke dalam agenda G-20 untuk pertama kali, ini mencerminkan pengakuan komunitas internasional bahwa AMR adalah ancaman nyata terhadap pembangunan ekonomi dan kemakmuran global.
Sejauh ini G-20 juga melakukan upaya terbesar untuk membangkitkan stpenemuan dan pengembangan produk farmasi yang terganjal untuk beberapa antibiotik baru (diperlukan untuk menggantikan obat-obatan yang resisten) dan menjalankan uji diagnostik agar dokter-dokter bisa meresepkan obat dengan lebih efektif.