China’s ever-zealous propaganda officials, evidently fearful of not demonstrating sufficient loyalty and respect for the new party chief, quickly hijacked the slogan; the China Dream has replaced the “China Model” in official political branding.
Whatever the new administration does is touted as part of its ambitious effort to make the “China Dream” come true.
Unfortunately, China propagandists, who double as censors, have a perverse ability to discredit anything that they try to brand.
The China Dream is no exception.
So far, public reaction has ranged from puzzlement to derision.
After a decade of government by slogan, the Chinese public wants substance.
This presents Xi with a real challenge.
He has risen to the top by winning friends and allies inside the CCP.
Now that he is the leader of a dynamic, diverse, and increasingly demanding society, he must gain popular support and confidence to maintain his credibility and become an effective politician.
The first thing that Xi should do is to articulate a clearer, more specific, and inspiring version of the China Dream, and stop letting the CCP’s propaganda officials define it for him.
The China Dream may include all of the economic benefits and material comfort that ordinary Chinese desire, but it will not be complete without the human rights and dignity that citizens in civilized societies take for granted.
The second thing that Xi and his colleagues need to do is to follow up with specific policies and actions that can bolster the credibility of their declared goals.
Political slogans, however high-sounding, become stale when their purveyors fail to make good on their promises.
Xi may still be enjoying a honeymoon with the Chinese public, but it is likely to be a short one.
His predecessors had ten years to carry out real reforms and accomplished little, leaving the Chinese in no mood to endure another decade of government by shibboleth.
Xi of Arabia
BEIJING – Those who have criticized China’s cautious foreign policy need to reconsider their position, following President Xi Jinping’s just-completed visit to Saudi Arabia and Iran – two major Middle Eastern powers that are currently at each other’s throats.
The visits reflect the more active foreign-policy approach that Xi has spearheaded, particularly in the Middle East.
This new approach raises an important question: Can China’s impact on the region be more constructive than that of the United States?
Now is certainly a tense time to become involved in the Middle East, a region where, as Richard N. Haass argues, a New Thirty Years’ War, in which “civil wars and proxy wars become impossible to distinguish,” is unfolding.
A key factor in unleashing the current chaos – which represents the convergence of numerous deep-rooted challenges and conflicts – was America’s 2003 invasion of Iraq.
By eliminating Saddam Hussein’s Sunni regime, the US paved the way for a Shia-led government, a development that tilted the regional balance of power toward Iran and left Sunni-ruled Saudi Arabia feeling encircled by a Shia coalition.
That is why Iran and Saudi Arabia are so deeply involved in Syria’s civil war.
They know that the fate of President Bashar al-Assad’s Alawite regime will have significant implications for the regional order.
For Saudi Arabia, reining in Iran is all the more important in the wake of the recent agreement on the country’s nuclear program, which has resulted in the lifting of international economic sanctions that have long constrained Iran’s regional leadership ambitions.
Of course, neither Saudi Arabia nor Iran – or Turkey, which has also joined the competition for regional influence – is seeking a direct confrontation.
These countries would rather empower other actors, even if it means fueling dangerous religious radicalization and the privatization of violence.
The terrorist movements that have emerged as a result of this approach – namely, the Islamic State – cannot be defeated using traditional counter-terrorism operations.
To be sure, these Middle East rivals are not the only ones involved in the region’s current quagmire.
External powers like France, Russia, and, of course, the US are also deeply involved, each with its own geopolitical objectives.
Now China is entering the fray, bringing a uniquely constructive vision with it.
The two characters that comprise the Chinese word for crisis (危机) mean, individually, “danger” (危) and “opportunity” (机).
That is precisely what China sees in today’s Middle East.
For most of the relevant actors, highly perilous geopolitical competition is overshadowing vast economic opportunities.
The Middle East is crucial to this connectivity-oriented grand strategy, not least because of its key role in the “One Belt, One Road” project that Xi promoted in Cairo.
China’s determination to reestablish the ancient Silk Roads – including the overland route that runs through the Middle East – has led it to enter into strategic partnerships with eight Arab countries in recent years, and to sign agreements with six Arab countries to pursue the initiative jointly.
Iran, Turkey, and seven Arab countries are among the founding members of the Beijing-based Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, a key institution for financing related infrastructure projects.
But China is not waiting for the One Belt, One Road initiative to be completed before pursuing increased trade with Middle Eastern countries.
During his recent visit to Saudi Arabia, he claimed that free-trade negotiations between the Gulf Cooperation Council and China should be concluded this year.
Moreover, Xi announced that China will issue $55 billion in loans to the Middle East, including a $15 billion special loan for industrialization, $10 billion in commercial loans to boost production capacity, and $10 billion in concessional loans.
The remaining $20 billion will go toward a joint investment fund with the United Arab Emirates and Qatar to invest in traditional energy, infrastructure development, and high-end manufacturing industries in the region.
All of this aligns with the “1+2+3” cooperation pattern that Xi proposed at the June 2014 Ministerial Conference of the China-Arab States Cooperation Forum in Beijing.
According to this approach, energy cooperation should form the core of collaboration, while infrastructure construction and trade and investment form two wings. Nuclear power, satellites, and new energy sources are three high-tech areas where cooperation can lead to important breakthroughs.
Here, the goal is to take advantage of the region’s energy resources, while helping it to industrialize and diversify its economy.
Of course, China’s success in the Middle East requires progress on mitigating the region’s tensions, cooling its hotspots, and stabilizing weak countries – all of which will require smart diplomacy by many actors.
But peace and development are inextricably linked.
To turn the tide against extremism, Middle Eastern countries must be able to provide economic opportunities to their people, and these can only be secured through trade, investment, and jobs.
In this fundamental respect, China has a lot to offer the Middle East – and President Xi has once again shown his determination to offer it.
When Xi Meets Obama
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA – As Chinese President Xi Jinping begins his trip to the United States in Seattle, home to many of the world’s leading technology firms, most observers are looking ahead to his subsequent meeting with President Barack Obama.
Can the summit reverse the downward spiral in US-China relations that began with Xi’s accession to power in 2013?
Few dispute that the world’s most important bilateral relationship is in deep trouble.
From the US perspective, China’s reckless behavior in the South China Sea, unrestrained cyber attacks against American targets, protectionist economic policies, and escalating political repression at home have demolished the belief that a globally integrated China would be a responsible and cooperative partner.
Indeed, recent Chinese actions directly challenge vital American interests and core values.
Chinese leaders, for their part, view America’s strategic “pivot to Asia” as a thinly veiled step to tighten its geopolitical containment of China.
Moreover, they have become obsessed with US dominance in international finance and technology and, most important, America’s ideological commitment to liberal democracy, which they regard as an existential threat to the Chinese Communist Party (CCP).
The toxic mix of mutual mistrust and tit-for-tat behavior has brought Sino-American ties to their lowest point since the Tiananmen Square massacre of 1989.
There is now widespread concern that the US and China may be headed for a new cold war.
For Xi, the stakes of his US trip could not be higher.
To maintain his domestic image as a strong leader, he must stick to his nationalist rhetoric and policies.
But he also needs to stabilize the all-important relationship with the US.
Judging by recent moves by China and the US, we can expect modest success in a few contentious areas.
While such improvements, on their own, will not change the relationship’s adversarial dynamic, they may halt the deterioration in bilateral ties, at least for now.
On the eve of the summit, both the US and China took positive, albeit symbolic, steps to demonstrate their goodwill and improve the diplomatic atmosphere.
The US extradited a low-level Chinese official to face corruption charges.
The Obama administration also decided not to announce sanctions against Chinese entities and individuals allegedly involved in cyber attacks on American companies and government agencies.
For its part, China released a human-rights activist and dispatched a high-level delegation to the US to discuss cyber security.
In fact, the two sides are reportedly negotiating a landmark deal that would prohibit cyber attacks against each other’s vital infrastructure.
An agreement on the issue could be the most important outcome of the summit, although other types of cyber attacks are unlikely to be covered by it.
For China, the biggest prize is a bilateral investment treaty (BIT).
In practical terms, a US-China BIT would make it easier for Chinese entities to invest and operate in the US and increase American firms’ access to Chinese markets.
Such a deal would be a near-term boon for Xi, because it would represent a vote of confidence by the US in China’s struggling economy.
But the prospects for a BIT are uncertain, at best.
The US Congress is deeply skeptical, and the American business community needs convincing as well.
Both have been bitterly disappointed by China’s mercantilist trading policies after its accession to the World Trade Organization.
Given how many contentious issues remain unresolved, an accord is unlikely during the summit.
The South China Sea dispute may prove to be the toughest diplomatic nut to crack.
China has staked its national prestige and its leadership’s nationalist credentials on this issue, which means that Xi is likely to rebuff US demands that China cease all activities seen as militarizing its new artificial islands in disputed waters.
The most that can be realistically expected is an insipid statement of the two sides’ agreement to disagree.
But the most politically sensitive topic for China has little to do with cyber security or the South China Sea. It is China’s ongoing crackdown on civil liberties and human rights.
Facing enormous domestic pressure, Obama has announced that human rights will be on the agenda of his summit with Xi.
But Xi is unlikely to make any concessions, because doing so could damage his political standing within the CCP and undermine a central component of his political vision: the reassertion of political control over a dynamic society.
Ultimately, the key question looming over the summit is whether Xi will be able to offer enough to repair the damage done to Sino-US relations in recent years.
To be sure, trying is better than doing nothing.
But what really matters is whether, after the summit, China takes concrete actions that reflect a genuine shift from the policies that have fueled the deterioration in bilateral ties.
Why Work at Work?
PHUKET – Marissa Mayer, the new CEO of Yahoo!, recently created a fuss by issuing an edict that forbids anyone at the company to work from home.
Mayer’s demarche received a lot of press coverage, probably more than it deserved.
And, by all accounts, enough people at Yahoo! were not working, either from home or from more interesting places, that it had become a serious problem.
Beyond that, Mayer’s edict makes more sense as a means of cultural change within a business than it does as a way to improve any particular individual’s productivity.
Almost precisely because working remotely is easy, the advantage that a workplace has over a collection of home workers – or a set of outsourced workers assembled through Task Rabbit – is that people can accomplish more in a setting that provides a common culture and the benefit of serendipitous connections.
Long ago, the advantage of a firm was that it lowered transaction costs (an idea first clearly expressed by the Nobel laureate economist Ronald Coase), such as the costs of finding workers, assigning them to tasks, assessing productivity, and setting salaries.
Now that transaction costs are so low, the primary benefit of working at work is that the physical interactions foster an organizational culture and boost creativity, rather than efficiency or productivity, within an established routine.
Mayer, I think, did not order her employees back to the office merely because some people were not actually working at home; rather, many of those who were working were not working together.
To be sure, it seems contradictory to some people that Yahoo!, an online business, requires its employees to be physically present in the company’s offices.
But most of the money and talent in this industry already seem to concentrate physically in one small part of the United States, between San Francisco and San Jose.
Whether it’s the Yahoo! Cafeteria (now more inviting and more frequented with the advent of free food), or the halls of the Plug &amp; Play startup accelerator, proximity matters.
Being physically present at work means direct contact with other sharp and creative minds.
And the benefits of human contact and interaction are why salespeople still call on customers instead of using Skype, and why Meetup (which supports organizers of face-to-face meetings; I am on the company’s board) changes lives in ways that Twitter and Facebook rarely do.
Of course, those who prefer to work at home cite not just the cost and time of commuting, but also the proliferation of meetings – too much culture, perhaps – and a steady flood of communication that simply interrupts their work rather than enhancing it.
Interestingly, I heard this point at a WPP Stream “unconference” in Phuket, Thailand, where a couple of hundred people had flown thousands of miles to meet face to face to share ideas and strengthen working relationships.
So, yes, online work can make a lot of sense in many situations, but when you are trying to fix a broken corporate culture, you need the commitment, human engagement, and creative interaction that happen most consistently in a physical workplace.
In the end, it is up to good managers to decide who can work where, and to make meetings short and useful.
Indeed, the whole point of having managers is that they are supposed to exercise judgment.
Otherwise, computers and the Internet would allow us not just to work from home, but to report to a software program rather than to a person.
But, in the end, the challenge is to find the right fit between people and environment.
Personally, I come at this from the opposite direction.
As an independent angel investor with no real day job, I don’t have an office to report to every day.
But I would miss the companionship of people working around me – even if they do not necessarily work with me.
Fortunately, Meetup allows me to sit at a desk amid its roughly 90 people; I travel a lot, but I work from a desk at Meetup whenever I am at “home” in New York City.
True, I don’t have to go to the company’s meetings, but I like being surrounded by busy people; I know it makes me work harder.
Whatever our work, we remain physically social beings.
Yankee Bases Go Home
RIO DE JANEIRO – Last month, the leaders of all 12 countries of South America (except one) gathered in Quito, Ecuador’s capital, for the summit of the Union of South American Nations.
UNASUR or UNASUL (depending on whether one speaks Spanish or Portuguese) was established by the twelve presidents in Brasília in May 2008 with the aim of furthering economic and political integration.
Instead, Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez hijacked the Quito meeting to propagate his Bolivarian Revolution and expound his own ideas for the continent’s future as independent of the United States.
Thanks to America’s recently announced military agreement with Colombia, Chávez’s ideas got more of a hearing than might have been expected. For, instead of infrastructure plans, commercial or environmental treaties, or even multilateral action against such common problems as violence and poverty, the issue that dominated both press accounts and the speeches at the gathering was the new US-Colombian military agreement, announced less than a month before the summit.
To no one’s surprise, Chávez dominated the criticism of the pact.
He claimed that the “Winds of war are blowing,” and that the announcement of the military agreement “can transform itself into a tragedy.”
Unfortunately, Colombian President Álvaro Uribe was absent from the meeting.
Colombia and Ecuador broke diplomatic relations in March 2008, after Colombia’s army pursued FARC guerillas, who have been fighting Colombia’s government for decades, into Ecuadorean territory.
So Uribe could not defend the new military agreement.
This left the floor open to Chávez to isolate Colombia and preach against the US.
In a continent where anti-Americanism remains both very popular and an effective way to consolidate national cohesion and political power, Chávez’s attacks found a ready audience.
In addition, Uribe’s absence allowed Chávez to avoid responding to Colombia’s accusations that Venezuela and its ally Ecuador support the narco-Marxist FARC.
Indeed, the ongoing fallout is likely to remain very negative.
By raising anti-American suspicions and strengthening Chávez’s position across the continent, the agreement weakens the influence of Brazil.
Recently, Brazil had been differentiating itself from the rest of the continent through its stable economy and vibrant democratic political system, both of which were helping the country’s poor.
So the spread and strengthening of Chávez’s so-called Bolivarian Revolution was not in Brazil’s interests, even though some of President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva’s officials appear to be fans of Chávez and his administration.
The terrible timing of the US-Colombia military agreement also gave Chávez and his allies a reason to build up their armies against the “evil imperialist ianque .”
After all, one must remember, the Bolivarian Revolution’s supposed “enemy�� is the US, and no one else.
So the agreement may legitimize and produce an arms race in South America, which is in no one’s interest.
Another unexpected consequence of the US-Colombia military agreement may be a further heightening of tensions between Venezuela and Colombia.
The radical polarization of the Andean region between those two countries will create difficulties in building regional consensus and security problems in the Amazon, as well as weakening the Brazilian project for South American political and economic integration.
Finally, another major consequence of the US-Colombia deal are the doubts that it has created in Latin America about President Barack Obama’s administration, and about the future of relations between the US and South America, especially Brazil, the main regional power.
The agreement revived the perception that US diplomacy lacks sensitivity where the region is concerned.
If Obama wants to encourage moderate and democratic politics in South America, and to bolster Brazil’s efforts to foster stability and economic progress against the region’s radical and undemocratic forces, it must take greater care in not appearing to undermine those the US claims to support.
For Chávez is showing that the old cry of “Yankee go home” still resonates.
China’s Singapore Swing
BEIJING – The Chinese Communist Party has released the final document of the Third Plenum of the 18th Central Committee.
In the CCP’s history, the third plenum has traditionally been the occasion for the party to announce its major policies for the next 5-10 years.
This year happened to be one of leadership transition, so the third plenum became more important.
As expected, its final document unveils a plan for comprehensive reforms that will reshape China’s economy and society in the next decade.
For starters, the household registration (hukou) system will be reformed.
Small cities and towns will allow migrants to apply for the local hukou with no strings attached, and medium-size cities will do the same, with some restrictions.
Although large cities will remain as closed as ever, the new policy will dramatically weaken the institutional foundation of China’s long history of urban-rural and regional divides.
Similarly, the one-child policy that has been enforced for the last 34 years will be modified.
In most provinces, parents who are both single children themselves already can have two children.
The new policy recommends that provinces allow couples to have two children if either parent is a single child.
While this will affect only around 10 million couples – a small number in a country of more than 1.3 billion people – the reform represents a gigantic step toward ending the one-child rule.
Farmers, moreover, will be granted the right to sell their residential land on the open market and will be much more likely to be compensated at market rates when their land is taken by the government.
State-owned enterprises (SOEs), meanwhile, are expected to surrender more of their profits to the government – up to 30% by 2020.
This extra revenue will be used to finance China’s social-security system.
Indeed, from now on, the central government will take over social-security expenditure, establishing nationally unified pension and health-insurance systems, while the retirement age will be raised gradually.
Currently, women can retire at the age of 50, and men at 55 – ridiculously low by global standards and clearly unsustainable, given China’s rapidly aging population.
SOEs’ power will be curtailed in other ways.
Their ability to stifle innovation will be weakened by a drastic reduction in the government’s power to restrict the entry of new competitors into all areas of the economy, as well as a major effort to reduce bureaucratic red tape.
Financial liberalization, too, will be deepened, which will help startups and private firms most of all.
In addition to pledging to liberalize exchange and interest rates, the final document also calls for allowing domestic private capital to form small and medium-size banks.
And, in an effort to bring coherence to commercial courts’ rulings, the court system will be directly financed by the central government, rather than by the corresponding local government.
This promises to strengthen the independence of the court system at the local level.
All of these reforms have long been expected.
But the third plenum also provided surprises, including the creation of a leading group within the CCP to steer reform.
China used to have a reform commission within the executive branch; the establishment of the leading group indicates the CCP’s commitment, and that of President Xi Jinping, to comprehensive reform.
A second surprise is the document’s emphasis on the market.
In the past, government direction was emphasized, despite an acknowledgement of the market’s positive role.
Now, for the first time, the CCP is officially calling for “allowing the market to take a central role in resource allocation.”
A final surprise is that the document sets a timeframe to complete all of the reforms; by 2020, China is supposed to become a full-fledged market economy.
This is the first time in recent history that the CCP has set a specific deadline for policymaking.
And yet, while all of these measures are encouraging signs, some key items are missing.
For example, there was no clear mention of further SOE reform.
Likewise, though the document calls for strengthening local legislatures, it proposes no concrete plan to curb local governments’ role in economic activities, which is one of the sources of distortions in the Chinese economy.
This is related to the final document’s most significant lacuna: political reform.
In fact, a Singapore-style approach – combining a freewheeling market economy and an authoritarian regime – has clearly emerged from the plenum.
It is an approach that awaits the test of time.
Singapore is a city-state of five million people – roughly the population of the Haidian district of Beijing.
Given China’s much greater size and complexity, the Chinese government’s pursuit of the Singaporean model, with its suppression of any and all social disorder, would ultimately undermine economic dynamism.
To build the innovative economy envisioned by the third plenum, the CCP’s leadership needs to find a new governance model that fosters a vibrant society.
Sooner rather than later, the crucially important economic reforms that have just been unveiled will not be enough.
China’s Real-Estate Wrongs
BEIJING – China’s real-estate sector has been a source of serious concern for several years, with soaring property prices raising fears of overheating in the housing market.
But, with price growth easing, it seems that the government’s campaign to rein in property risk is finally taking hold.
The danger now is that the housing market will collapse – bringing China’s economic prospects down with it.
In its effort to control rising housing prices, China’s government has pursued nine distinct policies, not all of which have served their purpose.
Though policies like limits on mortgages for first-time buyers and minimum residency requirements for purchasing property in a first-tier city like Beijing or Shanghai helped to ease demand, supply-side tactics, such as limiting credit to real-estate developers and imposing new taxes on property sales, have proved to be counter-productive.
This flawed approach allowed China’s housing prices to continue to rise steadily, fueling major housing bubbles, especially in first-tier cities.
The average Beijing resident would have to save all of his or her income for 34 years before to be able to purchase an apartment outright.
In Shanghai and Guangzhou, the equivalent is 29 and 27 years, respectively – much higher than in other major international cities.
The expectation that this trend will continue has driven homeowners to retain possession of their properties, even though rental rates amount to less than 2% of a property’s market value.
But, with the real-estate sector finally facing a downturn, the time to rethink this investment strategy has arrived.
In the first four months of 2014, housing sales dropped by nearly 7% year on year, with construction of new floor area falling by more than 22%.
As a result, downward pressure on property prices is mounting.
In normal times, citizens and officials alike would welcome this trend.
But, at a time of weakening economic performance, China cannot afford an implosion of the real-estate sector, which accounts for at least 30% of overall growth.
Indeed, though China’s government has expressed its willingness to sacrifice some growth in its pursuit of structural reform and rebalancing, the impact of a housing-market collapse on the financial sector would cause growth to slow beyond the acceptable limit.
That impact partly reflects the highly problematic nature of the Chinese government’s long-awaited move to liberalize interest rates.
Instead of taking a direct approach – lifting the interest-rate cap imposed on banks – liberalization has been achieved by allowing shadow banking to flourish.
As a result, a large number of nonbank financial institutions – such as wealth-management companies and online financial-services providers – are now using promises of high returns to attract small investors.
Making matters worse, the monetary authorities have tightened the credit supply, in an effort to deleverage the Chinese economy.
While both interest-rate liberalization and deleveraging are critical to the long-term health of China’s economy, the skyrocketing cost of borrowing is forcing many low-risk companies, which are unable to offer sufficiently high rates of return, out of the market.
At the same time, real-estate developers who have borrowed heavily from shadow-banking institutions, based on the assumption that property prices would continue to rise steadily, may struggle to repay their debts, with a sharp decline in prices inevitably leading to defaults.
Given that the formal banking sector provides a large share of shadow-banking finance, this could initiate a chain reaction affecting the entire financial sector.
Many remain convinced that China’s government – which wields with the world’s largest foreign-exchange reserves and virtually unchecked authority – would be able to prevent a major financial crisis.
But the financial crisis in the fast-growing city of Wenzhou, triggered by bad loans, suggests otherwise – not least because the economy has yet to recover fully.
There is no reason to believe that a similar crisis could not occur on a national scale.
To avoid such an outcome, China’s leaders must urgently adopt counter-cyclical measures.
They should begin by eliminating non-market-based restrictions on the real-estate sector, which have generated serious distortions not only to the economy, but also to people’s lives, with couples divorcing temporarily to gain the right to purchase an additional apartment.
When it comes to the real-estate sector, China’s government has consistently had the right objective and the wrong strategy.
It is time to align intention with action.
Otherwise, China’s financial sector – indeed, its entire economy – will suffer.
In Praise of China’s New Normal
BEIJING – China’s economy is, at long last, undergoing a rebalancing, with growth rates having declined from more than 10% before 2008 to roughly 7.5% today.
Is this China’s “new normal,” or should the country anticipate even slower growth in the coming decade?
China’s rebalancing is apparent, first and foremost, in the export sector.
Export growth has slowed from its 2001-2008 average of 29% annually to below 10%, making foreign demand a far less critical engine of growth.
Moreover, manufacturing employment and output, as a share of the total, began to decline last year.
In fact, in the first half of this year, services accounted for more than half of total economic growth.
It is no surprise, then, that China’s current-account surplus has shrunk rapidly, from its 2007 peak of more than 10% of GDP to about 2% of GDP today.
This rebalancing has helped to improve China’s income distribution.
Indeed, in recent years, labor’s share of national income has been on the rise – a direct reflection of the decline in manufacturing and expansion in services.
The second is China’s ongoing demographic transformation.
The share of working-age people (16-65 years old) in the total population has been declining since its 2010 peak of 72%.
And the absolute number of working-age people has been falling since 2012.
At the same time, China is undergoing rapid urbanization, with some 200 million people having left the agricultural sector in 2001-2008 to seek urban manufacturing jobs.
More recently, however, the pace of migration has slowed substantially, with rural areas retaining 35% of China’s total labor force.
All of this implies lower growth rates for China – though perhaps not as low as the 6-7% rates that economists like Liu Shijing and Cai Fang are predicting for the next decade.
In fact, relying on China’s past growth record to predict future performance is inherently problematic, owing not only to important shifts in the labor force, but also to the fact that the speed and scale of China’s pre-2008 growth was unprecedented.
For starters, it is likely that the contribution to output growth of the rising ratio of working-age people prior to 2010 was overestimated.
That makes the subsequent decline in the ratio an inaccurate measure with which to determine the negative impact on economic performance.
Moreover, this approach neglects the educational dividends that China will enjoy over the next 20 years, as the younger generation replaces older workers.
As it stands, the rate of return-adjusted educational attainment for Chinese aged 50-60 is half that of those aged 20-25. In other words, young workers will be twice as productive as those entering retirement.
Indeed, the level of educational attainment in China continues to improve.
By 2020, the share of those aged 18-22 who are pursuing a college education will reach 40%, compared to 32% today.
This improvement in human capital is bound to offset, to some extent, the net loss of labor.
Furthermore, China’s low retirement age – 50 for women and 60 for men – provides policymakers with considerable room to maneuver.
Increasing the retirement age by just a half-year for each of the next ten years would more than compensate for the annual decline in the labor force, which is projected to be 2.5 million workers during this period.
Other trends are boosting China’s prospects further.
Though investment is likely to decline as a share of GDP, it will probably take a decade for it to dip below 40% – still robust by international standards.
Meanwhile, the capital stock can maintain a reasonable growth rate.
Finally, China’s capacity for innovation is improving steadily, owing to rapidly increasing human capital and rising investment in research and development.
If this is China’s “new normal,” it would still be the envy of the rest of the world.
China’s Shadow Menace
BEIJING – The US Federal Reserve’s decision to exit from so-called “quantitative easing” – its massive monthly purchases of long-term assets – is stoking fears of a hard economic landing in China.
But China’s strong economic fundamentals mean that policymakers have the space to avoid such an outcome – as long as they bring the country’s shadow banking system under control.
As it stands, Chinese consumption and investment growth is expected to remain at roughly last year’s levels.
Meanwhile, economic recovery in the advanced economies, especially the United States and Europe, is reinvigorating external demand, leading analysts to project annual Chinese export growth of more than 10% this year – 3-4 percentage points higher than in 2013.
This would bring annual GDP growth in 2014 to a very healthy 7.5-8%.
The problem is that China’s financial sector has accumulated considerable risk in recent years, with broad money (M2) having ballooned to ¥110.7 trillion ($18 trillion) – almost twice the country’s GDP – at the end of last year.
In an attempt to rein in M2, which could indicate that the economy is overleveraged, the central bank tightened conditions for commercial bank lending, so that, for any given increase in M2, less credit is extended.
But the move failed to contain M2 growth; on the contrary, M2 grew faster last year than in 2012.
Worse, restricting commercial banks’ role as financial intermediaries and encouraging the growth of unregulated shadow banking has generated even more risks for China’s economy.
Clearly, a new approach is needed – one that is based on a deeper understanding of the dangers inherent in China’s banking system.
While it is true that surging M2 can reflect excessive leverage, it is not a particularly accurate gauge in China, where commercial banks can easily circumvent high reserve requirements and quantitative controls by moving loans off their balance sheets to wealth-management products – practices that fuel artificial credit expansion that looks like M2 growth.
In this sense, it is the Chinese monetary authorities’ reluctance to open up the formal financial sector to domestic private capital, or to liberalize the deposit rate, that is fueling the expansion of shadow banking.
With small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) – by far the economy’s most important growth engine – unable to acquire sufficient funding from the formal financial sector, they have been forced to turn to informal channels.
As shadow banking has become the primary source of finance for SMEs – which tend to be higher-risk borrowers – the financial risks in China’s economy have grown exponentially.
Exacerbating matters, the central bank’s repeated efforts to tighten the money supply raises the cost of capital.
Last June, the annualized interbank lending rate surged to more than 10% – a level that it almost matched in December.
SMEs ultimately shoulder these costs, diminishing their ability to contribute to overall economic growth.
Consider the Internet giant Alibaba, which began using Zhi-fu-bao, the Chinese equivalent of PayPal, to raise money last year.
In just a few months, it received ¥400 billion from 85 million small investors.
Tencent, China’s largest Internet company, is now using the same strategy to compete with Alibaba, with both companies offering high rates of return – often 6-7% annually – to attract as many investors as possible.
The problem is that most of this investment is in the interbank market, meaning that SMEs ultimately face interest rates of more than 10% – and that does not include the added 3% for SMEs’ loan guarantees.
These unsustainable high rates are transmitting major risks to the real economy.
Nowhere is this more apparent than in the real-estate sector.
Liquidity-thirsty developers, unable to acquire financing through the formal banking sector, have been taking out massive loans at extremely high interest rates.
But, in many cases, housing demand has not grown as expected, raising the risk of default – the effects of which would be transmitted to the entire financial sector.
The fact is that China has never been closer to a major financial crisis than it is today.
Yet China’s monetary authorities do not seem to understand the scale of the risk – or its root causes.
The Chinese economy may well need to be deleveraged.
But, instead of blindly tightening the credit supply, policymakers must pursue deep financial-sector reform to liberalize the deposit rate, eliminate quantitative controls, and, most important, allow for the establishment of domestic private financial institutions.
Pursuing this agenda is essential to China’s long-term financial and economic health.
But doing so presupposes a major shift in Chinese monetary authorities’ mindset.
Therein lies the real challenge facing China today.
Did US Drone Strikes Lose Yemen?
NEW YORK – Recent revelations that the US killed an innocent American in a drone strike in Pakistan confirm what a new study, “Death by Drone,” of civilian harm caused by US drone strikes in Yemen shows – that claims about the precision of drone strikes are overstated.
The revelations also underscore the stark asymmetry between how the US treats drone strikes that kill its own citizens and those that kill others. While the Obama administration has now publicly acknowledged that it has recently killed three US citizens in drone strikes, it has refused to acknowledge countless other drone strikes around the world which have killed non-US civilians.
In Yemen, the US has been conducting drone strikes since at least 2002, with estimates of the total number of strikes ranging from 91 to 203.
While the American and Yemeni governments have lauded the drones’ precise targeting, they have refused to meaningfully disclose key details about the strikes, including how many have been conducted, who has been targeted, or, crucially, the number and identities of civilians killed.
In a May 2013 speech at the National Defense University, Obama offered assurances that, outside the Afghan war theater, no drone strike would be carried out unless there was “near-certainty that no civilians will be killed or injured.”
Obama also claimed that the US targets only “terrorists who pose a continuing and imminent threat to the American people,” and that it does not launch drone strikes when it has “the ability to capture individual terrorists.”
“Death by Drone,” which includes first-hand testimony from eyewitnesses and survivors of drone strikes in Yemen, tells a different story.
The nine case studies documented in the report, four of which cover attacks that came after the 2013 speech, provide credible evidence that US drone strikes have killed and injured Yemeni civilians, suggesting that the “near-certainty” standard is not being effectively implemented.
The report also casts doubt on Obama’s other claims, with evidence indicating that targets of drone strikes, though perhaps posing a threat to Yemen, may not have posed a direct threat to the US, and that their capture may have been possible.
In other words, Yemeni civilians have suffered and died from drone strikes that may not have been necessary.
They do not know what havoc their missiles have caused. They are unaware of the suffering they create for our families.”
Indeed, if the US never acknowledges the specific strikes, how can ordinary Americans possibly know that Rasilah al-Faqih, a pregnant Yemeni woman, was killed in Walad Rabei’, along with her husband and ten-year-old daughter, as they headed home from a visit to the doctor?
Or that Abdoh Mohammed al-Jarraah’s house in Silat al-Jarraah had 19 people, including women and children, inside when it was hit by a US drone strike?
The US’ refusal to acknowledge drone strikes that kill foreigners is sending a damaging message in Yemen and beyond.
As Moqbel Abdullah Ali al-Jarraah, a villager from Silat al-Jarraah, put it: “I believe that America is testing its lethal inventions in our poor villages, because [it] cannot afford to do so at any place where human life has value. Here, we are without value.”
In every incident recorded in this report, the families of Yemeni civilians killed in US strikes want to know why they were targeted.
As the father of Nasser Mohammed Nasser, one of four innocent civilians killed in a US drone strike on April 19, 2014, lamented: “My son and those who were with him had nothing to do with Al Qaeda. They were simply on their way to earn a living.
Why, then, did the American aircraft strike them?”
But the US has given Nasser no answers.
It has not even acknowledged that it killed his son.
In February 2013, then-White House counterterrorism chief John Brennan testified at his Senate confirmation hearing to become CIA Director that, “in the interest of transparency,” the US must acknowledge mistaken killings publicly.
Later that month, he recognized that the US government “should make public the overall numbers of civilian deaths resulting from US strikes targeting Al Qaeda.” The US has done neither.
It should come as no surprise, then, that civilians like Nasser, who have lost mothers, fathers, sons, and daughters in US strikes, are outraged not only at the US, but also at the Yemeni government, which consented to the attacks.
They believe that instead of making Yemen and the US safer, drone strikes only strengthen support for Al Qaeda.
Earlier this year, the US announced a new policy for drone exports, purportedly part of a broader effort to work with other countries to “shape international standards” on the use of drones and compel recipient states “to use these systems in accordance with international law.”
But, as “Death by Drone” shows, the US drone program is fundamentally flawed and should not be perpetuated. The Obama administration’s recent admissions that its drone strikes killed its own citizens only underscore this fact.
Can Yemen Be Saved?
SANA'A – Yemen is no stranger to crisis.
Exposed to a regional proxy war between Iran and Saudi Arabia, plagued by an entrenched Al Qaeda affiliate, and divided by tribal disputes and a secession movement, the country has become a poster child for everything that can go wrong in the Arab world.
Yemen has demonstrated remarkable resiliency in the past.
To ensure that the recent overthrow of its government by the Shia Houthi rebel movement does not deal Yemen the lethal blow that it has avoided so far, the international community must not abandon the country in what may be its hour of greatest need.
The origins of the Houthi movement date to 1991, when it was created to protect Zaydism, a moderate form of Shi'ism, from the encroachment of Sunni Islamists.
After the attacks on New York and Washington, DC, on September 11, 2001, the group's battle took on a geopolitical dimension, as its fighters objected to Yemen's decision to collaborate with the United States and enhance bilateral intelligence cooperation.
From 2004 to 2010, the group fought six wars against the Yemeni government and even skirmished with Saudi Arabia.
Yet it never managed to expand its reach beyond its stronghold in the north of the country.
That changed in 2011, when the popular protests and political chaos stemming from the Arab Spring led to widespread institutional paralysis, allowing the Houthis to march past a military that largely refused to fight it.
The group's power grab has frightened its adversaries, leading them to seek new alliances that could imperil the state's security.
In the central region of Marib, home to the oil and gas facilities that Yemen relies on for foreign currency, several tribes have vowed to fight the Houthis.
The region was once a stronghold of Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP), an affiliate of the global terrorist organization.
If the military refuses to assist the tribes – as is likely – they may be tempted to turn to AQAP.
The situation is no less precarious in the southern provinces, where a secession movement has been active since 2007.
Southerners are up in arms because the Houthi rebellion halted plans for the adoption of a federal system, which would have given the region greater autonomy.
In response, armed groups seized checkpoints and closed the port of Aden.
The risk of secession is very real.
Southern Sunnis have been marginalized since a 1994 civil war that left northerners in control of most of the country's political institutions.
Many in the region worry that the Houthis will discriminate against them further.
AQAP is firmly rooted in this region as well, implying the possibility that local residents will seek its help in defending against an expected Houthi onslaught.
Meanwhile, Yemen continues to serve as a battleground in a proxy war between Iran and Saudi Arabia.
Iran has armed and trained the Houthis, and, though the rebels' brand of Shi'ism shares little with that practiced in Tehran, they have praised the Islamic Republic's founder, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, and held up Iran's Lebanese proxy, Hezbollah, as a model to be emulated.
When the Houthis took over Sana'a, the capital, in September, Saudi Arabia cut off aid to the country.
To make matters worse, falling oil prices and attacks on pipelines imperil a hydrocarbon industry that provides 63% of government revenues.
Decreased earnings led Yemen to forecast a $3.2 billion budget deficit last year.
If the turmoil is not curtailed and the Saudis do not resume the payments that have long ensured the country's ability to function, Yemen may not be able to cover its expenditures.
The US has followed Saudi Arabia's lead, shuttering its embassy and freezing intelligence cooperation and counterterrorism operations.
This is a mistake.
Yemen's military is largely intact, having remained in its barracks as the Houthis marched to the capital, and there is little evidence that the units that work with the Americans are loyal to the new rebel government.
Suspending cooperation risks giving AQAP free rein in a country where it was able to wreak havoc even when bridled.
Yemen is mired in crises that it cannot solve alone.
Unless its international allies throw it a lifeline, it risks being swallowed by a sea of disorder that could imperil the entire region.
Yemen’s Regime Change Gets Personal
SANAA – When Yemen’s President Ali Abdullah Saleh ordered his military on March 18 to fire on peaceful protesters calling for his resignation, he sealed his fate.
A wave of military, government, and diplomatic defections, led by his long-time ally First Armored Brigade Commander General Ali Muhsin al-Ahmar, rocked his regime.
But, although al-Ahmar announced that he was appalled by the use of force and vowed to defend the constitution, his decision was anything but altruistic.
The disgruntled general, who has long-standing ties to the type of jihadists that the United States is battling in Yemen, merely sought to settle a score with the president’s family.
The relationship between al-Ahmar and Saleh extends to their youth, with Saleh’s mother having had a second marriage to al-Ahmar’s uncle.
Though they are not half-brothers, this frequent, if mistaken reference, indicates their closeness.
Al-Ahmar has long been considered either Saleh’s right hand man or the country’s hidden president.
When the Nasserite party attempted to overthrow Saleh less than 100 days into his presidency, al-Ahmar defended him and quashed the coup.
In 1994, his units put down a secessionist movement in the south.
But, as Saleh prepared the way for his son Ahmad – the head of the Presidential Guard – to succeed him, he began to marginalize al-Ahmar.
In 2009, Saleh sacked al-Ahmar’s key backers, including Central Command Chief General al-Thahiri al-Shadadi and Lieutenant General Haydar al-Sanhani, from power.
Al-Ahmar has also not benefited from the military aid that the US lavished on Yemen in the wake of al-Qaeda’s failed Christmas Day plot in 2009 to down an American airliner.
While the Central Security Service, led by Saleh’s nephew Yahya, has received millions of dollars to fight al-Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, al-Ahmar has been left out of the economic bonanza.
At the same time, al-Ahmar’s dismal performance in spearheading the war against the Houthi-led sectarian rebellion in the north made him a convenient scapegoat for the regime’s failures.
The regime’s desire to get al-Ahmar out of the picture became clear during the last round of fighting aginst the Houthis in 2009-2010, when Saudi Arabia began bombing the rebels. According to a US diplomatic cable released by WikiLeaks, Yemeni officials gave the Saudis the coordinates for al-Ahmar’s command center, telling them that it was a Houthi camp.
His relationship with Saleh frayed and his influence waning, al-Ahmar understood that his loyalty to Saleh had become a liability.
So his decision to abandon Saleh stemmed less from his love of the constitution and democracy than from his desire to even the score with the president and his son Ahmad Saleh, with whom he has long clashed.
Their units skirmished during the Houthi campaign, and the two engaged in a power struggle over defense of the radio and television stations.
Saleh won at the time, but today al-Ahmar’s troops have control.
Al-Ahmar’s relationship with jihadists is a source of serious concern.
He is married to the sister of Tariq al-Fadhli, a Yemeni who fought alongside al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Ladin in Afghanistan.
When more than 4,000 Arabs returned from fighting the Soviets there, al-Ahmar organized them into units and deployed them in the 1994 civil war.
One jihadist who trained in al-Qaeda’s camps, and met bin Ladin, told me that upon his return from Afghanistan, he was invited to meet al-Ahmar’s associates and was given a monthly stipend.
During a 1999 trial of Yemenis convicted of kidnapping 16 Europeans, it emerged that the group’s ringleader called al-Ahmar during the ordeal.
Though his ties to jihadists may be expedient rather than ideological, they are deeply worrying.
Today, Saleh’s support among his top generals is dwindling.
Of Yemen’s four regional commanders, only Southern Command Chief General Mahdi Maqwala still backs him.
Lesser lieutenant generals have deserted the president in droves.
The fate of the country may not hinge on Saleh, a crafty veteran who knows that his career is over.
But his son Ahmad, who is less politically astute, may yet seek to settle accounts with al-Ahmar.
His forces have already clashed with rival units in Mukalla and surrounded the presidential palace in Aden.
If the Salehs retain control of the air force, which remains under the control of Saleh’s half-brother, employing it against defecting military divisions would likely lead to a bloodbath.
Nevertheless, the doomsday scenarios predicting anarchy and chaos in the post-Saleh era are most likely exaggerated.
Unlike in Egypt, the vacuum resulting from Saleh’s departure can be quickly filled, so the country need not fall back on a military oligarchy.
The Yemeni opposition is not only organized, but also plays an active role in politics and has true grassroots support.
And, unlike in Egypt, where the ruling party was detested and out of touch with the masses, Yemen’s General People’s Congress has some following in society. If Saleh leaves peacefully and represses the urge to unleash the last remaining loyal army units against protesters and defecting soldiers, the country can avert Libya-like mayhem.
Indeed, the opposition parties have already organized a transitional council to take Saleh’s place.
With the sun quickly setting on the Saleh era, the president is out of options.
The only decision before him and his thinning ranks of allies is whether to leave peacefully or go down fighting.
Japan vs. the Currency Speculators
TOKYO – With Japan’s economy struggling to escape its deflationary torpor, the economic-revitalization plan that Prime Minister Shinzo Abe launched in 2012 has come under growing scrutiny.
But Japan’s current travails, which have brought a concomitant decline in Japan’s stock market, stem from the yen’s appreciation – 24% over the last year – against major currencies.
“Abenomics” – which included substantial monetary and fiscal expansion – has nothing to do with it.
Since Abenomics was introduced, Japan’s labor market has improved considerably: 1.5 million new jobs have been created, and the unemployment rate has fallen to just over 3%.
Moreover, corporate profits have soared, and tax revenues have increased by more than ‎¥20 trillion ($188 billion).
To build on these gains, Japan has promised a large fiscal expansion next month, which some describe as a piecemeal, temporary version of so-called “helicopter drops” (permanent monetization of government debt).
But there is concern that it will not be enough, if the yen continues to appreciate.
To be sure, expansionary policies, particularly monetary policies – a pillar of Abenomics – could contribute to currency depreciation.
But the US Federal Reserve’s dovish approach to exiting its own quantitative-easing program, together with expansionary policies in other major economies, has weakened their impact on the exchange rate.
More recently, the United Kingdom’s vote to “Brexit” the European Union, together with the introduction of negative rates by multiple central banks, including the Bank of Japan (BOJ), shook markets.
Taking advantage of this nervousness, hedge-fund managers and other speculators have increasingly been betting on the yen’s appreciation; indeed, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange shows substantial interest in the yen futures market.
In a flexible exchange-rate system, each country conducts monetary policy independently, based on domestic objectives, and accepts the resulting exchange rate.
But when exchange-rate movements become sharp or erratic, monetary authorities have the authority – even the obligation – to intervene to smooth them out.
The Japanese authorities seem to recognize this, in theory.
On August 18, officials from the Ministry of Finance (MOF), the Financial Services Agency, and the BOJ gathered to discuss what can be done to stem the yen’s appreciation.
After the meeting, Masatsugu Asakawa, the deputy minister of finance for international affairs, declared that the MOF would act swiftly against exchange-rate movements deemed to be speculative.
The announcement was supposed to cause speculators to shake in their boots.
Yet markets moved only slightly, within a range of a couple of yen to the dollar.
After all, the MOF has made such threats before – for example, just after the introduction of the BOJ’s negative interest-rate policy, and again after the Brexit decision – but never followed through.
Like Aesop’s boy who cried wolf, the MOF has lost credibility, at least when it comes to the threat of intervention in currency markets.
So speculators remain convinced that they are making a one-way bet – win big or break even – and continue to push the yen higher.
At this point, the MOF’s words will not be enough to deter speculation.
But the MOF remains hesitant to back its tough talk with action, not least because of American disapproval of supposed “currency manipulation.”
High-level officials at the US Treasury and Federal Reserve actively try to dissuade advocacy of direct intervention, including by me.
An American scholar reacted angrily when I merely mentioned the word, as if it were an obscenity.
American officials, for their part, emphasize that if Japan can be accused of manipulating currency markets, the US Congress will not approve the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP).
It is possible that the MOF will choose to keep the US on its side, and continue to offer only empty threats to speculators.
Or it may simply vacillate until it is too late to take real action.
Either approach may well produce the same disastrous result: allowing the yen to appreciate to damaging levels and causing Abenomics to fail.
What the MOF should do is intervene courageously in currency markets to stem the yen’s appreciation.
Speculators will learn a tough lesson, and Japan’s economy could get back on track.
Though Japan may become a scapegoat for the failure of the TPP, it seems unlikely that the deal would be ratified in any case, given the current political climate in the United States.
An alternative would be for the BOJ to purchase foreign securities.
Many hedge-fund managers, along with some economists, claim that the key to saving Japan’s economy from deflation is a more direct helicopter drop, with newly printed cash delivered directly to consumers.
Yet these same people are impeding effective macroeconomic policy, by betting on the yen’s appreciation.
Only when the speculators are brought to heel should such a bold – and highly risky – monetary policy even be up for discussion.
Asia’s Military Revolution
SEOUL – A vast revolution in military affairs is taking place across East Asia.
The latest signs are Chinese President Xi Jinping’s purge of General Xu Caihou, an ex-Politburo member and former vice-chairman of the Central Military Commission, on charges of corruption, and Japan’s “reinterpretation” of Article 9 of its constitution to permit the country to provide military aid to its allies.
Despite the rising regional tensions that inspired these moves, China’s relations with its neighbors and the United States are not fated to lead to direct confrontation.
But the relentless march of new initiatives to meet the perceived “China threat” will require the region’s political leaders, including the Chinese, to address their disputes in new and more creative ways if that outcome is to be avoided.
In general, there are three ways to foster international peace: deepening economic interdependence, promoting democracy, and building international institutions.
Unfortunately, because East Asia’s political leaders have failed to pursue the latter objective, they now find themselves playing dangerous balance-of-power games reminiscent of Europe a century ago.
Deepening economic interdependence in the wake of Asia’s 1997 financial crisis has not generated political momentum for peace and cooperation.
The region’s business leaders have been unable to prevent deteriorating foreign relations from harming their interests.
By contrast, military lobbying now deeply influences foreign and defense policies – witness China’s double-digit increase in defense spending and rising US arms sales in the region.
What explains this failure?
International-relations theorists since Immanuel Kant have held that democracies rarely (if ever) fight one another; as a result, political leaders, such as US President Woodrow Wilson, have tried to promote democracy as a means to spread peace.
Until recently, the US seemed to have assumed that China’s engagement with Western democracies would bolster peaceful ties.
But, since the 2008 financial crisis, China’s confidence in its authoritarian development model has grown stronger.
Its leaders now increasingly appear to believe that a new “Beijing Consensus” of mercantilism and state intervention has replaced the old “Washington Consensus” of free trade and deregulation.
China’s ideological incompatibility with the US thus is making the shift in their relative power difficult to achieve peacefully.
In the late nineteenth century, a rising US was able to cooperate with a declining Britain, owing to their shared culture and values.
China’s leaders, however, tend to suspect that the US is deliberately trying to undermine their country’s political stability by questioning its record on human rights and political freedoms.
Meanwhile, Xi’s domestic policies seem to be taking the country ever further from Western norms.
It is this ideological divide that is undermining the development in East Asia of institutions that establish principles, rules, and decision-making procedures for the region.
While much of the West is bound together by institutions like the Organization for Security Cooperation in Europe and NATO, East Asia’s main body, the ASEAN Regional Forum, is too weak to play an analogous role, leaving the region beset with unregulated rivalries.
So far, US and East Asian leaders have done little beyond offering rhetorical support for the creation of multilateral security institutions.
With the exception of the almost defunct six-party talks aimed at eliminating the nuclear threat posed by North Korea, Asia’s powers refuse to be constrained by international rules or norms.
Instead, East Asia’s leaders resort to realpolitik.
Unfortunately, unlike Europe’s nineteenth-century political masterminds – figures like Talleyrand, Metternich, Bismarck, and Disraeli – who crafted durable international alliances, Asia lacks leaders willing and able to look beyond their narrow national interests.
For example, China’s leaders seem to believe that the 2008 economic crisis and the high costs of two foreign wars have left the US in no position to exercise international leadership.
That may explain China’s recent foreign-policy assertiveness, particularly in its dispute with Japan over control of the Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands, which could be intended to probe the strength of the US-Japan alliance.
Testing US power in this way could prove to be a dangerous miscalculation.
Though weakened economically, the US remains a military superpower.
Its interests in East Asia date back to the late nineteenth century.
Just as Britain refused to concede naval supremacy to Germany a century ago, the US will not easily accept any Chinese challenge to its strategic position in the western Pacific, especially given that so many East Asian states are pleading for US protection.
China and the US need to talk.
Despite their economic interdependence and some 90 inter-governmental channels for bilateral dialogue, the two superpowers are caught in a perilous tug-of-war over interests in the East and South China Seas and the western Pacific.
Sino-Japanese relations are particularly fraught, with two decades of economic stagnation in Japan and rapid growth in China fueling nationalist overreaction on both sides.
Having become accustomed to outsourcing its security to the US, and despite having the world’s third-largest economy, Japan neglected to develop its own constructive diplomatic vision.
It remains to be seen whether Abe’s constitutional reinterpretation, cloaked in the language of regional cooperation, advances such a new vision.
It does not help that the US wants Japan to shoulder more of the burden of maintaining Asia’s security, a position that may make sense strategically and financially, but that betrays a lack of understanding of the political context.
The US seems to underestimate regional concerns over Japan’s potential remilitarization.
By providing Japan with a diplomatic carte blanche, the US may find itself hostage to Japanese interests, with the result that Japan becomes part of Asia’s security problem, not part of its solution.
Asia-Pacific leaders must shake off their complacency.
Serious efforts and far-reaching compromises are needed to begin the process of building institutions for regional security cooperation.
Otherwise, the much-heralded “Asian century,” far from bringing economic prosperity and peace, will be an age of suspicion and peril.
The Politics of Young and Old
PARIS – If one considers some of today’s main challenges – including climate change, pensions, public debt, and the labor market – an obvious conclusion emerges: It is relatively much worse to be young today than it was a quarter-century ago.
Yet in most countries, the generational dimension is remarkably absent from the political debate.
Fifty years ago, people spoke often, and loudly, of a “generation gap.”
Today, that gap has become invisible.
This is bad for the young, for democracy, and for social justice.
Start with climate change.
Its containment requires changing habits and investing in emission reductions so that future generations will have a habitable planet.
The alarm bell was first rung in 1992 at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro; but over the last generation, little was done to contain emissions.
And progress following the landmark agreement achieved in Paris in December is unlikely to be fast, because the accord is premised on postponing major efforts.
Universal assent was made possible only by further delaying.
Given the massive inertia inherent in the greenhouse effect, the gap between responsible and irresponsible behavior will start resulting in different temperatures only in a quarter-century, and major consequences will follow only in 50 years.
Anyone older than 60 today will hardly notice the difference between the two scenarios.
But the fate of most citizens currently younger than 30 will be fundamentally affected.
In due course, the respite gained by the older generations will have to be paid for by the younger ones.
Now consider debt.
Since 1990, public debt has increased by about 40 percentage points of GDP in the European Union and the United States (and much more in Japan).
Given near-zero interest rates, the corresponding drag on income is currently low; but, because inflation is virtually inexistent and growth is anemic, the debt ratios have only stabilized.
So debt reduction will take longer than expected in the aftermath of the global crisis, which will deprive the coming generations of the fiscal space they might need to invest in climate action or in the containment of security threats.
Future pensions represent another form of debt.
The pay-as-you-go (PAYG) systems in place in many countries are giant intergenerational transfer schemes.
True, everyone is expected to contribute while they work, before becoming a recipient in retirement.
In an ideal steady state, pension regimes would not redistribute income across cohorts born at different points in time.
As specialists say, they would be generationally neutral.
But the baby boomers (those born from the mid-1940s to the mid-1960s) paid little into the PAYG schemes because economic growth, population size, and their parents’ low life expectancy made financing pensions easy.
All these factors have now gone into reverse: Growth has slowed, the baby boomers are a demographic bulge weighing on their children, and they are expected to live long.
Countries where pension reforms were introduced early have been able to limit the resulting burden on the young and keep the balance between generations approximately fair.
But countries where reforms were delayed have allowed that balance to place the young at a disadvantage.
Finally, consider the labor market.
Over the last decade, conditions for new entrants have worsened markedly in many countries.
The number of young people categorized as NEET (neither in employment nor in education or training) currently stands at 10.2 million in the US and 14 million in the EU.
Furthermore, many of those who have recently entered the labor market have suffered from job insecurity and repeated spells of unemployment.
In continental Europe, especially, young workers are the first to suffer from economic downturns.
On all of these issues – climate, debt, pensions, and jobs – the younger generations have been made relatively worse off by developments over the last quarter-century.
A telling symbol is that there is often more poverty among the young than among the elderly.
This ought to be a major political issue, with significant implications for public finances, social protection, tax policy, and labor market regulation. And it reinforces the imperative of reviving growth through productivity-boosting policies.
Yet the new generation gap has had little direct political effect.
It hardly arises in electoral debate and has generally not led to the emergence of new parties or movements.
Instead, the generational divide shows up in electoral participation.
In the latest US mid-term elections, the turnout rate among younger citizens was less than 20%, compared to more than 50% for senior voters.
Similar trends are observable in other countries.
Despite the increased uncertainty they face, younger citizens are much more disengaged from electoral politics than their parents and grandparents were at the same age.
This generational gap in electoral participation explains why politicians care more about the elderly than about the young.
But in aging societies, the more the young abstain from voting, the more decisions by parliaments and governments will be biased against their interests.
True, parents are generally not selfish.
They help their children through private transfers and grants.
But only those with income and wealth can provide meaningful support.