Consider this.
The United States and France, which have taken the West’s lead on Lebanon, have both confirmed the “democratic and constitutional nature” of the Siniora government.
This is true, but only up to a point, for Lebanon’s confessional-based political system assigns the Shi’a, who make up close to 40% of the population, only 21% of parliamentary seats.
The Sunnis, who comprise at most 20% of the population, are given the state office with the greatest executive power, that of prime minister.
Furthermore, the Sunni-based, anti-Syrian Future Movement to which Siniora belongs effectively extended this inequity into the present parliament when it overrode the opposition and insisted on conducting the 2005 general elections on the basis of the Electoral Law gerrymandered by Syria in 2000.
The West should therefore be wary of dismissing the Lebanese opposition out of hand as the cat’s paw of Syria and Iran.
Rather, it should welcome proposals by Arab League mediators for immediate electoral reform and early parliamentary elections.
At the same time, it should expect the opposition to endorse the establishment of an international tribunal to adjudicate the matter of the assassination of former Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri, albeit after clarifying and narrowing the current excessively broad United Nations rules governing the investigation.
The West should also recognize that the constituencies of Hezbollah and its allied, largely Christian, Free Patriotic Movement, led by presidential contender Michel Aoun, will be hit hardest by many of Siniora’s proposed economic and administrative reforms, such as lifting fuel subsidies and sharply raising value added tax.
Already the 200,000-member Federation of Labour Unions has joined the opposition bandwagon, and Siniora’s proposals will further fuel grassroots populist nationalism.
All this might be seen as a predictable, conservative reaction to urgently needed reforms, were it not for the poor track record of the Sunni economic establishment, which for many years adapted well enough to Syrian domination.
Part of Hariri’s legacy was the award of quasi-monopolistic licences to cronies – for mobile telephones, for example – and the sale of government debt at highly profitable rates to local banks in which had a direct interest.
So were the profligate borrow-and-spend policies and the use of public-sector hiring to co-opt political factions, both of which resulted in Lebanon’s massive debt problem.
Yet the real challenge for Western policy in Lebanon is neither constitutional reform nor establishment of the Hariri tribunal.
The Siniora government and the opposition are likely to reach a compromise within the next few months, probably on the basis of some variant of Arab League proposals.
The tougher challenge is to solve the Gordian knot that binds Hezbollah (and the issue of its disarmament), Syria, and Israel together in a fateful triangle.
In short, the West needs to pre-empt a resumption of hostilities in Lebanon by seeking unconditional talks between Syria and Israel over the Golan Heights.
Failing that, Paris III will represent a sidestepping of the key political issues that must be addressed, and thus merely stock up trouble for the future.
Needed But Not Wanted
NEW YORK – Baruch Spinoza, the seventeenth-century Dutch philosopher, Benjamin Disraeli, the nineteenth-century British prime minister, and Nicolas Sarkozy, the twenty-first century French president, have one thing in common: all were sons of immigrants.
People have migrated to other countries for thousands of years – to escape, prosper, be free, or just to start again.
Not a few enriched their adopted homelands by achieving great things, or producing children who did.
New waves of immigrants are rarely, if ever, popular. But they are often needed.
Many people have migrated to Western European countries from North Africa and Turkey during the last half-century, not because of Western generosity, but because they were required for jobs that natives no longer wanted.
They were treated as temporary workers, however, not as immigrants.
Once the job was done, it was assumed that the migrants would go home.
When it became clear that most had elected to stay, and were joined by extended families, many were grudgingly allowed to become citizens of European states, without necessarily being treated as such.
Xenophobes, as well as leftist multi-cultural ideologues, regarded these new Europeans as utterly different from the native born, albeit for different reasons.
Multi-culturalists saw attempts to integrate non-Westerners into the Western mainstream as a form of neo-colonialist racism, while xenophobes just didn’t like anything that looked, talked, or smelled foreign.
We who live in rapidly aging societies, such as Western Europe or Japan, still need immigrants.
Without them, necessary institutions, such as hospitals, would be unstaffed, and more and more elderly people would have to be supported by fewer and fewer young people.
And yet many politicians, especially in Europe, now treat immigration as a disaster.
New populist parties garner large numbers of votes simply by frightening people about the supposed horrors of Islam, or of clashing civilizations.
For the populists, however, the real enemies – perhaps even more nefarious than the immigrants themselves – are the “cosmopolitan elites” who tolerate and even encourage these horrors.
Mainstream politicians are so afraid of this populist demagoguery that they often end up mimicking it.
The failure of integration of non-Western immigrants in such countries as France, Germany, or The Netherlands is often exaggerated by hysterical alarmists; Europe, after all, is not about to be “Islamized.”
But the fact that some young people of African, South Asian, or Middle Eastern descent feel so alienated in the European countries of their birth that they are happy to murder their fellow citizens in the name of a revolutionary religious ideology, means that something is amiss.
Children of immigrants in the past, however unwelcome they were made to feel, rarely wished to blow up the places to which their parents had chosen to move.
Politics in many Muslim countries is partly to blame.
Islamist extremism is a handy revolutionary creed for vulnerable young people to latch onto, to gain a sense of power and belonging.
Hindus, Christians, or Buddhists lack such a cause, which is why political terrorism is largely confined to Muslims.
But, as the occasional riots in French immigrant areas show, violence is not confined to Muslims. National policies have something to do with this, but so do the deeply flawed immigration policies in all European Union countries.
Apart from EU citizens, who in theory are allowed to seek work anywhere in the Union (Romanian gypsies in France might argue otherwise), three other categories of people have been allowed to settle in Europe: former colonial subjects, such as Algerians in France, Indians and Pakistanis in Britain, or Surinamese in The Netherlands; “guest laborers” who arrived in the 1960’s and 1970’s; and political refugees, the so-called asylum-seekers.
Unlike in Canada or the United States, economic immigrants are not allowed to become citizens in exchange for their necessary labor.
Immigrants – not “guest workers” – who come for work are more likely to want to integrate to some degree, and to be treated as fellow citizens, than people who come with the baggage of empire, or simply as refugees, or, worse, people pretending to be refugees because they have no other way to gain access to wealthy countries’ job markets.
But European welfare states are better equipped to deal with asylum-seekers and other newcomers as needy dependents than as people in need of a job.
When European politicians claim that France, Britain, or The Netherlands are not traditional “immigrant countries” like the US, they are right only up to a point, as the examples of Spinoza, Disraeli, and Sarkozy show.
What is true is that large numbers of de facto immigrants have accumulated in many countries in a very short time, in a haphazard way that makes it seem as though no government was ever in control.
Children of guest workers feel unwanted.
Refugees languish helplessly in welfare nets, or are suspected of being cheats.
And former colonial subjects, though in many cases remarkably well integrated, still bear the scars of troubled imperial histories.
Japan, and even the US, is not immune to these problems, either. The Japanese government simply got rid of its Iranian guest workers when jobs dried up.
But it won’t be as easy to deal with the hundreds of thousands of Chinese who live in Japan without the rights of citizenship. The same is true of Mexicans working in the US, often illegally.
Millions of people around the world remain in limbo – often needed, or pitied, but nonetheless unwanted.
There is no quick or easy way out of this problem, especially in bad economic times.
But Europe – and Japan, for that matter – should start by making economic migration legitimate.
This means working out what jobs need to be filled, and welcoming those who will fill them, not as guests, but as equal citizens.
Need Versus Greed
NEW YORK – India’s great moral leader Mohandas Gandhi famously said that there is enough on Earth for everybody’s need, but not enough for everybody’s greed.
Today, Gandhi’s insight is being put to the test as never before. 
The world is hitting global limits in its use of resources.
We are feeling the shocks each day in catastrophic floods, droughts, and storms – and in the resulting surge in prices in the marketplace.
Our fate now depends on whether we cooperate or fall victim to self-defeating greed.
The limits to the global economy are new, resulting from the unprecedented size of the world’s population and the unprecedented spread of economic growth to nearly the entire world.
There are now seven billion people on the planet, compared to just three billion a half-century ago.
Today, average per capita income is $10,000, with the rich world averaging around $40,000 and the developing world around $4,000.
That means that the world economy is now producing around $70 trillion in total annual output, compared to around $10 trillion in 1960.
China’s economy is growing at around 10% annually. India’s is growing at nearly the same rate.
Africa, long the world’s slowest-growing region, is now averaging roughly 5% annual GDP growth.
Overall, the developing countries are growing at around 7% per year, and the developed economies at around 2%, yielding a global average of around 4.5%.
This is very good news in many ways.
Rapid economic growth in developing countries is helping to alleviate poverty.
In China, for example, extreme poverty has been cut from well over half of the population 30 years ago to around 10% or less today.
Yet there is another side to the global growth story that we must understand clearly.
With the world economy growing at 4-5% per year, it will be on a path to double in size in less than 20 years.
Today’s $70 trillion world economy will be at $140 trillion before 2030, and $280 trillion before 2050 if we extrapolate from today’s growth rate.
Our planet will not physically support this exponential economic growth if we let greed take the upper hand.
Even today, the weight of the world economy is already crushing nature, rapidly depleting the supplies of fossil-fuel energy resources that nature created over millions of years, while the resulting climate change has led to massive instabilities in terms of rainfall, temperature, and extreme storms.
We see these pressures every day in the marketplace.
Oil prices have surged to more than $100 per barrel, as China, India, and other oil-importing countries join the United States in a massive scramble to buy up supplies, especially from the Middle East.
Food prices, too, are at historical highs, contributing to poverty and political unrest.
On the one hand, there are more mouths to feed, and with greater purchasing power on average.
On the other hand, heat waves, droughts, floods, and other disasters induced by climate change are destroying crops and reducing the supplies of grains on world markets.
In recent months, massive droughts have struck the grain-producing regions of Russia and Ukraine, and enormous floods have hit Brazil and Australia; now, another drought is menacing northern China’s grain belt.
There is something else hidden from view that is very dangerous.
In many populous parts of the world, including the grain-growing regions of northern India, northern China, and the American Midwest, farmers are tapping into groundwater to irrigate their crops. The great aquifers that supply water for irrigation are being depleted.
In some places in India, the water table has been falling by several meters annually in recent years.
Some deep wells are approaching the point of exhaustion, with salinity set to rise as ocean water infiltrates the aquifer.
A calamity is inevitable unless we change. And here is where Gandhi comes in.
If our societies are run according to the greed principle, with the rich doing everything to get richer, the growing resource crisis will lead to a widening divide between the rich and the poor – and quite possibly to an increasingly violent struggle for survival.
The rich will try to use their power to commandeer more land, more water, and more energy for themselves, and many will support violent means to do so, if necessary.
The US has already followed a strategy of militarization in the Middle East in the naïve hope that such an approach can ensure secure energy supplies.
Now competition for those supplies is intensifying, as China, India, and others bid for the same (depleting) resources.
An analogous power grab is being attempted in Africa.
The rise in food prices is leading to a land grab, as powerful politicians sell foreign investors massive tracts of farmland, brushing aside the traditional land rights of poor smallholders.
Foreign investors hope to use large mechanized farms to produce output for export, leaving little or nothing for the local populations.
Everywhere in the leading countries – the US, the United Kingdom, China, India, and elsewhere – the rich have enjoyed soaring incomes and growing political power.
The US economy has been taken over by billionaires, the oil industry, and other key sectors.
The same trends threaten the emerging economies, where wealth and corruption are on the rise.
If greed dominates, the engine of economic growth will deplete our resources, push the poor aside, and drive us into a deep social, political, and economic crisis.
The alternative is a path of political and social cooperation, both within countries and internationally.
There will be enough resources and prosperity to go around if we convert our economies to renewable energy sources, sustainable agricultural practices, and reasonable taxation of the rich.
This is the path to shared prosperity through improved technologies, political fairness, and ethical awareness.
The False Promise of Negative Interest Rates
LONDON – As a biographer and aficionado of John Maynard Keynes, I am sometimes asked: “What would Keynes think about negative interest rates?”
It’s a good question, one that recalls a passage in Keynes’s General Theory in which he notes that if the government can’t think of anything more sensible to do to cure unemployment (say, building houses), burying bottles filled with bank notes and digging them up again would be better than nothing.
He probably would have said the same about negative interest rates: a desperate measure by governments that can think of nothing else to do.
Negative interest rates are simply the latest fruitless effort since the 2008 global financial crisis to revive economies by monetary measures.
When cutting interest rates to historically low levels failed to revive growth, central banks took to so-called quantitative easing: injecting liquidity into economies by buying long-term government and other bonds.
It did some good, but mostly the sellers sat on the cash instead of spending or investing it.
Enter negative interest-rate policy.
The central banks of Denmark, Sweden, Switzerland, Japan, and the eurozone have all indulged.
The US Federal Reserve and the Bank of England are being tempted.
“Negative interest rate” is a phrase seemingly designed to confuse all but the experts.
Instead of paying interest on commercial banks’ “excess” reserves held by the central bank, the central bank taxes these deposits.
The idea is to impel the banks to reduce their unspent balances and increase their lending or investments.
In the case of the European Central Bank, there is a technical reason: to increase the supply of high-class bonds for President Mario Draghi’s ongoing program of quantitative easing.
The policy is supposed to work by aligning the market rate of interest with the expected rate of profit, an idea derived from the Swedish economist Knut Wicksell.
The problem is that whereas until now it had been believed that nominal interest rates cannot fall below zero, an investor’s expected rate of return on a new investment may easily fall to zero or lower when aggregate demand is depressed.
Negative interest rates are the latest attempt to overcome the mismatch of incentives for lenders and borrowers.
Making it more costly for commercial banks to park their money with the central bank should lower the cost of commercial loans.
The calculation is that it will make more sense for a commercial bank to put money into circulation, whether by making loans or buying government and other securities, than to pay the central bank for holding that money.
But, as the World Bank has pointed out, negative rates can have undesirable effects.
They can erode bank profitability by narrowing interest-rate margins.
They can also encourage banks to take excessive risks, leading to asset bubbles.
Lower interest rates on deposits may cause large sections of the economy to become cash-based, while pension and insurance companies may struggle to meet long-term liabilities at a fixed nominal rate.
But, quite apart from these problems, the real case against negative interest rates is the folly of relying on monetary policy alone to rescue economies from depressed conditions.
Keynes put it in a nutshell: “If we are tempted to assert that money is the drink which stimulates the system into activity, we must remind ourselves that there may be several slips between the cup and the drink.”
Economists are now busy devising new feats of monetary wizardry for when the latest policy fails: taxing cash holdings, or even abolishing cash altogether; or, at the other extreme, showering the population with “helicopter drops” of freshly printed money.
The truth, however, is that the only way to ensure that “new money” is put into circulation is to have the government spend it.
The government would borrow the money directly from the central bank and use it to build houses, renew transport systems, invest in energy-saving technologies, and so forth.
Sadly, any such monetary financing of public deficits is for the moment taboo.
It is contrary to European Union regulations – and is opposed by all who regard post-crash governments’ fiscal difficulties as an opportunity to shrink the role of the state.
But if it is at all true that we are entering a period of “secular stagnation” and growing joblessness, as Larry Summers and others have argued, a larger investment role for the state is inescapable.
Events following the crash of 2008 clearly show that monetary policy on its own cannot achieve a level of economic activity close to its potential.
The state must be involved.
Whether the capital spending appears on the books of the central government or on the balance sheet of an independent investment bank (as I would prefer) is secondary.
Negative interest rates are simply a distraction from a deeper analysis of what went wrong – and what continues to go wrong.
The Politics of Negative Interest Rates
ATHENS – Objects of desire come at a cost.
Only bad things, like toxic waste, have a negative price, the equivalent of a fee payable to anyone willing to make them disappear.
Does this mean that negative interest rates embody a new perspective on money – that it has gone “bad”?
In market economies, money is the measure of the value of goods and services.
And the interest rate is the price of that metric – of money itself.
When the price is zero, it makes no difference whether money is kept under a mattress or lent, because there is no cost to holding or borrowing cash.
In a farmers’ market, sellers with many unsold potatoes start dropping the price until a level is reached (possibly very low, but still positive) at which all of the potatoes are bought.
In contrast, since the 2008 global financial crisis, every time the price of money has been reduced, demand for it falls and excess savings rise.
Clearly, money is not like potatoes or any other well-defined “thing.”
To understand how money can be our societies’ supreme good while fetching a negative price, it helps to start with the realization that, unlike potatoes, money has no intrinsic private value.
Its utility comes from what its holder can make others do.
Money, to recall Lenin’s definition of politics, is about “who does what to whom.”
Imagine you are an entrepreneur with money in the bank, or have a bank eager to lend large sums to invest in your business.
You spend sleepless nights wondering whether you should invest in a new product – that is, whether you should exploit your access to money to cause an array of others to work on your behalf.
In our current Great Deflation, what worries you most is your customers’ future purchasing power and sentiment.
Will they be able and willing to buy your new product at high enough prices and quantities?
Suppose that, sleep-deprived, you then switch on the radio or TV only to hear that US Federal Reserve Chair Janet Yellen and European Central Bank President Mario Draghi are considering reducing interest rates further.
Will you rejoice at the prospect that your financing costs will fall?
Will you be motivated to invest your own money now that it earns lower (perhaps even negative) interest?
No and no.
Your reaction is most likely to be one of alarm: “Oh, my God!
If Janet and Mario are considering another interest-rate cut, they must have good reason to believe that demand will remain low!”
So you abandon your investment plan.
“Better to borrow money at almost no cost,” you think, “and buy back a few more of my company’s shares, boost their price, earn more on the stock exchange, and bank the profits for the rainy days that are coming.”
And so it is that the price of money falls, even as the supply of it burgeons.
Central bankers who never predicted the Great Deflation are now busily trying to find a way out with economic and econometric models that could never explain it, let alone point to solutions.
Unwilling to question the political dogma that central banks must be apolitical, they refuse to think of money as more than a “thing.”
And so they continue the search for a technocratic fix to a problem crying out for a philosophically astute political solution.
It’s a futile quest.
Once the price of money (interest rates) hit zero, central banks tried buying mountains of public and private debt from commercial banks to give them an incentive to lend freely.
The ECB went so far as to pay banks to lend to business while, at the same time, punishing them for not lending (via negative interest rates for excess reserves).
But bankers and businesses, viewing these measures as desperate responses to self-fulfilling deflationary expectations, went on an investment strike, while using the central-bank money to inflate the prices of their own assets (stocks, art, real estate, and so forth).
This did nothing to defeat the Great Deflation; it only made the rich richer, an outcome that somehow reinforced central bankers’ belief in central bank independence.
Not all central bankers, thankfully, are incapable of responding creatively to the Great Deflation.
Andy Haldane, Chief Economist at the Bank of England, has courageously suggested that all money should become digital, which would permit real-time negative interest rates to be imposed on all of us, thus forcing everyone to spend at once.
John Williams, President and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, recently argued that the Great Deflation could be beaten only by targeting the price level and nominal national income simultaneously – a New Deal-like approach featuring joint action by the Fed and the government.
What separates these central bankers from the herd is their readiness to jettison the myth of independent monetary policy, to accept that money is the most political of commodities, to challenge the sanctity of cash, and to concede that defeating the Great Deflation requires a progressive policy agenda.
Simone Weil once said, “If you want to know what a man is really like, take notice of how he acts when he loses money.”
Likewise, if we want to know what our societies are really like, we must take notice of how they react to negative interest rates.
The Negative Way to Growth?
NEW YORK – Monetary policy has become increasingly unconventional in the last six years, with central banks implementing zero-interest-rate policies, quantitative easing, credit easing, forward guidance, and unlimited exchange-rate intervention.
But now we have come to the most unconventional policy tool of them all: negative nominal interest rates.
Such rates currently prevail in the eurozone, Switzerland, Denmark, and Sweden.
And it is not just short-term policy rates that are now negative in nominal terms: about $3 trillion of assets in Europe and Japan, at maturities as long as ten years (in the case of Swiss government bonds), now have negative interest rates.
At first blush, this seems absurd: Why would anyone want to lend money for a negative nominal return when they could simply hold on to the cash and at least not lose in nominal terms?
In fact, investors have long accepted real (inflation-adjusted) negative returns.
When you hold a checking or current account in your bank at a zero interest rate – as most people do in advanced economies – the real return is negative (the nominal zero return minus inflation): a year from now, your cash balances buy you less goods than they do today.
And if you consider the fees that many banks impose on these accounts, the effective nominal return was already negative even before central banks went for negative nominal rates.
In other words, negative nominal rates merely make your return more negative than it already was.
Investors accept negative returns for the convenience of holding cash balances, so, in a sense, there is nothing new about negative nominal interest rates.
Moreover, if deflation were to become entrenched in the eurozone and other parts of the world, a negative nominal return could be associated with a positive real return.
That has been the story for the last 20 years in Japan, owing to persistent deflation and near-zero interest rates on many assets.
One still might think that it makes sense to hold cash directly, rather than holding an asset with a negative return.
But holding cash can be risky, as Greek savers, worried about the safety of their bank deposits, learned after stuffing it into their mattresses and walls: the number of armed home robberies rose sharply, and some cash was devoured by rodents.
So, if you include the costs of holding cash safely – and include the benefits of check writing – it makes sense to accept a negative return.
Beyond retail savers, banks that are holding cash in excess of required reserves have no choice but to accept the negative interest rates that central banks impose; indeed, they could not hold, manage, and transfer those excess reserves if they were held as cash, rather than in a negative-yielding account with the central bank.
Of course, this is true only so long as the nominal interest rate is not too negative; otherwise, switching to cash – despite the storage and safety costs – starts to make more sense.
But why would investors accept a negative nominal return for three, five, or even ten years?
In Switzerland and Denmark, investors want exposure to a currency that is expected to appreciate in nominal terms.
If you were holding Swiss franc assets at a negative nominal return right before its central bank abandoned its euro peg in mid-January, you could have made a 20% return overnight; a negative nominal return is a small price to pay for a large capital gain.
And yet negative bonds yields are also occurring in countries and regions where the currency is depreciating and likely to depreciate further, including Germany, other parts of the eurozone core, and Japan.
So, why are investors holding such assets?
Many long-term investors, like insurance companies and pension funds, have no alternative, as they are required to hold safer bonds.
Of course, negative returns make their balance sheets shakier: a defined-benefit pension plan needs positive returns to break even, and when most of its assets yield a negative nominal return, such results become increasingly difficult to achieve.
But, given such investors' long-term liabilities (claims and benefits), their mandate is to invest mostly in bonds, which are less risky than stocks or other volatile assets.
Even if their nominal returns are negative, they must defer to safety.
Moreover, in a “risk-off" environment, when investors are risk-averse or when equities and other risky assets are subject to market and/or credit uncertainty, it may be better to hold negative-yielding bonds than riskier and more volatile assets.
Over time, of course, negative nominal and real returns may lead savers to save less and spend more.
And that is precisely the goal of negative interest rates: In a world where supply outstrips demand and too much saving chases too few productive investments, the equilibrium interest rate is low, if not negative.
Indeed, if the advanced economies were to suffer from secular stagnation, a world with negative interest rates on both short- and long-term bonds could become the new normal.
To avoid that, central banks and fiscal authorities need to pursue policies to jump-start growth and induce positive inflation.
Paradoxically, that implies a period of negative interest rates to induce savers to save less and spend more.
But it also requires fiscal stimulus, especially public investment in productive infrastructure projects, which yield higher returns than the bonds used to finance them.
The longer such policies are postponed, the longer we may inhabit the inverted world of negative nominal interest rates.
What’s Wrong With Negative Rates?
NEW YORK – I wrote at the beginning of January that economic conditions this year were set to be as weak as in 2015, which was the worst year since the global financial crisis erupted in 2008.
And, as has happened repeatedly over the last decade, a few months into the year, others’ more optimistic forecasts are being revised downward.
The underlying problem – which has plagued the global economy since the crisis, but has worsened slightly – is lack of global aggregate demand.
Now, in response, the European Central Bank (ECB) has stepped up its stimulus, joining the Bank of Japan and a couple of other central banks in showing that the “zero lower bound” – the inability of interest rates to become negative – is a boundary only in the imagination of conventional economists.
And yet, in none of the economies attempting the unorthodox experiment of negative interest rates has there been a return to growth and full employment.
In some cases, the outcome has been unexpected: Some lending rates have actually increased.
It should have been apparent that most central banks’ pre-crisis models – both the formal models and the mental models that guide policymakers’ thinking – were badly wrong.
None predicted the crisis; and in very few of these economies has a semblance of full employment been restored.
The ECB famously raised interest rates twice in 2011, just as the euro crisis was worsening and unemployment was increasing to double-digit levels, bringing deflation ever closer.
They continued to use the old discredited models, perhaps slightly modified.
In these models, the interest rate is the key policy tool, to be dialed up and down to ensure good economic performance.
If a positive interest rate doesn’t suffice, then a negative interest rate should do the trick.
It hasn’t.
In many economies – including Europe and the United States – real (inflation-adjusted) interest rates have been negative, sometimes as much as -2%.
Other data provide a similar picture.
Clearly, the idea that large corporations precisely calculate the interest rate at which they are willing to undertake investment – and that they would be willing to undertake a large number of projects if only interest rates were lowered by another 25 basis points – is absurd.
More realistically, large corporations are sitting on hundreds of billions of dollars – indeed, trillions if aggregated across the advanced economies – because they already have too much capacity.
Why build more simply because the interest rate has moved down a little?
The small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs) that are willing to borrow couldn’t get access to credit before the ECB went negative, and they can’t now.
Simply put, most firms – and especially SMEs – can’t borrow easily at the T-bill rate.
They don’t borrow on capital markets.
They borrow from banks.
And there is a large difference (spread) between the interest rates the banks set and the T-bill rate.
Moreover, banks ration.
They may refuse to lend to some firms.
In other cases, they demand collateral (often real estate).
It may come as a shock to non-economists, but banks play no role in the standard economic model that monetary policymakers have used for the last couple of decades.
Of course, if there were no banks, there would be no central banks, either; but cognitive dissonance has seldom shaken central bankers’ confidence in their models.
The fact is that the eurozone’s structure and the ECB’s policies have ensured that banks in the underperforming countries, and especially in the crisis countries, are very weak.
Deposits have left, and the austerity policies demanded by Germany are prolonging the aggregate-demand shortfall and sustaining high unemployment.
In these circumstances, lending is risky, and banks have neither the appetite nor ability to lend, particularly to SMEs (which typically generate the highest number of jobs).
A decrease in the real interest rate – that on government bonds – to -3% or even -4% will make little or no difference.
Negative interest rates hurt banks’ balance sheets, with the “wealth effect” on banks overwhelming the small increase in incentives to lend.
Unless policymakers are careful, lending rates could increase and credit availability decline.
There are three further problems.
First, low interest rates encourage firms to invest in more capital-intensive technologies, resulting in demand for labor falling in the longer term, even as unemployment declines in the short term.
Second, older people who depend on interest income, hurt further, cut their consumption more deeply than those who benefit – rich owners of equity – increase theirs, undermining aggregate demand today.
Third, the perhaps irrational but widely documented search for yield implies that many investors will shift their portfolios toward riskier assets, exposing the economy to greater financial instability.
What central banks should be doing is focusing on the flow of credit, which means restoring and maintaining local banks’ ability and willingness to lend to SMEs.
Instead, throughout the world, central banks have focused on the systemically significant banks, the financial institutions whose excessive risk taking and abusive practices caused the 2008 crisis.
But a large number of small banks in the aggregate are systemically significant – especially if one is concerned about restoring investment, employment, and growth.
The big lesson from all of this is captured by the familiar adage, “garbage in, garbage out.”
If central banks continue to use the wrong models, they will continue to do the wrong thing.
Of course, even in the best of circumstances, monetary policy’s ability to restore a slumping economy to full employment may be limited.
But relying on the wrong model prevents central bankers from contributing what they can – and may even make a bad situation worse.
Marginalized People’s Neglected Diseases
WASHINGTON, DC – When Pope Francis visited the United States in September, he delivered historic addresses to the US Congress and the United Nations General Assembly.
Building on the sentiments of his encyclical letter, Laudato Si’, Francis highlighted the international community’s responsibility to respond to human suffering, such as that faced by refugees and those living in extreme poverty, and called for global solidarity in order to overcome social exclusion and inequality.
The pope’s entreaties should make us turn our attention to every aspect of human suffering, especially those that affect the most marginalized people.
One of these is neglected tropical diseases (NTDs).
This group of parasitic and related infections – including lymphatic filariasis (or elephantiasis), intestinal worms, and schistosomiasis – is a scourge of poverty.
These illnesses afflict approximately 1.4 billion people per year, including more than 500 million children, causing untold pain and suffering and, through lost productivity, contributing to the cycle of poverty.
Over the past decade, the international community has made important progress against NTDs.
For example, the generosity of major pharmaceutical companies, which provide medicines free of charge, has enabled treatment programs to be scaled up.
But, unfortunately, despite encouraging signs of progress, barely 40% of people at risk for these preventable diseases receive the medicine they require.
Well over a billion people still do not have access to treatments for potentially debilitating conditions that cost less than $0.50 per person to deliver.
This is not only a serious medical issue; it is also a grave moral problem, one that those of us who work with the poor confront every day.
The reason for the international community’s failure to solve this problem is as simple as it is ugly: for the most part, NTDs afflict only the poorest and most overlooked people.
As Francis put it in Laudato Si’ “There is little in the way of clear awareness of problems which especially affect the excluded.”
Indeed, “they are mentioned in international political and economic discussions, but one often has the impression that their problems are brought up as an afterthought.”
The pope’s historic visit to the US came at an important time.
Congress was finalizing spending bills for fiscal year 2016, and the UN was completing its work on the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), setting targets that will guide development policy for the next 15 years.
Both organizations would do well to heed the pontiff’s words.
It is critical that the US continue its strong leadership on NTDs by maintaining funding for treatment programs in the federal budget, this year and in the years to come.
As Francis reminded members of Congress, “How much has been done in these first years of the third millennium to raise people out of extreme poverty!
I know that you share my conviction that much more still needs to be done, and that in times of crisis and economic hardship a spirit of global solidarity must not be lost.”
On the international level, we are encouraged that UN members were inspired to assign high priority to the fight against NTDs in the post-2015 development agenda.
In particular, a global indicator for NTDs – the “number of people requiring interventions against neglected tropical diseases” – was included in the SDGs’ monitoring framework.
This will help to ensure that NTDs are finally given the attention they deserve over the next 15 years.
One of the most basic steps we can take to overcome what Francis calls “the globalization of indifference” is to come together in support of decisive, measurable action against NTDs.
Introducing a global metric to mark our progress on the path to controlling and eliminating them for good is a true demonstration of our solidarity with the poor.
In his UN speech, Francis reminded us of a crucial point: “Above and beyond our plans and programs, we are dealing with real men and women who live, struggle and suffer, and are often forced to live in great poverty, deprived of all rights.”
If, with all of our technological advances and unprecedented private-sector donations, we cannot change the predicament of the poorest people for mere pennies per person, how can we truly expect to overcome the more challenging, costlier health and development challenges we face?
Neighbors
TEL AVIV – During the military operations in Gaza, code-named “Fused Lead” (after a Hanukkah song about a small spinning top – one of that holiday’s symbols – made out of fused lead), we Israelis have been reminded of a fundamental fact: Gaza is not Vietnam, Iraq, Afghanistan, or even Lebanon.
It is a region composed of a common country that we share with the Palestinians.
It is a country that we call Israel and they call Palestine.
One and a half million people live in Gaza.
They are part of a people of whom another 1.3 million live in Israel, and another two million in the West Bank.
The men and women of Gaza are our neighbors and have lived back to back with us for a long time, even if we are separated from them by a border.
Our homes and our cities are just a few kilometers from each other, our fields brush up against theirs.
The men of Gaza, the activists or policemen of Hamas whom we observe through our military binoculars, were in the past the activists and policemen of Fatah.
They were born in Gaza or pushed there as refugees during the war of 1948, or in other wars.
Over the course of the years, they were the masons who built our homes, they washed dishes in the restaurants where we ate, they were the merchants from whom we used to buy goods, and workers in the greenhouses of the kibbutzim.
They are our neighbors, and they will be our neighbors in the future.
So, when we decide to fight a war against them, we have to consider very carefully the character of that war, its duration, and the effect of its violence.
We Israelis have no power to extirpate the Hamas government from Gaza, much as we did not have the power to eliminate the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) as the voice of the Palestinian people’s national aspirations, or Hezbollah from Lebanon in the war of 2006.
Ariel Sharon and Menachem Begin went all the way to Beirut in the early 1980’s, paying a terrible and bloody price, to try to eliminate the PLO – a result that could never be obtained.
And what happened?
In the end, Sharon and then Binyamin Netanyahu both ended up sitting down at the negotiating table with Yassir Arafat and his representatives to try to reach an agreement.
Now Arafat’s former deputy, Abu Mazen, is a frequent and welcome guest in our country.
We Israelis must begin to realize this simple fact: the Arabs are not metaphysical creatures, but human beings, and human beings have it within themselves to change.
After all, we Israelis change our positions, mitigate our opinions, and open ourselves up to new ideas.
So we would do well to get out of our heads as quickly as possible the illusion that we can somehow annihilate Hamas or eradicate them from the Gaza strip.
Instead, we have to work, with caution and good sense, to reach a reasonable and detailed agreement for a lasting ceasefire that has within it the perspective that Hamas can change .
Such a change is possible and can be acted upon.
Such fundamental changes of heart and mind have happened many times in the course of history.
To be sure, even if, beginning today, we start working for such a lasting truce, there will inevitably be further days of war ahead.
Rockets will, no doubt, again be launched against us.
But at least we will know that we are not fighting for an impossible objective that can only result in blood and devastation – blood and devastation that will weigh on the collective memories of the sons and grandsons of our neighbors, who will remain our enemies, even if the spinning top continues to turn.
Kremlin Murder Incorporated
NEW YORK – In his play Murder in the Cathedral, T. S. Eliot describes the murder of the Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Becket, as a silently ordered hit.
The English king, Henry II, did not need to give a direct order; his knights knew what to do with somebody seen to be undermining the state.
Eliot may have set his play in twelfth-century England, but he wrote it in 1935, barely two years after Adolf Hitler had come to power in Germany.
So it is, at least in part, a cautionary tale about the rise of fascism in Europe.
Sadly, it has lost none of its relevance.
Today, Eliot's masterpiece can be read as a warning about the path being taken by Russia, where politics under President Vladimir Putin has been growing murderously medieval.
One by one, Putin's critics have been eliminated.
In 2006, the journalist Anna Politkovskaya was gunned down in an elevator, and Alexander Litvinenko, a former KGB agent who had been critical of Putin, died of polonium poison while in exile in London.
In 2009, Sergei Magnitsky, a lawyer campaigning against corruption, died in prison after being denied medical care for life-threatening conditions.
The same year, another lawyer, Stanislav Markelov, a champion of human rights, was shot following a news conference.
The murder last week of Boris Nemtsov, a leading opposition politician and a former deputy prime minister under Boris Yeltsin, should come as no surprise.
But it should come as a shock – and as a wake-up call for those Russians who until now have tolerated a culture of lawlessness and impunity, unseen since the darkest days of Stalin's personal rule in the Soviet Union.
Before his death, Nemtsov was said to be working on a report titled “Putin and the War," providing proof of Russia's involvement in the conflict in eastern Ukraine.
He was scheduled to lead a protest against the war two days after his murder.
Some have wondered if Putin was afraid of what Nemtsov had uncovered, and thus ordered the assassination.
That is unlikely, at least in terms of someone receiving a direct order from Putin.
Simply put, orchestrating Nemtsov's murder was not worth the trouble; after all, the Kremlin's propaganda machine would have had little problem twisting Nemtsov's report to Putin's benefit.
Indeed, even Nemtsov's brazen murder is unlikely to hurt Putin politically.
His popularity now stands at 86%.
For many Russians, Nemtsov's opposition to the war in Ukraine made him a traitor, whose death was justified – indeed, almost demanded – by national necessity.
Putin has announced that he will personally oversee the investigation into the assassination.
But those leading the effort have already indicated its likely conclusion: Nemtsov's murder was an attempt to destabilize Russia.
We can be all but certain that some culprit or another will be “found," and that his crime will be part of a conspiracy by the CIA or Ukrainian authorities.
The Kremlin is no stranger to twisting the truth to fit its needs.
Before Russia's annexation of Crimea, it argued that the United States had hired snipers to fire at pro-Western protesters in Kyiv in order to blame Russia for their deaths.
When a Malaysian airliner was shot down over Ukraine – most likely by pro-Russia rebels – the official Kremlin story was that Western secret services downed it to undermine Putin's reputation.
Allegations like these have whipped up nationalism, hatred, and anti-Western hysteria, distracting Russians from Putin's culpability for their country's economic crisis.
As menacing as Putin's Russia may be, however, nothing about it is original.
In 1934, Joseph Stalin, too, ordered a thorough investigation into the murder of a rival: Sergei Kirov, the head of the Communist Party in Leningrad.
The NKVD, the precursor to the KGB, orchestrated the assassination on Stalin's order, but the inquiry gave the Soviet dictator a pretext for eliminating other opponents.
The search for Kirov's murderers eventually culminated in the Great Terror, a massive purge of Party leaders, military commanders, and intellectuals.
Putin may not have ordered the hit on Nemtsov or any of the others.
But, like Stalin, he has nurtured a climate of fear and lawlessness, in which those who rally behind the Kremlin feel a duty to eliminate the leader's opponents however they can, and in anticipation of his will.
An atmosphere in which unlawful deeds become heroic acts was a signature feature of Stalin's rule.
That stifling dynamic has returned under Putin.
During the darkest days of the Soviet Union, the chiefs of the NKVD were the country's second most important officials.
Today, Andrei Lugovoi, the KGB agent that the British government suspects of delivering the polonium that killed Litvinenko, sits in the Russian Duma.
So what will happen next?
Will Putin, like Stalin, unleash his own great terror, and murderously pursue supposed adversaries?
Or will Nemtsov's death finally move complacent and obedient Russians to action?
In the first decade of this century, it was easy to love Putin.
He made Russians rich, cosmopolitan, and respected.
Today, as low oil prices and Western sanctions bite, he is making them poor and nearly universally despised.
On March 1, the day Nemtsov was to lead his protest, tens of thousands of Russians took to the streets with slogans like “Nemtsov is love, Putin is war."
Could it be that Russia's culture of impunity has reached an inflection point?
Putin's regime relies on the promise of economic prosperity, without which it could begin to unravel – if not as a result of mass protest, then because insiders no longer have a stake in its political survival.
At that point, when Putin is at his most vulnerable, his allies will have to act carefully – and keep looking over their shoulders.
Neo-Liberalism Meets Neo-Confucianism
The West has dominated the world ever since the industrial revolution.
Today that dominance seems threatened by the East Asian heirs to Confucianism, the ideology par excellence of state cohesion.
Centuries of inculcation with Confucianism was as important to the rise of East Asia’s hyper-growth economies as the conjunction of Protestantism and the rise of capitalism was to the west.
Confucianism’s tenets still provide an inner compass to most East Asians in a post-Confucian age, just as Biblical admonitions remain standards for the West in a post-religious age.
The basic thrust of Confucianism has changed little since Confucius’s disciples recorded his aphorisms a generation before Socrates.
Indeed, Confucianism became the official ideology of the Chinese state two centuries before the birth of Christ.
Confucianism was essentially a philosophical justification of government by benevolent bureaucracy under a virtuous ruler.
Virtue ensured harmony between man and nature, as well as obedience within a stratified society.
As one Confucian classic put it: Possessing virtue will give the ruler the people.
Possessing the people will give him the territory.
Possessing the territory will give him its wealth.
Possessing the wealth, he will have resources for expenditure.
Virtue is the root; wealth is the result.
During the neo-Confucian renaissance of the eleventh and twelfth centuries, a metaphysical dimension was added to fill a gap exposed by Buddhism’s inroads into China.
Thereafter, a good Confucian could, with untroubled conscience, scorn the Buddhist renunciation of the world.
This restatement of fundamental precepts restored Confucianism to a primacy in China and neighboring states that remained unchallenged for 700 years.
Neo-Confucianism provided the basic ideology for China’s admiring neighbors – Japan, Korea, and Vietnam – until the advent of the West.
Its tenets were highly appropriate to the settled, sophisticated agrarian civilizations of pre-nineteenth-century East Asia, for they knitted together society and polity in a manner calculated to promote stability and harmony.
The ultimate guarantee of harmony was the ruler’s justness, which permitted him to enjoy the “mandate of heaven”; the people had a right, indeed an obligation, to rebel against a tyrant.
But while the ethical basis of Neo-Confucianism was crucial, the Chinese also understood the need for a morally motivated bureaucracy, and thus perfected in the seventh century the world’s first examination system for selecting bureaucrats, with the Confucian canon as the syllabus.
Of course, the Neo-Confucian system was not immune to mankind’s appetites.
Many Confucian emperors were brutal.
Yet stability was achieved.
There was only one change of dynasty in China between 1368 and the end of the imperial era in 1911.
The Tokugawa Shoguns, who completed the reunification of Japan in 1600, remained in power for more than two and a half centuries.
In Korea, the Yi dynasty ruled from 1382 until the Japanese conquest of 1910.
Periodic civil strife and rebellion were not eliminated, but only in Vietnam was the longevity of a dynasty a cloak for inextinguishable internecine warfare.
Like a happy and secure childhood, Confucian civilization bestowed upon its practitioners the self-confidence to meet the challenge of the West.
Since Confucianism was essentially an agnostic ideology, concerned with the management of the visible world, the post-Confucians experienced little of the spiritual angst that afflicted Hindus, Muslims, and Christians in their collision with the “materialism” of industrial society.
Confucian civic culture also provided the basis for a long history of successful self-government.
East Asians entered the modern world of nation states in self-consciously discrete secular units.
By contrast, the Indian subcontinent, with two major religions and a dozen major linguistic groups, was united in modern times only under British rule.
Applied learning is the key to the post-Confucian states’ success.
Confucian literati, shunning manual labor, grew their fingernails long, but they never displayed antipathy towards the world of affairs.
The Chinese myth of success was the bright peasant boy whose village clubbed together to educate him and whose subsequent success resulted in the elevation of all who had helped him on his way into the civil service.
Ideally, state and family were mirror images.
The emperor was the supreme paterfamilias, his benevolent rule reciprocated by the obedience of his ministers and subjects, while family members were fixed in their appropriate hierarchical relationships.
Families and nations that obeyed together stayed together.
Meiji Japan grasped the advantages of making the nation a macrocosm of the family.
An imperial order in 1890 outlined the objectives of education: the Confucian concepts of loyalty, obedience, and filial piety were to be transferred from the family to the nation.
At about the same time, the Chinese scholar Yen Fu – whose translations of Adam Smith, John Stuart Mill, Herbert Spencer, and Montesquieu were read even by the young Mao – also concluded that filial piety fostered habits of disciplined subordination to authority that could be applied to the factory and the polity.
During the past century, the post-Confucian states have accustomed themselves to a pluralistic world of theoretically equal nation states.
But it is difficult to know how deep that adjustment has gone.
If the West is perceived to be attempting to maintain the leadership it snatched 200 years ago by industrializing first, thereby denying the post-Confucians the fruits of their dynamism permanently, the Chinese, in particular, will conclude that pluralism is eyewash and that the West’s worldview in fact replicates their traditional one.
Today’s trade and currency battles would then become a Kulturkampf.
In a few decades, when China’s economy equals America’s in size, the winner will be hard to pick.
Better for the West to accept equality now – and struggle to maintain it.
Trouble in Nepali Paradise
NEW DELHI – Away from the glare of global headlines, Nepal is grappling with a constitutional crisis that could once again propel the tourist mecca, sensitively situated between India and China, into full-fledged conflict.
From 1996 to 2006, Nepal was wracked by a brutal civil war that pitted a Maoist insurgency against the long-ruling monarchy, whose powerful army initially enjoyed the support of the country's democratic political parties.
Peace (brokered by India, with active United Nations support) came only after the Maoists and the democrats agreed in 2005 to establish a Constituent Assembly.
The first election was held in 2008, two years after a “people's movement" forced King Gyanendra to abdicate.
In that election, the Maoists emerged as the largest party, winning 240 of the 601 seats.
Then came long-established forces like the Nepali Congress, a social-democratic party modeled on its Indian namesake, and the moderate Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist-Leninist), which, despite its name, is committed to electoral politics within a democratic system.
And new mobilized parties of Nepal's southern plains, representing the Madhesi people, won 80 seats on a platform of greater federalism, ensuring that no single party or grouping could dominate the assembly.
But this balance devolved into paralysis, as the parties consistently failed to overcome their differences to make progress toward a constitution.
The deadlock spilled over into the country's politics, with shifting coalitions forming four successive governments that collapsed within months, each time in a welter of recrimination from the parties that had been excluded.
In 2012, the Supreme Court intervened, decreeing that the Constituent Assembly had outlasted its mandate, and installed an interim unity government led by the chief justice.
In 2013, it ordered new elections that changed the political balance, with the Nepali Congress emerging as the largest party and forming a coalition government with the Communists.
The Maoists were left with only 80 seats, and the Madhesi forces with 50.
The new government made a public commitment to deliver a new constitution by January 22, 2015.
But, though the Congress prime minister, Sushil Koirala, and his Communist deputy, K.P. Oli, have presided over a more stable country, they have been unable to forge consensus on a new constitution.
The parties remain sharply divided on several fundamental questions.
Should a new, federal Nepal be divided into states along a north-south axis, as the ruling parties prefer, even though this would give the dominant hill castes of the north a majority everywhere?
Or should the new states be delineated according to local ethnic identities, giving minority groups a sense of ownership of at least part of the country?
Should Nepal adopt a parliamentary system, an executive presidency, or some combination of the two?
Should it employ the British first-past-the-post electoral system traditionally used on the Indian subcontinent, or should it institute a form of proportional representation?
Perhaps the most important conflict is over how such questions should be settled.
The opposition Maoist-Madhesi alliance wants the decision rule to be consensus, whereas the exasperated government proposes requiring a two-thirds majority.
Constituent Assembly Chairman Subash Chandra Nembang has attempted to resolve the problem his own way, preparing questionnaires on disputed constitutional issues that, if used, would effectively institute a majority process.
The opposition has since boycotted all Constituent Assembly proceedings.
The opposition parties have gained wide support for their position, with Nepal's largest media organizations, key civil-society leaders, minority activists, and women's groups all opposing the ruling coalition's effort to railroad a constitution through the Constituent Assembly.
India, too, supports an inclusive approach, having recognized from its own experience of managing diversity the importance of providing minority groups with a sense of security.
And the United Nations Security Council has called for an inclusive constitution with the broadest possible support.
Yet Nepal's ruling coalition remains convinced that it has the numbers to achieve its preferred outcome.
The result is a profound cleavage that carries serious risks.
The conflict is already spilling into the streets, with opposition-called strikes paralyzing daily life in large parts of Nepal.
And, unless the constitutional crisis is resolved soon, the strikes will be only the beginning.
The Maoists are disenchanted with the democratic process.
The monarchists are hoping for a return to absolutism.
Centralists view federalism as a fig leaf for secession.
And ethnic separatists of various hues are indeed seeking autonomy.
With all sides keeping their powder dry, failure to reach a constitutional settlement could plunge Nepal back into war.
It probably would not take long to raise the resistance.
The Maoists disbanded their 19,000-member army in 2011-2012, integrating 1,500 fighters into the regular army and pensioning off the rest.
But many observers believe that the veterans could easily be reactivated and equipped from hidden arms caches.
Open fighting in Nepal would not be good for China or India, both of which fear a flashpoint between them.
If, as is believed, China is sympathetic to the Maoists, it could ultimately be dragged, in some capacity, into a war in Nepal.
But it is India – which maintains open borders with Nepal, and received millions of Nepali refugees during the civil war – that probably has the most at stake, as renewed conflict would destabilize India's hill districts, while leaving its Himalayan borders vulnerable to Chinese encroachment.
In this context, India must make a strong diplomatic push to help resolve the conflict, even at the risk of fueling resentment among Nepalese, who are wary of foreign interference.
Soon, the snow in the hills above Kathmandu will begin to melt.
But Nepal's political landscape is showing no sign of a thaw.
Paradise has never seemed more fraught.
These are testing times in Shangri-La.
The Lesson of Nepal
LONDON – A disaster happens. Bilateral aid is promised.
Then the waiting game begins.
It is a pattern that is all too common, and it is one that, sadly, is being repeated in Nepal.
More than a week after the earthquake and aftershocks killed more than 7,000 people and devastated the capital, Kathmandu, and despite the mobilization of massive amounts of aid from international agencies, the country’s finance minister had yet to receive any of the money promised by foreign countries.
Disaster aid for education in such circumstances almost always flows far too slowly, because there is no central pool of funds available to be distributed when a crisis erupts.
And for the children of Nepal, the consequences are doubly devastating.
More than 1.7 million children require immediate aid, according to UNICEF Australia.
More than 16,000 schools have been damaged, including some 5,000 that were completely destroyed.
Of the 500 schools in the hard-hit Gorkha district, 450 have been leveled or are now derelict.
The United Nations is doing what it can.
According to the UN resident coordinator, there has been a quick airlift and supply of materials – such as the well-known “School in a Box,” a pre-packaged educational kit suitable for teaching up to 40 children, Early Childhood Development Kit, and Recreation Kits – for displaced boys and girls.
In the meantime, the best that can be hoped for Nepal’s children is that tents and shelters can be brought in to create Child-Friendly Spaces.
An entire education system is under threat.
Schools that remain intact are now housing the homeless, and school buses have been requisitioned to help victims travel out of Kathmandu.
As the death toll spirals upward and the full horror unfolds, much of the relief effort is on hold, unable to move ahead until the funds that have been promised arrive – a process that could take weeks or months.
The world must end this paralysis.
With established pools of aid being stretched to address immediate needs – medical assistance, shelter, and food – education is being neglected.
Indeed, only a fraction of humanitarian aid budgets, roughly 1%, is allocated to education.
Meanwhile, long-term development budgets are set in stone years in advance and lack the flexibility to respond to natural and man-made disasters.
A humanitarian fund for education in emergencies needs to be established, and soon, so that when calamity strikes, vulnerable children are not forced to wait in misery and insecurity while the adults pass around the begging bowl.
Such a pool of money would help the roughly 50% of the world’s children who are out of school – some 28 million boys and girls – because of conflicts, civil wars, or humanitarian emergencies.
It would have been helpful during the Ebola outbreak, when extra funding would have helped to reopen schools quickly, rather than leaving five million children unable to pursue their studies.
It could provide opportunities for students in Iraq and Palestine whose schools were destroyed and have yet to be reopened, as well as for some half-million Syrian children in Lebanon, displaced by four years of mayhem.
In the case of Nepal and other disaster-prone regions, the fund could, and should, be used to strengthen immediate relief plans, improve coordinated responses, and support longer-term efforts to bridge humanitarian relief and development, including preventive measures, such as retrofitting schools.
Initial reports following the recent disaster suggest that schools that were retrofitted as a precaution against earthquakes (the typical cost was $8,000) escaped most of the damage.
No one is asking donors to make education a priority over immediate life-saving responses, or that financing be diverted from other emergency relief efforts.
But it is crucial to realize that, for children, educational opportunity underpins all humanitarian and development interventions.
Schools provide more than the skills that children will need in later life; they also serve as vehicles for disseminating lifesaving health and safety information.
The average refugee child spends more than ten years in exile; that child’s education cannot wait until he or she is able to return home.
Education may not provide humanitarian support in exactly the same way that the provision of medical care, food, or shelter does, but the risks facing children out of school during crises – including labor, marriage, human trafficking, and recruitment as soldiers – can be as grim as any other type of suffering.
On July 7, the Norwegian government will convene a conference on education in Oslo.
The assembled leaders and policymakers should take the opportunity to heed the call of organizations – such as the International Network for Education in Emergencies, UNICEF, and UNHCR – to ensure that no child falls into the gap between humanitarian and development assistance.
Schools provide their students with something that no other service or humanitarian assistance program can offer: hope of a return to normalcy and of a future worth planning for after those delivering the emergency response have left.
Nepal\u0027s Remarkable Peace
KATMANDU – Nepal’s Maoist leader, Pushpa Kamal Dahal, known as “Prachanda,” has now been sworn in as the first prime minister of the Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal, having won an overwhelming vote in the Constituent Assembly elected in April.
The Assembly’s opening action had been to vote almost unanimously to abolish the 239-year-old monarchy, and in June former King Gyanendra Shah departed from the palace, remaining in the country as an ordinary citizen.
Nepal fleetingly made headlines after the 2001 palace massacre of the previous monarch and his family.
Its bloody ten-year civil war, however, was seldom in the international limelight.
So, too, the country’s unique peace process has rarely gained outside attention since the guns fell silent two years ago.
Yet, amid too many continuing conflicts and failing peace processes around the world, a success story deserves to be recognized and supported.
I came to Nepal in mid-2005, when human rights violations committed by both sides in the armed conflict, together with Gyanendra’s crackdown on democratic rights as he seized absolute power, led the international community to support a monitoring presence from the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights.
With no end in sight to a war with thousands of civilian victims, and democracy far from the horizon, nobody could have foreseen how Nepal’s people would express their demand for peace and change.