Victims had to be rescued in boats by India’s army and air force.
It is difficult to imagine India’s fourth-largest city – schools, colleges, IT companies, factories, and commercial establishments – being brought to a halt.
And yet global automakers such as Ford, Daimler, BMW, and Renault took the unprecedented decision to halt production at their local factories.
The venerable Chennai newspaper The Hindu failed for the first time in 178 years to bring out a print edition, because its employees couldn’t get to work (though it gamely produced an online issue).
Inevitably, many linked the flooding in Chennai to the talks in Paris, seeing the devastating rains as proof of the catastrophic consequences of human action on the world’s weather.
More such disasters, they suggested, are inescapable unless world leaders in Paris take decisive action to limit global climate change.
“We are feeling climate change’s fast-growing impact now,” said India’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi, pointing to Chennai and calling upon industrialized countries to do more to mitigate global warming.
Indeed, scientists predict that India will become significantly hotter over the next few decades, and therefore more prone to a range of weather-related calamities such as droughts, floods, crop failures, and cyclones.
Chennai, they say, is just a warning.
But another factor arguably offers a more proximate explanation for what went wrong.
It is normal for India’s east coast around Chennai to suffer heavy monsoon rains at this time of year.
And, although this is the most severe precipitation to hit the region since 1911, the flooding was also the result of human error: the irresponsible and unplanned urbanization that has transformed India in recent decades.
In virtually every affected area, the flooding can be linked to ill-planned construction, which has taken place without regard to hydrology or Chennai’s natural ecosystems.
Norms set by the Environment Department of Tamil Nadu have largely been ignored, because politicians make common cause with builders in the name of development.
As a result, airports and bus terminals have been built on floodplains; warehouses and factories on wetlands and marshlands; and housing projects on former lakes.
Drainage courses and catchments have been fair game for developers.
Bypass roads and expressways have sprouted up without regard for data on water flow in the city.
The result has been rapid degradation of water bodies.
Because construction has occurred with scant regard for the provision of adequate waste disposal and sewage systems, the city’s rivers and canals have become garbage dumps, so choked that they can no longer serve as effective conduits to channel rainwater to the sea.
Likewise, the destruction of crucial wetlands and inadequate infrastructure to contain flooding means that rainwater runoff has nowhere to go.
The same phenomena can be found in dozens of Indian cities.
Urbanization is inevitable: an economy of 1.2 billion people cannot employ two-thirds of them in agriculture and hope to grow; rural people will inevitably move to cities to seek work and better lives.
India’s urban population has risen from 10% at independence, less than seven decades ago, to almost 40% today.
It will not be long before a majority of Indians live in cities.
But those cities cannot all grow the same way as Chennai has.
Many Indian cities have a higher population density than Chennai, and a similar catastrophe in Kochi or Thiruvananthapuram could lead to much higher casualties.
We need to rethink our city drainage systems, rework our disaster-management institutions, and ensure that monsoon rainwater can drain out of our cities in the shortest possible time.
The Chennai tragedy is a wake-up call to India.
The disaster could have been avoided if strict measures had been taken to preserve water bodies and respect environmental imperatives.
If we get our priorities right, we will heed the lessons of this horror and create urban space only in environmentally sustainable ways.
If we see Chennai as a one-off event, an “act of God” rather than an error of Man, further disasters will be unavoidable.
In line with the Modi government’s slogan “Make in India,” the country is planning to build a hundred “smart cities” to bring hi-tech growth to urban centers.
But India’s cities must be smart in a low-tech sense, too.
The lesson of Chennai is that we cannot let more construction, urbanization, and manufacturing erode our natural resilience to familiar monsoon weather events.
“Make in India” must not become the unmaking of India.
Chernobyl’s Myths and Misconceptions
The twentieth anniversary of the Chernobyl nuclear accident of April 26, 1986 is prompting a new wave of alarmist claims about its impact on human health and the environment.
As has become a ritual on such commemorative occasions, the death toll is tallied in the hundreds of thousands, and fresh reports are made of elevated rates of cancer, birth defects, and overall mortality.
This picture is both badly distorted – and harmful to the victims of the Chernobyl accident.
All reputable scientific studies conducted so far have concluded that the impact of radiation has been less damaging than was feared.
A few dozen emergency workers who battled the fire at the reactor succumbed to acute radiation sickness.
Studies are still under way into elevated rates of cancer and cardiovascular disease among the “liquidators” who worked at the reactor site in the months following the accident.
And some 5,000 cases of thyroid cancer, attributed to radioactive iodine absorbed through consumption of milk in the weeks immediately following the accident, have been detected among those who were children at the time.
There has been real suffering, particularly among the 330,000 people who were relocated after the accident.
About that there is no doubt.
But, for the five million people living in affected regions who are designated as Chernobyl “victims,” radiation has had no discernable impact on physical health.
This is because these people were exposed to low radiation doses that in most cases were comparable to natural background levels.
Two decades of natural decay and remediation measures mean that most territories originally deemed “contaminated” no longer merit that label.
Aside from thyroid cancer, which has been successfully treated in 98.5% of cases, scientists have not been able to document any connection between radiation and any physical condition.
Where a clear impact has been found is mental health.
Fear of radiation, it seems, poses a far more potent health threat than does radiation itself.
Symptoms of stress are rampant, and many residents of affected areas firmly believe themselves to be condemned by radiation to ill health and early death.
In part, this is because the initial Soviet response was secretive: Mikhail Gorbachev, the Soviet leader at the time, addressed the issue on television only weeks later, on May 14, 1986.
Myths and misconceptions have taken root, and these have outlasted subsequent efforts to provide reliable information.
Combined with sweeping government benefit policies that classify millions of people living in Chernobyl-affected areas as invalids, such myths encouraged fatalistic and passive behaviors and created a “culture of dependency” among affected communities.
The United Nations Chernobyl Forum, a consortium of eight UN agencies and representatives of Belarus, Russia, and Ukraine, reinforced these findings.
What the region needs are policies aimed at generating new livelihoods rather than reinforcing dependency; public-health campaigns that address the lifestyle issues (smoking and drinking) that undermine health across the former Soviet Union; and community development initiatives that promote self-reliance and a return to normalcy.
But the reception given to the Chernobyl Forum’s message has been surprisingly mixed.
Some officials have reverted to alarmist language on the number of fatalities attributed to Chernobyl.
Some NGO’s and Chernobyl charities have responded with disbelief, citing as evidence the general population’s admittedly poor health.
Opponents of nuclear power have suggested that self-interest has compromised the Chernobyl Forum’s integrity.
Set against the impressive body of science underpinning the Chernobyl Forum, such responses reflect the tenacity not only of myths and misconceptions, but also of vested interests.
The new view on Chernobyl threatens the existence of charities – such as those offering health “respites” abroad for children – that depend for their fund-raising on graphic footage of deformed babies.
The new understanding also deprives the region’s officials of a routine way to seek international sympathy, even if the repetition of such appeals after two decades yields little financial aid.
By misstating the problems, these approaches threaten to divert scarce resources into the wrong remedies.
The twentieth anniversary of the Chernobyl accident is an ideal occasion for all actors to do some honest soul-searching.
Governments are right to worry about the fate of Chernobyl-affected territories, but the way forward will require fresh thinking and bold decisions, particularly a shift in priorities from paying paltry benefits to millions to targeted spending that helps to promote jobs and economic growth.
Similarly, charities are right to worry about the population’s health, but they should focus on promoting healthy lifestyles in affected communities rather than whisking children abroad as if their homes were poisonous.
All parties are right to worry about the affected populations, but, more than any sophisticated diagnostic equipment, what is needed is credible information, presented in a digestible format, to counter Chernobyl’s destructive legacy of fear.
The children of Chernobyl are all grown up; their interests, and those of their own children, are best served not by continually evoking the nightmare of radiation, but by giving them the tools and authority they need to rebuild their own communities.
Revisiting the Iraq War
NEW YORK – Seven years, 12 volumes of evidence, findings, and conclusions, and one executive summary later, the Report of the Iraq Inquiry, more commonly referred to as the Chilcot Report (after its chairman, Sir John Chilcot), is available for one and all to read.
Few people will get through all of it; the executive summary alone (well over 100 pages) is so long that it calls for its own executive summary.
But it would be a shame if the Report were not widely read and, more important, studied, because it contains some useful insights into how diplomacy operates, how policy is made, and how decisions are taken.
It also reminds us of the centrality of the decision to invade Iraq in 2003, and of the aftermath, for understanding today’s Middle East.
A central theme of the Report is that the Iraq War did not have to happen, and certainly not when it did.
The decision to go to war was partly based on faulty intelligence.
Iraq constituted at most a gathering threat, not an imminent one.
Alternatives to using military force – above all, strengthening Turkey’s and Jordan’s lackluster enforcement of and support for the UN sanctions designed to pressure Saddam Hussein – were barely explored.
Diplomacy was rushed.
Making matters worse was that the war was undertaken without sufficient planning and preparation for what would come after.
As the Report rightly points out, many in both the US and British governments predicted that chaos could emerge if Saddam’s iron grip were removed.
The decisions to disband the Iraqi army and to bar all members of Saddam’s Ba’ath Party (rather than just a few of its leaders) from positions in the successor government were huge mistakes.
Iraq was not just a war of choice; it was an ill-advised and poorly executed policy.
Much of the Report focuses on British calculations and then-Prime Minister Tony Blair’s support for US policy.
The decision to associate the UK with the United States was a defensible strategic choice for a smaller country that derived much of its influence from the closeness of the bilateral relationship.
Where the Blair government got it wrong was in not pressing for more influence over the policy in exchange for its support.
George W. Bush’s administration might well have rejected such efforts, but the British government could then have exercised the option of distancing itself from a policy that many believed was unlikely to succeed.
Many lessons should be taken from the Iraq War.
One is that, because assumptions fundamentally affect what analysts tend to see when they look at intelligence, flawed assumptions can lead to dangerously flawed policies.
Nearly everyone assumed that Saddam’s non-compliance with United Nations inspectors stemmed from the fact that he was hiding weapons of mass destruction.
In fact, he was hiding the fact he did not have such weapons.
Likewise, before they started the war, many policymakers believed that democracy would emerge quickly once Saddam was gone.
Ensuring that such fundamental and consequential assumptions are tested by “red teams” – those not supporting the associated policy – should be standard operating procedure.
There is also the reality that removing governments, as difficult as that can be, is not nearly as difficult as creating the security that a new government needs to consolidate its authority and earn legitimacy in the eyes of the public.
Creating anything like a democracy in a society lacking many of its most basic prerequisites is a task of decades, not months.
The Report said little about the legacy of the Iraq War, but it is important to consider.
First and foremost, the war disrupted the regional balance of power.
No longer in a position to distract and balance Iran, Iraq instead came under Iranian influence.
Iran was free not just to develop a meaningful nuclear program, but also to intervene directly and via proxies in several countries.
Sectarian fighting poisoned relations between Sunnis and Shia throughout the region.
The alienation felt by soldiers and officers of Saddam’s disbanded army fueled Sunni insurgency and, ultimately, led to the rise of the so-called Islamic State.
The war had a profound effect not just on Iraq and the Middle East, but also on the UK and the US.
The British parliamentary vote in 2013 against participation in any military effort to penalize Syrian President Bashar al-Assad for defying explicit warnings not to use chemical weapons in his country’s civil war was surely related to the view that military intervention in Iraq had been a mistake.
It is also possible that some of the mistrust of elites that led a majority of voters to support “Brexit” stemmed from the Iraq War experience.
The Iraq War and its aftermath similarly affected the thinking of US President Barack Obama’s administration, which had little appetite for new military ventures in the Middle East at a time when many Americans were suffering from “intervention fatigue.”
The danger, of course, is that lessons can be overlearned.
The lesson of the Iraq War should not be that all armed interventions in the Middle East or elsewhere are to be avoided, but rather that they must only be undertaken when they are the best available strategy and when the results are likely to justify the costs.
Libya was a recent intervention that violated this principle; Syria has been even more costly, but in its case for what was not done.
The Iraq War was costly enough without people learning the wrong lessons from it.
That would be the ultimate irony – and only add to the tragedy.
Sex, Lies, and Leadership
LONDON – News events can often serve as important catalysts for introspection, not least for members of company boards.
Recent revelations of the Russian government’s involvement in hacking into the Democratic National Committee’s computer system – just two years after North Korea’s hack of Sony Pictures – has spurred a push in boardrooms around the world to tighten their organizations’ cyber security.
Likewise, stories of illegal or unethical labor practices – for example, among Apple suppliers in China – have inspired companies to take a close look at their supply chains.
And criticism of excessive executive remuneration has led to frantic meetings by many boards’ compensation committees.
But there is one issue in the news that has not yet received sufficient attention in boardrooms: child sexual abuse.
In the United Kingdom, the last month has brought harrowing reports about child abuse in youth soccer teams, where promising young athletes attempt to play their way to the professional level.
At last count, 98 amateur and professional clubs in the UK were implicated in some way.
While the public has been shocked by the revelations, the affected clubs’ leaders may not have been – at least not in every case.
After all, many clubs had previously heard allegations of sexual abuse of young players, but had chosen to ignore them or cover them up, at times even doling out hush money to the victims – all for the sake of protecting their own reputations.
Crewe Alexandra’s board, for example, actively discussed sexual abuse allegations against a coach, Barry Bennell, in the late 1980s, but decided not to report him to the police or even to fire him. Bennell turned out to be a serial pedophile.
Though he was ultimately tried and sentenced in 1998, he first got to spend several more years abusing young boys, thanks in no small part to Crewe’s spineless and venal board.
Even today, boards are sometimes choosing to defend their reputations at the expense of basic human decency.
Last July, Chelsea Football Club paid a former footballer £50,000 ($62,000) to agree not to speak of the abuse he allegedly endured in the 1970s.
The five-year review of child safety measures, launched by the Football Association (the governing body of UK soccer) in 2001, was dropped after just two years, reportedly in response to resistance from some FA staff.
Yet the scandal plaguing UK soccer is hardly unique.
According to a just-released joint investigation by the IndyStar and USA Today, at least 368 gymnasts in the United States have alleged some form of sexual abuse over the last 20 years.
Top officials at USA Gymnastics, one of the country’s most prominent Olympic organizations, not only failed to alert police to those allegations; they hid the complaints.
Even coaches who were fired, the report asserts, were often not flagged, meaning that predatory coaches could simply start training children at a new gym.
And then there is the Penn State scandal, in which the university’s trustees turned a blind eye to a long-running cover-up of the serial pedophilia of Jerry Sandusky, a former assistant football coach who gained access to his victims through his own charity for troubled youth.
Two former university officials have been charged in the alleged cover-up.
Now that the truth has come out, there is nowhere to hide.
The FA and clubs across the UK are scrambling to conduct investigations and reviews.
USA Gymnastics has hired a former prosecutor to help it strengthen its child-protection policies, and its board of directors has established a policy review panel.
Penn State fired the coach under whom Sandusky worked, Joe Paterno, for failing to pursue an allegation against Sandusky that a subordinate brought to his attention in 2002.
But it should not be only the affected organizations that take action.
Even “innocent” companies and organizations must evaluate and upgrade their policies for protecting vulnerable people, along with their means for enforcing those policies.
They must also review their records, to identify lapses and ensure that past mistakes are not repeated.
Such reviews are needed not just in obviously child-related sectors, like education or sports, but wherever power differentials are a permanent feature of operations.
Any organization operating in countries or communities where it has a great deal of influence and leverage must take action to ensure that no staff are using their positions to take advantage of vulnerable people or groups.
Examples include the oil and gas sector, the health sector, and the humanitarian sector, including aid agencies and United Nations peacekeepers.
The responsibility extends beyond the organizations themselves.
As we have seen with the FIFA corruption scandal, sponsors and investors can use their influence to bring about change.
Beyond the moral imperative, doing so is in these actors’ self-interest.
Hiding from a scandal may help you in the short term, but it is harder than ever to keep a secret nowadays – and those who cover it up enable crimes and ethical violations are complicit in them.
In the same vein, companies should be holding other organizations in their supply chains accountable.
As with unfair or illegal labor practices, businesses must refuse to sponsor, supply, or work with organizations that fail to protect their workers from sexual abuse.
Otherwise, they, too, are guilty.
Child sexual abuse is not a new problem.
What has become apparent lately is the power that boards of companies – as well as large investors, like pension and sovereign-wealth funds – have to help stop it.
At a time of collapsing confidence in “elites” – from political leaders to, yes, board members – actively using this power to protect young people would have the added benefit of fostering trust within divided societies.
There is no excuse to delay.
The Right Food Fight
DRESDEN – To what extent should governments regulate or tax addictive behavior?
This question has long framed public debate about alcohol, tobacco, gambling, and other goods and services in many countries worldwide.
And now, in the United States – arguably the mother of global consumer culture – the debate has turned toward the fight against the epidemic of childhood obesity.
It is ironic that in a world where childhood malnutrition plagues many developing countries, childhood obesity has become one of the leading health scourges in advanced economies.
The World Bank estimates that over a third of all children in Indonesia, for example, suffer from stunted growth, confronting them with the risk of lifetime effects on fitness and cognitive development.
Yet, the plight of malnourished children in the developing world does not make obesity in the advanced countries any less of a problem.
Indeed, though perhaps not on a par with global warming and looming water shortages, obesity – and especially childhood obesity – nonetheless is on the short list of major public-health challenges facing advanced countries in the twenty-first century, and it is rapidly affecting many emerging-market economies as well.
Yet solving it poses much more difficult challenges than the kind of successful public-health interventions of the last century, including near-universal vaccination, fluoridation of drinking water, and motor-vehicle safety rules.
The question is whether it is realistic to hope for success unless the government resorts to far more blunt instruments than it currently seems prepared to wield.
Given the huge impact of obesity on health-care costs, life expectancy, and quality of life, it is a topic that merits urgent attention.
The US leads the world in obesity, and is at the cutting edge of the debate.
Almost everyone agrees that the first line of defense ought to be better consumer education.
First Lady Michelle Obama’s “Let’s Move” educational campaign aspires to eliminate childhood obesity in a generation, though its impact so far remains unclear.
Other efforts include appeals by celebrities like the chef Jamie Oliver and attempts to use peer-based learning, such as the Sesame Street-inspired platform Kickin’ Nutrition (full disclosure: the creator is my wife).
Yet, although education is essential to fight obesity, it is far from clear whether it will be enough in a food environment dominated by large corporations with deep pockets and every incentive to cultivate excessive consumption.
Commercial television programs aimed at children are replete with advertising for processed foods of dubious value to human health.
And, for every celebrity who donates time to fighting obesity, there are a dozen who accept large payments to hawk products, such as ultra-sugary drinks, that are arguably the tobacco of our generation.
It is hard for non-profits to compete with the production values embodied in Beyoncé’s Pepsi commercial or Taylor Swift’s Diet Coke commercial.
The causes of obesity are complex, and the science of understanding human behavior is embryonic; but it is not hyperbole to call the problem an epidemic.
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, roughly 18% of children aged 6-11 in the US are not just overweight, but obese.
The risks posed by this epidemic are manifold, but the main one is that childhood obesity begets adult obesity, with significantly increased risks of diabetes and heart disease.
Indeed, experts estimate that more than 18% of all adults in the advanced economies are obese.
Even more stunning are estimates that roughly 9% of all Americans – and a similar percentage of adults worldwide – have diabetes.
Yet politicians push back on Big Food at their peril.
When the popular former mayor of New York City, Michael Bloomberg, attempted to ban large sugary drinks, public opinion – not to mention the New York State Court of Appeals – rejected the effort, despite support from medical experts.
Many commentators, even those sympathetic to Bloomberg’s goal, argued that it was wrong to try to legislate consumer behavior so bluntly.
Yet, when one considers other successful efforts to improve public health over the last five decades – for example, smoking bans, seat-belt laws, and speed limits – one finds that legislation typically supplemented education.
A less intrusive approach to influencing food choices might be to institute a retail tax on all processed foods – not just sugary drinks – and an offsetting subsidy on non-processed foods.
In the long run, low-income families (which suffer the most from obesity) would be the greatest beneficiaries.
And, in the short term, any income effects could be offset by increased transfers.
Together with the medical researchers David Ludwig and Dariush Mozaffarian, I have proposed an outline of such an approach.
Obviously, some processed foods are far worse than others.
A more complex breakdown is possible, and other ideas should of course be vetted and discussed.
But our approach has the important practical advantage of simplicity.
What must be understood, above all, is that US consumer culture is dominated by a food industry that exploits people’s natural joy in eating, and transforms it (in many cases) into something that is addictive and destructive.
Any visitor to the US can readily see the pervasiveness of the problem.
The right place to start to address it is by creating a better balance between education and commercial disinformation.
But food is so addictive, and the environment so skewed toward unhealthy outcomes, that it is time to think about broader government intervention.
That should certainly include vastly enhanced expenditures on public education; but I suspect that a long-term solution will have to involve more direct regulation, and it is not too soon to start discussing the modalities.
Children’s Champions
LONDON – The British social reformer, Eglantyne Jebb, once noted that the only international language that the world understands is the cry of a child.
Nearly a century after Jebb founded Save the Children, the 2014 Nobel Peace Prize was awarded to Malala Yousafzai, the 17-year-old campaigner for girls’ education, and child-labor opponent Kailash Satyarthi.
The Nobel Committee thus recognized a global civil-rights struggle against child trafficking, child labor, child marriages, and discrimination against girls.
Given recent and ongoing conflicts in Syria, Iraq, Gaza, and South Sudan, which have devastated so many young lives, the Nobel committee had good cause to highlight children’s suffering.
Schools, which should have been sanctuaries, have become military targets.
Thousands of children in Syria and Iraq have been press-ganged into military service.
Despite the efforts of United Nations relief agencies, the carnage this summer has created an additional one million child refugees.
The vulnerability of children was illustrated only too well six months ago, when the Islamist terrorist group Boko Haram (whose name means “Western education is a sin”) abducted 276 Nigerian schoolgirls.
Even if all of the kidnapped girls are returned safely, as a truce between the group and Nigeria’s government stipulates, there are still 15 million children under the age of 14 worldwide who are forced to work, often in appallingly exploitative environments.
A further ten million school-age girls are married off as child brides each year, while around 32 million girls are denied the right even to an elementary education.
But a worldwide counter-offensive is now underway.
Satyarthi’s Global March Against Child Labor has rescued thousands of boys and girls, as young as eight, working as slave laborers in India’s back streets and sweatshops.
The organization has inspired a worldwide campaign to lift children out of exploitation and into education.
Meanwhile, Yousafzai – following her defiant response to an assassin’s bullet two years ago – has led the fight to end discrimination against girls.
Her impact has been remarkable.
Visiting Pakistan immediately after that attack, I saw angry girls cowed into submission by their fear of the Taliban.
On a return visit a few weeks ago, I addressed some 2,000 girls about education.
Inspired by Yousafzai, they were far from quiescent; on the contrary, they were vocal in their demands for the same rights that boys enjoy.
Hundreds of local child-liberation groups, some in the least promising of places, have emerged to fight for children’s civil rights.
These include the Freed Kamlari Development Forum (which combats girls’ slavery in Nepal); the Upper Manya Krobo Rights of the Child Club; and the Yellow movement, which campaigns for youth rights in Ethiopia.
These young activists may not yet be trending on Twitter or Facebook, or even be household names in their own countries, but support for their cause is growing fast.
Consider the campaign for child-marriage-free zones, which began with schoolgirls in 20 areas of Bangladesh uniting to fight against child marriage.
The movement now operates in Pakistan, India, and Africa.
The success of these groups, led by Plan International, has forced governments to toughen laws against child marriage, and – as in Pakistan’s Sindh province – beef up enforcement and policing.
Yousafzai and Satyarthi would undoubtedly point to thousands of others like them who are protesting against child marriage, labor, and trafficking.
Indeed, for the past two years, the Youth Courage Awards have recognized campaigners – role models for a new generation – who have transformed the prospects for children in their own countries.
They include: India’s Ashwini, a visually impaired champion for disabled children; Attal, who created a girls school in his family kitchen in Afghanistan; Shweta who grew up in a South Asian brothel and created a support group for trafficked and abused girls; and Salyne, whose organization, Teach For Lebanon, is helping to educate many of the country’s half-million Syrian and Palestinian refugees.
One Youth Courage award winner, Razia, who at the age of nine was forced to stitch footballs when she should have been in school, started her civil-rights work after&nbsp;Satyarthi&nbsp;rescued her.
She is now leading the campaign in India for the right to education.
The campaign against child exploitation and for education has become global.
The organization A World at School is now circulating the biggest-ever petition in support of the Millennium Development Goal of universal education.
The sad fact is that children are doing more than adults to fight for their own rights.
Nonetheless, the child-liberation movement that Satyarthi, Yousafzai, and others have helped to mobilize is growing by the day, and new, courageous voices are speaking out against injustices that cannot be allowed to persist for another generation.
Children of Frenchmen
One puzzling and often overlooked feature of the France that elected Nicolas Sarkozy as its new president, and that is now poised to give his political allies a powerful parliamentary mandate, is its mix of private optimism and public pessimism.
Consider this: France has the highest fertility rate in the European Union (just under two children per woman), even ahead of booming Ireland.
Of course, that rate alone is not enough to sustain France’s current population, but it’s far stronger than its European neighbors and almost equal to that of the US.
Yet, despite this, Eurobarometer polls repeatedly show that the French are the most pessimistic of all Europeans when it comes to their country’s future.
How can it be that people who are so negative about their common future as a nation go about confidently building their private futures within their families?
Indeed, strained by decades of governmental failure to curb massive unemployment, the French are nowadays often perceived as having retired from the political sphere to concentrate on their lives and leisure.
Museums, gardening, clubs of all sorts are blossoming in today’s France.
Private associations, it seems, have picked up where political parties and trade unions have left off.
But if the French have turned their backs on the public sphere, how are we to make sense of the record-high participation in the recent presidential election, when more than 85% of turned out to vote in both rounds?
How do we explain the passion aroused by the campaign and by Sarkozy himself including the massive affirmation he received in the parliamentary election?
Political fervor, it seems, has not vanished in the land of Rousseau and Danton.
So the truth must lie elsewhere: the French are not hopeless about politics; they are simply waiting for a genuine leader.
As a matter of fact, a case can be made that the French will never come to believe that the state lacks power, globalization or no globalization.
The French still expect greater things from their government than from an integrated Europe or the boundless world.
Yes, the French are incorrigible lovers of the welfare state (they are not the only ones).
And Sarkozy seems to understand this instinctively.
His agenda appears to aim at domestic liberalization – moving beyond the 35-hour week, ending the special pension regimes accorded to particular professions, increasing incentives to work and gain wealth.
But it also seeks protection from the dizzying effects of globalization, which probably will mean strong support for the EU’s Common Agricultural Policy, skepticism toward further trade liberalization and the will to improve European Union’s economic government.
Nevertheless, precisely because they care about the future of their numerous children, the French are much more amenable to some wise reforms than most commentators (and politicians) generally assume.
Secondary and higher education are rightly near the top of the agenda list of the new government.
But so are measures aimed at harnessing the state to efforts to encourage entrepreneurship and boost economic dynamism such as public guaranties for housing and start-ups, and fiscal rebate for investment in small enterprises.
France is also in desperate need of a reality check on the nature of its current cultural diversity.
And no one should forget that, despite his campaign rhetoric and his apparent unpopularity with many immigrants, Sarkozy himself is an immigrant’s son who favors bold affirmative action policies.
Besides, the nomination of a woman with a North-African ascent as minister of Justice made that clear from the start.
Most French understand that their public spaces – the labor market, the workplace, housing, and educational institutions – are corroded by discrimination.
SANTIAGO – Chile celebrated 200 years of independence in 2010.
Only 20 of the 198 countries on Earth have reached that age.
Therefore, it has been, for Chileans, a time of assessment and of asking ourselves a very simple, yet profound, question: have we done things right or wrong?
If we compare ourselves to the rest of Latin America, the truth is that we have done things very well, especially in the last 25 years, during which we went from being one of the poorest countries on the continent to having the highest per capita income in the region.
Yet if we compare ourselves to the more exclusive group of developed countries, the truth is that we still have much to learn from them.
The great goal, the grand mission, the overarching challenge of our generation, the Bicentennial Generation, is just one: for Chile to be the first country in Latin America to be able to say, before the end of this decade, with pride and humility, that it has overcome poverty and become a developed country with real opportunities for material and spiritual advancement for all its children.
Of course, this is a dream that has been extraordinarily elusive in our first 200 years of independence.
So why should now be different?
First of all, unlike any time in the past, this goal has become fully attainable, and is, as a result, a moral imperative.
Chile currently has a per capita GDP of $15,000, after adjusting for purchasing power.
We have set the goal of growing at an average of 6% annually, in order to attain, by 2018, the per capita GDP now enjoyed by European countries such as Portugal and the Czech Republic.
We are also working on doubling the job-creation rate of recent years, with the aim of adding one million jobs in the period 2010-2014.
All indicators demonstrate that we are on the right path.
Despite the devastating effects of the earthquake and tsunami of last February, Chile’s economy is already growing at close to 6%, and we have created nearly 300,000 new jobs in the first nine months of my administration – the highest in our country’s history.
Secondly, these goals are attainable because the world has changed.
The Iron Curtain, which for decades irreconcilably divided the East from the West, is gone.
And globalization and new technologies have torn down the wall that for centuries separated the rich and prosperous countries of the North from the poor and underdeveloped countries of the South.
Yet a third wall remains, less visible than the others but just as harmful, if not more so.
This wall has been with us always, separating rusting spirits who live in nostalgia, fear the future, and believe that only the past was better, from youthful, creative, and entrepreneurial spirits who fearlessly embrace the future and believe that the best is always yet to come.
This wall kept Chile and Latin America from joining the nineteenth-century Industrial Revolution, which is why we remain underdeveloped to this day.
But we need this wall to tumble if we do not want to miss today’s revolution, which is delivering societies based on knowledge, technology, and information.
This revolution will be tremendously generous to those countries that embrace it – and utterly indifferent, even cruel, to those that ignore it or let it pass by.
I mean developing our human capital, which is our greatest resource; encouraging innovation and entrepreneurship, which are the only truly eternal resources we have on hand; investing in science and technology, which will open up unsuspected opportunities in the future; and promoting more dynamic and flexible markets and societies that will put us ahead, and at the helm, of change, rather than always lagging behind and trying to comprehend and adapt to change.
These are some of the many measures that form the goals – and foundation – of my administration.
They are grand, noble, and ambitious goals, but fully attainable for today’s Chile, the Bicentennial Chile, a Chile now viewing the twenty-first century with more optimism and enthusiasm than ever before.
Chile’s Uncertain Future
CAMBRIDGE – When I was in Chile earlier this month, I was impressed by the contrast between the palpable success of its long-standing free-market policies and the current agenda of its leftist president, Michelle Bachelet.
How this contrast is resolved will be important not only to the country’s more than 17 million people, but also to everyone who regards Chile as a model of what sound economic policies have been able to achieve.
Chile’s economic performance has been the strongest in South America.
Its per capita GDP exceeds $22,000 in purchasing-power-parity terms, making its income higher than that of Argentina, Brazil, and Mexico.
It’s no surprise that Chile is considered a developed country – the only South American member of the OECD.
Copper is Chile’s major product and accounts for half of its exports.
Although the government owns Codelco, the world’s largest copper producer, it is Chile’s only publicly owned company.
The company’s revenue varies with the global price of copper, yielding higher government revenues in some years and declines – for example, this year – when the global price is down.
The government follows a wise fiscal strategy that involves budget surpluses in years when copper revenue is high, with the additional funds channeled to a national stabilization fund.
But even with the currently depressed copper price, Chile’s budget deficit is only 2% of GDP.
As a result of Chile’s cautious fiscal strategy, the country has a national debt that amounts to only 16% of GDP – and a sovereign debt rating that is the highest in South America.
Taxes and other government revenues are less than 20% of GDP.
Half of tax revenue is collected with a value-added tax, which is essentially a tax on consumption.
Although there is a tax on corporate income, it is integrated with personal taxes in a way that reduces its adverse effect on investment and production.
Chile is well known for an investment-based pension system.
Employees are required to contribute 10% of their wages to a private pension company of their choice and can then select one of the investment strategies offered by that company.
The government mandates the range of investment strategies, which vary in terms of the share of equities and fixed income that companies may offer.
For those who have worked and contributed during their entire adult life, this produces benefits that are more than 50% of pre-retirement income.
Meanwhile, sound monetary policy, guided by a series of talented central bankers (whose independence is enshrined in Chile’s constitution), has prevented inflation and kept long-term rates relatively low.
Chile’s inflation target is 3% with an acceptable range of plus or minus 1%.
Inflation this year is expected to be 3.9%, and the ten-year bond rate is just 4.4%.
And, by protecting the floating exchange-rate regime, the central bank ensures that Chile does not confront the kind of foreign-debt crisis that has hit other Latin American countries.
Chile is also a devoted free trader. It has free-trade agreements with more than 20 countries and is a member of the nascent Trans-Pacific Partnership.
The economy has also benefited from its openness to foreign investment, with the stock of foreign direct investment in Chile topping 80% of GDP.
There is also universal literacy, with 98% of the adult population able to read and write.
On average, young people spend an average of 15 years in school from primary through tertiary education.
Chile’s excellent economic performance has been the result of the free-market policies introduced during the military dictatorship of General Augusto Pinochet but confirmed and strengthened by democratically elected governments over the 25 years since he left office.
So, given the success and popularity of these policies, it is surprising that Chile’s voters have elected a president and a parliament that many Chileans now fear could put this approach at risk.
Bachelet’s policy agenda emphasizes three major changes.
A key element would be universal free university education, modeled on European systems.
Paying for this educational reform would require higher tax rates.
And labor laws would be revised to strengthen the role of unions.
Critics of Bachelet claim that this agenda is already depressing business investment and is responsible for relatively slow economic growth.
And they worry that foreign and domestic investors will be discouraged by the new labor rules.
Fortunately, the Chilean public shows no inclination to follow the mistakes of several other South American countries, especially Venezuela, Ecuador, Brazil, and Argentina.
Even Bachelet’s critics agree that Chile’s basic macroeconomic policies will not change: an independent central bank committed to price stability, a free-trade regime with a floating currency, and a fiscal policy that will keep deficits and public debt low.
Bachelet’s term in office will end in 2017.
Under Chile’s constitution, she cannot serve another consecutive term.
The election that year will therefore be an important one to watch.
The Democratic Merits of Selective Schools
SANTIAGO – Where do Latin American elites come from?
If the magical realist fiction once so popular in the United States and Europe is any guide, they belong to one of the 14 families (yes, that is always the number) that since colonial times have owned all arable land – along with everything else.
But reality is more complicated than fiction.
In most Latin American countries, the traditional ruling families learned long ago to share their place at the table with a different kind of elite: the urban, professional, and educated graduates of the region’s top public schools and universities.
In Chile, however, that may be about to change.
Chile’s Instituto Nacional, a fiercely competitive secondary school for boys, is as old as the Republic itself.
With no fees and an entrance system based entirely on merit, students from middle- and working-class families comprise the vast majority of the student body.
In last year’s college entrance examinations, 22 Institute students were nationally ranked – far more than the nine who studied at the second most successful institution, an expensive private Catholic school run by the Church’s conservative Opus Dei organization.
The Instituto and its counterpart for young women, Liceo 1, have educated 18 Chilean Presidents and four of the last seven, including the incumbent, Michelle Bachelet.
Chile is far from unique in this respect.
From Colegio Nacional in Buenos Aires to Stuyvesant High School in New York City, institutions that are public, meritocratic, and free have long and distinguished records of achievement across the Americas.
One might expect that such schools would make a progressive leader like Bachelet proud – not least because she herself attended one.
Yet she has proposed a plan, recently approved by the Chilean Congress, that will upend the system, allowing the Instituto Nacional and two dozen other highly competitive public schools across Chile to select only 30% of their students through entrance exams, with the rest chosen by lottery.
The affected schools’ students, teachers, and alumni are predictably upset.
Why would anyone wish to weaken public schools in the name of equality?
Backers of the reform make two arguments – neither of which is convincing.
The first argument is that these schools’ achievements seem greater than they are.
By selecting only the strongest students, critics claim, they ensure strong results, without having to add a lot of value.
This is a textbook “endogeneity” problem: Do the students excel because of the quality of the school, or does the school gain strong results because of the quality of the students?
To answer this question, a recent paper compared standardized-test performance by students who barely missed gaining admission to the Instituto to that of enrolled Instituto students.
It turned out that the performance gap between the two groups grew, and the difference was statistically significant.
In short, there is reason to believe that elite public schools like Instituto Nacional do make a difference for their students.
In fact, the critics&nbsp; who helped to craft the reform recognize this.
They argue that the performance advantage is precisely why the doors of such schools should be open to all, without entrance exams.
The proposal has a nice egalitarian ring to it; but it is far from clear that these schools and their teachers, however skillful, can have such a significant impact on a randomly selected group of students.
The challenge is particularly great for schools with a special focus, such as sports, music, science, or the visual arts.
After all, not just any pair of legs will allow you to play soccer like Lionel Messi, and not just any set of vocal cords will allow you to sing like Maria Callas.
The Bronx High School of Science in New York City takes children of immigrants and molds them into some of the world’s leading scientists.
Not even the school’s most enthusiastic boosters – of which there are many – could argue with any certainty that it could produce such impressive results if it could not select its own students.
Latin America tried this experiment once already, with many public colleges attempting to deflect accusations of elitism by eliminating entrance examinations and tuition fees in the 1960s.
In a region where a university degree had, until then, represented a ticket to the good life, enrollment predictably swelled.
But, in many places, the experiment was short-lived.
Institutions like the University of Chile and Brazil’s University of São Paulo resumed their highly competitive admissions processes.
Those that did not, such as the University of Buenos Aires, saw their role in shaping their countries’ academic, business, and political elites diminish.
In that last sentence, underline the word “political.”
Indeed, the strongest argument for maintaining elite public schools, with their merit-based admissions policies, is political.
In countries where traditional wealthy elites have long wielded power, an alternative elite drawn from the middle classes and educated under republican values is politically invaluable.
It is no coincidence that many of Chile’s democratic reformers of the last two centuries were once students at the Instituto Nacional.
In last year’s Chilean college entrance exam, the second-place school was not the only expensive Catholic institution with a largely upper-class student body to perform well; the rest of the top-ten schools also fit this description.
Opus Dei runs most – though not all – of them.
The dominance of such conservative, elitist institutions is why schools like the Instituto Nacional are so important.
Yet once the effects of Bachelet’s recent reform kick in, their graduates may no longer be at the top of the ranks.
As the elite public schools suffer, so will Chilean democracy.
Chile’s Pension Crunch
SANTIAGO – Defined-benefit pension plans are under pressure.
Changing demographics spell trouble for so-called pay-as-you-go (PAYG) systems, in which contributions from current workers finance pensions.
And record-low interest rates are putting pressure on funded systems, in which the return from earlier investments pays for retirement benefits.
The Financial Times recently called this pensions crunch a “creeping social and political crisis.”
Defined-contribution, fully-funded systems are often lauded as the feasible alternative.
Chile, which since 1981 has required citizens to save for retirement in individual accounts, managed by private administrators, is supposed to be the poster child in this regard.
Yet hundreds of thousands of Chileans have taken to the streets to protest against low pensions.
(The average monthly benefit paid by Chile’s private system is around $300, less than Chile’s minimum wage.)
Chile’s government, feeling the heat, has vowed to change the system that countries like Peru, Colombia, and Mexico have imitated, and that George W. Bush once described as a “great example” for Social Security reform in the United States.
What is going on?
The blame lies partially with the labor market.
Chile’s is more formal than that of its neighbors, but many people – especially women and the young – either have no job or work without a contract.
High job rotation makes it difficult to contribute regularly.
And it has proven difficult to enforce regulations requiring self-employed workers to put money aside in their own accounts.
Moreover, the legally mandated savings rate is only 10% of the monthly wage, and men and women can retire at 65 and 60, respectively – figures that are much lower than the OECD average.
The result is that Chileans save too little for retirement.
No wonder pensions are low.
But that is not the end of the story.
Some of the same problems plaguing defined-benefit systems are also troubling defined-contribution, private-account systems like Chile’s.
Take changes in life expectancy.
A woman retiring at age 60 today can expect to reach 90.
So a fund accumulated over 15 years of contributions (the average for Chilean women) must finance pensions for an expected 30 years.
That combination could yield decent pensions only if the returns on savings were astronomical.
They are not.
On the contrary, since the 2008-2009 global financial crisis, interest rates have been collapsing worldwide.
Chile is no exception.
This affects all funded pension systems, regardless of whether they are defined-benefit or defined-contribution schemes.
Lower returns mean lower pensions – or larger deficits.
The shock and its effect are large.
In the case of a worker who at retirement uses his fund to buy an annuity, a drop in the long interest rate from 4% to 2% cuts his pension by nearly 20%.
The rate-of-return problem is compounded in Chile by the high fees charged by fund managers, which are set as a percentage of the saver’s monthly wage.
So, more challenging than any technical problem with Chile’s pension system is its legitimacy deficit.
To address that problem, it helps to think of any pension system as a way of managing risks – of unemployment, illness, volatile interest rates, sudden death, or a very long life span.
Different principles for organizing a pension system – defined-benefit versus defined-contribution, fully funded versus PAYG, plus all the points in between – allocate those risks differently across workers, taxpayers, retirees, and the government.
The key lesson from Chile is that a defined-contribution, funded system with individual accounts has some advantages: it can stimulate savings, provide a large and growing stock of investible funds (over $170 billion in Chile), and spur economic growth.
But it also leaves individual citizens too exposed to too many risks.
A successful reform must improve the labor market and devise better risk-sharing mechanisms, while preserving incentives to save.
It is a tall order.
Chile’s system already shares risks between low-income workers and taxpayers, via a minimum non-contributory pension and a set of pension top-ups introduced in 2008 (as Minister of Finance, I helped design that reform).
Subsequent experience suggests that those benefits should be enlarged and made available to more retirees.
But the Chilean government has little money left, having committed the revenues from a sizeable tax increase two years ago to the ill-conceived policy of free university education, even for high-income students.
In response to the recent protests, the government has proposed an additional risk-sharing scheme: some (thus far undecided) part of a five-percentage-point increase in the mandatory retirement savings rate, to be paid by employers, will go to a “solidarity fund” that can finance transfers to people receiving low pensions.
The goal is correct, but, as usual, the devil is in the details.
In the medium to long run, it seems likely that wages will adjust, so that the effective burden of the additional savings will be borne by employees, not employers.
One study estimates that workers treat half of the compulsory savings as a tax on labor income, so too-large an increase (especially in the funds that do not go to the worker’s individual account) could cause a drop in labor-force participation, a shift from formal to informal employment, or both.
Chile’s economy does not need that.
There are no easy answers to the pensions conundrum, whether in Chile or elsewhere.
Chilean legislators will have to make difficult choices with hard-to-quantify tradeoffs.
Whatever they decide, irate pensioners and pensioners-to-be will be watching closely.
Chile’s Presidential Minuet
BUENOS AIRES – Chile has been Latin America’s success story since the 1980’s, boasting rapid economic growth, successful integration into the world economy, solid democratic institutions, an effective state bureaucracy, and low levels of corruption.
By most standards, the country is far better off than the rest of the region.
Not surprisingly, Chileans have kept the ruling Christian Democrat-Socialist coalition (the Concertación ) in power for four consecutive terms since 1990, when democracy was restored after 17 years of General Augusto Pinochet’s repressive military rule.
On December 13, however, voters in Chile’s presidential election are likely to make the Concertación candidate sweat.
The Concertación is running Christian Democrat Eduardo Frei, the son of a former president who was president himself from 1994 until 2000.
His opponent is Sebastián Piñera, a tycoon, former senator, and presidential runner-up in 2006 who represents the main opposition forces – Piñera’s moderately conservative Renovación Nacional (RN) and the more rightist Union Democrata Independiente (UDI).
So far, nothing new: the RN and the UDI – which differ mainly in their attitude towards the military government from which they emerged (the RN being the more self-critical) – have been the main challengers in all the previous elections.
But change is coming, in the form of a 36-year-old maverick with no traditional-party backing.
Marco Enríquez-Ominami, with about 20% support in recent polls, is remarkably close to Frei (around 26%), and not terribly far from Piñera (roughly 38%).
The young candidate’s unexpected popular support is rooted within the ruling coalition: his adoptive father is a prominent Socialist senator (his biological father, a leader of the revolutionary left in the 1970’s, was killed by Pinochet’s political police).
Marco himself was elected deputy on the Socialist ticket, but he defected when the party denied him the chance to contest Frei’s nomination in a primary.
With this unique mix of insider knowledge and outsider status, and a freshness that both main candidates lack, Enríquez-Ominami has gone farther than most observers predicted.
Piñera’s lead and the emergence of Enríquez-Ominami are probably expressions of the same phenomenon: fatigue with – and within – the Concertación .
Despite its many successes since 1990, and the high popularity of the current president (Socialist Michelle Bachelet, Chile’s first female chief executive), time is taking a toll.
In recent years, several groups have split from the incumbent parties.
Many voters are following suit, drawn mainly to Enríquez-Ominami.
Frei’s lackluster numbers reflect his own weaknesses (he is notoriously uncharismatic and was the least popular of the four Concertación presidents), as well as the inevitable stress that two decades of uninterrupted rule has placed on the ruling coalition.
As things stand now, the right is likely to win the first round, but with less than 50%.
Even a comfortable Piñera victory could be reversed on the January 17th run-off, as Frei and Enríquez-Ominami are essentially splitting the center-left vote.
Enríquez-Ominami has the popularity and momentum to displace Frei from the run-off, but he may have a harder time defeating Piñera.
The two most likely scenarios, then, are government continuity or predictable change (the right has been expected to capture the presidency for years).
But a third scenario – less predictable change following a victory by Enríquez-Ominami – should not be ruled out, as campaign advertisements will appear in the media only starting November 13.
In terms of Chile’s major policies, however, continuity is almost certain to prevail, even if Enríquez-Ominami wins.
The center-left coalition that defeated Pinochet (in a 1988 plebiscite and his presidential candidate in the 1989 election) has been wise enough to keep, and in some cases deepen, the sound free-market policies inherited from the military government.
Chile boasts orthodox fiscal and monetary management, a very open economy, and a dynamic private sector.
It was also the first country in the world to adopt a fully private pension system, a policy experiment carried out by one of Pinochet’s technocrats (who happened to be Piñera’s brother, José) and largely kept in place since then.
These policies are popular with voters, and they are protected by powerful actors (for example, the strong export-oriented business sector) and by trade agreements with almost all the world’s major economies and regional blocs.
Unlike many Latin American countries, in which populist backlashes have followed the liberalizing reforms of the 1990’s, the main challenger in Chile is an even more pro-market coalition.
Beyond the economy, there are, of course, many areas of disagreement.
The Concertación has dealt prudently with the political legacies of the dictatorship, gradually rescinding the self-serving rules that Pinochet created to protect himself, the military, and the right, and making some progress in prosecuting human rights violators.
But many are not happy: the far left – not very strong these days but with an important political tradition – wants more and faster progress on prosecutions, while the recalcitrant right insists on treating Pinochet (who died in 2006) as a national hero.
Moral, ethnic, and environmental issues follow similar ideological lines.
And yet the range of the policy debate is much narrower, and the tone more amiable, than is the case in Chile’s more polarized neighbors, such as Argentina, Bolivia, and Venezuela.
In either of the most probable scenarios, continuity or prudent change, or even if the “outsider” candidate wins, Chile will in all likelihood remain a beacon of democratic stability, economic dynamism, and international engagement in a region too often characterized by political and economic turbulence.
Chile Stays the Course
BUENOS AIRES – When Sebastián Piñera – the moderately conservative tycoon who was recently elected president – takes office on March 11, Chile will experience what some political scientists consider a watershed in every successful transition to democracy: the rotation of power among political parties.
After General Augusto Pinochet’s dictatorship gave way to democracy in 1990, the center-left coalition known as the Concertación won four consecutive free and fair presidential contests.
After 20 years in office, it will now cede power to Piñera´s Coalición por el Cambio , composed of his center-right Renovación Nacional and the more conservative Union Demócrata Independiente .
The long rule of the Concertación reflected its success.
In almost all areas, from political stability to economic development to poverty alleviation, Chile has done very well over the past two decades, certainly much better than its Latin American neighbors.
The rightist opposition had to solve the puzzle of defeating a coalition that had maintained Pinochet’s most successful policies (mainly the free-market, export-oriented economic model) without being tainted (as many Coalición leaders are) by links to his bloody regime.
Piñera benefited from his own critical stance towards the military government, and from an electoral campaign that emphasized the liberal much more than the conservative aspects of his coalition.
Instead of vindicating Pinochet and appealing to traditional Catholic values, Piñera offered a centrist vision of change that included more rights for homosexuals and an emphasis on social issues (in a country that, even after 25 years of strong growth, remains very unequal).
Piñera’s victory was aided by the sclerosis of the Concertación, which ran as its candidate the Christian Democrat Eduardo Frei, the least popular of its four presidents of the last two decades.
(The current and popular Socialist president, Michelle Bachelet, could not legally run for reelection.)
Even worse, after the Socialist Party denied a young deputy, Marco Enríquez-Ominami, the possibility to compete in a primary against Frei, Enríquez launched a quite successful independent candidacy, which split the Concertación vote in the first round.
With more internal democracy and some renewal in its leadership, the ruling alliance might have secured a fifth term.
How much change does Piñera represent for Chile?
First, a look at the numbers: the president-elect won the second-round vote with only a slight popular majority (51.6%), and will have fewer seats than the Concertación in the Senate.
The rough balance of power that has characterized Chilean politics over the past 20 years will continue during Piñera’s four-year term: only incremental, negotiated change will be possible.
Moreover, at a substantive level there is not really that much difference between the two alliances (and even less between the centrist Piñera and Frei).
Yes, traditional constituencies of the right, such as the business sector, the military, and the Church, will find a somewhat more welcoming government, but a sharp rightward turn is unlikely.
The most controversial change that Piñera is likely to seek is the partial privatization of CODELCO, the huge and highly profitable state-owned copper company.
But, even if this politically risky move succeeded, he would just be deepening the economic model started by Pinochet and followed by the Concertación .
In foreign policy, Chile is expected to adopt a harsher stance towards the Cuban dictatorship and Venezuela’s President Hugo Chávez, while retaining the policy of integration with Argentina and Brazil, and of negotiation with Bolivia (over an old territorial dispute).
The real action may actually take place within the two political coalitions.
Previous signs of exhaustion in the Concertación have worsened after the electoral defeat.
Several key party leaders have resigned.
The smallest of the alliance’s parties (the Radicals ) quickly negotiated a deal with the right in Congress (though it was canceled after the ensuing political scandal).
And Enríquez-Ominami may continue to build his new force at the expense of the Concertación .
Other tensions may erupt without the unifying incentives of power.
As the cleavages inherited from the military years fade and the ideological ocean that once separated left and right becomes a navigable river, there is potential for coalition reshuffling.
Piñera needs more votes in Congress, and the experience of other multi-party presidential democracies such as Argentina and Brazil shows that it is not difficult for incumbents to attract coalition partners in exchange for government posts.
Tensions in the new ruling coalition are also possible.
Piñera has said that he will emphasize technical competence in his cabinet appointments, with a bias towards the young.
This may bode ill for traditional politicians of the right who have been waiting two decades for a chance in office.
One factor, however, may hold everything together: Bachelet can and may run again for president in 2013-2014.
Her popularity, plus the toll that holding office might take on the Coalición , could turn the Concertación’s recent narrow defeat into a future victory.
This prospect gives incentives for both alliances to stay together.
Silver Linings for a Golden Age
SINGAPORE – Are prospects for global stability and prosperity improving or deteriorating?
With enlightenment and progress in some parts of the world accompanied by atavism and stagnation elsewhere, this is not an easy question.
But we can gain greater purchase on it by considering three other questions.
The first is whether the United States will regain its standing as a source of moral leadership.
Despite its flaws, America did provide such leadership, beginning at the end of World War II.
But the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, changed everything.
Americans’ anger following the attacks drove them to support policies that they once would have considered inconceivable.
In the name of the “global war on terror,” they have tolerated torture; accepted – and even endorsed – the illegal invasion of Iraq; and allowed innocent civilians to become collateral damage of mechanical drone strikes.
In order to restore America’s moral leadership, President Barack Obama must make good on his early rhetoric – exemplified in his speeches in Istanbul and Cairo early in his presidency – which demonstrated genuine regard for the oppressed.
In 2007, during his first presidential campaign, he wrote that America “can neither retreat from the world nor try to bully it into submission.
We must lead the world, by deed and by example.”
But Obama cannot do it alone – and, so far, neither the American public nor the US Congress seems committed to reconnecting with its moral compass.
It should be unacceptable, for example, for Congress to block the release of 86 Guantánamo Bay detainees cleared by a committee of national-security officials.
Not even the revelations by former intelligence contractor Edward Snowden that no one is exempt from the possibility of US surveillance have stirred Americans to demand a new approach.
The answer to the second major question shaping the world’s future – whether China will regain its economic momentum – also appears to be “no,” at least in the short term, with most experts agreeing that China’s export- and investment-led growth model has all but exhausted its potential.
Indeed, China cannot continue to rely on manufacturing exports when its major sources of demand – the US and Europe – are struggling and its labor costs are rising.
Likewise, China’s government cannot continue to waste resources on economic-stimulus packages that have led to industrial overcapacity and skyrocketing local-government debt.