Politically and economically, it came with the best intentions. The single-market principle was supposed to promote the efficient allocation of capital and labor.
But details matter.
Tax competition means that capital may go not to where its social return is highest, but to where it can find the best deal.
The implicit subsidy to banks means that German banks have an advantage over those of other countries.
Workers may leave Ireland or Greece not because their productivity there is lower, but because, by leaving, they can escape the debt burden incurred by their parents.
Moreover, Germany is on the hook in either case: if the euro or the economies on the periphery collapse, the costs to Germany will be high.
Europe has great strengths.
Its weaknesses today mainly reflect flawed policies and institutional arrangements.
These can be changed, but only if their fundamental weaknesses are recognized –&nbsp;a task that is far more important than structural reforms within the individual countries.
While structural problems have weakened competitiveness and GDP growth in particular countries, they did not bring about the crisis, and addressing them will not resolve it.
Europe’s temporizing approach to the crisis cannot work indefinitely.
It is not just confidence in Europe’s periphery that is waning. The survival of the euro itself is being put in doubt.
The False Promise of a Eurozone Budget
BRUSSELS – A key question confronts the four presidents of Europe’s major institutions (the European Commission, the European Council, the European Central Bank, and the Eurogroup) as they prepare their report on how to reform the common currency: Does the eurozone need its own budget?
They are facing the argument that the United States’ monetary union works much better because there is a large federal budget to smooth the impact of asymmetric shocks – that is, shocks to individual states.
The eurozone, it is claimed, should have its own budget to provide similarly automatic insurance to its members.
This argument, however, misreads the US experience.
True, in the US, as in most existing federal states, the federal budget redistributes income across regions, thus offsetting at least part of the interregional differences in income.
But, while this has been repeatedly documented in many cases, the inference that redistribution is equivalent to a shock absorber is wrong.
For example, in the US, the federal budget offsets a substantial part (estimated at 30-40%) of the differences in per capita income levels across states, because poorer states contribute less income tax, on average, and receive higher transfer payments.
But this does not imply that these mechanisms also provide insurance against shocks (sudden changes in income for individual states).
Many of the transfers from the federal government – especially basic social support like food stamps – vary little with the local business cycle.
On the revenue side, the degree to which federal taxation absorbs shocks at the state level cannot be very large for the simple reason that the main source of federal revenues that does react to the business cycle, the federal income tax, accounts for less than 10% of GDP.
The low sensitivity of both federal expenditure and federal revenues to local business-cycle conditions explains why only a small fraction (estimated at about 10-15 %) of any shock to the GDP of any individual state is absorbed via automatic transfers to and from the US federal budget.
One idea that has been mooted repeatedly in Europe is to create some European, or at least eurozone, unemployment insurance fund.
This idea is attractive at first sight.
But here, too, the reference to the US experience is misleading.
In the US, unemployment insurance is organized at the state level.
The federal government intervenes only in the case of major nationwide recessions and provides some supplementary benefits for the long-term unemployed.
But this support is given to all states and thus does not provide those most affected with much more support than the others receive.
Moreover, unemployment benefits are not as important as is often assumed.
In most countries, they amount to only about 2-3% of GDP, even during a major recession.
In the US, the annual supplementary federal expenditure has amounted to only about 1% of GDP in recent years.
It is thus clear that a eurozone unemployment insurance system would never be able to offset major shocks, such as those hitting Ireland or Greece, where GDP has shrunk by more than 10%.
The case of Spain illustrates another feature of European economies that makes it difficult to argue for a federal unemployment scheme.
Spanish unemployment is now close to 30%, which a priori should be a good justification for some form of shock absorber.
But Spanish unemployment has typically been consistently higher than the eurozone average, and fell to single-digit levels only as a result of an unsustainable building boom.
Any common eurozone unemployment scheme would thus risk financing the long-term unemployment created by rigid national labor-market institutions, which for decades have proved impervious to reforms.
All in all, it is difficult to base the argument for some eurozone shock absorber on the US experience.
But how can one explain the fact that the global financial crisis led to no regional banking crises in the US, whereas several eurozone countries’ banking systems are under such stress that their governments have had to rescue them (and then be rescued in turn by the eurozone’s bailout fund)?
This reflects another aspect of US arrangements that, again, is not widely appreciated.
The US “banking union” provides tangible insurance against local financial shocks.
For example, the local real-estate boom and bust in Nevada was as severe as that in Spain or Ireland.
But, in Nevada, which is similar in size to Ireland, the local banking system’s losses were absorbed to a large extent by US “banking union” institutions, particularly the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and the federal mortgage-refinancing agencies, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.
For Nevada, such support can be estimated at 10-20% of its “national” income.
Ireland would certainly be in much better shape if it had received a similar transfer.
This leads to a simple conclusion: The euro’s long-term stability depends far more on completing plans for a European banking union than it does on creating some new budget for the eurozone.
The Eurozone’s Last Stand
NEW YORK – The eurozone crisis is reaching its climax.
Greece is insolvent.
Portugal and Ireland have recently seen their bonds downgraded to junk status.
Spain could still lose market access as political uncertainty adds to its fiscal and financial woes.
Financial pressure on Italy is now mounting.
By 2012, Greek public debt will be above 160% of GDP and rising.
Alternatives to a debt restructuring are fast disappearing.
A full-blown official bailout of Greece’s public sector (by the International Monetary Fund, the European Central Bank, and the European Financial Stability Facility) would be the mother of all moral-hazard plays: extremely expensive and politically near-impossible, owing to resistance from core eurozone voters – starting with the Germans.
Meanwhile, the current French proposal of a voluntary rollover by banks is flopping, as it would impose prohibitively high interest rates on the Greeks.
Likewise, debt buybacks would be a massive waste of official resources, as the residual value of the debt increases as it is bought, benefiting creditors far more than the sovereign debtor.
So the only realistic and sensible solution is an orderly and market-oriented – but coercive – restructuring of the entire Greek public debt.
But how can debt relief be achieved for the sovereign without imposing massive losses on Greek banks and foreign banks holding Greek bonds?
The answer is to emulate the response to sovereign-debt crises in Uruguay, Pakistan, Ukraine, and many other emerging-market economies, where orderly exchange of old debt for new debt had three features: an identical face value (so-called “par” bonds); a long maturity (20-30 years); and interest set well below the currently unsustainable market rates – and close to or below the original coupon.
Even if the face value of the Greek debt were not reduced, a maturity extension would still provide massive debt relief – on a present-value basis – to Greece as a euro of debt owed 30 years from now is worth much less today than the same euro owed a year from now.
Moreover, a maturity extension resolves rollover risk for the coming decades.
The advantage of a par bond is that Greece’s creditors – banks, insurance companies, and pension funds – would be able and allowed to continue valuing their Greek bonds at 100 cents on the euro, thereby avoiding massive losses on their balance sheets.
That, in turn, would sharply contain the risk of financial contagion.
Rating agencies would consider this debt exchange a “credit event,” but only for a very short period – a matter of a few weeks.
Consider Uruguay, whose rating was downgraded to “selective default” for two weeks while the exchange was occurring, and then was upgraded (though not to investment grade) when, thanks to the exchange’s success, its public debt became more sustainable.
The ECB and creditor banks can live for two or three weeks with a temporary downgrade of Greece’s debt.
Moreover, there would be few holdouts that refuse to participate in the exchange.
Previous experience suggests that most hold-to-maturity investors would accept a par bond, while most mark-to-market investors would accept a discount bond with a higher coupon (that is, a bond with a lower face value) – an alternative that could be offered (and has been in the past) to such investors.
At the same time, the best way to contain financial contagion would be to implement a pan-European plan to recapitalize eurozone banks.
This implies using official resources like the EFSF not to backstop an insolvent Greece, but to recapitalize the country’s banks – and those in Ireland, Spain, Portugal, Italy, and even Germany and Belgium that need more capital.
In the meantime, the ECB must continue to provide unlimited resources to banks under liquidity stress.
To reduce the risk of financial pressures on Italy and Spain, both countries need to press ahead with fiscal austerity and structural reforms.
Moreover, their debt could be ring-fenced with a larger package of EFSF resources and/or with the issuance of Eurobonds – a further step towards European fiscal integration.
Finally, the eurozone needs policies to restart economic growth on its periphery.
Without growth, any austerity and reform will deliver only social unrest and the constant threat of a political backlash, without restoring debt sustainability.
To revive growth, the ECB needs to stop raising interest rates and reverse course.
The eurozone should also pursue a policy – partially via looser monetary policy – that weakens the value of the euro significantly and restores the periphery’s competitiveness.
And Germany should delay its austerity plan, as the last thing that the eurozone needs is a massive fiscal drag.
The eurozone’s current muddle-through approach is an unstable disequilibrium: kicking the can down the road, and throwing good money after bad, will not work.
Either the eurozone moves toward a different equilibrium – greater economic, fiscal, and political integration, with policies that restore growth and competitiveness, including orderly debt restructurings and a weaker euro – or it will end up with disorderly defaults, banking crises, and eventually a break-up of the monetary union.
The status quo is no longer sustainable.
Only a comprehensive strategy can rescue the eurozone now.
The Eurozone’s Strategy of Pain
BRUSSELS – For the third year in a row, the eurozone is the weakest link in the world economy.
In 2010, attention was focused on responses to the crisis on the eurozone periphery – Greece, Portugal, and Ireland.
In 2011, the crisis moved to the core, with Italy and Spain feeling the heat, and concerns mounting about the viability of the eurozone itself.
The question for 2012 is whether those tensions will abate or reach a new climax.
Once again, the Greek crisis is the focus of attention and epitomizes Europe’s failings.
Once again, hard decisions have to be made about debt restructuring and the provision of further assistance to Athens.
And once again, the Europeans have to accept that the situation is more serious than they thought.
But the depth of Greece’s woes should not obscure the fact that it is a small economy and, in many respects, an extreme, special case.
No other country flouted the European Union’s budget rules the way Greece did, or has accumulated as large a public-debt burden, and no other EU country combines to the same extent a dysfunctional state and an uncompetitive private economy.
The real battle is being fought in Italy and Spain.
Both countries’ borrowing conditions deteriorated in the second half of 2011.
Both are so large – accounting for 17% and 11% of eurozone GDP, respectively – that financing them through multilateral assistance would strain, if not exhaust, the resources of the eurozone and the International Monetary Fund.
Both recently installed new, reform-minded governments.
And both are struggling to rebuild competitiveness, foster growth, restore fiscal soundness, and clean up banks’ balance sheets.
If they succeed, the euro will survive; if they fail, it won’t, at least in its present form.
That is why discussions over the last few months have largely, if implicitly, been about how to support adjustment and reform in Italy and Spain.
Proposals to permit the European Central Bank to intervene more decisively in bond markets, or to increase the size of the “firewall” by leveraging the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF), were intended to set an upper limit on interest rates paid by Italy and Spain on their debt emissions.
Similarly, proposals to create common bonds were intended to quell expectations of insolvency by ensuring that these countries would eventually be able to borrow against their eurozone partners’ guarantee.
All of the discussions were couched in general terms, but everybody had the same specific countries in mind.
None of these proposals, it seems, will be implemented anytime soon.
The ECB has bought some Italian and Spanish bonds, and it might buy more, but it has made clear that it is not ready to commit to a ceiling for long-term interest rates.
The EFSF’s size will be increased by accelerating the creation of the permanent European Stability Mechanism, and by letting it overlap with the EFSF.
But the EFSF’s capacity will remain at roughly €500 billion – well below the €1 trillion-plus envisaged by those who advocate bringing massive financial firepower to bear (the so-called “bazooka solution”).
Likewise, Eurobonds are officially off the agenda, at least for now.
Rather, Europe is putting in place a new fiscal compact to ensure that all eurozone countries adopt and implement stringent budgetary rules.
These choices partly reflect pragmatic concerns: all of the financial-engineering schemes that have been proposed to protect Italy and Spain from aggravated borrowing conditions raise legal, political, or governance difficulties.
But there is a principle at issue as well: it is thought (particularly in Germany) that protection from market pressure would only impede adjustment and reform.
Indeed, the perception in Northern Europe is that only serious strains provide the required incentives to overcome domestic political and social obstacles to slashing public spending and reforming labor markets.
For Southern Europe, no pain means no gain: a deep recession and a sharp increase in unemployment may be the price of lasting improvements in productivity and competitiveness.
This reasoning is not without justification.
Soon after the ECB began buying Italian bonds last August, then-Prime minister Silvio Berlusconi’s government backtracked on its commitments to tax reform.
Even though it later reversed its stance, the episode was widely regarded as clear evidence of the moral-hazard effect of ECB support.
Only after the bond market turned on Berlusconi again was he replaced by the reform-minded Mario Monti.
But the strategy is a high-risk gamble.
Governments may need incentives to act, but they also need to be able to show their citizens that reform pays.
If, after a few quarters of fiscal adjustment and painful reform, output is lower, unemployment higher, and the outlook darker, governments may soon lose public support and reform may stall, as we have seen in Greece.
Reform-minded teams may lose power to populists.
Furthermore, a degraded macroeconomic and financial environment increases the likelihood of bank failures, with immediate consequences for public finances and economic confidence.
These risks are compounded by the need for reform in several countries at once.
Indeed, there is a “fallacy of composition” in the current approach: the countries in need of serious adjustment and improved competitiveness include the whole of Southern Europe and France, and jointly account for more than one-half of eurozone GDP.
True, competition for investment is an incentive to act.
But macroeconomic and financial interdependence may render success elusive if reforming countries face an adverse regional environment of stagnating or falling demand.
It is one thing to believe that governments act only under pressure, and that societies accept reforms only if they believe that there is no other alternative; it is quite another to believe that adjustment and reform will proceed if all of Southern Europe is struggling with recession.
Keeping Southern Europe on a short leash would be a more credible strategy if accompanied by a growth program for the entire eurozone.
And, at this stage, such a program is nowhere in sight.
The Eurozone’s Strength in Disunity
FLORENCE – For months, an increasingly frenetic, even apocalyptic, debate about the fate of the euro has been the major driver of global instability.
Can Europe’s common currency survive?  No less a figure than former United States Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan has now declared that it cannot.
But the euro also seems surprisingly resilient in the face of this woe.
Unlike in the early summer of 2010, it has been largely stable relative to the dollar on foreign-exchange markets.
That stability is puzzling.
Skeptics have plenty of ammunition for their critique of the euro.
European governments’ high-level crisis diplomacy and new and ever more complex mechanisms sometimes briefly calm the markets, but the tide of doubt quickly sweeps back in.
For a day, or sometimes only for a few hours, traders succumb to the illusion of stability, fueling a euphoric but ephemeral financial-market rally.
Then they awaken to the reality that not much has really changed, and that in a few weeks or months the problems will reappear in a seemingly even more intractable form.
All manner of new legal and constitutional difficulties constantly arise.
Is an amendment to the EU treaty required?
Isn’t that politically unthinkable?
One is ineluctably led to the conclusion that governance of the eurozone is irredeemably flawed.
But the persistence of these difficulties sheds light on why the eurozone was established in the first place.
Market turbulence demonstrates a need for some institutional mechanism that can ensure greater currency stability.
An international currency is the most obvious solution.
The euro originated from the harmful effects of international currency instability in the wake of the collapse of fixed-exchange-rate regimes in the early 1970’s.
Whenever the dollar was weak, capital surged into alternative currencies, notably the Japanese yen and the German Mark.
But exchange-rate appreciation put great strain on the export industries that were central to these countries’ economic performance; and both countries tried desperately to avoid becoming reserve currencies.
Today, the major “beneficiaries” – in fact, victims – of dollar doubts are economies that are much smaller than Japan or Germany.
Nowadays, capital flows are driving up the Swiss franc, the Swedish and Norwegian krone, and the Canadian and Australian dollars, causing profound dislocations in these small economies as their products and services become uncompetitive.
The managers of these new safe-haven currencies are now desperately seeking at least a temporary peg or some system of bands relative to the exchange rates of their big neighbors.
Such a policy is fraught with danger; indeed, it is inherently self-defeating, as the establishment of a peg or a band provides an obvious target against which speculators can take huge positions.
The current turmoil eventually will lead smaller European countries to look for ways to tie themselves much more closely to the euro.
That is what happened in the 1970’s, during the original wave of currency turmoil: the Scandinavians and the Swiss negotiated to associate themselves with a European currency regime.
Today, the logic of that strategy has become even more compelling.
The benefits of euro membership are also clear to many other small economies.
Slovenia, which entered the eurozone in 2007, and Slovakia, which joined at the beginning of 2009 – just as the cresting financial crisis slammed shut the door to further euro enlargement – have enjoyed much greater financial stability than their untied neighbors.
Part of those neighbors’ problem was that domestic borrowing costs looked so high that many small borrowers, including many house buyers, turned to low-interest Swiss-franc loans and were then hit by the franc’s massive appreciation.
The turbulence reinforces the lesson – fundamental to the rationale of establishing the euro – that ordinary people and businesses should not be exposed to exchange-rate risk.
Even in larger countries, the costs and benefits of membership in a currency union are under renewed consideration.
In the initial aftermath of the financial crisis, it was widely assumed that currency flexibility gave the United Kingdom an advantage over eurozone members like Spain.
But Spanish exports recovered more quickly than British exports, and inflationary pressure via the exchange rate is now a major constraint on future British monetary policy.
Of course, there are obvious governance problems with the eurozone.
Most glaringly, the question of how to allocate the costs of some member countries’ unsustainable debt overhang has not been adequately addressed.
It is easy to conclude that no one is in charge: not the national governments, and certainly not the ineffective European Commission in Brussels, with which the large member countries seem to be practically at war.
And yet, paradoxically, the absence of control is what makes the euro attractive.
Unlike the US dollar, there is no obvious way to put pressure on the European Central Bank to depreciate the currency in order to obtain a competitive advantage over other economies.
European governments are not in a position to instruct the ECB to purchase government bonds.
The more the eurozone’s ineffective governance is criticized, the greater becomes the euro’s importance as a non-political currency that represents a secure store of value.
In a stable world of confident markets, small countries can rest easy with their own monetary regimes.
In a turbulent world of market volatility, however, they risk being overwhelmed.
There is thus a surprising resilience in the European project.
A bundle of logs lashed together in a raft – even if it lacks a rudder – has a clear advantage over a single storm-tossed trunk.
The higher the waves of doubt and uncertainty become, the more the common approach is needed.
A Breach in the Eurozone Dike
PRINCETON – While all eyes have been on the European periphery, has the core been cracking?
The Bundesbank has lowered its forecast for German annual GDP growth in 2013 to 0.4%.
The Central Bank of the Netherlands expects Dutch GDP to shrink by -0.5% this year –&#160;following a contraction of about 1% in 2012.
The eurozone crisis may be entering its third stage.
In the first stage, beginning in the spring of 2008, the locus of the North Atlantic crisis moved from the United States to the eurozone.
Banks in the eurozone came under pressure, and interbank tensions increased.
In the second stage, starting in the spring of 2009, the crisis spread to the sovereigns, as investors grew increasingly worried that propping up banks would strain government finances.
In turn, sovereign weakness made the banks appear riskier, and the banks and their home governments became joined at the hip.
Throughout the crisis, it has been widely assumed – at least so far – that the eurozone core would remain solid, and would continue to write the checks for the periphery’s distressed governments and banks.
That assumption appeared plausible.
A “two-speed” Europe was the new normal.
In particular, Germany stood above the fray.
Following strong performance in 2010, Germany’s GDP exceeded pre-crisis levels by early 2011, a somewhat better achievement than that of the US.
Indeed, given Germany’s surprisingly impressive employment performance, another Wirtschaftswunder appeared to be in the making.
Then a subtle change occurred.
The US – despite a historically slow return to normalcy –&#160;pulled ahead of Germany.
Absent a prolonged fiscal-cliff and debt-ceiling mess, the US may be cobbling together a sustainable recovery.
Following the German economy’s sharp contraction in the last quarter of 2012, the question for the country today is whether it can avoid a technical recession (defined as two consecutive quarters of economic contraction).
Europe does not have its own growth engine.
The German rebound was initially robust because world trade rose rapidly after a precipitous fall.
China’s voracious appetite for German cars and machines provided the needed boost, even as Germany’s traditional trade partners in Europe struggled.
Since then, however, Chinese demand growth has slowed, and Germany’s European trading partners are in even deeper trouble.
Fiscal austerity in the periphery requires cutting back on imports; hence, the countries exporting to the periphery need to curtail their own imports – and so the process cascades.
This trade multiplier is causing European economies to drag each other down, and the rest of the world is feeling the effects.
The Dutch economy’s poor prospects are similarly alarming.
The Netherlands is second only to Germany in the volume of credit that it channels through the so-called “Target 2” system to the eurozone periphery, and it is the periphery’s largest creditor in per capita terms.
Economic forecasters continue to promise that growth will revive.
Things will begin to look up in the second half of 2013, we are told.
But the track record of charting this recovery has been discouraging.
In his book The Signal and the Noise, the American statistician Nate Silver says that forecasters perform worst when faced with a circumstance that they have not encountered before.
This is such a circumstance.
In April 2010, the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook projected 1.8% annual GDP growth in Germany and the Netherlands in 2013.
In October of last year, the IMF lowered its 2013 growth forecast for Germany to 0.9% and to 0.4% for the Netherlands.
And, a mere two months later, both countries’ central banks report that even these reduced expectations are too optimistic.
Who is to say that the second half of 2013 will bring more hope and cheer?
The European crisis-management process has been predicated on the Scarlett O’Hara principle that “tomorrow will be a better day.”
Although everyone knows that postponing hard decisions only makes the problem larger, they could still believe that there would always be a firm line of defense.
That may be changing.
The third stage of the eurozone crisis will arrive when the economic strength of the core is in doubt.
Those very doubts undermine the credibility of the safety net that has been supporting the European periphery.
A solution to the eurozone crisis that relies on Germany has always been politically uncertain.
It may soon become economically untenable.
A Green European Budget
PARIS – However predictable the difficult negotiations that accompany European politics may seem to be, in the end they seldom fail to surprise.
A crucial European Union summit aimed at securing a deal on the EU budget for 2014-2020, the so-called multi-annual financial framework (MFF), will take place later this week, and the mood music surrounding it has been intense, to say the least.
Before even a word has been spoken, Europeans are being told that the negotiations in Brussels will be “bad-tempered,” with vetoes by individual member states looming large.
Unfortunately, such talk could well become a self-fulfilling prophecy.
Consider this: A group of major companies based in various EU countries – the likes of Tesco, Shell, Barilla, and Philips – are insisting that whatever its final size, the MFF deal should commit to a proposed minimum of 20% of spending in 2014-2020 on green and low-carbon growth.
These are the same companies that Europe’s national governments court and listen to on a daily basis.
But, when it comes to the MFF, Europe’s national leaders appear not to be listening closely.
Nor do they say much about the obvious dividends that such spending could provide, from the United Kingdom in the west to the EU’s newest candidate country, Croatia, in the east.
Europe’s 500 million citizens may not be surprised by what is playing out in the corridors of power, but they ought to find it very disturbing.
The issue is not only what could be lost in the race to the bottom in which many EU national governments are now engaging, but also the manipulative anti-EU sentiment coming from many quarters of the European press, which appears intent on pushing various national leaders into another budget showdown.
In the EU’s western, net-contributor states, the MFF debate remains narrowly focused on how much money can be cut from the European Commission’s proposed €1.033 trillion ($1.3 trillion) budget for 2014-2020.
Next to nothing, though, is being said about the Commission’s more important, and more integral, proposal: the 20% spending commitment for projects and initiatives that can stimulate resource-efficient business, protect Europe’s collective, boundary-less environment, and ensure a better future for families across the continent.
The dividends promised by a “green” MFF (which recently received the support of the European Parliament) are at least threefold: a higher share of jobs in one of the world’s fastest-growing economic sectors; lower energy bills for households throughout Europe; and help in achieving the reductions in greenhouse-gas emissions to which all EU states have agreed as part of their “Europe 2020” commitments.
The green potential within EU spending has already taken root.
In France, for example, social housing organizations have rapidly deployed €320 million of EU money in the last few years to improve energy efficiency in existing housing stock.
This European finance triggered additional investment of €2.2 billion, created 15,000 local jobs, and has resulted in savings of €98 per month per household, thanks to a 40% average decrease in heating costs.
Recently, Michael Heseltine, a former minister in Margaret Thatcher’s government, stressed the importance of wind energy for deprived regions of the United Kingdom, such as the northeast of England.
And yet the penny has not dropped in London that focusing European investment funds accordingly would create opportunities to build stronger businesses and increase competitiveness in the technologies of the future – and to share these gains within and beyond the EU.
Instead, in the UK and elsewhere, the predictable MFF chest-thumping that is now underway threatens to dispatch this kind of opportunity to the bin beneath the negotiating table.
Europe has come a long way since 1951 and the creation of the European Coal and Steel Community, the forerunner of the EU.
But we are now in the process of constructing the EU economy anew, striving to overcome the economic crisis, and creating a more sustainable, globally competitive, and resilient European economy – an economy that can be green as well as productive.
The EU’s heads of government need to understand the bigger picture as they prepare for this week’s MFF summit.
Europe’s common good – indeed, its most promising path to a prosperous future – is at stake.
The EU’s Global Mission
In some quarters, pessimism, sad to say, dominated the recent celebrations marking the European Union’s 50th birthday.
Unease about the EU’s future is, of course, understandable, especially given the uncertainty surrounding efforts to revive the Constitutional Treaty.
But the European project has been an enormous success, not only for Europe, but also for the world.
Europeans should not be dismayed by comparisons of GDP growth in Europe and, say, the United States.
Of course, Europe faces great challenges in perfecting its economic union, including the need to reduce unemployment and boost the economy’s dynamism.
But, while GDP per capita has been rising in the US, most Americans are worse off today than they were five years ago.
An economy that, year after year, leaves most of its citizens worse off is not a success.
More importantly, the EU’s success should not be measured only by particular pieces of legislation and regulation, or even in the prosperity that economic integration has brought.
After all, the driving motivation of the EU’s founders was long-lasting peace.
Economic integration, it was hoped, would lead to greater understanding, underpinned by the myriad interactions that inevitably flow from commerce.
Increased interdependence would make conflict unthinkable.
The EU has realized that dream.
Nowhere in the world do neighbors live together more peacefully, and people move more freely and with greater security, than in Europe, owing in part to a new European identity that is not bound to national citizenship.
This stands as an example that the world should emulate – one of shared rights and responsibilities, including the obligation to help the less fortunate.
Here, too, Europe has led the way, providing more assistance to developing countries than anyone else (and at a markedly higher fraction of its GDP than the US).
The world has faced a difficult period during the past six years.
The most fundamental of these values is democracy, understood to entail not merely periodic elections, but also active and meaningful participation in decision making, which requires an engaged civil society, strong freedom of information norms, and a vibrant and diversified media that are not controlled by the state or a few oligarchs.
The second value is social justice.
An economic and political system is to be judged by the extent to which individuals are able to flourish and realize their potential.
As individuals, we are part of an ever-widening circle of communities, and we can realize our potential only if we live in harmony with each other.
This, in turn, requires a sense of responsibility and solidarity.
The EU demonstrated that sense powerfully by its assistance to Europe’s post-Communist countries.
The transition from Communism to the market has not been easy, but Europe’s unprecedented generosity has paid off: the countries that have joined the EU have outperformed all the others, and not just because of access to Europe’s markets.
Even more important was the institutional infrastructure, including the binding commitment to democracy and the vast array of laws and regulations that we too often take for granted.
Europe has succeeded in part because it recognizes that the rights of individuals are inalienable and universal, and because it created institutions to protect those rights.
America, by contrast, has witnessed a massive assault on those rights, including that of habeas corpus – the right to challenge one’s detention before an independent judge.
Fine distinctions are made, for example, between the rights of citizens and non-citizens.
Today, only Europe can speak with credibility on the subject of universal human rights.
For the sake of all of us, Europe must continue to speak out – even more forcibly than it has in the past.
Likewise, while the European project sought to bring about the “harmony” of people living together in peace, we also must live in harmony with our environment – the scarcest of all of our resources.
In this area, too, Europe has taken the lead, especially concerning global warming, showing that petty selfishness can be put aside to achieve a common good.
In today’s world, too, there is much that is not working well.
While economic integration helped achieve a broader set of goals in Europe, elsewhere, economic globalization has contributed to widening the divide between rich and poor within countries and between rich and poor countries.
Another world is possible.
But it is up to Europe to take the lead in achieving it.
The EU’s Hour, or Europe’s Darkest Hour?
COPENHAGEN – So far, Europe’s leaders seem to be mostly preoccupied with finding national answers to the global economic crisis.
In particular, the leaders of “Old Europe” have been reluctant to open up their coffers for the countries of “New Europe.”
If this attitude prevails, there is a grave risk that the European Project will become paralyzed.
This will not only delay the restoration of economic growth, but will also have dire political consequences.
The European Union’s new members from eastern and central Europe have been hit much harder by the crisis than the old member states; they are also much less prepared to confront the situation psychologically and socially.
Many were gravely disappointed when European leaders earlier this month rejected pleas to establish a special support program for them.
Of course, German Chancellor Angela Merkel was right to point out that each country should be dealt with according to its situation. But she and her colleagues should have voiced clearer and more emphatic support for the new member states.
Emotions and expectations ran high when the new democracies from the former East Bloc joined the EU only five years ago.
Until the crisis hit last year, the enlargement had proven to be a profitable business for Old Europe: high growth rates in most of New Europe injected energy into Old Europe’s sagging economies, much to the surprise of those who had predicted that enlargement would become an economic millstone around the neck of the established member states.
But then the financial system crumbled growth rates fell like a ton of bricks.
The new democracies were shaken as public protests erupted in some of their capitals, and some governments have fallen.
Expectations and confidence in democracy, the market economy, and the larger European project have suffered as well.
If this is allowed to continue, we might end up opening a Pandora’s Box, setting free the nationalistic and xenophobic ghosts of the past.
Some of these democracies are very young and fragile.
The optimism created by their peaceful return to a free and democratic Europe has been shattered to a degree that none of us could have foreseen.
This is where political leadership is needed.
The leaders of the well established European democracies must explain to their own voters that enlargement has greatly benefited them, and that it will also be to their benefit to share the responsibilities and costs of steering the hardest-hit countries through the crisis.
There were always exaggerated claims that bringing in the new members would be a costly affair, just as petty and narrow prejudices blemished the willingness to open up Europe’s borders for “Polish plumbers.”
Any sober appraisal of what has actually happened since expansion would put the problems in perspective: when enlargement was agreed, the combined size of the ten new members’ economies roughly equaled that of the Netherlands.
Today, after five years of much stronger growth among the newcomers, their combined GNP is somewhat smaller than that of the Benelux countries.
Thus, the sheer magnitude of the task of reviving these economies is not overwhelming.
But the political consequences of failure to deliver a message of genuine European solidarity will be.
This is, indeed, “the hour of Europe.”
I remember when this phrase was last used: in 1991, when the chairman of the European Council of Ministers visited what was still Yugoslavia and eagerly accepted the empty promises of Slobodan Milosevic and his clique that they were ready to accept European pleas for a peaceful resolution to the conflicts there.
The chairman stated: “This is the hour of Europe, not the hour of the Americans.”
As we all are embarrassingly aware, it was the Americans who had to produce the intervention that finally stopped the bloodshed in the Balkans.
But this time we Europeans cannot expect others to step in.
Turning to the International Monetary Fund or others when it comes to pulling our chestnuts out of the fire will not bring us the needed confidence in the European project.
So this must be the hour of Europe.
And that means that a clear message should be sent to those who are becoming doubtful about the EU’s worth: We are in this together.
We will find common European solutions. Solidarity among members is not just something we talk about when the future looks bright and rosy.
The EU’s Kosovo Catalyst
Kosovo’s declaration of independence has put stability in the Western Balkans back on Europe’s agenda.
Unless the European Union acts quickly, the whole region could slide backwards, with dire social, economic, and security consequences.
The EU needs a comprehensive regional approach, focusing on the remaining steps that would lead each country towards membership.
The Western Balkans − a term used only since 1999 − comprises Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Macedonia (FYROM), Montenegro, Serbia, and Kosovo, with a combined population of roughly 22 million.
Economic developments in the region are promising, with almost all its economies posting high growth, fueled by increasing industrial output and exports.
Inward investment is steadily rising, as business seems to believe that the remaining political and security challenges – the possible negative effects of post-independence Kosovo and Bosnia’s malaise – will be overcome sooner rather than later.
Much work has already been done to re-establish and improve regional relations.
The EU-led Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe has since 1999 successfully stimulated regional cross-border cooperation, for the first time since the breakdown of Yugoslavia.
Energy, transport infrastructure – roads, railways, and waterways – and crime prevention have all benefited.
The Stability Pact has now been transferred to local control, re-emerging as the Sarajevo-based Regional Cooperation Council, ready to develop regional and multilateral standards for its members.
The recently revived Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) is meant to be the main regional engine for trade and business generally, and will adhere both to WTO rules and the parties’ obligations towards the EU.
Similarly, the South-East European Cooperation Process is one of the relatively new regional organizations that contribute to candidate and potential candidate countries’ preparations for EU membership, providing the first genuine region-wide policy forum where both EU members and candidates participate.
But these bodies must not be seen as substitutes for the far more comprehensive accession process, which only the EU itself can initiate.
And yet, despite the region’s favorable prospects and relatively small size, the Union has been slow in doing so.
Certainly, the pace of candidate countries’ approach to the Union depends on the speed of their reforms.
And Europe, with the vital support of the United States, worked hard to stop the carnage of the 1990’s and subsequently to help rebuild the Balkan countries.
But the EU has so far failed to prepare the Western Balkans for accession, in line with its leaders’ promise at their Thessaloniki summit in 2003 to admit the Western Balkan states when they  meet the Union’s standards.
That promise was not a matter of charity; the Balkans would add value to the EU.
To be sure, the EU’s lengthy internal crisis over the proposed constitution was a major distraction, and damaged the Union’s reputation in the Balkans.
Let us hope that the new Reform Treaty will help to reassure the critics and pave the way for a new – and more robust – phase of integration.
If not, one would have to ask what had happened to the European spirit of the 1970’s and 1980’s, when countries such as Greece, Portugal, and Spain, which had just emerged from dictatorship and civil unrest, were welcomed into the European community of democratic states.
Political decisions taken then were far more risky than those at hand in the Balkans, and the Greek and Iberian success stories demonstrate the wisdom of the courageous decisions taken at that time.
What about today?
The most recent EU members, Bulgaria and Romania, are both in the Balkans  and  both are examples of countries with special needs.
While the EU at first took their accession negotiations a bit too casually, it subsequently decided to continue monitoring the two countries even after accession in order to ensure that they develop the effective administrative and judicial systems that are an obligation of membership.
The EU must learn from this experience to develop an accession strategy for the Western Balkans, whose development has been delayed by a complex post-conflict transition process.
Their special needs should be taken into account in any new EU approach, giving them hope while mitigating the fallout from Kosovo.
It is in Europe’s interest as much as it is in the interest of the region to accelerate the integration process.
A reinvigorated accession process would contribute to the EU’s consolidation, both territorially and politically, while strengthening its role in its wider neighborhood – the Mediterranean, the Middle East, and around the Black Sea.
The EU’s Kyoto Shell Game
RIGA – With each passing year, the impending crisis of global warming looms closer and closer.
Time is running out for preventative action to be taken.
The European Union’s “20-20-20” mantra aims to cut greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions by 20% relative to their level in 1990 and to increase the share of renewable resources to 20% by the year 2020.
Is it really viable?
The EU seemingly has a long-term record of championing action to prevent climate change.
In 1994, the EU committed itself to the GHG reductions set forth by the Kyoto Protocol and ratified it in 2002.
The EU-15 promised an 8% reduction in GHG emissions by 2010.
Every the industrial nation that has not ratified the Kyoto protocol, first and foremost the United States, has been criticized for being “environmentally irresponsible.”
But in the 15-year period between 1990 and 2005, the EU-15 managed to reduce GHG emissions by only 2%, and it is now obvious that the EU-15 will not fulfill its Kyoto commitment.
Only five of the EU-15 countries are on track to meet their targets.
The EU-15 could, under the best of circumstances, reduce its emissions by 4.6% by 2010.
The failure of the EU-15 to meet its Kyoto target does not come as a big surprise.
However, what is surprising is that the EU-15 have managed to market their failure as a success.
When the 20-20-20 commitment was adopted in March 2007, the decision was much trumpeted and sold to the public as another success for EU climate change policy.
Then EU Council President Angela Merkel called it “a breakthrough,” and European Commission President José Manuel Barroso proclaimed it “the most ambitious package ever.”
However, when it came to sharing the burden of emissions reduction among EU member states, the European Commission proposed in January 2008 to change the base year from 1990 to 2005.
This approach – endorsed as a basis for negotiation in the recent EU Council – amounted to allowing some member states not to fulfill their supposedly binding Kyoto burden-sharing targets.
The reason was simple: The EU-12 – the new members admitted in 2004 – have been outperforming the EU-15.
The new members have not agreed to a collective Kyoto goal, but as a group they are projected to reduce emissions relative to 1990 by around 20% by 2010.
Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia have, for example, managed to more than halve their 1990 emissions by 2005.
This can partly be attributed to the collapse of heavily polluting Soviet-style industry.
Israel’s European Peace?
MADRID – As the dramatic events unfolding across the Middle East capture global attention, the numerous challenges facing Israel are being largely overlooked.
In fact, Israel is confronting one of the most dangerous periods in its existence.
Not only do long-standing concerns like the threat of a nuclear-armed Iran remain unresolved; all of Israel’s neighbors are now either beset by or hurtling toward upheaval.
And, though US-brokered peace talks with Palestine have resumed, they are likely to end in failure.
But there is one promising development: the European Union, in an uncharacteristic show of backbone, has issued written guidelines prohibiting cooperation with Israeli companies operating in the West Bank and East Jerusalem.
This bold move could presage a game-changing role for the EU in bringing about a long-awaited resolution to the Israel-Palestine conflict.
Such an outcome could not arrive soon enough, especially given the unprecedented chaos on Israel’s borders.
In Egypt, the tense, polarized environment following the military’s overthrow of President Mohamed Morsi has created the real possibility of civil conflict.
Although Israel was initially apprehensive about an Islamist government across its Sinai border, the Muslim Brotherhood’s value – its ability to influence Hamas, the dominant political force in Gaza – quickly became apparent.
The nature and posture of the new military-led regime remains to be seen.
Meanwhile, Syria’s civil war has begun to spill over into Israel’s Golan Heights.
The introduction of chemical weapons and the possibility of Western military intervention threaten to draw Israel directly into the conflict.
The spillover effects of the Syrian crisis have also unsettled Lebanon, exemplified in the recent spate of sectarian violence, and threaten to destabilize Jordan, which is struggling under the burden of more than 500,000 Syrian refugees.
It is in this highly uncertain context that US Secretary of State John Kerry sought to restart Israel-Palestine peace negotiations.
Three potential approaches were discussed: talks without preconditions, talks following a settlement freeze, and talks following the release of Palestinian prisoners.
Unexpectedly, a modified version of the third option – whereby 104 Palestinian prisoners will be released in phases over the course of the negotiations – ultimately facilitated the resumption of talks.
Despite its apparent success, however, the bargain dealt a serious blow to the legitimacy of the peace process.
The first tranche of 26 prisoners – all of them tried and convicted by Israeli courts for their involvement in the killing of Israelis – were released from custody in July, ahead of the second round of talks.
The problem is that many of their victims were civilians, not military personnel or government officials, causing outrage among the Israeli public.
Yet the Palestinian Authority demanded their release, Israel’s government obliged, and the US supported the transaction.
By endorsing a false peace-justice tradeoff, instead of insisting on the more politically difficult option of a settlement freeze, or on the removal of preconditions, the US has jettisoned legality from the peace process.
Furthermore, this approach undercuts the credibility of the rule of law in Israel.
As Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu put it, the agreement “collides with the incomparably important value of justice.”
That collision is all the more jarring, given that the prisoners are not being released in support of a final agreement; they are merely facilitating the initiation of a negotiation process that appears to lack commitment from either side.
Just days before the second round of talks began, Israel announced plans to proceed with the construction of 1,200 homes in the West Bank and East Jerusalem.
This suggests that, while the prisoner release may lead to a short-term agreement, it is not backed by a genuine effort to develop the kind of trust-based arrangements that are needed for lasting peace.
Against this background, the EU’s unexpected stand is notable, not only for its technical features, but also for its practical and symbolic implications.
In all future agreements with the EU or any of its member states, Israel’s government will have to acknowledge explicitly that territories beyond the pre-1967 borders are not part of Israel.
While the guidelines simply formalized existing EU policy, they drew immediate criticism, with Netanyahu declaring that they “undermined peace” and “hardened Palestinian positions” during negotiations.
This strong reaction reflects the profound importance of the EU’s ties with Israel, undercutting the long-held assumption that the US is the only outside actor that can influence Israeli policy.
Given the EU’s robust relationship with Israel – underpinned by its role as Israel’s largest trade partner, accounting for roughly 26% of total Israeli exports and 34% of its imports – it can develop powerful incentives that could provide the impetus that the peace process needs to succeed.
The easiest option would be conditional liberalization of trade in services within the existing framework of the EU-Israel Association Agreement.
But the challenging strategic environment and legacy of failed negotiations call for a more daring approach: The EU should take the initiative in persuading its partners in the European Economic Area to offer Israel membership, conditional on the completion of a peace agreement.
Beyond deepening the EU’s internal market, such a move would serve as a powerful symbol of the value and potential of the EU-Israel relationship, opening the way to further integration in the future.
Europe has an historic opportunity to help resolve one of the world’s longest-running and seemingly most intractable conflicts.
It is thus simultaneously an opportunity for the EU to assert itself, at long last, as an effective force in world affairs.
The EU’s Small Leaders
The defeat of the EU’s Constitutional Treaty in referendums in France and the Netherlands has, it seems, given rise to a new consensus that further enlargement of the Union should be slowed down, or even stopped.
Advocates of this position see EU voters as terrified by the consequences of the May 2004 enlargement of the EU, when eight formerly communist states joined, and angry that they were not consulted about it.
One set of fears concerns the labor market – the so-called “Polish plumber” question.
In this interpretation, wages were eroded and jobs were lost because of the inflow of poorly qualified and cheap central Europeans.
Particular cases, such as the elimination of German meat processing and packing jobs, or casual workers in France, were widely discussed as evidence of a new threat.
But the “Polish plumber” is actually a weak bogeyman.
First, there had already been a substantial flow of workers before enlargement.
Poles had worked in some agricultural jobs – in sugar beet and wine harvesting – even during the communist era.
With the fall of the Iron Curtain in 1989, labor flows, both legal and illegal, became much greater.
Second, inflows of new workers bring substantial benefits as well as losses: in France, which suffers a shortage of some 6,000 plumbers, there must be plenty of households that would be pleased to find someone qualified to do repair work.
Finally, the enlargements of the 1980’s, when Greece and then Spain and Portugal joined the then European Community, were not very disruptive.
By themselves, the labor-market implications of poor countries’ accession to the EU simply are not very dislocating.&#160;
What makes the debate so passionate in 2005 is a new fear that did not exist in the 1980’s: that the new members have a different social model, in which workers’ rights and the welfare state will be eroded.
It is not so much the Polish plumber as it is the Slovak 19% flat tax that is the challenge to the older West European social model and welfare state.
The EU’s large states feel particularly vulnerable, and it is there that the biggest shock to expectations has occurred.
In the past, France and Germany were the motors of European integration.
Now they are the countries that feel most threatened, and bookshops in both countries are full of alarmist and sensational accounts of national decline.
Germany’s post-1949 Federal Republic was accustomed to being regarded as Europe’s great economic success story, but it never really recovered from the post-unification recession of the early 1990’s, with growth sluggish to non-existent.
The consensual society that was at the center of the Federal Republic’s Wirtschaftswunder now looks inflexible, throwing up obstacles to change.&#160;
Germany is surrounded by small states that all seem to be prospering more in today’s geo-political and geo-economic environment.
These include not only the rapidly growing formerly communist countries to the east, Poland and the Czech Republic, but also Denmark, the Netherlands, Austria, and Switzerland, upon which Germans traditionally looked down.
Now, as one mordant and widespread slogan puts it, Austria is “the better Germany.”
Many French writers also express a vivid feeling of national decline, and many ordinary citizens believe that the rules of the global economy work against French national interests.
In short, the large states still have illusions, encouraged by their political elites, about what the state can do to guide economic development.
By contrast, the small European states – whether in Eastern or Western Europe – have been much more flexible in responding to the challenges of the modern globalized economy.
Politics can offer all kinds of goods that voters find very attractive: tax breaks, subsidies, and social benefits.
But small states are less likely to think that they can create the rules of the game, and accordingly they are more willing and able to make adjustments.
They are more keenly aware that if they try to redistribute too much, they will simply drive away the factors of production: capital will flow elsewhere, and labor will likewise migrate.
The same sort of logic applies to the large states: France and Germany are losing skilled labor at the same time as they are drawing in cheaper labor from Eastern Europe.
The result is that they are feeling less French or German, creating greater political room, on both the left and the right, for nationalist ressentiment.
In the earlier rounds of European integration, from the 1950’s to the 1980’s, the big states received very obvious gains, which their politicians could easily present as such to voters.
But since 1989 – or since the Maastricht Treaty came into force in 1992 – the political dynamic has changed.
It is now the EU’s smaller states that gain the most from wider and deeper European integration.
If the large states are to obtain similar gains, and their politicians are to recover voters’ respect, their governments will have to accept the small-state logic and abandon the Great Power posturing of the past.
Europe’s Smart Asian Pivot
MADRID – For the first time in centuries, the focus of the global economy is shifting to the East.
The United States has commenced its “pivot” to Asia, and its relations with China, in particular, seem constantly to be flirting with Thucydides’s trap, the historical pattern that suggests that a rising power will inevitably collide with a reigning power.
But, with the US and China regarding each another warily in the foreground of world affairs, where does Europe fit in?
The European Union is at a critical historical juncture, one that demands its own pivot eastward – a coherent and decisive Asian strategy that builds on Europe’s strengths.
Although the EU’s population is only one-fifth the size of that of China and India combined, and its military presence in Asia is minimal, its €12.6 trillion ($16.8 trillion) economy is the world’s largest.
This has not gone unnoticed by Asia’s governments, which are heavily dependent on economic growth to meet their young and growing populations’ demand for jobs and prosperity.
Currently, Asia is the EU’s main trading partner, surpassing North America and constituting one-third of its total trade.
Trade with China alone is worth more than €1 billion per day, second only to trade with the US.
Moreover, the EU has a somewhat paradoxical asset at its disposal: it is not a Pacific power and does not carry the burden of great-power status in Asia.
Far from being a weakness, this is precisely the source of the EU’s potential strength in Asia, for it provides a degree of diplomatic agility that the American heavyweight cannot muster.
In attempting to execute its strategic pivot, the US is haunted at virtually every turn by its status as a historical hegemon, a military power, and the guarantor of its Asian allies’ security.
Even when rebranded as a “rebalancing,” America’s eastward shift is inevitably met with suspicion by some Asian countries, particularly China.
Europe, by contrast, can use its agility to perform a “smart pivot.”
The EU must engage with Asia on at least three mutually beneficial fronts, with trade being the most important.
The trade-liberalization agreements that the EU has in the pipeline with Asia’s vibrant economies (including South Korea, Singapore, Malaysia, India, Vietnam, Japan, and Thailand) are more ambitious in scope than previous bilateral deals.
As large-scale regional free-trade arrangements take shape, the EU continues to signal unequivocal commitment to free trade through sophisticated bilateral agreements.
But trade flows are vulnerable.
Of course, economic relations between states foster interdependence, decreasing the risk of conflict.
But if conflict does erupt, the cost is far higher.
When the territorial dispute between Japan and China over the Senkaku/Diaoyu islands flared anew last year, Japanese auto exports to China plummeted 80% in just three months.
Herein lies Asia’s specific paradox: a high level of economic integration has not given rise to regional institutions that can support the stability required for sustained prosperity.
Instead, Asia remains deeply scarred by unsettled disputes, periodic fits of nationalism, and contested borders, all of which tend to be amplified by apprehension stemming from the asymmetric rise of some of its powers.
Regional integration is a recipe for long-term stability in Asia, and a second line of engagement for the EU.
In Europe, once torn apart by war, armed conflict among EU member states is now almost unthinkable.
The EU’s institutional architecture facilitated the pivot from devastating and recurrent wars to peace and prosperity.
But creating that architecture is a daunting task, which has taken Europe decades and is still ongoing.
Successive quandaries and crises have revealed the flaws in the EU’s institutional design, and each (painstaking) upgrade has made the European project that much stronger.
With no hint of paternalism, and recognizing its status as a work-in-progress, the EU should increase its engagement with Asia’s existing structures and lend its know-how where possible – for example, in ASEAN’s shift toward a three-pillared design (political-military, economic, and socio-cultural) by 2015.
On the global front, the EU and China may find themselves to be natural partners on key issues.
China is facing increasing pressure (particularly from the US) to assume a global political role that corresponds to its economic weight.
Here, China could find an excellent partner in Europe, either in a G-3 format with the US or in focused bilateral cooperation.
Consider the Middle East.
China and Europe might find common cause in the vacuum left as America’s domestic energy revolution weakens its commitment to the region.
As China’s reliance on Middle East energy resources grows – 90% of the region’s oil exports will go to Asia by 2035 – the need to deepen engagement with oil-producing states will become more acute.
Europe, the Middle East’s experienced neighbor, could be China’s strategic partner in this endeavor.
Japan is another Asian giant regaining confidence, following Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s energetic stimulus program.
As Japan takes unprecedented trade-liberalization steps in the Trans-Pacific Partnership negotiations with the US and other economies in Asia and the Americas, and boosts its regional engagement, Europe must maintain its strong ties with the world’s third-largest national economy.
The ambitious bilateral trade agreement now under construction is expected to boost exports in both directions by up to one-third.
In any comprehensive strategy for engagement with Asia, the EU is only as strong as its parts.
Though country-to-country engagement with Asia’s rising powers may be tempting, and while China often prefers bilateral dealings, renationalization of EU members’ foreign policies would be counterproductive.
A thickly woven cord is needed to keep Europe reliably anchored as it points eastward, whereas separate strands would withstand only a limited degree of strain in the turbulent years ahead.
The EU vs. Democracy
ROME – One of the ways in which the European Union effectively asserts the fundamental values of democracy and the rule of law is through its External Cooperation Programs, whereby, on the invitation of local authorities, it provides support in the form of electoral assistance projects and election observation missions.
So, during the course of 2009, the EU sent election observation missions to various countries, including Mozambique, Afghanistan, Guinea Bissau, Lebanon, Malawi, and Bolivia.
Just this month the European Parliament sent observers to Ukraine’s presidential election.
At the end of each mission, a couple of days after the election, the Head of Mission, who is normally a member of the European Parliament, first issues a preliminary report on the election and on the handling of the electoral process, followed by a final report a few months later.
On December 6 last year, Evo Morales was re-elected President of Bolivia with more than 60% of the popular vote.
In her preliminary statement, the EU Head of Mission, MEP Renate Weber, stated that the electoral process had, in general terms, adhered to international standards with respect to democratic elections, and that the Bolivian Electoral Commission had acted in a transparent, neutral, and efficient way.
But the preliminary report also included some criticism that irked the Bolivian administration.
In particular, the report stated that the country’s sharp political polarization was highly visible in the media, in particular on Bolivian television stations.
Shouldn’t what is good for the goose also be good for the gander?
I have in mind the two countries of which I am a citizen (Italy and Malta), where the media situation is an absolute disaster.
More or less everybody is acquainted with the situation in Italy, where Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi not only owns the three major private TV stations, but, as the head of government, also “manages” indirectly at least two of the three state-owned TV channels.
Media manipulation has become the order of the day in Italy, but, unfortunately, the EU, behaving on the premise that it will not interfere in internal matters, refuses to say a word about any of this.
The situation is even worse in the smallest EU member country, Malta. There, the only two political parties represented in parliament since independence in 1964 have ganged up to ensure for themselves an oligarchic duopoly on anything that goes on in the country.
The political leaders of the Nationalist (Christian Democratic) Party and the Labor Party have enacted a law whereby, since 1994, they alone share more than €200,000 state financing.
Not content with this, the two parties passed a law in 1992 that gave each of them – and no other parties – a national TV station.
Getting greedier by the day, they then decided to share on a 50-50 basis both the National Electoral Commission and the National Broadcasting Authority.
Nor have they shrunk from constitutional tinkering in order to lock in their power. Indeed, they have changed the constitution three times since 1987 to ensure that every vote for the Nationalist Party and the Labor Party is given a higher weighting than votes received by any of the country’s other political parties when it comes to translating votes into parliamentary seats.
All of this is happening not in some remote country, far removed from civilization.
It is happening in an EU member state. When will the EU intervene to stop this internal rot?
The Exchange-Rate Delusion
MILAN – If one looks at the trade patterns of the global economy’s two biggest players, two facts leap out.
One is that, while the United States runs a trade deficit with almost everyone, including Canada, Mexico, China, Germany, France, Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan, not to mention the oil-exporting countries, the largest deficit is with China.