But there are other problems in the region that Israel – and the world – must face.
The Palestinians’ current unity government resulted from Saudi mediation, which came in response mainly to Iran’s ambition to increase its influence, not only in Iraq, but also in Lebanon, Gaza, and the West Bank.
Of course, that issue is completely outside Israel’s control.
The ongoing fight in the Muslim world between Sunnis and Shi’a recalls the struggle between Protestants and Catholics in seventeenth-century Europe.
So it is little wonder that the Saudis, Jordanians, Egyptians, and the Gulf states are seeking to resist Iran’s hegemonic ambitions in the region.
Nevertheless, the stakes are far higher than in the seventeenth century, because Iran represents a threat that combines a fanatic religion with a determination to acquire nuclear weapons.
Indeed, Iran is the only country that openly declares its desire to destroy another member of the United Nations.
That is a threat that every country is obliged to take seriously.
When a country’s president delivers crazy speeches, denies the Holocaust, and does not hide his ambition to control the Middle East, who can guarantee that the threat is not serious?
The issue is not one of restoring nuclear “balance” to the Middle East, as Iran’s leaders maintain.
First of all, Israel does not threaten anybody.
Israel never said that it wants to destroy Iran; Israel never openly proclaimed that it would enrich uranium and build nuclear bombs in order to destroy another country.
On the contrary, Israel has said that it will not be the first to use nuclear weapons in the Middle East.
But that does not mean that we can afford to ignore an obvious threat from countries that want to destroy us.
Despite the current unfavorable situation, the path to stabilizing the Middle East still leads through joint economic projects.
Even now, Israel is planning to build a new “corridor of peace,” which will comprise the Jordanians, the Palestinians, and us.
Within the framework of this project, we are seeking to halt the dehydration of the Dead Sea, build a joint airport and a joint water network with Jordan, and develop tourism infrastructure, at a cost of up to $5 billion.
We have the donors, so there is no shortage of money to finance our efforts, which, I am sure, will be realized.
Israel wants – indeed, desperately needs – peace and stability in the Middle East, and we will continue to do everything in our power to achieve it.
But we cannot reach that goal alone, much less negotiate with those whose idea of a stable and peaceful Middle East is one that has no place for Israel.
Who Will Eclipse America?
WASHINGTON, DC – According to Voltaire, the Roman Empire fell “because all things fall.”
It is hard to argue with this as a general statement about decline: nothing lasts forever. But it is also not very useful.
In thinking, for example, about American predominance in the world today, it would be nice to know when it will decline, and whether the United States can do anything to postpone the inevitable.
Contemporary commenters despaired of the Roman Empire for several hundred years before it finally collapsed.
Could America find its way to a similar extension?
In terms of providing an essential structure for discussion of this problem, Arvind Subramanian’s new book, Eclipse: Living in the Shadow of China’s Economic Dominance, is a major contribution.
(Full disclosure: Subramanian and I are colleagues at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, and we have worked together on other issues.)
In particular, Subramanian develops an index of economic dominance that should become a focus of conversation anywhere that people want to think about changes in world economic leadership.
There is no need to know any economics in order to be fascinated by this book: it is about power, pure and simple.
The basic facts are incontrovertible.
The United Kingdom was the world’s dominant economic power from the rise of industrialization in the early nineteenth century. But it lost its predominance and was gradually eclipsed by the US, which, at least since 1945, has been the undisputed leader among market-based economies.
The US surpassed the UK in terms of industrial production as early as the end of the nineteenth century, but that was not enough to tip the balance.
Economic predominance shifted only when the UK ran large current-account deficits during World Wars I and II – the country had to borrow heavily in order to finance its war effort, and imports were significantly higher than exports.
Much of the world’s gold reserves ended up in the hands of the US.
This helped undermine the role of the British pound internationally and catapulted the US dollar to the fore – particularly after the Bretton Woods conference in 1944, at which it was agreed that countries would hold their reserves in dollars as well as gold.
More recently, however, it has been the Americans’ turn consistently to run large current-account deficits, buying more from the rest of the world than they earn by selling goods and services abroad.
On this dimension, the US seems destined to repeat the mistake of the British.
At the same time, emerging-market countries’ per capita income has risen – as has their international role.
In particular, China has followed a strategy in the past decade or so that entails running large current-account surpluses and building up foreign-exchange reserves, which are now reported to be in excess of $3 trillion.
Indeed, Subramanian’s most provocative argument is that China has already surpassed the US in terms of economic dominance – but we have not yet woken up to this new reality.
The story is fascinating and well told; but there is still a great deal worth arguing.
For example, did the British decline because the US could not be stopped, or because of problems within the British Empire and at home?
A few years ago, some regarded Japan as having overtaken the US. Europe also was supposedly vying for global economic dominance.
Now any such claims would seem preposterous.
In both cases, the credit system got out of control, with too much lending to the private sector in 1980’s Japan and excessive government borrowing during the 2000’s in the eurozone.
Similarly, it remains unclear that the Chinese development path will remain smooth.
Fixed investment in China is close to 50% of GDP – which must be a world record.
Credit to state firms and to households continues to grow rapidly.
Isn’t this a version of exactly what derailed Japanese growth?
On the key issue of being able to issue a “reserve currency” that investors and governments want to hold, Subramanian is correct that China has many of the prerequisites in place.
But it still lacks some key elements, including fully-fledged property rights.
If you worry about getting your money out of a country when times turn tough, China is not an attractive place to hold your reserves.
External challenges do sometimes bring down states.
But, more frequently, the big problems are internal – the regime cannot deliver growth, its legitimacy fades, and people start to head for the exits (or at least get their money out).
If the US is eclipsed any time soon, this will more likely be due to its loss of social cohesion and its dysfunctional politics.
China might well step in to fill that vacuum, but that is quite different from being able to elbow America aside.
Who Will Help the Poor?
PARIS – With the deepening of the economic crisis and the prospect of another recession looming large on the horizon, growing social inequality has become an increasingly urgent issue.
How does one reinforce a sense of solidarity and responsibility within a country?
Who will protect the weakest?
As I ponder this issue, I am reminded of a debate that I had more than ten years ago in Berlin with the German theologian Hans Küng and American and Asian participants.
The subject was “Globalization and Ethics” – specifically, a comparison of the ways that Europe, the United States and Asia protect the most fragile members of their respective societies.
Are we heading toward a world united by shared incompetence and inadequacy?
In the Western world, the poorest are the worst affected by economic stagnation.
But, in rapidly growing emerging-market countries, the rich tend to close their eyes to the suffering of the poorest, except when they feel threatened by the risk of political upheaval, as in, say, Saudi Arabia.
In fact, wealthy elites in emerging countries live in a state of denial towards their poor, literally ignoring them.
Brazil and India are particularly striking in this regard.
Economic growth is necessary, but not sufficient: a strong sense of social responsibility is needed as well.
It would be absurd to condemn, as some do, globalization as the main and only culprit in the erosion of traditional sources of support for the poor.
Globalization is above all a context, an environment, even if the consequences of the first major financial and economic crisis of the global age will further deepen the gap between the very rich and the very poor.
But globalization makes the weakest among us more visible, and therefore makes the absence of social justice more unacceptable.
A world of much greater transparency and interdependency creates new responsibilities for the rich.
Or, more precisely, it makes the old responsibility to protect the weakest both more difficult and more urgent.
In a world of increasing complexity, perhaps what is needed are simple solutions.
One could follow, for example, Adam Smith’s principle of comparative advantage: what Europe does best is the state, while Asia still relies on the family and the US continues to focus on individual initiative.
The problem is that in a world of universal benchmarking, the legitimacy of solutions will stem more than ever from their cultural acceptability and their efficiency.
In Western Europe, for example, the call for sacrifice from all citizens in order to resolve the debt crisis runs up against a lingering perception that not all will contribute equally, and that social inequality will be exacerbated by austerity.
Restoring growth in the short term while addressing debt problems in the medium and long term may well be the only valid response to the crisis.
But it will not work, in Europe or elsewhere, without a much greater emphasis on social justice.
While some of the very rich complain, as Warren Buffett did recently, that they do not pay enough taxes, the enlightened generosity of these happy few – who want to save capitalism and liberalism – is unlikely to be emulated by the new rich in the emerging countries, much less by the rich elsewhere.
Let’s be realistic: people like Buffett and Bill Gates have very few followers even among the very rich in the US.
And can Asian societies really revive an effective sense of family responsibility?
Globalization does appear to have weakened cultural differences noticeably in the past decade.
But, when it comes to the protection of the weakest and the struggle against rising social injustice, perhaps “global deculturation” creates an opportunity to combine the best of what remains in particular traditions.
Perhaps countries should seek to base their social-welfare systems on a new synthesis of the state, the family, and philanthropy.
Who Will Rescue the Rest of Us?
SYDNEY – The rescue of the 33 Chilean miners, from what was feared would be their tomb, gave the world something to cheer about.
Hope has not, after all, become a redundant virtue in the twenty-first century.
But, looking around us today, there do not seem to be many reasons for optimism elsewhere.
The world lurches towards a currency war, or even towards trade protectionism, threatening to destroy jobs and growth.
America’s recovery from recession is anemic and largely jobless.
China, meanwhile, with foreign reserves worth half its total output, denies with a straight face that it is deliberately manipulating the value of the renminbi. So its trade surplus continues to soar at the expense of other countries.
Nor does a global solution to the challenge of climate change appear any closer.
A few weeks of rain in Australia has emboldened those who think that global warming is a gigantic hoax perpetrated by the United Nations or conspiring scientists or maybe men from Mars.
The war in Afghanistan bleeds more lives and treasure into the inhospitable terrain of that sad land, with little immediate chance of whatever might constitute sufficient success to allow America and its allies to quit. And the problems of Pakistan fester next door.
In Palestine, Israeli colonies continue to grow with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu ignoring Washington’s efforts to secure traction for the peace process.
Europeans continue to look inward, obsessed with their own problems of declining competitiveness and how to pay for entitlements that they have come to regard as theirs by right.
With the gap between the world’s rich and poor increasing, the impoverished South seeks a home or a job in the developed North.
Legal and illegal migration triggers far-right hostility in countries that customarily brag about their commitment to civil liberties.
So, as Lenin once asked, what is to be done?
The world obviously needs political leadership of the highest quality to see us through.
We need the sort of courage that was the hallmark of Margaret Thatcher. We need Bill Clinton’s extraordinary ability to spin a political narrative that enabled voters to identify their own interests with his goals.
We require Helmut Kohl’s understanding of the need to identify the big decisions in politics, and to get those decisions right.
We need leaders with sufficient mastery of detail, like China’s last premier Zhu Rongji, who can not only tell us how they will get us from A to Z, but can actually lead us from A to B.
Looking around, leaders like this seem to be an extinct species.
Or, if they exist at all, they appear to be constrained by dysfunctional political systems. Their ability to act is limited by their political environment.
The best example is US President Barack Obama, on whom so many hopes rested – probably too many for any one leader.
Obama inherited messy and expensive wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, and an economy in meltdown.
His attempts to revive the economy have inevitably driven up the deficit.
But no recovery in the labor or housing markets has yet materialized.
Now Obama faces defeat in the mid-term elections at the hands of Republicans whose past policies created many of the problems that weigh him down today.
They want less government, lower taxes, and a smaller deficit, a combination to be achieved seemingly without pain.
This nonsense on stilts is articulated by some zany candidates who enjoy the support of the Tea Party, a reference not to the Mad Hatter in Alice in Wonderland, which would be fitting, but to the Bostonians who rebelled against colonial Britain’s imposition of taxes in the eighteenth century.
The rest of the world needs a strong, self-confident, and decisive America.
But America’s political system is about to deliver a balance of power in Washington that is likely to produce stalemate and paralysis.
In Europe, meanwhile, many of our problems are exemplified by what is happening in France, where President Nicolas Sarkozy’s attempt to recognize demographic and fiscal reality by raising the retirement age from 60 to 62 provoked a wave of strikes and stormy protests from workers and students.
Is there not something deeply depressing about 18-year-olds demonstrating about the retirement age?
How on earth did they acquire such a statist and conservative mind-set?
Perhaps, then, Asia is the answer.
Perhaps the Singapore-based strategist Kishore Mahbubani is correct to write off the West and tell us that the future lies in his own continent.
The evidence on that point is mixed.
India is a glorious democracy with an economically literate government and pockets of real economic achievement.
But the fiasco in the run-up to the Commonwealth Games showcased some of India’s problems, not least deep corruption and inadequate infrastructure.
If those problems were sorted out, India’s growth rate would outstrip China’s.
And what of the booming Middle Kingdom?
In Brussels the other day, Premier Wen Jiabao scolded European leaders for pressing for the renminbi’s revaluation.
Did they not understand, he argued, that this would lead to factory closures and social turbulence in China?
Elsewhere, of course, this sort of turmoil has democratic safety valves.
It is more than odd to argue that the rest of the world has to cope with a built-in advantage for China’s exporters because its authoritarian political system cannot cope with any change.
No wonder the impressive premier is thought to favor some political loosening.
From East to West, politics seems to be operating in a manner that is, to be diplomatic, sub-optimal.
Then again, maybe we’re lucky that things aren’t worse.
The Chilean miners survived against the odds, so perhaps the rest of us will somehow get by as well.
But who, exactly, is responsible for the rescue operation?
Who Will Run the World?
SINGAPORE – Barack Obama’s election comes at a moment when a new bit of conventional wisdom is congealing.
It concerns the end of America’s global dominance.  
True, freewheeling American-style capitalism has not acquitted itself proudly of late.
And America’s military superiority has not proved all that useful in accomplishing American ends.
But who may pick up the slack in providing global leadership?
The uncomfortable answer that Obama is likely to confront is this: nobody.
America may be damaged, but no replacement is on offer.
Europe is self-absorbed, focused on creating whatever kind of entity it ends up deciding to be.
China’s standard response to any suggestion that it exercise global leadership is to hide beneath its vast internal agenda and plead poverty.
No other country comes close to having either the capacity or the ambition.
In the face of the familiar litany of desperate global problems – not just financial instability, but also climate change, energy insecurity, potential pandemics, terrorism, and the spread of weapons of mass destruction – the prospect of a rudderless world is more than alarming.
What is to be done?
And by whom?
Given that the United States has not been playing much of a leadership role on many of these issues recently, it is worth taking a look at what happens when no one country exercises effective leadership.
One set of answers might seem apparent from the collapse of international trade negotiations and the unraveling international system to control the spread of nuclear weapons.
Things can certainly get grim.
But that is not the whole story. 
To see why, consider climate change.
It is now clear that avoiding catastrophic climate change requires dramatic and rapid reductions in greenhouse-gas emissions, cuts that would lower annual emissions to 80% below 1990 levels by 2050.
Yet emissions are not just rising, but accelerating.
The coming recession may stem their growth temporarily, but only slightly.
The necessary reductions imply a rapid and radical transformation of industrial, energy, and land-use systems around the world.
What are governments doing about this?
Supposedly, by December 2009 they will agree on a new treaty to set limits on emissions.
But the prospects that an agreement will be reached in Copenhagen in December 2009 are close to nil.
The new Obama administration will have only a few months to develop meaningful proposals that can win domestic support, and will be preoccupied with the aftermath of the current financial debacle and the Iraq war.
Europe is pushing for ambitious targets but is having trouble with its own vested interests.
The large emerging countries, although they will suffer disproportionately from wilder weather and rising sea levels, show little interest in picking up the slack.
Negotiation watchers term the current American-Chinese dance of mutual blame a suicide pact.
In short, the process is a mess.
This is hardly surprising.
An inter-governmental system that falls apart under the challenges of trade negotiations and proliferation threats is unlikely to master the deep complexity and multitudinous vested interests that the issue of climate change entails.
Traditional diplomacy will at best devise a face-saving but meaningless accord next year.
In many areas, frustration with inter-governmental intransigence and incompetence has sparked extraordinary innovation by non-governmental organizations, corporations, and ordinary people.
Private organizations such as the Forest Stewardship Council and the Marine Stewardship Council provide and, increasingly, implement environmental standards where inter-governmental action has failed.
Private actors from foundations to pharmaceutical corporations to NGOs are actively experimenting with alternative ways to tackle transnational health challenges.
Often governments are part of these experiments – but they are not necessarily the drivers, and progress does not depend on signing treaties.
Indeed, there are many ways to put matters on the global agenda, as shown by Bono’s campaigns on African development and Al Gore’s on climate change.
Agreements about how to make things better already frequently include NGOs and corporations in various capacities – and sometimes exclude governments altogether.
Private groups using everything from satellite imagery (as in forestry) to the unofficial equivalent of on-site inspections (as in human rights) monitor who is abiding by – or violating – what standard of behavior.
While enforcement in the coercive sense remains the domain of states, coercive enforcement is rare even when it comes to inter-governmental agreements.
Whether countries abide by agreements has far more to do with international processes of persuasion, socialization, and capacity-building – and those can be done by anyone with a good argument.
The big question today is whether all these alternative approaches can add up to more than a bit of desperate tinkering around the edges.
Standard international-relations thinking does not even entertain the question, and those conventional ways of seeing the world have blinded us to looking at this crucial question.
As a result, we do not yet know the answer.
Data remain scarce.
There are hundreds of global public-private partnerships working on various global ills – but few have been examined to see what good they do.
The mishmash of initiatives, actors, campaigns, and appeals creates opportunities for major progress – and mass confusion. 
If there is to be real progress toward more effective and efficient global governance that can address the unprecedented challenges posed by climate change and the rest of the global agenda, we must do much more than look for an easy replacement for American hegemony.
We must figure out how to make sense of this enormous diversity of ways of saving the world.
Citizen Bezos?
NEW YORK – My very first serious job was as a fact-checker for Forbes magazine (now mostly a laissez-faire collection of blogs).
I consider fact-checkers to be the altar boys of journalism.
And, despite having left the church, I still feel a profound reverence for the holy truth.
So, in most of the discussion about business models occasioned by the sale of the Washington Post to Amazon.com founder and CEO Jeff Bezos, the values that I have held dear are being tarnished.
How so?
Even reputable fact-checkers disagree on the origin of the famous admonition to journalists: “Comfort the afflicted, and afflict the comfortable!”
(They even disagree on whether it was first directed at preachers or at newsmen).
In any case, journalism is one business in which the customer is not always right.
The challenge that business considerations pose to journalism – both news and commentary providers – takes the form of three separate temptations: to slant the news to please readers rather than inform them, and thus attract advertisers; to slant the news to please advertisers directly; and to slant the news to advance owners’ political or commercial interests.
These temptations have always been present, but “hard” news could be supported by constituency-pleasing sections, advertiser-pleasing features and product reviews, news-you-can-use sections replete with ads for related goods, and, of course, the classified ads.
Today, the church of newspaper journalism is fragmenting.
Brands and advertisers can speak directly to customers, and markets no longer need the convening power of a newspaper to match buyers and sellers (the purpose of classified ads).
Investigative journalism and serious commentary, like religion, do not have a profit model.
They serve a higher purpose (although they can be and often are corrupted or twisted for bad ends).
So, should we welcome Bezos’s entry into this world?
Many commentators expect him to digitize-monetize-revolutionize the Post (whatever that means).
But I think he bought it for a different purpose.
He is a canny businessman – that much is clear.
He runs Amazon tightly and for the long term; it generates huge amounts of cash, which it reinvests on behalf of all of its shareholders.
But it is Bezos personally, not Amazon, who bought the Post.
This is a man who is a generous donor to the Long Now Foundation (I am on its board) and who personally founded and owns a rocket company, Blue Origin (I am on the board of a competing company called XCOR).
I think – I hope! – that Bezos will make the proper distinctions.
He understands the difference between media (yet another of his personal investments is the Web site Business Insider) and journalism.
In our market-driven times, we tend to think about the price of everything and the value of nothing, as Oscar Wilde put it.
But we are also discovering behavioral economics – the human quirks and emotional urges that drive people to do things that make little economic sense.
The best joke of all – that Bezos bought the Post by mistake through an errant one-click purchase (a capability patented by Amazon) – has a ring of truth to it.
The purchase was not an economically motivated decision, though it was no mistake.
There probably is not a sustainable business model for newspapers like the Post.
But I do think there is sustainable value of the kind that no corporation or financially driven investor could ever justify.
Bezos’s move is not like the recent purchases of Newsweek, where there was an illusion of turning it around, or the Boston Globe, bought by John Henry, who owns the Boston Red Sox baseball team and Liverpool Football Club.
Perhaps the most interesting example is Rupert Murdoch – the son of an Australian news baron – who recently split his family-controlled News Corporation, into the TV and film company 21st Century Fox and the less profitable new News Corp, which retains the news and publishing operations.
Although Murdoch remains chairman of both, everyone expects him to focus more on the news business.
That portfolio includes both customer-pleasing tabloids with a troubled history of pandering, spying, and bribing, and the venerable journalism of the Wall Street Journal’s news pages – a contradiction that splitting the parent has not resolved.
And, finally, there is Project Syndicate itself (which publishes this column).
Originally funded by yet another billionaire, George Soros, Project Syndicate operates independently to provide hard-to-monetize informed opinion and analysis with nary an “advertorial” or product review in sight.
One way to think about the best business model for journalism is to think about the best business model for food.
Is it an all-you-can-eat buffet?
A tony à la carte sanctuary with great wines that generate most of the profit?
A franchise with pre-cooked dishes thawed and heated in huge ovens?
All can work – but only with good management.
But there is also the philanthropic soup kitchen – in the Post’s case, a high-end one, delivering nutritious food in a world in which restaurants now give away less-healthy food, because they use it to sell other goods.
In the end, I think Bezos wants less to own the Post than to set it free, for at least a generation or two.
As Bezos wrote in a memo to the staff: “The values of the Post do not need changing.
The paper’s duty will remain to its readers and not to the private interests of its owners.
We will continue to follow the truth wherever it leads....”
If I am wrong, I hope this commentary will help to afflict him into righteousness!
Why America Must Not Re-elect President Bush
I have never been heavily involved in partisan politics, but these are not normal times.
President George W. Bush is endangering the United States and the world's safety while undermining American values.
For opposing him, I have been demonized by the Bush campaign.
President Bush ran in 2000 on a platform promising a "humble" foreign policy.
If re-elected, the Bush doctrine of preemptive action - and the invasion of Iraq - will be endorsed, and the world will have to live with the consequences.
By repudiating Bush's policies at the polls, America will have a chance to regain the respect and support of the world.
The terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, required a strong response.
But they also led to suspension of the critical process so essential to a democracy - a full and fair discussion of the issues.
Bush silenced criticism by calling it unpatriotic.
For 18 months after 9/11, he managed to suppress all dissent. That is how he led America in the wrong direction.
In fact, Bush played right into the hands of Osama bin Laden.
Afghanistan's invasion was justified: that was where bin Laden lived and al Qaeda had its training camps. Invading Iraq was not.
It was Bush's unintended gift to bin Laden.
Immediately after 9/11, there was a spontaneous outpouring of sympathy for America worldwide. It has given way to widespread resentment.
There are many more people willing to risk their lives to kill Americans than there were on September 11.
Bush likes to insist that terrorists hate Americans for what they are - a freedom loving people - not what they do.
But war and occupation create innocent victims.
We count the body bags of American soldiers - over 1,000 in Iraq.
The wider world also counts the Iraqis who get killed daily, perhaps 20 times more.
Nor was the torture of detainees at Abu Ghraib prison the work of a few bad apples. It was part of a system of dealing with prisoners put in place by Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld.
Public opinion condemns America worldwide, and our troops in Iraq are paying the price.
Bush convinced people that he is good for American security by playing on the fears generated by the 9/11 attacks.
At a time of peril, people rally around the flag, and Bush exploited this by fostering a sense of danger.
His campaign assumes that people do not really care about the truth and will believe almost anything if it is repeated often enough.
There must be something wrong with Americans if we fall for it.
For instance, some 40% of Americans still believe that Saddam Hussein was connected with 9/11, although the 9/11 Commission - set up by Bush and chaired by a Republican - definitively established that no such connection existed.
I want to shout: "Wake up America.
Don't you realize we are being misled?"
The war in Iraq was misconceived from start to finish - if it has a finish.
It is a war of choice, not necessity.
Moreover, America went to war on false pretenses.
Weapons of mass destruction could not be found, and the connection with al Qaeda could not be established.
Bush then claimed that America went to war to liberate Iraq.
But democracy cannot be imposed by force.
Saddam Hussein was a tyrant, and Iraqis - and the world - can rejoice in being rid of him.
But America had an obligation to maintain law and order; instead, we stood idly by while Baghdad and other cities were ransacked.
If we had cared about the Iraqi people, we should have had more troops available for the occupation.
We should have provided protection not only for the oil ministry, but also other ministries, museums, and hospitals.
Worse still, when American soldiers encountered resistance, they employed methods - invading homes and mistreating prisoners - that alienated and humiliated the population, generating resentment and rage.
The Bush administration's flip-flops and missteps are legion.
First the Iraqi army was dissolved, then America tried to reconstitute it.
First the US tried to eliminate the Baathists, then America turned to them for help.
When the insurgency became intractable, America installed an Iraqi government. The man chosen to lead it was a protégé of the CIA with a reputation for being a strongman - a far cry from democracy.
Despite the Bush campaign's efforts at spin control, the situation in Iraq is dire.
Much of the western part of the country has been ceded to insurgents, the prospect of holding free and fair elections in January is fast receding, civil war looms.
Bush's war in Iraq has done untold damage to America as well, impairing its military power and undermining the morale of the armed forces.
Before the war, America could project overwhelming force. Not anymore.
Afghanistan is slipping from control.
North Korea, Iran, Pakistan, and other countries pursue nuclear programs with renewed vigor.
The Bush administration can be criticized for many other policies, but none are as important as Iraq.
The war has cost nearly $200 billion, and costs will continue to mount, because getting into Iraq was much easier than getting out will be.
Bush has been taunting John Kerry to explain how he would do things differently.
Kerry has responded that he would have done everything differently, and that he would be in a better position to extricate us.
But it won't be easy for him, either, because America is caught in a quagmire.
Top military and diplomatic experts desperately warned Bush not to invade Iraq. He ignored them.
He suppressed the critical process, arguing that any criticism of the Commander-in-Chief puts US troops at risk.
But this is Bush's war, and he ought to be held responsible for it.
Americans should step back for a moment and ask: who got them into this mess?
A moment's reflection should raise another question: does Bush's Texas swagger qualify him to remain America's Commander-in-Chief?
Calling Off America’s Bombs
NEW YORK – As the US Congress considers whether to authorize American military intervention in Syria, its members should bear in mind a basic truth: While Syrian President Bashar Al-Assad has repeatedly used extreme violence to retain power, the United States – and other governments in the Middle East and Europe – share responsibility for turning Syria into a killing field.
These governments, led by the US, have explicitly sought the violent overthrow of Assad.
Without their involvement, Assad’s regime would most likely have remained repressive; with their involvement, Syria has become a site of mass death and destruction.
More than 100,000 people have died, and many of the world’s cultural and archaeological treasures have been demolished.
Syria’s civil war has occurred in two phases.
The first phase, roughly from January 2011 until March 2012, was largely an internal affair.
When the Arab Spring erupted in Tunisia and Egypt in January 2011, protests erupted in Syria as well.
In addition to the usual grievances under a brutal regime, Syrians were reeling from a massive drought and soaring food prices.
The protests became a military rebellion when parts of the Syrian army broke with the regime and established the Free Syrian Army.
Neighboring Turkey was probably the first outside country to support the rebellion on the ground, giving sanctuary to rebel forces along its border with Syria.
Although the violence was escalating, the death toll was still in the thousands, not tens of thousands.
The second phase began when the US helped to organize a large group of countries to back the rebellion.
At a meeting of foreign ministers in Istanbul on April 1, 2012, the US and other countries pledged active financial and logistical support for the Free Syrian Army.
Most important, then-Secretary of State Hillary Clinton declared: “We think Assad must go.”
That open-ended statement, without any clear means to achieve the goal that it announced, has done much to fuel military escalation and the rising death toll in Syria, while pushing the US repeatedly to defend its “credibility” against a line in the sand that it should not have drawn.
Then and now, the US has claimed to speak in the interest of the Syrian people.
This is very doubtful.
The US views Syria mainly through the lens of Iran, seeking to depose Assad in order to deprive Iran’s leaders of an important ally in the region, one that borders Israel.
The US-led effort in Syria is thus best understood as a proxy war with Iran – a cynical strategy that has contributed to the massive rise in violence.
The US government’s misguided move from potential mediator and problem solver to active backer of the Syrian insurrection was, predictably, a terrible mistake.
It put the US in effective opposition to the United Nations peace initiative then being led by former UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan, whose approach was to call for a ceasefire followed by a negotiated political transition.
The US preempted this process by backing the military rebellion and insisting on Assad’s immediate departure.
It is hard to understand this blunder.
Even if the US ultimately sought to force Assad from office, its blunt action hardened Assad’s resistance, as well as that of his two allies in the UN Security Council, Russia and China.
Aside from seeking to defend their own interests in the region, both countries understandably rejected the idea of US-led regime change in Syria.
Russia argued that America’s insistence on Assad’s immediate departure was an impediment to peace.
In this, Russia was right.
Indeed, Russia was playing a plausibly constructive role at the time, albeit one premised on Assad remaining in power for at least a transitional period, if not indefinitely.
Russia sought a pragmatic approach that would protect its commercial interests in Syria and its naval base at the port of Tartus, while bringing an end to the bloodletting.
The Russians openly backed Annan’s peace initiative.
Yet, with the US and others financing the rebels, Russia (and Iran) supplied more – and more sophisticated – weapons to the regime.
Now, with the use of chemical weapons, probably by the Syrian government (and possibly by both sides), the US has again ratcheted up the stakes.
Bypassing the UN once again, the US is declaring its intention to intervene directly by bombing Syria, ostensibly to deter the future use of chemical weapons.
America’s motivations are not entirely clear.
Perhaps there is no underlying foreign-policy logic, but only carelessness.
If there is a kind of logic, however weak, it seems to revolve around Iran and Israel, rather than Syria per se.
There are many dictatorships in the world that the US does not try to overthrow.
On the contrary, many of them are ostensibly America’s close allies.
So why does the US continue to back a deadly rebellion in a civil war that is continuing to escalate dangerously, now to the point of chemical-weapons attacks?
To put it simply, President Barack Obama’s administration has inherited the neoconservative philosophy of regime change in the Middle East.
The overriding idea is that the US and its close allies get to choose who governs in the region.
Assad must go not because he is authoritarian, but because he is allied with Iran, which, from the perspective of the US, Israel, Turkey, and several Gulf countries, makes him a regional threat.
In fact, the US has probably been lured into serving these countries’ own narrower interests, whether it be Israel’s unconvincing vision of its own security or the Sunni countries’ opposition to Shia Iran.
But, in the long term, US foreign policy divorced from international law cannot produce anything other than more war.
The US should reverse course.
A direct US attack on Syria without UN backing is far more likely to inflame the region than it is to resolve the crisis there – a point well appreciated in the United Kingdom, where Parliament bucked the government by rejecting British participation in a military strike.
Instead, the US should provide evidence of the chemical attacks to the UN; call on the Security Council to condemn the perpetrators; and refer such violations to the International Criminal Court.
Moreover, the Obama administration should try to work with Russia and China to enforce the Chemical Weapons Convention.
If the US fails in this, while acting diplomatically and transparently (without a unilateral attack), Russia and China would find themselves globally isolated on this important issue.
More broadly, the US should stop using countries like Syria as proxies against Iran.
Withdrawal of US financial and logistical support for the rebellion, and calling on others to do the same, would not address Syria’s authoritarianism or resolve America’s issues with Iran, but it would stop or greatly reduce the large-scale killing and destruction in Syria itself.
It would also enable the UN peace process to resume, this time with the US and Russia working together to restrain violence, keep Al Qaeda at bay (a shared interest), and find a longer-term pragmatic solution to Syria’s deep domestic divisions.
And the search for a US modus vivendi with Iran – where a new president suggests a change of course on foreign policy – could be revived.
It is time for the US to help stop the killing in Syria.
That means abandoning the fantasy that it can or should determine who rules in the Middle East.
Diplomacy and Double Standards
CANBERRA – When does acceptable diplomatic caution and realism become indefensible abdication of moral standards?
Not everyone on the foreign-policy frontline cares, but those who do often face deeply uncomfortable choices.
Negotiating a life-saving peace may mean giving amnesty to the murderously guilty.
Living with tyranny might be less life-threatening than embracing anarchy.
Calming a volatile situation may mean not publicly denouncing behavior that cries out for condemnation.
Making the right call is more difficult in the real world than in a philosophy classroom.
But sometimes the line really is crossed, all relevant players know it, and the consequences are potentially profound.
The United States’ failure so far to cut off its military aid to Egypt in response to the regime’s massacre of hundreds of Muslim Brotherhood supporters, in the streets and in prisons, is as clear a recent case as one can find.
Former President Mohamed Morsi’s government was a catastrophic failure – ruthlessly ideological, economically illiterate, and constitutionally irresponsible.
It deeply polarized a society yearning for a new inclusiveness.
But, had the army held its nerve – and triggers – there is every reason to believe that Morsi would have been voted out in the next election.
If the Muslim Brotherhood denied a ballot, or refused to accept defeat, tougher measures could then have been contemplated.
As it is, the army’s coup was indefensible, and its slaughter of mostly unarmed protesters ranks in infamy with the Tiananmen Square massacre of 1989, and those of Libya’s former leader, Muammar el-Qaddafi, and Syria’s Hafez and Bashar al-Assad.
It is not as if maintaining its $1.3 billion in annual military aid gives the US any leverage over Egypt’s behavior.
It might have once, but the amount now pales in significance next to the $12 billion in economic assistance recently rushed to the generals by Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and the United Arab Emirates.
Certainly, the regime would resent withdrawal of this aid, as would most of the Brotherhood’s civilian opponents; but that matters less than the impact on American credibility, in the Middle East and the rest of the world, of not doing so.
Unless political leaders know that tearing up the rule book on the scale seen in Egypt will expose them to more than rhetorical consequences, the tacit message – that regimes that pick the “right” targets can repress at will – will resonate in Bahrain, Yemen, and Saudi Arabia, not to mention Syria.
Farther afield, the US risks reinforcing the perception that it is comfortable with double standards.
For a country whose global leadership depends as much on its soft power as on its military might, that is dynamite.
The charge sheet here is already rather full, with multiple instances in recent years of America being almost universally regarded as not practicing what it preaches.
For starters, there was the invasion of Iraq in 2003: Embracing the United Nations Security Council when you get your way, but bypassing it when you don’t, does not do much to encourage a cooperative rule-based international order.
Then there was the Palestinian election of 2006: Promoting democracy generates ridicule when it extends only to elections that produce palatable winners, as Gaza’s vote for Hamas did not.
Or, again in the Middle East, there has been the blind eye endlessly turned to Israel’s actual possession of nuclear weapons, in contrast to the response to Iran’s possible early moves in that direction.
And there was the 2008 agreement to trade nuclear material and technology with India, despite its unwillingness to accept serious new disarmament or non-proliferation commitments.
To be fair to the US, such double standards abound among other major powers as well.
Russia’s invocation of the “responsibility to protect” to justify its 2008 invasion of Georgia was met with incredulity at the time, and rendered even more cynical by its resolute failure since 2011 to condemn the Syrian regime for mass-atrocity crimes against its own people.
China’s strategic aspirations in the South China Sea, and its unwillingness to embrace a maritime code of conduct there, sit uncomfortably with its stated concern for sovereign boundaries and the peaceful resolution of territorial disputes.
And every one of the nuclear-armed states has been guilty of “do as I say, not as I do” in insisting on non-proliferation while making no serious commitment to disarmament.
To be fair to diplomatic policymakers everywhere, it is often the case that hard choices between competing moral values – for example, justice and peace – simply have to be made.
And positions that are claimed to embody double standards are often nothing of the kind.
A good example is the allegation that the “responsibility to protect” principle is inherently flawed, because the major powers will always be immune from intervention, not only because five of them can exercise a Security Council veto, but also because of their inherent military strength.
But this ignores the principle that no military intervention will ever be legitimate unless it satisfies, among other criteria, the test of diminishing, not augmenting, human suffering.&#160; And going to war against any of the major powers to protect a suffering minority would certainly trigger a much wider conflagration.
The bottom line is that values matter in international relations, and states that place great emphasis on the promotion of values are extremely vulnerable to charges of hypocrisy.
No state that aspires to win the support or cooperation of others can afford to be seen to be comfortable with unambiguous double standards.
And worst of all is to be perceived as being soft on those who, like Egypt’s current military rulers, commit mass-atrocity crimes against their own citizens.
Why America Will Lead the “Asian Century”
SINGAPORE – Not a week passes, it seems, without a big-picture thinker releasing a big-picture book or giving a big-picture sermon describing the gradual eclipse of American hegemony in Asia.
True, American power will inevitably decline in relative terms as Asian giants such as China and India rise.
But, at least as far as Asia is concerned, arguments about the end of American hegemony ring hollow.
For one thing, the United States was never a hegemon in Asia.
Only some American post-Cold War triumphalists thought it was.
The nature of US power and the exercise of its influence was always much more clever and subtle than most assume.
In fact, as India and China rise, the US could actually find itself in a stronger position.
How can this be?
After all, power and influence are built on the back of economic success.
The Chinese economy has been doubling in size every ten years since 1978.
The Indian economy has been doing the same since 1991.
In contrast, it takes about two decades for the US economy to double in size.
Doesn’t this surely mean that Asia is rushing toward a state of multi-polarity – a configuration of roughly equal great powers balancing against each other – while American influence is on the wane?
The seemingly obvious conclusion would be true but for the fact that Asia has a unique kind of hierarchical security system that came about partly by accident and partly by design.
No power can be preeminent if it cannot maintain its military advantage over rivals.
Yet, despite the fact that America spends more on defense than the next ten powers combined, it has never been a regional hegemon because it actually relies on the cooperation of other states to remain predominant.
Without cooperation from allies such as Japan, South Korea, Singapore, and the Philippines, the US could not retain its forward military positions in the West Pacific.
Likewise, the US needs the cooperation of Indonesia, Malaysia, and Thailand to host its critical radar infrastructure.
Moreover, in remaining preeminent, America requires other key states and regional groupings, such as ASEAN, to acquiesce in its security relationships.
Thus, there is broad-based regional approval of US alliances with Japan, South Korea, and Australia, as well as with partners such as the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and India.
The key to the effectiveness of these bilateral relationships is that they enjoy widespread support (and thus legitimacy) in the region as stabilizing arrangements.
The whole is greater than the sum of its parts.
Combined with the raw military capacity that the US brings to the table, this means that America is powerful enough to enforce the peace and provide stability for commerce to thrive.
America’s presence and bilateral partnerships are complementary to Asian states’ obsession with counter-dominance and non-interference in the region.
This dynamic “liberal order” – largely fair, flexible, and open enough to welcome new entrants as they rise – will continue to serve Asia well.
For example, even China has been a major beneficiary of the public goods provided by the US-led hierarchical system.
This interdependent relationship means that the US is not so powerful, that it can readily ignore the wishes of key states, and it is here that its apparent weakness is actually strength.
America is not a Hobbesian Leviathan with absolute authority and power.
Indeed, China’s strategists are frequently puzzled by the lack of “balancing” that takes place against the US in the region.
But it is puzzling only if we characterize Asia as being multi-polar rather than hierarchical.
In fact, any balancing tends to take place in order to preserve the hierarchy, not to replace or supersede it.
Other states tend to resist bids by any Asian power – be it Japan, China or India – to rise to the top of the pyramid.
As a foreign-based power, the US needs the cooperation of Asian partners.
This keeps the top dog in check.
Were an Asian country like China to rise to the top, it would not need the same level of regional cooperation and acquiescence to maintain its position and military footholds.
As China and India rise, and Japan becomes more “normal,” they will balance each other within the US-led hierarchy to ensure that the US remains on top and one or the other doesn’t dominate.
If China makes a bid for regional hegemony, it will find it difficult to resist the structural constraints placed on it within this hierarchy.
US power is in relative decline, but that is no bad thing.
False triumphalism breeds poor discipline.
But a sense of strategic vulnerability breeds interdependency, which has always been the key to successful US leadership in Asia.
China without North Korea
NOTTINGHAM – North Korea’s third nuclear test is a game changer not only for the United States and Japan, but also for the regime’s last ally, China.
The official Chinese reaction to North Korea’s latest provocation was stern: China is “strongly dissatisfied and resolutely opposed” to the test, and it is calling for the resumption of international talks.
But China’s stance lacks meaningful bite, because its leaders fail to recognize that they no longer need to succumb to their unruly neighbor’s blackmail.
In carrying out the test, the North Koreans have once again compromised China’s national interests.
The international community is again firmly focused on China’s relationship with its rogue ally, and expects that, as an emerging superpower seeking to reassure the world of its peaceful rise, China will play a constructive role.
However limited China’s influence may be, the North Korean regime can sustain itself only with Chinese backing.
With North Korea’s latest nuclear test coming so quickly after its rocket launch in December, the United Nations has good reason to ask China, a permanent Security Council member, to take the diplomatic lead.
It is simply not enough for China to call, as its official statement does, for the resumption of the Six-Party Talks with South Korea, China, the US, Japan, and Russia.
That framework has been thoroughly discredited by North Korea’s repeated violation of past agreements.
China must warn North Korea that it will not be pressured into providing support even when Chinese national interests have been undermined.
Indeed, China should make clear that, much as it would prefer North Korea to survive and prosper, it could afford to allow its erstwhile ally to implode.
Simply put, the conventional wisdom that North Korea’s collapse would be disastrous for China is misconceived.&#160;Any crisis sparked by North Korean refugees fleeing across the Chinese border would be short-lived, and international assistance would be readily available.
Likewise, China need not fear a South Korea-led unification of the peninsula.
China already enjoys a smoother relationship with the South than it does with the North.
Unification would occupy the Korean people for the next two decades, with Japan and the US compelled to inject a huge amount of aid to rebuild and reintegrate the North.
This hardly runs counter to China’s interests as it continues its own advance toward becoming the world’s largest economy.
Indeed, if this process were to unfold, the US rationale for keeping its own military forces in South Korea would disappear.
A phased reduction of the American presence would follow.&#160;If the US wished to maintain bases in Korea in the longer term, it would have to secure permission from a proud and newly united Korean nation – hardly a forgone conclusion.
Moreover, a united Korea will have inherited the North’s nuclear weapons.
This will pose challenges to US-Korea relations, which should work to China’s advantage.
The US will remain committed to de-nuclearizing the peninsula, while the Korean government will be tempted to retain the North’s nuclear capabilities.
This strain further reduces the risk of having US troops stationed on the Korean side of China’s border.
China must also consider the implications of North Korea’s actions on its own fractious relations with Japan.
Chinese President Xi Jinping’s top foreign-policy priority is to force the Japanese government to acknowledge, if not accept, China’s territorial claims in the two countries’ dispute over the Diaoyu/Senkaku islands in the East China Sea.
Chinese naval ships have already trained their weapons on a Japanese destroyer and a Japanese naval helicopter.
In these incidents, the single most important reason for Japanese restraint has been its military’s own rules of engagement.
Under current law, Japanese security forces are forbidden from firing their weapons unless clearly fired upon, which means that the country’s Maritime Self-Defense Force vessels can do little when targeted by Chinese naval radar.
And revising the rules to allow Japan’s military to, say, destroy a North Korean missile before it reaches Japanese air space would increase the risk of conflict between Chinese and Japanese naval and air forces.
If the Chinese leadership can think beyond its usual default response to North Korean misbehavior – abstract condemnation followed by a call for dialogue – it can apply real pressure on the North Korean regime in full view of the international community.
North Korea’s last ally should give it one last chance. And then it should be prepared to pull the plug.
Apple’s Cash-Flow Problem
CAMBRIDGE – I recently examined the problem of corporate short-termism from two nonstandard angles.
One was that some short-termism is sensible.
Large firms face an increasingly fluid economic, technological, and political environment – owing to more global and competitive markets, to the greater potential of technological change to alter firms’ business environment, and to governments’ growing influence over what makes business sense.
In this fluid environment, large companies must be cautious before making large, long-term commitments.
Second, I described how emerging data could suggest measurement problems with the conventional wisdom that more rapid trading in financial markets is making them more oriented to the short term than ever before.
Proponents of this view point to furious trading in New York and London, with average holding periods for major stocks diminishing in recent decades.
In fact, the change may be driven by a rapidly trading minority, and not by major stockholders shortening their holding periods.
Indeed, the average holding period for America’s core shareholders, like Fidelity and Vanguard, has increased in recent decades.
(I examine these issues in greater depth in a longer forthcoming article.)
The shareholder activism around Apple highlights the importance and controversy of the short-term problem.
Apple has been spectacularly successful in the past decade.
Its products, from iPhones to iPads to MacBooks, have captured consumers’ imaginations, remade markets, and earned the company and its shareholders huge sums of money.
Apple’s stock capitalization has soared, and it became the first trillion-dollar company.
As Apple’s profits have grown, it has amassed $137 billion in cash, according to a recent count – more than it can profitably use (at least for now) in its operations.
So the company has wisely left its cash invested in global financial accounts, not business operations.
Meanwhile, its staggeringly successful products are generating still more cash to handle and stockpile.
Enter shareholder activist David Einhorn, whose hedge fund Greenlight Capital has been pressing Apple to distribute a healthy fraction of that cash.
Much commentary on the foray has been negative: Einhorn’s proposal is a short-run, financial-engineering idea for a company that has gone from success to success, it is said – American stock-market short-termism at its worst.
Maybe it is.
Maybe investors are being too quick to pressure a great company.
But, odd as it might seem, getting its cash out could be a good long-term strategy for Apple.
There has long been a life cycle for firms: young firms innovate, are cash-hungry, and have to scramble for financing.
Some succeed, sell their products, and find themselves pulling in more cash than they need.
Great companies take that cash and invest it in even better products, taking the firm to new heights.
Apple has been one of those companies.
But, inevitably, the firm’s technologies become standardized and commoditized.
New, hotter technologies come along, and the firm no longer attracts the best people to work for it, because, well, it’s no longer the next new thing.
New products stall, old products are not as profitable as they once were (because competitors figure out how to make something better), and markets and consumers move on.
Firms that reach that point, and that know themselves, then return more of their cash hoard to their investors, who invest it elsewhere.
In the 1980’s and 1990’s, large swaths of American industry – especially the domestic oil industry – faced this problem, described by the economist Michael Jensen as the managerial challenge of handling free cash flow well.
Where is Apple in that company life cycle?
Is it still in its youth, cash-starved with more ideas than it can finance?
Is it middle-aged, but nimble and able to remake itself, as it did several times during Steve Jobs’ tenure?
Does it need $137 billion to engineer and finance a large-scale Apple TV that will be even more successful than iPhones and iPads?
Or has the company peaked?
Could the rollout last fall of the inferior Apple Maps, which sent people to the wrong destination – causing severe public embarrassment and leading to a managerial shakeup – foreshadow a time when Apple’s best days are behind it?
The company could be at a high plateau and could stay there for years, even decades, but does it really need $137 billion in cash for new investments?
Here is another way of looking at the Apple problem: If Apple continues to succeed, won’t it generate the cash that it needs for innovation from its super-products, like the iPad, the iPhone, and the MacBook?
Roughly 70% of Apple’s revenues come from the iPhone and the iPad.
Will those products last, or will they be superseded?
Were those products’ success the result of a unique Apple asset, namely Steve Jobs, or is the company well positioned to produce the next big thing?
Could it be too tempting in the short run to Apple’s management to have that $137 billion in the bank, so that it spends some or all of it on investments that fail to pan out in the long run?