BERKELEY – As the first wave of America’s baby boomers begins to retire, the retirement system is revealing its flaws.
More than half of all workers (and more than 60% of low-income workers) are at risk of lacking sufficient savings to maintain their living standards after they stop working.
In a recent international comparison, America’s retirement system received a passing grade of C; but, for a large and growing number of Americans, the system is failing.
The slow recovery from the Great Recession has exacerbated the challenge.
Homes are most Americans’ major retirement asset, and, despite a recent pickup, housing prices are still 28% below their 2006 peak, while 28% of all homeowners owe more on their mortgages than their property is worth.
Discretionary employer retirement plans are a major pillar of America’s retirement system.
But nearly 16 million Americans are either unemployed or have dropped out of the labor force, while more than half of the jobs created during the recovery are low-wage positions that usually do not offer such plans.
By contrast, most of the 625,000 public-sector jobs lost during the recovery offered generous pensions.
Nearly 60% of all employed private-sector workers aged 25-64 are not covered by employer retirement plans, and coverage rates vary by income: 73% of all workers in the top earnings quartile are covered by such plans, compared to only 38% in the bottom quartile.
Plan participation also varies by income, with low-income workers much less likely to participate than high-income workers.
The lack of universal coverage also means that workers move in and out of plans as they change jobs; more than one-third of all households end up with no employer-based pension coverage.
By contrast, in several other countries, mandatory employer and employee participation in national employer-based plans means nearly universal coverage.
Personal retirement savings, another pillar of the US retirement system, are woefully inadequate for most households, partly because the decades-long stagnation in median wages has made it difficult to save.
According to a recent study, one-third of Americans aged 45-54 have nothing saved specifically for retirement.
Meanwhile, three-quarters of near-retirees – those aged 50-64 – have annual incomes below $52,201 and average total retirement savings of less than $27,000.
The United States relies on generous tax incentives to encourage personal retirement savings, but these incentives are poorly targeted and yield limited returns.
More than 80% of the value of these incentives goes to the top 20% of taxpayers, who earn more than $100,000 a year.
Moreover, while the incentives cost the US Treasury nearly $100 billion annually, they induce little new saving; instead, they cause high-income taxpayers to shift their savings to tax-advantaged assets – a major reason why President Barack Obama proposes capping the tax deduction for retirement saving.
A more radical proposal would convert the tax deduction into a means-tested and refundable matching government contribution – deposited directly into a taxpayer’s individual retirement account (IRA).
Taxpayers are more responsive to matching incentives than they are to tax incentives, because the former are easier to understand and more transparent.
Lack of coverage in employer-based plans and insufficient personal savings leave more than one-third of all households (and more than 75% of low-income households) entirely dependent on Social Security for their retirement income.
And, because Social Security replaces only about 40% of pre-retirement income for low-wage workers and less than a third for median-wage workers, those who rely on it as their sole source of income live at or below the poverty line.
(Replacement rates in other developed countries are in the 70% range, compared to a benchmark of 80% recommended by retirement experts.)
Addressing the looming retirement crisis in the US requires increasing worker coverage in employer-based plans.
Here, automatic enrollment, unless workers opt out, has proved effective, boosting employee participation to more than 90%.
Indeed, recent research indicates that automatic enrollment is much more effective than tax incentives for increasing retirement saving.
But many employers do not offer retirement plans, while almost all workers are eligible for tax-advantaged IRAs.
As Obama has proposed, employers that do not offer retirement plans should be required to offer automatic contributions to their workers’ IRAs through regular payroll deductions.
Matching government contributions should be used in lieu of, or in addition to, tax deductions to encourage low-income workers to participate.
California and several other US states are also evaluating new state-administered retirement-savings programs for private-sector workers without access to employer-based plans.
The California plan, based on a proposal by Teresa Ghilarducci and her colleagues, would automatically enroll eligible employees, defined as private-sector workers at firms with five or more employees that do not offer retirement plans.
Contributions would be made through automatic payroll deductions by employers at a default rate of 3% of gross pay, but employees could opt out or adjust their contribution rates.
Under this scheme, each worker would have an individual account balance (treated as an IRA from a tax perspective), but the assets that secure the plan’s benefits would be held in a pooled trust, with a real return guaranteed by private insurance and paid out as an annuity upon retirement.
Accounts would be linked to workers, not to their employers, ensuring portability between jobs.
(The lack of portability and the absence of annuity payouts are major shortcomings of most employer plans.)
An independent board would oversee the state plan’s administration, relying on a competitive bidding process to select investment managers.
Senator Tom Harkin recently proposed a national plan with many similar features, open to all workers whose employer plans do not meet minimum requirements.
The countries that outrank the US on the global retirement index in terms of coverage, adequacy of benefits, and long-term sustainability have national pension plans in addition to their basic social-security-type programs.
Some are mandatory, some have automatic enrollment, and some rely on matching government contributions to encourage participation.
In the US, making saving easier and more financially rewarding through better-targeted tax incentives, matching government contributions, automatic IRAs, and state-wide retirement plans would help boost retirement savings, especially for low- and middle-income households.
Improving financial literacy would also help.
The current obsession with government deficits and budgetary constraints should not deflect attention from the need for reforms that address the looming retirement crisis confronting many Americans.
How to Default on Sovereign Debt
ITHACA – The financial brinkmanship over Greece’s debts has raised the question of whether (or when) the country will default.
To be sure, it would be far better for Greece and its creditors to reach a negotiated solution.
But that outcome is far from guaranteed.
The Greek government barely managed to make a significant payment last month, and even larger payments fall due throughout the summer, starting in June with an installment of more than €1.5 billion on its liabilities to the International Monetary Fund.
As Greek officials consider their options, they would do well to bear in mind that there are better and worse ways to default on sovereign debt – especially given countries’ desire to reestablish their creditworthiness as soon as possible.
In the coming weeks and months, the Greek government would be wise to consider three guidelines:
Don’t name-call: Default is painful, even if it does turn out to be the right choice in the long run.
In the midst of all that pain, it is tempting to point fingers.
But it is important to resist this urge.
More likely than not, sovereign debtors will have to interact with the same creditors and international actors again.
It is hard to know how much harm Argentina’s undiplomatic pronouncements during its default saga did to its efforts at navigating the United States’ legal system; what is clear is that its ill-considered official rhetoric did not help its case.
In the Greek context, there has already been enough name-calling for several debt crises.
Issuing a statement of regret at the inability to reach a negotiated solution, offering clear short- and long-term plans to manage the default, and outlining a compelling strategy for recovery and growth would be far preferable.
Explain yourself: In the aftermath of a default, it may seem that no one is listening to even the most rational of explanations.
Creditors will likely insist that the default was a terrible mistake and argue that recovery is impossible unless the decision is quickly reversed.
Some commentators may actually wish an insubordinate country ill, if only to prove a point or teach would-be followers a lesson.
But other actors, including potential future creditors, could be more open to persuasion.
Creditworthiness is generally understood to depend on two things: willingness to pay and ability to pay.
A default is a concrete demonstration of the limits of a state’s willingness to pay, at least in the short term.
And yet things are not necessarily so black and white.
A country that is defaulting can emphasize that the rejection of a particular debt payment does not necessarily entail a rejection of the logic of debt payments as a whole.
In the case of Greece, some investors and commentators may sympathize with the authorities’ contention that austerity measures have only hampered its recovery.
They may accept that a default could be part of a policy package designed to improve the country’s economic fundamentals and thus its capacity to repay its debt in the long term.
Repay some debt: It sounds counterintuitive, but countries in default should consider paying some of their debts – on their own terms and on a graduated basis – as a way to rebuild creditworthiness.
If the explanation for a default includes an assertion that payments should be tied to economic recovery, then it can make sense to specify the conditions for resuming payments – and follow through when the conditions are met.
To be sure, this could weaken a debtor’s leverage – the promise of future repayment – in bringing creditors back to the negotiating table.
But it would also demonstrate to old and potential new creditors alike not only a capacity, but also a willingness, to make payments, thereby creating incentives for external actors to support economic recovery.
Even after the Soviet Union’s repudiation of czarist Russia’s debts – perhaps the twentieth century’s most notorious (and most misunderstood) debt default – certain creditors expressed interest in lending to the new regime, in part because Soviet agencies repaid debt that they considered legitimate.
More recently, Ecuador continued payments on the small portion of debt that it considered acceptable after defaulting on its international debts in 2008 (under circumstances far less extreme than Greece’s).
This repayment contributed to a slow improvement in its credit rating and its eventual return to international capital markets in 2014.
Even if Greece reaches an agreement in time to make the first IMF installment due in early June, it may not have enough to cover the even larger payments required of it through the rest of the summer.
Chances are that the Greek government and its creditors will be back at the negotiating table again.
A unilateral default, one hopes, will not be necessary.
But if Greece does take that route, it should seek to make its path as smooth as possible.
How to Emerge from the Crisis in 2009
WASHINGTON, DC – In the maelstrom of events and news that characterize the current global crisis, it is often difficult to keep a clear head and a sense of what is really going on.
But when one takes a step back (something easier to do on days when markets are closed), the picture becomes clearer, and so do the required policies.
Let me first set the scene by making three observations on where we are today.
First, in the advanced countries, we have probably seen the worst of the financial crisis.
There are still land mines, from unknowable credit default swap (CDS) positions to hidden losses on balance sheets, but the worst days of frozen money markets and obscene risk spreads are probably over.&nbsp;
Second, and unfortunately, the financial crisis has moved to emerging countries.
In crossing borders, the sharp portfolio reallocations and the rush to safer assets are creating not only financial but also exchange-rate crises.
Add to this the drop in output in advanced countries, and you can see how emerging countries now suffer from both higher credit costs and decreased export demand.
Third, in the advanced economies, the hit to wealth, and even more so the specter of another Great Depression, has led people and firms to curtail spending sharply.
Not only have they revised their spending plans, but, in many cases, they have delayed purchases, waiting for the uncertainty to clear.
The result has been a sharp drop in output and employment, reinforcing fears about the future, and further decreasing spending.&nbsp;
Let me now turn to policy.
If my characterization of events is correct, then the right set of policies is straightforward:
First, the measures put in place earlier to repair the financial system must be refined and consolidated.
One silver lining of the worst days of the crisis in October was to scare governments into action on the financial front.
Central banks generously provided liquidity.&nbsp;&nbsp;
But governments soon realized that the main issue was solvency.
They pledged to implement programs aimed at asset purchases (to clarify the balance sheets of financial institutions), recapitalization (to make sure that, if solvent, they could operate and continue to lend), and guarantees (to reassure depositors and some investors that their funds were safe).
The basic architecture for these measures is now in place, but the implementation has been often haphazard.
Lessons from previous banking crises around the world could have been learned faster.
The twists and turns in some of the programs, most notably in the United States, have left markets confused, and have led private investors to stay on the sidelines, waiting for policy clarification before taking a stake in financial institutions.
I have little doubt that learning by doing will eventually lead to coherent programs.
But time has been lost.&nbsp;
Second, emerging market countries must get help in adjusting to the financial crisis.
It is not just a question of providing them with liquidity so that they can simply maintain their exchange rates in the face of a large capital outflows.
Many investors who want out will not return for some time, and countries must accept this fact and adjust accordingly.&nbsp;&nbsp;
In some cases, they can do this on their own, so all that is needed is liquidity support to avoid a collapse of the exchange rate and allow for the adjustment to occur.
In other cases, the capital outflows only worsen already difficult situations.
These countries need more than liquidity; they need financial help to carry out the necessary adjustments.
Are the proper help measures in place?
Yes and no.
For a few countries, the main central banks have provided access to liquidity through swap lines.
The International Monetary Fund, for its part, has created a new liquidity facility, enabling countries that pre-qualify to apply and get funds with little or no conditionality.
For the time being, these arrangements have been sufficient.
But liquidity provision needs to be provided on a more coherent and comprehensive basis.
As for countries that need more help, this is the IMF’s natural function. A number of countries have already obtained funds under program lending.
One may reasonably worry that the available funds will be depleted before the crisis is over.
Third, governments must counteract the sharp drop in consumption and investment demand.
In the absence of strong policies, it is too easy to think of scary scenarios in which depressed output and troubles in the financial system feed on each other, leading to further large drops in output.
It is thus essential for governments to make clear that they will do everything to eliminate this downside risk.
Can they credibly do it?
The answer is yes.
With interest rates already low, the room for monetary policy is limited.
But the room for fiscal policy is wider, so governments must do two things urgently.
First, in countries in which there is fiscal space, they must announce credible fiscal expansions; we – the IMF – believe that, as a whole, a global fiscal expansion about 2% of world GDP is both feasible and appropriate.
Finally, and just as importantly, governments must indicate that, if conditions deteriorate, further fiscal expansion will be implemented.
Only with such a commitment will people and firms be confident that we are not headed for a repeat of the Great Depression, and start spending again.&nbsp;
My strong belief is that if these policies are followed, by the end of 2009, if not sooner, the world economy will start recovering from the crisis.
Upaya Mengakhiri Kelaparan
ISTANBUL/KUALA LUMPUR – Bulan September lalu, para pemimpin dunia menyatakan komitmennya untuk mengakhiri kelaparan pada tahun 2030, sebagai bagian dari Tujuan Pembangunan Berkelanjutan atau SDGs (Sustainable Development Goals) yang telah disahkan PBB.
Dokumen SDGs berkesan seperti tanggung jawab yang masif.
Faktanya, secara global produksi pangan sudah cukup untuk memberi makan semua orang.
Lalu kenapa masalah tersebut tidak ada habisnya?
Kemiskinan dan kelaparan berhubungan erat, itu sebabnya target SGDs adalah pengentasan keduanya.
Bagi seseorang yang hidup dengan 1,90 dolar AS per hari (garis kemiskinan menurut Bank Dunia), alokasi untuk makanan  sekitar 50-70% dari pendapatannya.
Bank Dunia memperkirakan hampir 80% penduduk miskin sedunia tinggal di wilayah pedesaan, meskipun wilayah tersebut mewakili kurang dari setengah populasi dunia.
Kesimpulan yang kentara adalah peningkatan pendapatan desa wajib untuk mengakhiri kelaparan.
Itu tidak akan mudah.
Mayoritas negara-negara berkembang saat ini terbebani oleh tingkat pengangguran (unemployment) dan setengah pengangguran (underemployment).
Dan di tengah suramnya prospek ekonomi sekarang, terutama dengan rendahnya harga komoditas, dan desakan atas pengetatan fiscal (fiscal austerity) berkembang di banyak tempat, tekanan  ke bawah (downward pressure) pada pendapatan desa akan bertambah buruk.
Meskipun negara-negara di dunia bisa mewujudkan pertumbuhan inklusif, itu tidak cukup untuk mengakhiri kelaparan pada tahun 2030.
Satu-satunya cara ialah melalui penerapan perlindungan sosial (social protection) yang dirancang secara cermat dan perluasan investasi yang memihak orang miskin (pro-poor investment).
Menurut Bank Dunia, satu miliar penduduk di 146 negara berpendapatan rendah dan menengah saat ini menerima perlindungan sosial dalam berbagai bentuk.
Akan tetapi, 870 juta jiwa yang hidup dalam kemiskinan ekstrem, mayoritas di wilayah pedesaaan, tidak memperoleh cakupan yang memadai.
Ketimpangan terbesar menimpa negara-negara berpendapatan rendah, dimana perlindungan sosial hanya menjangkau kurang dari 10% penduduk, 47% diantaranya hidup dalam kemiskinan ekstrem. Ini tentu tidak mengherankan.
Di negara-negara berpendapatan menengah bawah, perlindungan sosial menjangkau sekitar seperempat warga yang hidup dalam kemiskinan ekstrem, menyisakan 500 juta jiwa tidak memperoleh cakupan.
Di kelompok negara berpendapatan menengah atas, sekitar 45% warga yang hidup dalam kemiskinan ekstrem adalah penerima manfaat program kesejahteraan sosial.
Ini jelas belum optimal.
Disempurnakannya perlindungan sosial bisa menjamin konsumsi pangan yang mencukupi dan memungkinkan penerima manfaat  untuk mengalokasikan dana bagi perbaikan gizi, kesehatan, dan produktivitas.
Ketika investasi tersebut menaikkan pendapatan secara berkelanjutan, ini akan mengaktifkan kenaikan investasi produktif perseorangan, sehingga bisa mematahkan lingkaran setan kemiskinan dan kelaparan.
Pemerintah juga harus mengucurkan dana untuk memastikan agar warga yang saat ini terperosok dalam jurang kemiskinan bisa mencapai titik yang mana mereka bisa menyokong dirinya sendiri.
Dorongan investasi awal yang besar akan menghasilkan pendapatan tambahan dengan lebih cepat dan mengurangi kerugian finansial jangka panjang.
Selain itu, investasi tersebut akan memperkuat permintaan agregat yang sangat dibutuhkan ekonomi global.
Kita bisa membiayai investasi yang mendesak ini.
Menurut perkiraanFood and Agricultural Organization (FAO), International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), dan World Food Programme (WFP), jumlah yang diperlukan setara dengan 0,3% pendapatan negara-negara di dunia pada tahun 2014.
Yang dibutuhkan hanyalah penyediaan dukungan anggaran dan bantuan teknis dari negara-negara maju kepada kelompok negara-negara berpendapatan rendah.
(Sebagian besar negara berpendapatan menengah bisa memenuhi kebutuhan pembiayaannya sendiri).
Seharusnya tidak sulit memperoleh kemauan politik untuk menyalurkan bantuan, setidaknya secara teori.
Bagaimanapun juga, sudah lebih dari setengah abad sejak Deklarasi Universal Hak-hak Asasi Manusia dan Konvenan Internasional tentang Hak-hak Ekonomi, Sosial, dan Budaya diadopsi, dua naskah yang mengelompokkan pemenuhan kebutuhan material setiap orang sebagai hak asasi manusia.
Beberapa tahun sebelumnya, Presiden AS Franklin D. Roosevelt menyerukan kebebasan dari kekurangan (freedom from want) – yang kiranya termasuk kebebasan dari kelaparan – salah satu dari empat hak dan kebebasan yang harus diberikan kepada semua orang tanpa terkecuali.
Kini, melalui adopsi SDGs, pemerintah di semua negara wajib dan bertanggung jawab untuk mengentaskan kemiskinan dan kelaparan, serta menciptakan kondisi untuk menjamin keduanya berakhir selamanya.
Pertemuan High-Level Political Forum on Sustainable Development yang berikutnya menawarkan peluang penting untuk menempa jalur ke depan, serta menetapkan prioritas jangka pendek dan menengah.
Mengakhiri kelaparan dan kemiskinan melalui cara yang berkelanjutan adalah tindakan yang benar, menguntungkan secara politik, dan layak secara ekonomi.
Bagi para pemimpin dunia, kelambanan atau berdiam diri bukan lagi sebuah pilihan.
How to End the Greek Tragedy
SANTIAGO – European leaders, faced with the reality of an insolvent Greece, are reportedly now considering a “Plan B” that would involve reducing the burden of its future debt payments.
This is a welcome contrast to the options considered so far, all of which involved – under different guises – foisting more debt onto a country that has too much of it already.
Greek public debt today stands at nearly 160% of the country’s official GDP. Suppose Greece took 25 years to bring it down to the Maastricht ceiling of 60%.
If the real interest rate on Greek debt were 4% (more or less what Greece is paying now for the emergency loans from the European Union) and annual GDP grew by 2% on average, the required primary fiscal surplus each year for the next quarter-century would be 5.7% of GDP.
That is an unimaginably large burden, and it risks condemning Greece to permanent recession and social unrest.
A possible counterargument is that Greece has a large informal economy, so its actual GDP is larger than the official figure. As a result, the debt ratios commonly applied to Greece could be overstated.
But informal output is of little use for debt service if it cannot be taxed.
In any case, the scope for tax increases is severely limited in an economy that is shrinking quickly.
The conclusion is clear: Greece’s debt-service burden is too large, and it must be reduced.
This can be accomplished in two ways: sharply cutting the interest rate paid by Greece, or reducing the face value of the debt.
Some analysts – most prominently Jeffrey Sachs – have argued that the best way forward is to cut the yield on Greek debt to that of German public debt. Germany currently pays a little over 3% nominal interest on 10-year debt, half of what Greece is being charged for emergency loans – and far less than Greece would pay if it attempted to raise money in private markets.
This approach has several advantages: by leaving the face value of the debt unaltered, EU officials could argue that restructuring Greece’s debt did not amount to a default, thereby limiting contagion.
European banks holding Greek government debt could keep pretending that it is worth its full value.
And the European Central Bank would have fewer excuses to refuse Greek bonds as collateral.
The question is whether the change in coupons – possibly coupled with an extension of maturities – would be enough to stabilize the Greek economy and restore growth.
Even with German-level interest rates, Greece would have to run a primary surplus of at least 2% of GDP – still quite large, and far from today’s deficit.
And, with the face value of the debt unchanged, the psychological drag on expectations and investment might linger.
The alternative is to cut the face value of Greece’s debt.
European leaders seem to be moving in this direction.
The required cut is large: eliminating half of Greece’s public debt obligation would leave it at nearly 80% of GDP, a ratio higher than Spain’s.
Talk of “haircuts” for private investors immediately triggers concerns about contagion.
But markets are already assigning a high probability to a Greek default.
The rating agencies have long placed Greek debt deep in junk territory, and are now giving Portuguese and Irish debt the same status.
Rising spreads in Spain and Italy show that contagion is already occurring, even in the absence of an official decision to write down Greek debt.
The EU is pinning its hopes on one mechanism to reduce Greek debt: loans from the European Financial Stability Facility that would allow Greece to buy its own debt at a discount in the secondary market.
But, while allowing the EFSF to finance buybacks is a step forward, a slew of theoretical and empirical research, generated by developing countries’ efforts to buy back their debt in the 1980’s and 1990’s, has shown that it is far from a cure-all.
The main reason is simple: as debt is reduced, its price rises in the secondary market, sharply curtailing the benefits to the borrower.
So far, policymakers are talking only about exchanging old Greek bonds for cash (in buybacks) or new Greek bonds.
It would be far preferable to exchange them for Eurobonds, backed by the full faith and credit of all eurozone countries.
Nor are European ministers, still struggling to catch up with reality, yet considering involuntary debt exchanges.
But, if the past 18 months are any guide, they soon will be.
How to Fail to Recover
NEW YORK – Some people thought that Barack Obama’s election would turn everything around for America.
Because it has not, even after the passage of a huge stimulus bill, the presentation of a new program to deal with the underlying housing problem, and several plans to stabilize the financial system, some are even beginning to blame Obama and his team.
Obama, however, inherited an economy in freefall, and could not possibly have turned things around in the short time since his inauguration.
President Bush seemed like a deer caught in the headlights –�paralyzed, unable to do almost anything – for months before he left office.
It is a relief that the US finally has a president who can act, and what he has been doing will make a big difference.&nbsp;
Unfortunately, what he is doing is not enough.
The stimulus package appears big – more than 2% of GDP per year – but one-third of it goes to tax cuts.
And, with Americans facing a debt overhang, rapidly increasing unemployment (and the worst unemployment compensation system among major industrial countries), and falling asset prices, they are likely to save much of the tax cut.
Almost half of the stimulus simply offsets the contractionary effect of cutbacks at the state level.
America’s 50 states must maintain balanced budgets.
The total shortfalls were estimated at $150 billion a few months ago; now the number must be much larger – indeed, California alone faces a shortfall of $40 billion.
Household savings are finally beginning to rise, which is good for the long-run health of household finances, but disastrous for economic growth. Meanwhile, investment and exports are plummeting as well.
America’s automatic stabilizers –�the progressivity of our tax systems, the strength of our welfare system – have been greatly weakened, but they will provide some stimulus, as the expected fiscal deficit soars to 10% of GDP.
In short, the stimulus will strengthen America’s economy, but it is probably not enough to restore robust growth. This is bad news for the rest of the world, too, for a strong global recovery requires a strong American economy.
The real failings in the Obama recovery program, however, lie not in the stimulus package but in its efforts to revive financial markets.
America’s failures provide important lessons to countries around the world, which are or will be facing increasing problems with their banks:
- Delaying bank restructuring is costly, in terms of both the eventual bailout costs and the damage to the overall economy in the interim.
- Governments do not like to admit the full costs of the problem, so they give the banking system just enough to survive, but not enough to return it to health.
- Confidence is important, but it must rest on sound fundamentals.
Policies must not be based on the fiction that good loans were made, and that the business acumen of financial-market leaders and regulators will be validated once confidence is restored.
- Bankers can be expected to act in their self-interest on the basis of incentives.
Perverse incentives fueled excessive risk-taking, and banks that are near collapse but are too big to fail will engage in even more of it.
Knowing that the government will pick up the pieces if necessary, they will postpone resolving mortgages and pay out billions in bonuses and dividends.
- Socializing losses while privatizing gains is more worrisome than the consequences of nationalizing banks.
American taxpayers are getting an increasingly bad deal.
In the first round of cash infusions, they got about $0.67 in assets for every dollar they gave (though the assets were almost surely overvalued, and quickly fell in value).
But in the recent cash infusions, it is estimated that Americans are getting $0.25, or less, for every dollar.
Bad terms mean a large national debt in the future.&nbsp; One reason we may be getting bad terms is that if we got fair value for our money, we would by now be the dominant shareholder in at least one of the major banks.
- Don’t confuse saving bankers and shareholders with saving banks.
America could have saved its banks, but let the shareholders go, for far less than it has spent.
- Trickle-down economics almost never works.
Throwing money at banks hasn’t helped homeowners: foreclosures continue to increase.
Letting AIG fail might have hurt some systemically important institutions, but dealing with that would have been better than to gamble upwards of $150 billion and hope that some of it might stick where it is important.
- Lack of transparency got the US financial system into this trouble.
Lack of transparency will not get it out.
The Obama administration is promising to pick up losses to persuade hedge funds and other private investors to buy out banks’ bad assets.
But this will not establish “market prices,” as the administration claims.
With the government bearing losses, these are distorted prices.&nbsp; &nbsp;Bank losses have already occurred, and their gains must now come at taxpayers’ expense.
Bringing in hedge funds as third parties will simply increase the cost.
- Better to be forward looking than backward looking, focusing on reducing the risk of new loans and ensuring that funds create new lending capacity.&nbsp; Bygone are bygones.&nbsp; As a point of reference, $700 billion provided to a new bank, leveraged 10 to 1, could have financed $7 trillion of new loans.&nbsp;
The era of believing that something can be created out of nothing should be over.
Short-sighted responses by politicians – who hope to get by with a deal that is small enough to please taxpayers and large enough to please the banks – will only prolong the problem. An impasse is looming.
More money will be needed, but Americans are in no mood to provide it – certainly not on the terms that have been seen so far. The well of money may be running dry, and so, too, may be America’s legendary optimism and hope.
How to Fight Secular Stagnation
MILAN – Much of the world, especially the advanced economies, has been mired in a pattern of slow and declining GDP growth in recent years, causing many to wonder whether this is becoming a semi-permanent condition – so-called “secular stagnation.”
The answer is probably yes, but the question lacks precision, and thus has limited utility.
There are, after all, different types of forces that could be suppressing growth, not all of which are beyond our control.
To be sure, there is a strong case to be made that many of the growth-destroying headwinds that we currently face would be difficult, if not impossible, to counter in the near term without endangering future growth and stability.
The result of these persistent conditions can be called “secular stagnation one” (SS1).
The first indication that we are experiencing SS1 relates to technology.
If we are, as the economist Robert Gordon argues, experiencing a slowdown in productivity-enhancing technological innovation, long-term potential growth would be constrained.
But even if innovation has not dropped off too much, or picks up again soon, the structural adaptation and behavioral changes needed to take advantage of the concomitant productivity gains will take time.
A second condition supporting SS1 is rooted in the impact of heightened uncertainty – about growth, job security, policies and regulations, and the many developments that could affect any of those factors – on investment and consumption.
People simply don’t know whether their governments are going to start making progress in combating deflationary pressure, countering rising inequality, addressing social and political fragmentation, and restoring economic growth and employment.
With future demand far from guaranteed, private investment has been declining in many countries, including, most recently, China.
The same goes for household consumption, particularly in the advanced economies, where a larger share of consumption is optional (for example, replacing consumer durables, traveling, and eating out at restaurants).
Given how long it took the US economy, for example, to recover fully from the Great Depression – until World War II, when the government took over much of the demand side of the economy – it seems that a reversal in these trends will not arrive anytime soon.
The third indication that we are stuck in SS1 is debt.
Households, corporations, financial institutions, and governments are all facing balance-sheet constraints, which it seems plausible to assume, are holding back expenditure and investment, elevating savings, and contributing to a broadly deflationary environment.
Actions aimed at supporting deleveraging and balance-sheet repair – such as recognizing losses, writing down assets, and recapitalizing banks – carry longer-term benefits but short-term costs.
Indeed, balance-sheet repair takes time, especially in the household sector, and produces an unavoidable drag on growth.
The picture is somewhat bleak.
But there is more to the story, revealed by another, more precise, question: is there a set of policy responses that could, over time, increase the level and quality of growth?
Here, the answer also seems to be yes, suggesting that we are also facing another type of secular stagnation – call it “secular stagnation two” (SS2) – that is dictated by our unwillingness or inability to implement the right policy mix.
A key element of that policy mix would focus on tackling rising inequality.
While the forces fueling this trend – in particular, globalization and progress in digital technology – will be difficult to counter fully, their adverse effects can be mitigated through redistribution via the tax and social-security systems.
As economies undergo prolonged structural transformations, individuals and families need the resources to invest in new skills.
Moreover, monetary policy, which has been shouldering much of the burden of recovery since the 2008 economic crisis, must be rethought.
The fact is that years of ultra-low interest rates and massive quantitative easing have not increased aggregate demand sufficiently, much less reduced deflationary forces adequately.
But raising interest rates unilaterally carries serious risks, because in a demand-constrained environment, higher interest rates attract capital inflows, thereby driving up the exchange rate and undermining growth in the tradable part of the economy.
Given this, advanced-country policymakers should consider imposing some controls on their capital accounts (much as successful emerging economies do) – a move that would facilitate more independent and tailored approaches to exiting financial repression.
A third priority should be to strengthen fiscal responses, especially with respect to public-sector investment.
Europe, in particular, is paying a heavy price for underusing its fiscal capacity – a decision that has been driven by the political unpopularity of debt and fiscal transfers.
Under the right conditions, the balance sheets of pension and sovereign-wealth funds could also be tapped to fund investment.
There are many more areas where countries may need to consider reforms. These include tax policy, the inefficient or improper use of public funds, impediments to structural change in product and factor markets, and mismatches between the reach of global financial institutions and the capacity of sovereign balance sheets to intervene in case of financial distress.
SS1 will make addressing SS2 much more difficult.
In fact, it seems that not even robust domestic and international policy responses would be sufficient to eliminate the risk that demand and growth will remain subdued for an extended period.
But that is no reason to delay action in the areas where policy can make a difference.
Just as our past policy choices helped to generate the SS1 we face today, failure to implement policies aimed at tackling SS2 could create a much more intractable and potentially unstable situation tomorrow.
National Governments, Global Citizens
CAMBRIDGE – Nothing endangers globalization more than the yawning governance gap – the dangerous disparity between the national scope of political accountability and the global nature of markets for goods, capital, and many services – that has opened up in recent decades.
When markets transcend national regulation, as with today’s globalization of finance, market failure, instability, and crisis is the result.
But pushing rule-making onto supranational bureaucracies, such as the World Trade Organization or the European Commission, can result in a democratic deficit and a loss of legitimacy.
How can this governance gap be closed?
One option is to re-establish national democratic control over global markets.
This is difficult and smacks of protectionism, but it is neither impossible nor necessarily inimical to healthy globalization.
As I argue in my book The Globalization Paradox, expanding the scope for national governments to maintain regulatory diversity and rebuild frayed social bargains would enhance the functioning of the global economy.
Instead, policy elites (and most economists) favor strengthening what is euphemistically called “global governance.”
According to this view, reforms such as those that enhance the effectiveness of the G-20, increase the representativeness of the International Monetary Fund’s Executive Board, and tighten the capital standards set by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision would be sufficient to provide a sound institutional underpinning for the global economy.
But the trouble is not just that these global institutions remain weak. It is also that they are inter-governmental bodies – a collection of member states rather than agents of global citizens.
Because their accountability to national electorates is indirect and uncertain, they do not generate the political allegiance – and hence legitimacy – that truly representative institutions require.
Indeed, the travails of the European Union have revealed the limits of transnational political community-building, even among a comparatively limited and similar set of countries.
Ultimately, the buck stops with national parliaments and executives.
During the financial crisis, it was national governments that bailed out banks and firms, recapitalized the financial system, guaranteed debts, eased liquidity, primed the fiscal pump, and paid the unemployment and welfare checks – and took the blame for everything that went wrong.
In the memorable words of outgoing Bank of England Governor Mervyn King, global banks are “international in life, but national in death.”
But perhaps there is another path, one that accepts the authority of national governments, but aims to reorient national interests in a more global direction.
Progress along such a path requires “national” citizens to begin viewing themselves increasingly as “global” citizens, with interests that extend beyond their state’s borders.
National governments are accountable to their citizens, at least in principle. So, the more global these citizens’ sense of their interests becomes, the more globally responsible national policy will be.
This may seem like a pipedream, but something along these lines has already been happening for a while.
The global campaign for debt relief for poor countries was led by non-governmental organizations that successfully mobilized young people in rich countries to put pressure on their governments.
Multinational companies are well aware of the effectiveness of such citizen campaigns, having been compelled to increase transparency and change their ways on labor practices around the world.
Some governments have gone after foreign political leaders who committed human-rights crimes, with considerable domestic popular support.
Nancy Birdsall, the president of the Center for Global Development, cites the example of a Ghanaian citizen providing testimony to the US Congress in the hope of convincing American officials to pressure the World Bank to change its position on user fees in Africa.
Such bottom-up efforts to “globalize” national governments have the greatest potential to affect environmental policies, particularly those aimed at mitigating climate change – the most intractable global problem of all.
Interestingly, some of the most important initiatives to stem greenhouse gases and promote green growth are the products of local pressures.
World Resources Institute President Andrew Steer notes that more than 50 developing countries are now implementing costly policies to reduce climate change.
From the perspective of national interest, that makes no sense at all, given the global-commons nature of the problem.
Some of these policies are driven by the desire to attain a competitive advantage, as is the case with China’s support for green industries.
But when voters are globally aware and environmentally conscious, good climate policy can also be good politics.
Consider California, which at the beginning of this year launched a cap-and-trade system that aims to reduce carbon emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2020.
While global action remained stalled on capping emissions, environmental groups and concerned citizens successfully pushed for the plan over the opposition of business groups, and the state’s Republican governor at the time, Arnold Schwarzenegger, signed it into law in 2006.
If it proves a success and remains popular, it could become a model for the entire country.
Global polls such as the World Values Survey indicate that there is still a lot of ground that needs to be covered: self-expressed global citizenship tends to run 15-20 percentage points behind national citizenship.
But the gap is smaller for young people, the better educated, and the professional classes.
Those who consider themselves to be at the top of the class structure are significantly more globally minded than those who consider themselves to be from the lower classes.
Of course, “global citizenship” will always be a metaphor, because there will never be a world government administering a worldwide political community.
But the more we each think of ourselves as global citizens and express our preferences as such to our governments, the less we will need to pursue the chimera of global governance.
How to Help Burma
RANGOON – Across the Middle East, and now in Burma (Myanmar), one of the great questions of contemporary global politics has resurfaced: How can countries move from a failing authoritarianism to some form of self-sustaining pluralism?
Foreign ministers everywhere, in turn, face crucial policy questions: When a country launches such a political transition, when should other countries help, and what is the best way to do so?
Happy transitions, to paraphrase Tolstoy, are all alike; but every unhappy transition is unhappy in its own way.
The happy transitions across much of Central Europe following the end of the Cold War were made easier by the fact that the old communist order more or less died on its feet and surrendered power peacefully.
This, along with generous support from Western Europe, the United States, and others, helped to create a mood conducive to reconciliation, allowing each country to tackle in a measured, non-vengeful way the many difficult moral issues arising from the recent dark past.
Above all, perhaps, these transitions took place amidst a wider network of legitimate institutions – the European Union, OSCE, NATO, and the Council of Europe – championing the rule of law.
This supportive context provided a roadmap for national policymakers, helping them to build democratic institutions and marginalize extremists.
Elsewhere in the world, things are not so easy.
Discredited regimes may cling all the more ruthlessly and ruinously to power, as in Syria.
Or they may create all sorts of new problems on their way out of power, as in Libya.
Or they may be struggling to introduce democratic accountability while maintaining stability, as in Egypt.
In Burma, we see another model – a bold attempt after decades of military rule to move in a controlled but purposeful way toward a new, inclusive form of government. Here there are striking similarities to what happened in Poland as communism ended.
A military elite favors step-by-step reform, but wants to protect its position and is determined to avoid a descent into chaos.
The opposition is led by a charismatic leader with huge popular support.
And the ruling elite opens a number of parliamentary seats to a popular vote, only to be shocked by a landslide opposition win.
Moreover, as was true in Poland, Burma’s opposition leaders must strike a delicate balance: satisfy their impatient supporters (many of whom have suffered mightily under the old regime), while offering those still in power the prospect of a worthwhile future.
But there are key differences.
Burma has a very different internal political dynamic, not least because of the complex relationships among its various ethnic and linguistic communities – social cleavages that were not an issue in largely homogeneous Poland’s transition.
Moreover, unlike Poland when communism collapsed, Burma already has powerful business tycoons flourishing under the existing system – and they mean to maintain and develop their privileges.
Above all, there is no immediate international institutional context encouraging steady change and establishing standards and benchmarks: Burma must find its own path.
Earlier this month, I visited Burma, where I met President Thein Sein and the opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi, as well as former political prisoners and many other activists.
I came away convinced that Burma is a country on the move – and moving firmly in a good direction.
All sides accept that this large and resource-rich country has under-performed for far too long.
They also agree that a step-by-step approach, based on reconciliation, is better than an open struggle for power, which could quickly take on a calamitous ethnic dimension.
That consensus will remain credible as long as political reform continues and economic growth accelerates.
After such a long period of stagnation, people demand to see and feel changes for the better in their own lives.
The rest of us should be constructive and creative, not prescriptive and pernickety.
Above all, we should be patient.
The EU’s suspension of sanctions and general readiness to engage constructively make sense.
Burma’s leadership should respond by releasing all remaining political prisoners and opening up the entire political process.
The EU also should ensure that its development assistance – and the process of delivering it – enhances pluralism and reconciliation by benefiting all of Burma’s communities fairly and transparently.
Poland is making its own direct contribution, above all by helping senior Burmese decision makers, opposition leaders, and business representatives to understand the “technology of transition” –&nbsp;that is, the sequencing of technical reforms, which has helped to make Poland one of Europe’s healthiest economies today.
Our business representatives came with me to present large-scale investment projects.
Perhaps the most encouraging aspect of my visit to Burma was a willingness to open up and learn from other countries that have navigated the painful transition from dictatorship to democracy.
One general asked me, off the record, “How did you manage to implement such dramatic political changes without bloodshed?”
BEIRUT – Melihat kondisi Lebanon saat ini, jelas bahwa tanda-tanda kekacauan sedang melanda Timur Tengah.
Masuknya pengungsi asal Suriah dan Irak semakin mewarnai penampungan yang sudah dipenuhi pengungsi asal Palestina.
Jabatan presiden di Lebanon masih kosong semenjak dua tahun lalu, karena faksi-faksi politik yang saling bersaing, yang menandakan perseteruan antar penyokong dari Iran dan Arab Saudi, justru melemahkan tata kelola pemerintahan dalam negeri.
Dukungan yang diberikan tidak serta-merta menyelesaikan masalah.
Meskipun demikian, Lebanon menunjukkan tanda-tanda ketahanan.
Investor dan pengusaha mengambil risiko dan mendirikan usaha-usaha baru.
Kelompok masyarakat sipil mengusulkan dan menerapkan inisiatif-inisiatif bermanfaat.
Pengungsi kembali bersekolah.
Lawan-lawan politik berkolaborasi demi mengurangi risiko keamanan dan pemimpin-pemimpin keagamaan mengusung tema hidup berdampingan dan toleransi.
Ketahanan Lebanon dihasilkan dari kenangan buruk atas perang saudara yang berdarah (1975-1990).
Sebaliknya, pengalaman negara-negara lain di Timur Tengah – yang melibatkan sejarah panjang kediktatoran dan pengabaian terhadap kekecewaaan warga yang berkepanjangan – telah menyulut api konflik.
Suriah, Irak, dan Yaman kini terpecah-belah akibat perang.
Sementara itu, kesulitan yang dialami Palestina yang terus memburuk masih membekas di hati penduduk Arab dan muslim.
Di tengah gejolak ini, kelompok-kelompok radikal baru dengan agenda transnasional semakin merajalela.
Selama dua tahun terakhir, konflik melebar ke luar batas-batas negara dan mengancam keamanan global.
ISIS atau the Islamic State mengeksploitasi kemarahan Sunni yang ada sejak lama untuk menentang keutuhan wilayah Irak dan Suriah, menciptakan kekosongan strategis yang kini diperebutkan Rusia, Irak, Amerika Serikat, Turki, dan Arab Saudi, kadang secara tidak langsung, tapi seringnya melalui intervensi militer langsung.
Setiap negara memiliki agendanya masing-masing.
Irak ingin menonjolkan dukungannya pada populasi Syiah yang dominan, sementara Arab Saudi bereaksi dengan mempersenjatai faksi pemberontak yang melawan presiden Suriah yang disokong Iran, yaitu Bashar al-Assad, dan upaya mengakhiri “kehadiran” Iran di negara tetangganya, di Yaman.
Bagi Turki, kepentingannya adalah menghentikan pembentukan negara Kurdi, yang mungkin terjadi apabila pembagian wilayah di Irak dan Suriah betul-betul terjadi.
Dengan memburuknya kondisi di Timur Tengah layaknya tersedot ke dalam pusaran konflik permanen, tidak sulit membayangnya bahwa hanya diktator atau tokoh fanatik agama yang bisa membawa kestabilan.
Namun pemikiran tersebut mengabaikan sejumlah aksi revolusi progresif yang pernah terjadi, seperti di Beirut tahun 2005, di Aljazair dan Teheran tahun  2009, dan Arab Spring yang diawali di Tunisia dan menyebar ke seluruh kawasan pada tahun 2011.
Agar bisa memahami kemana berjalannya Timur Tengah, kita perlu kembali menelusuri sejarah untuk menilik asal-mula krisis di kawasan.
Nationalisme Arab dan aspirasi modernisasi telah runtuh pasca kekalahan Arab pada perang Arab-Israel tahun 1967 dan merosotnya harga minyak pada tahun 1986.
Para pemimpin nasional mempertahankan kekuasaan melalui penindasan dan menggunakan partai-partai oposisi Islam sebagai tameng untuk menghindari reformasi politik.
Perekonomian nasional, yang diperburuk dengan praktik kronisme, berakibat pada rendahnya pertumbuhan, dan hilangnya legitimasi pemerintah.
Kegagalan strategi tersebut berdampak pada jatuhnya rezim yang menerapkannya – di Tunisia, Mesir, Libya, Suriah, dan negara-negara lain – pada tahun 2011.
Ketika tidak ada institusi yang bisa membawa transisi politik secara damai di negara-negara tersebut, kelompok-kelompok yang mengedepankan kekerasan mempunyai keunggulan dibandingkan masyarakat awam, lalu perebutan kekuasaan tidak terhindarkan lagi.
Revolusi kekerasan mungkin melahirkan resolusi damai, tapi akibat tersebut hampir mustahil terjadi jika masih diwarnai kegelisahan sektarian yang mengakar dan belum terpecahkan, seperti yang dialami Timur Tengah saat ini.
Penekanan pada nuansa baru penolakan keras yang ada sejak lama – tercermin dalam kemarahan warga Sunni di Suriah dan Irak, Syiah di Bahrain, Arab Saudi, dan Yaman, serta Kurdi dan Palestina di mana-mana – menjadikan kondisi sekarang semakin berbahaya.
Permasalahan tersebut membara di tengah penindasan autokrat selama bertahun-tahun.
Kini, kotak Pandora sudah terbuka dan menyingkap teka-teki geopolitik yang sangat pelik.
Dunia Barat patut dipersalahkan atas situasi sekarang.
Negara-negara Barat gagal mengakhiri konflik berkepanjangan di Palestina dan menciptakan masalah baru dengan memporak-porandakan Irak, membiayai mujahidin di Afghanistan, dan menyokong diktator yang mendukung kepentingan keamanan mereka di Irak, Suriah, Mesir, dan di negara-negara lain.
Menyaksikan intervensi kekuasaan besar-besaran oleh Amerika Serikat dan Rusia, banyak orang teringat dengan perjanjian Sykes-Picot yang ditandatangani Britania Raya dan Perancis tentang penetapan batas-batas negara di kawasan dan pembagian Timur Tengah berdasarkan kekuasaan mereka.
Bagaimanapun juga, perjanjian Sykes-Picot memberi contoh bagus atas hal-hal yang patut dihindari dalam pembangunan kembali Timur Tengah.
Kawasan ini tidak membutuhkan batas-batas wilayah baru atau protektorat baru, tapi Timur Tengah sangat memerlukan negara-negara yang lebih kuat dan berdaya tahan dari segala perpecahan etnis dan tidak rentan terkena pengaruh eksternal.
Survei pendapat mengindikasikan bahwa mayoritas penduduk Timur Tengah menghendaki pemerintahan yang sah berdasarkan negara hukum, perlindungan hak-hak sipil, dan semangat hidup berdampingan antar komunitas.
Ini merupakan tujuan mulia yang memerlukan kompromi dan rekonsiliasi di tingkat global, regional, dan nasional.
Agar aktor-aktor dalam negeri mempunyai cukup ruang untuk merumuskan solusi, harus dimulai dengan meredakan ketegangan dan mencari jalan tengahnya – pertama secara global, antar Amerika Serikat dan Rusia, kemudian di kawasan, antara Iran, Turki, Arab Saudi, dan Israel.
Tujuannya disini adalah mencapai “grand bargain” yang memuat isu-isu pokok yang memecah-belah kawasan, termasuk status warga Palestina dan Kurdi, dan menciptakan kondisi-kondisi yang menunjang kesepakatan politik yang efektif di Suriah dan Irak.
Pemecahan masalah-masalah yang selama berpuluh-puluh tidak teratasi tentu sukar dilakukan, tapi kita tidak bisa terus berdiam diri.
Lagipula kontroversi terbesar di Timur Tengah tidak bisa diselesaikan dengan pengucilan semata.
Sebagaimana dikemukakan Antonio Gramsci dalam kumpulan esainya Prison Notebooks, “Krisis tersebut pada pokoknya dikarenakan fakta bahwa pelaku usang tengah sekarat dan pelaku baru tidak bisa dilahirkan, dan persis di masa peralihan sementara inilah beragam gejala mengerikan mulai bermunculan.”
Singkatnya kalimat itu menggambarkan kondisi Timur Tengah.
Bantuan pada kawasan untuk membangun tatanan regional baru mengharuskan kesediaan semua pihak, baik kecil maupun besar, untuk berkompromi, sebagaimana sikap warga Lebanon.
Sebuah perang yang menyisakan penaklukan terhadap satu pihak sama dengan perang yang tidak ada habisnya.
A Eurasian Solution for Europe’s Crises
MOSCOW – More than 18 months after former President Viktor Yanukovych was driven from power (and into exile), the crisis in Ukraine is at a stalemate.
Crimea has been reabsorbed by Russia (in what many consider an annexation); much of eastern Ukraine is held by pro-Russia rebels; and relations between the West and Russia are more tense than at any time since the early days of the Cold War.
But can anyone claim an advantage?
Those who wanted to see Ukraine anchored in the West, or imagined that sanctions on Russia would incite regime change in the Kremlin, by palace coup or popular uprising, have seen their hopes dashed: President Vladimir Putin’s popularity is as high as ever.
In Russia, those who predicted the immediate collapse of Ukraine and the establishment in its eastern and southern provinces of a pro-Russian “Novorossia” have been similarly disappointed.
The tragedy is that the price of these illusions has been extraordinarily high in human terms – the ceasefire-defying death toll in eastern Ukraine has risen to more than 6,000 since April 2014 – and dangerously high in geostrategic terms as well.
It looks like both sides are ready to fight “to the last Ukrainian.”
As I have long argued, Russia was never likely to yield.
After being pushed to the wall by more than two decades of Western expansion – be it European Union or NATO enlargement – into a part of Europe that it considers vital to its national security, Russians believe that they have the moral high ground in defending their interests.
The danger now, with both sides trading accusations in an atmosphere of mutual distrust, is that the current stalemate will lead to a much deeper crisis between Russia and the West.
Both sides need to find a solution; yet, despite emerging victorious from the Cold War, the West seems not only to have lost the peace, but is on the verge of re-dividing Europe.
And this is occurring at a time when the entire continent, including Russia and many other Eurasian states, is facing the threat of Islamic extremism.
It is also happening at a time when both parts of Europe are in search of a new geopolitical, or even spiritual, identity.
While the EU wrestles with problems of migration and integration, Russia is drifting away from a Eurocentric cultural and economic course toward a Eurasian alternative.
And the United States – at least under President Barack Obama – has retreated into a kind of semi-isolation, leaving behind troubling zones of instability and unresolved crises.
So what will happen next?
With both Western and Eastern Europe beset by political conflict and economic stagnation, the five centuries of European global dominance are drawing to an end.
The reality now, following the end of the bipolar supremacy of the US and the Soviet Union and a brief “unipolar” phase following the Soviet Union’s collapse, is that we are now in a “multipolar” world.
This, too, may prove temporary as two new geopolitical macro-blocs gain strength in the twenty-first century.
One centers on the US and its ambition to conclude the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP).
The second macro-bloc is “Greater Eurasia,” featuring China, Russia, Kazakhstan, Iran, and possibly India.
Strong foundations for this project were established with the May 2015 agreement between Russia and China to coordinate the Russian-led Eurasian Economic Union (EEU) with President Xi Jinping’s “Silk Road” initiative, which aims to bind Central Asia’s economies and those farther to the west closer to China’s.
The question is whether this Greater Eurasia can help Europe find a way through its current security impasse.
Some in Europe will doubtless prefer to strengthen the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe – but the truth is that the OSCE, burdened by its Cold War history and its failure to secure the post-Cold War peace, is too tarnished to play a decisive role.
An alternative might be a dialogue between the EU and the EEU, but that would be tricky as the EEU pursues a closer relationship with China and its Silk Road allies.
A better approach would be to invite – sooner rather than later – China and Eurasian states to create over time a common economic space from Shanghai to Lisbon.
There is obvious potential for the EU to engage constructively with the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (created in 2001 by China, Russia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan, with India and Pakistan set to join next year).
The failure of the old framework demands an effort to create a new one, beginning with a dialogue on Eurasian development cooperation and security that involves China and both Eurasian and European countries.
None of this will render the OSCE or NATO redundant, and that should be no one’s goal.
What matters in resolving today’s conflicts, be they active or supposedly “frozen,” is to build a broader framework of cooperation and dialogue between the EU and what I term Greater Eurasia.
The remaining question in such a scenario concerns the role of the US.
Does it really want to remain in semi-isolation, hoping to be called back to center stage at some unlikely “unipolar moment” in the future?
Let us hope for an America ready to act as a responsible player in a fairer world.
Women and the World Economy
WASHINGTON, DC – In many countries, public debate about gender equality focuses mainly on women's access to top positions and high-powered career opportunities.
But the “glass ceiling" is only a small part of the issue.
The broader question is whether women have the same opportunities as men to participate in labor markets in the first place.
In other words, are women empowered to contribute fully to global economic growth and prosperity?
Unfortunately, the International Monetary Fund's latest study by its staff, “Women, Work, and the Economy," shows that, despite some improvements, progress toward leveling the playing field for women has stalled.
This is bad news for everyone, because it translates into lower economic growth – amounting to as much as 27% of per capita GDP in some countries.
Around the world, the number of women in the workforce remains far below that of men; only about half of working-age women are employed.
Women account for most unpaid work, and when they are paid, they are overrepresented in the informal sector and among the poor.
They continue to be paid less than men for the same jobs, even in OECD countries, where the average gender wage gap is about 16%.
And in many countries, distortions and discrimination in the labor market restrict women's chances of equal pay and rising to senior positions.
The potential gains from a larger female workforce are striking.
In Egypt, for example, if the number of female workers were raised to the same level as that of men, the country's GDP could grow by 34%.
In the United Arab Emirates, GDP would expand by 12%, in Japan by 9%, and in the United States by 5%.
According to a recent study based on data from the International Labor Organization, of the 865 million women worldwide who could contribute more fully to their economies, 812 million live in emerging and developing countries.
Raising women's labor-market participation rate boosts economic performance in a number of ways.
For example, higher incomes for women lead to higher household spending on educating girls – a key prerequisite for faster long-term growth.
Employment of women on an equal basis with men provides companies with a larger talent pool, potentially increasing creativity, innovation, and productivity.
And, in advanced countries, a larger female labor force can help to counteract the impact of a shrinking workforce and mitigate the costs of an aging population.
So what underlies the persistence of gaping inequality and stalled progress?
Legal, regulatory, and social discrimination against women in many countries still prevents them from seeking paid work in the formal sector.
As a result, women dominate the informal economy, where jobs are often transient and earnings are low.
In addition, tax systems and social-welfare programs in many countries are designed in ways that discourage women from working.
Against this background, government tax and spending policies, as well as labor-market regulation, should be reformed to help boost female employment.
For example, taxing individual rather than family income – which in many economies imposes a higher marginal tax on the second earner in households – would encourage women to seek employment.
Linking social-welfare benefits to participation in the workforce, training, or active labor-market programs also can help, as can affordable, high-quality childcare and greater opportunities for paternity and maternity leave.
In Brazil, for example, the share of women in the workforce has risen sharply over the past 20 years, from about 45% to almost 60%, owing in part to family-friendly policies.
These are just a few examples; far more can be done.
Women benefit when flexible work arrangements are introduced and the barriers between part-time and full-time work contracts are lowered, as the Netherlands has successfully done.
In developing countries, accessible water and better transportation systems in rural areas can help women manage their time better.
Establishing and upholding equal property and inheritance rights can increase women's access to credit and other productive resources, and creating greater awareness of legal rights in general will help reduce discrimination.
Some of these steps have been taken in recent years, but it is time to jumpstart the process.
We urge policymakers to take action and implement policies aimed at removing the obstacles that block women's participation in the workforce.
We at the IMF will do our part by enhancing our analysis of the economic effects of gender inequality and working with our member countries to enable women to contribute fully to global economic growth and prosperity.
Especially now, with the growth outlook uncertain in much of the world, policies that encourage more women to enter the workforce certainly can help.
Women are ready, willing, and able.
Take my word for it.
How to Keep a New Year’s Resolution
MELBOURNE – Did you make any New Year’s resolutions?
Perhaps you resolved to get fit, to lose weight, to save more money, or to drink less alcohol.
Or your resolution may have been more altruistic: to help those in need, or to reduce your carbon footprint.
But are you keeping your resolution?
We are not yet far into 2010, but studies show that fewer than half of those who make New Year’s resolutions manage to keep them for as long as one month.
What does this tell us about human nature, and our ability to live either prudently or ethically?
Part of the problem, of course, is that we make resolutions to do only things that we are not otherwise likely to do.
Only an anorexic would resolve to eat ice cream at least once a week, and only a workaholic would resolve to spend more time in front of the television.
So we use the occasion of the New Year to try to change behavior that may be the most difficult to change. That makes failure a distinct possibility.
Nevertheless, presumably we make resolutions because we have decided that it would be best to do whatever it is that we are resolving to do.
But if we have already made that decision, why don’t we just do it?
From Socrates onwards, that question has puzzled philosophers.
In the Protagoras, one of Plato’s dialogues, Socrates says that no one chooses what they know to be bad.
Hence choosing what is bad is a kind of error: people will do it only if they think that it is good.
If we can teach people what is best, Socrates and Plato seem to have thought, they will do it.
But that is a hard doctrine to swallow – much harder than eating the extra slice of cake that you know is not good for you.
Aristotle took a different view, one that fits better with our everyday experience of failing to do what we know to be best.
Our reason may tell us what is best to do, he thought, but in a particular moment our reason may be overwhelmed by emotion or desire.
Thus, the problem is not lack of knowledge, but the failure of our reason to master other, non-rational aspects of our nature.
That view is supported by recent scientific work showing that much of our behavior is based on very rapid, instinctive, emotionally based responses.
Although we are capable of deciding what to do on the basis of rational thought processes, such decisions often prove less powerful than our instinctive feelings in moving us to action.
What does this have to do with keeping resolutions?
Richard Holton, a professor of philosophy at MIT and the author of Willing, Wanting, Waiting, points out that a resolution is an attempt to overcome the problem of maintaining an intention when we expect that, at some future time, we will face inclinations contrary to our intention.
Right now, we want to lose weight and we are rationally convinced that this is more important than the pleasure we will get from that extra slice of cake.
But we anticipate that, faced with cake tomorrow, our desire for that rich chocolate texture will distort our reasoning so that we might convince ourselves that putting on just a little more weight doesn’t really matter all that much.
To prevent that, we seek to shore up our current intention to lose weight.
By making a solemn resolution and telling our family and close friends about it, we tilt the scales against succumbing to temptation.
If we fail to keep our resolution, we will have to admit that we are less in control of our behavior than we had hoped, thus losing face in our own eyes and in the eyes of others about whom we care.
This fits well with what psychologists have discovered about how we can improve the odds that we will keep our resolutions.
Richard Wiseman, a professor of psychology at the University of Hertfordshire, has tracked 5,000 people who made New Year’s resolutions. Only about one in ten managed to stick to what they had resolved.
In his recently released book 59 Seconds, Wiseman sets out the things that you can do to make success more likely:
·         Break your resolution into a series of small steps;
·         Tell your family and friends about your resolution, thus both gaining support and increasing the personal cost of failure;
·         Regularly remind yourself of the benefits of achieving your goal;