That would be hugely unpopular.
Too many countries have lost their economic sovereignty in IMF programs.
Besides, the IMF would almost surely tell Sri Lankan officials not that they’re spending too much, but that they’re taxing too little.
Fortunately, there are many taxes that the authorities can impose that would increase efficiency, growth, and equity.
Sri Lanka has abundant sunshine and wind; a carbon tax would raise considerable revenue, increase aggregate demand, move the country toward a green economy, and improve the balance of payments.
A progressive property tax would encourage more resources to go into productive investments, while reducing inequality and, again, boosting revenues substantially.
A tax on luxury goods, most of which are imported, would serve similar goals.
Some in the country, citing inadequate inflows of foreign direct investment (despite marked improvement in the business climate), argue for lower corporate taxes.
But such tax concessions are relatively ineffective in bringing in the kind of long-term investment that Sri Lanka needs; so to embrace them would needlessly eviscerate the already weak tax base.
Likewise, another frequently proposed strategy, public-private partnerships, may not be as beneficial as advertised.
Such partnerships usually entail the government bearing the risk, while the private sector takes the profits.
Typically, the implicit cost of capital obtained in this way is very high.
And while the private sector can, and frequently does, renege on its contractual obligations (through bankruptcy) – or force a renegotiation under the threat of reneging – the government cannot, especially when an international investment agreement is in place.
Twenty-first century development strategies need to be different.
They should be based on learning – learning to produce, learning to export, and learning to learn.
There can be leapfrogging: in Sri Lanka’s case, the benefits (apart from direct employment) to be gained from certain low-skilled manufacturing stages like garments may be limited.
Given its education levels, Sri Lanka may be able to move directly into more technologically advanced sectors, high-productivity organic farming, and higher-end tourism.
But if Sri Lanka pursues such activities, it will need to ensure good environmental policies for the entire island.
That will necessitate sound urban planning.
Sri Lanka is fortunate to have a low level of urbanization today; but this is likely to change in the next two decades.
This gives the country the opportunity to create model cities, based on the adequate provision of public services and sound public transport and attuned to the cost of carbon and climate change.
Sri Lanka, beautiful and ideally located in the Indian Ocean, is in a position to become an economic hub for the entire region – a financial center and a safe haven for investment in a geopolitically turbulent part of the world.
But this won’t happen by relying excessively on markets or underinvesting in public goods.
Fortunately, with peace and the emergence of representative political institutions, Sri Lanka today has a better opportunity than ever to make the right choices.
Winning Sri Lanka’s Peace
COLOMBO – Winning a war or revolution, only to lose the subsequent peace, is one of the grim political truths of our time.
In Iraq, a quick military victory over Saddam Hussein’s regime soon gave way to insurgency, civil war, and the rise of the murderous Islamic State.
In Libya, Syria, Yemen, and elsewhere, the hopes unleashed by the Arab Spring have similarly turned into an often-violent despair.
Today, a half-decade after the end of its 36-year civil war, Sri Lanka is at a crucial moment in its own efforts to consolidate peace and secure its long-term benefits.
Newly elected President Maithripala Sirisena and I, as prime minister, are determined to win that peace, and to help our country become what it always should have been: a prosperous Asian island of democracy, civility, and open society.
The risks of a failed peace are appearing only now, because, since 2009, when the war with the Tamil Tigers ended in an enormous spasm of violence, the government led by former President Mahinda Rajapaksa made only the most half-hearted of efforts to bring about reconciliation with our Tamil citizens.
Reconstruction of war-ravaged Tamil districts, as well as other parts of our society damaged by years of fighting and terrorism, has barely begun.
That neglect was part of a deliberate strategy by Rajapaksa, who saw keeping Sri Lanka on a semi-war footing, and our Tamil citizens aggrieved and alienated, as the most effective way to maintain his iron-fisted rule.
But, though his divide and rule strategy worked for a while, allowing him to concentrate an unprecedented amount of power in his own hands, it could not hide the truth of our social divisions and continuing impoverishment.
So, in the presidential election of this past January, Sirisena stunned the world by creating a winning coalition of Sri Lankans of all faiths and ethnicities who want to rebuild their democracy, not continue down the path of authoritarian rule.
In the months since Sirisena’s triumph, Sri Lankan democracy has been revived, and the hard work of building a durable domestic peace has begun.
We plan to quickly call a Parliamentary election, which will take place one year ahead of schedule, in order to replace Rajapaksa’s echo chamber with a fully functioning assembly, one that holds the government to account.
Moreover, presidential power is now exercised within the limits established by law, not according to the whims of one man.
Our judges no longer feel intimidated.
Our business leaders no longer fear shakedowns and takeovers by the president’s greedy family members and cronies.
As we liberate all of our citizens from fear, we will rebuild Sri Lanka as a free society.
The authoritarian model of capitalism that Rajapaksa introduced to our country, and that much of the world seems to be embracing nowadays, is not for us.
Of course, some of our neighbors are advising us to take a different path, to reform our economy and not worry too much about re-establishing political freedom.
Our experience with authoritarian rule, however, is that it undermines the goal of post-conflict reconciliation and reconstruction by its need to maintain our society’s divisions artificially.
The best way to avoid a relapse into conflict and arbitrary rule is to ensure that Sri Lanka’s leaders are held accountable through representative institutions.
But we cannot fully turn the page on authoritarian rule, restore the full range of democratic freedoms, and rebuild our economy in an inclusive way on our own.
Too much of our country’s wealth has been damaged by war, taken flight abroad, or been siphoned off through corruption.
We simply lack the resources to undertake the great task of reconstruction without assistance.
So we need the world’s democracies to stand with us and support us, lest our people become discouraged and be tempted by the autocratic forces waiting in the wings to return to power in the coming parliamentary election.
We need to demonstrate to our people that reconciliation, democracy, tolerance, and the rule of law constitute the only route to long-term peace and shared prosperity.
Sadly, the help that we have received so far is too little to enable my government to be as effective as it can and should be in rebuilding our country and resetting our strategic position in the world.
Still, there is reason for hope.
Though our political institutions need a thorough overhaul, I am proud to say that, despite Rajapaksa’s best efforts to corrupt and hollow them out, our victory was made possible because the election commission and court workers adhered to the law.
Equally important, when the votes were counted, Sri Lanka’s military leaders honored their oaths and bravely rebuffed Rajapaksa’s unconstitutional order to annul the election and maintain him in power.
These acts of civic heroism form a strong basis on which to refound Sri Lanka’s state and society.
With the world’s help, we will do just that.
Stabilizing the Stans
WASHINGTON, DC – Recent violence in Kazakhstan and Tajikistan, following civil strife in Kyrgyzstan in 2010, has intensified international concern about Central Asia’s security as the region becomes increasingly important for delivering NATO supplies to the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) in Afghanistan.
Central Asian countries allow NATO members and partners to transport supplies through their territory to support military forces in Afghanistan – an essential complement to the flow of supplies to the ISAF through Pakistan, which is vulnerable to tensions with the United States.
These countries have been logical partners for NATO in Afghanistan.
They share Western concerns about a revival of the Afghan Taliban and their potential support for extremist Islamist movements in other Central Asian countries.
Indeed, all five of the post-Soviet Central Asian countries – Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan – have been targeted by Muslim extremist organizations linked to the Taliban and al-Qaeda.
Moreover, Central Asian leaders are eager to maintain NATO’s presence in Eurasia as a way to balance China and Russia.
Although the region’s leaders generally enjoy good relations with both countries, they fear that Russian military and Chinese economic dominance could lead to the rise a Sino-Russian condominium at their expense.
All Central Asian countries suffer from pervasive corruption, acute income inequalities, political succession problems, and transnational criminal groups that cooperate more effectively than the region’s frequently feuding governments do.
Deteriorating public services contributed to the overthrow of Kyrgyzstan’s government, and could lead alienated citizens to support Islamist terrorists and other extremists.
Although Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, and other Central Asian countries have resumed rapid economic growth, much of their recent progress simply correlates with surging world oil and gas prices.
Growth could easily slow following the next energy-price slump or other external shock, such as proposals in Russia to limit employment and remittance opportunities for Central Asian workers there.
All five countries have yet to fully recover from the disintegration of Soviet infrastructure networks, and require urgent domestic and region-wide measures to strengthen their education, transportation, energy provision, health care, and other public services.
And their myriad interdependencies increase the risks of transnational threats, such as disease outbreaks, and resource-related confrontations.
Social disorder in Tunisia, Egypt, Libya, and other Arab countries has invariably led observers to regard Central Asia’s autocracies as potentially vulnerable to similar upheaval.
Some Central Asian leaders have been in power for many years, and only Kyrgyzstan, the most impoverished of the five, has developed a competitive multi-party political system.
Ensuring long-term stability will require poverty reduction, job creation, reduced income inequality, and the development of these countries’ human resources.
Private-sector activity will not expand without healthy national banks subject to rigorous financial discipline and greater supervisory autonomy.
Governments, facing pressure to increase spending, need to develop targeted social safety nets that protect their poorest people through cash or near-cash transfers.
The International Monetary Fund recommends additional reforms aimed at improving labor-market flexibility, strengthening national competitiveness through investment in transportation and telecommunications infrastructure, and diversification away from natural-resource exports.
Moreover, reducing trade barriers between these countries is essential for taking advantage of regional synergies and economies of scale.
Central Asia’s economies need greater access to their neighbors’ markets, energy, and transportation infrastructure.
Above all, these states need to create a more favorable climate for business and foreign investment through enhanced transparency, improved governance, and more effective political, economic, and social institutions.
Although some Central Asian countries have made progress, most still lag other emerging markets in accountability, rule of law, and reducing corruption.
Elsewhere in the post-Soviet world, Georgia’s success shows that determined governments can reduce even entrenched venality.
In the meantime, Central Asian countries need sustained donor support, because private investment flows have not recovered to levels that preceded the global financial crisis.
But foreign donors must exercise greater oversight and conditionality in their regional aid programs, as well as ensure that their assistance is better coordinated and integrated than in the past.
Central Asia’s hydrocarbon reserves, and its pivotal location, make it strategically important for many countries.
Russian energy managers count on the region’s oil and gas supplies to supplement stagnating domestic production.
Western governments aim to circumvent Russia’s pipelines and import some oil and gas directly.
China views the region’s resources as an essential complement to its more vulnerable maritime energy imports from Africa and the Persian Gulf, and has invested billions of dollars constructing overland pipelines.
All of this serves to increase the political uncertainty that threatens the region’s stability.
These countries urgently need structural reforms that can generate more inclusive economic growth and political institutions that channel, rather than suppress, legitimate popular demands.
Citizens who can help to shape their country’s public policies through elections and other legal political activities are less likely to resort to extra-constitutional means.
The End of Globalization?
BRUSSELS – China has just announced that last year, for the first time since it began opening up its economy to the world at the end of the 1970s, exports declined on an annual basis.
And that is not all; in value terms, global trade declined in 2015.
The obvious question is why.
While global trade also fell in 2009, the explanation was obvious: The world was experiencing a sharp contraction in GDP at the time.
Last year, however, the world economy grew by a respectable 3%.
Moreover, trade barriers have not risen significantly anywhere, and transport costs are falling, owing to the sharp decline in oil prices.
Tellingly, the so-called Baltic Dry Index, which measures the cost of chartering the large ships that carry most long-distance trade, has fallen to an all-time low.
This indicates that markets do not expect a recovery, meaning that the data from 2015 could herald a new age of slowing trade.
The obvious conclusion is that the once-irresistible forces of globalization are losing steam.
The situation in China is telling.
In recent decades, as it became the world’s leading trading economy, China transformed the global trading system.
Now the value of both imports and exports have fallen, though the former have declined more, owing to the collapse of global commodity prices.
In fact, commodity prices are the key to understanding trade trends over the last few decades.
When they were high, they drove increased trade – to the point that the share of trade to GDP rose – fueling hype about the inevitable progress of globalization.
But in 2012, commodity prices began to fall, soon bringing trade down with them.
Assume that one ton of steel and ten barrels of oil are needed to produce one car.
In 2002-2003, that bundle of raw materials was worth around $800, or about 5% of the value of a $16,000 car.
This implies that, during the early 2000s, industrial countries had to export five cars for every one hundred bundles of these raw materials they imported.
By 2012-2013, the value of the raw materials needed for a car increased to about $2,000, about 10% of the cost of the same car (prices of cars had increased by much less).
Industrial countries thus had to export double, namely ten cars for the same amount of imports of raw materials.
Clearly, there is a direct link between the trends in trade and commodity prices (see figure).
Given that this connection affects all manufactured goods that require raw material inputs, it should be no surprise that, as commodity prices have declined, so has global trade.
One might argue that this example concerns only the value of trade, and that in recent decades, the growth of trade by volume also has exceeded that of real GDP growth.
But commodity prices affect trade volumes as well, because higher commodity prices force industrial countries to increase the volume of their exports (ten cars instead of five, in the example provided), in order to cover the costs of the same volume of raw material imports.
Because food, fuels, and raw materials comprise about a quarter of global trade, when their prices fluctuate – especially as strongly as they have in recent decades – aggregate trade figures are obviously affected.
Given the massive drop in commodity prices lately, there is little need to seek any other explanation for the recent slowdown in trade.
This is not to say that globalization and trade are one and the same.
Globalization entails many other features, including the surge in cross-border financial transactions and tourism, data exchange, and other economic activities.
In fact, these other interconnections have fed back into trade, as they have enabled the emergence of global value chains, whereby different steps of the production process occur in different countries.
But this phenomenon has been overestimated.
According to the World Trade Organization, the foreign value-added contained in exports is only around 15% for most large economies, such as the United States and the European Union.
In other words, global value chains have little impact on these larger trading economies.
China is the only exception.
Its position as an assembly platform for the world’s products meant that it imported most of the highest value-added elements of those goods.
But as the country’s industrial structure matures – Chinese-assembled iPhones now contain more Chinese-made parts than they did just a few years ago – it will move closer to the US and the EU in value-added terms, not the other way around.
This is yet another reason why trade might diminish in importance.
When something is widely hyped, there is nearly always a real reason for it.
Most economies are more open today than they were a generation ago.
But it is now becoming clear that the perception that globalization is some overwhelming and inexorable force largely reflected the side effects of the last decade’s commodity boom.
If prices remain low, as seems likely, the next decade might well see global trade stagnate, as the trade pattern “rebalances” from emerging economies to the established industrial powers.
The Great Income Stagnation
BERKELEY – Nowadays, the inequality debate often focuses on the disproportionate accumulation of income and wealth by a very small share of households in the United States and other advanced economies.
Less noticed – but just as corrosive – is the trend of falling or stagnating incomes for the majority of households.
For much of the post-World War II period, until the 2000s, strong GDP and employment growth in the advanced economies meant that almost all households experienced rising incomes, both before and after taxes and transfers.
As a result, generation after generation grew up expecting to be better off than their parents.
But, according to new research from the McKinsey Global Institute, that expectation may no longer be warranted.
During the last decade, income growth came to an abrupt halt for most households in the developed countries, with those headed by single women or comprising young, less educated workers among the hardest hit.
Real income from wages and capital for households in the same part of the income distribution was lower in 2014 than in 2005 for about two-thirds of households in 25 advanced economies – more than 500 million people. From 1993 to 2005, by contrast, less than 2% of households in these economies had flat or falling incomes.
Increases in government transfers and lower tax rates reduced the effect of stagnating or falling market incomes on disposable incomes.
Nonetheless, 20-25% of households faced flat or falling disposable incomes from 2005 to 2014, compared to less than 2% in the preceding 12 years.
A major culprit behind this reversal is the deep recession and slow recovery following the 2008 economic crisis in the advanced economies.
From 1993 to 2005, GDP growth contributed about 18 percentage points to annual median household income growth, on average, in the US and Europe; that figure plunged to just four percentage points from 2005 to 2014.
But the post-crisis drop in growth is far from the only problem.
(If it were, the last decade could be just an anomaly.)
Longer-term factors like weak investment, decelerating labor-force growth, and a sharp slowdown in productivity growth have reduced income growth for the median household in most advanced countries relative to the 1993-2005 period.
Demographic shifts – including changing family structure, low fertility rates, and population aging – have led to reductions both in the overall size of households and in the number of working-age earners per household.
And labor-market shifts – driven by technological change, the globalization of low- and medium-skill jobs, and the growing prevalence of part-time, temporary employment – have caused the wage share of national income to decline and the distribution of that income among households to become increasingly uneven.
None of these trends is going to be reversed anytime soon.
On the contrary, some are likely to strengthen.
McKinsey’s research confirms the role of such long-term factors in undermining incomes for the majority of households.
It shows that most households’ real market incomes remained flat or fell, even though aggregate growth remained positive in the 2005-2014 period.
In the US, in particular, the ability of labor to protect its share of national income, and of lower- and middle-income households to protect their share of the wage pool, eroded substantially.
As a result, real growth in median disposable income slowed by nine percentage points from 1993 to 2005, and by another seven percentage points from 2005 to 2014.
Sweden, where median households received a larger share of the gains from output growth in the 2005-2014 period, has bucked this negative trend.
In response to the growth slowdown of the last decade, Sweden’s government worked with employers and unions to reduce working hours and preserve jobs.
Thanks to these interventions, market incomes fell or were flat for only 20% of households.
And generous net transfers meant that disposable incomes increased for almost all households.
To be sure, the US also intervened after the crisis, implementing a fiscal stimulus package in 2009 that, along with other transfers, raised median disposable income growth by the equivalent of five percentage points.
A four-point decline in median market income thus became a one-percentage-point gain in median disposable income.
But that did not change the fact that, from 2005 to the end of 2013, market incomes declined for 81% of US households.
Similarly, recent research by Berkeley’s Emmanuel Saez shows that real market income for the bottom 99% in the US grew in both 2014 and 2015 at rates not seen since 1999.
Nonetheless, by the end of 2015, real market incomes for that group had recovered only about two-thirds of the losses borne during the 2007-2009 recession.
In other words, while disposable income did not fall in either Sweden or the US, the US approach was to compensate for a decline in market incomes, which Sweden had managed to head off.
The consequences of such failures are far-reaching.
Stagnating or falling real incomes do not just act as a brake on consumption demand and GDP growth; they also fuel social and political discontent, as citizens lose confidence in existing economic structures.
MGI surveys in France, the United Kingdom, and the US have found that people whose incomes are not growing, and who do not anticipate an improvement, tend to view trade and immigration much more negatively than those who are experiencing or foresee gains.
The Brexit vote in the UK and bipartisan opposition to trade agreements in the US are clear signs of this.
Recent debate about income inequality in the US and other developed countries has focused on the rapid surge in incomes for the few.
But stagnating or falling incomes for the many add a different dimension to the debate – and demand different types of solutions that emphasize wage growth for the majority of the income distribution.
With most households continuing to face stagnating or falling incomes – and with younger generations thus on track to be poorer than their parents – such solutions are urgently needed.
Stalin Lives
The legacy of dead dictators from vanquished totalitarian regimes should no longer be ambivalent.
Only Germany’s lunatic fringe dares to commemorate Hitler.
Not even the pathetic remnant of the Khmer Rouge celebrates Pol Pot’s memory.
Yet, as Russia approaches the 60th anniversary of its victory over Nazi Germany, marking Stalin’s role in that victory is proving to be damnably awkward.
Indeed, earlier this year, Moscow was roiled by debates about whether or not to build a statue to the dead dictator.
In large bookstores across Russia, a huge number of political biographies and histories portray Stalin and his era.
Some of these, based on newly opened archival material, are critical.
But the majority of these books and authors portray Stalin in a positive light.
Indeed, when Russians are asked to list the most important people of the twentieth century, Stalin is still tied for first place – with Lenin.
Some see the hand of what remains of the Communist Party behind this.
The Party has moved far from its old Leninist ideals, as it seeks support nowadays through a witch’s brew of Russian nationalism, hyper-orthodox Christianity, and “state Stalinism.”
Of course, towns and cities are no longer named for Stalin.
In the late 1950’s, countless Stalin monuments were demolished.
Yet many symbols of Stalin’s rule have been carefully preserved, including the national anthem he personally approved in 1944.
There are seven high-rises in Moscow that Russians still call “Stalin’s vysotki.”
Next to Lenin’s tomb is Stalin’s grave and monument, where heaps of fresh flowers are always to be seen on the anniversaries of his birth, his death, and the victory over Hitler.
To be sure, Khrushchev’s uncovering of Stalin’s crimes and cult of personality in 1956 made a huge impression both in the Soviet Union and abroad.
But many people in the political elite and military circles were enraged by Khrushchev’s revelations.
This incited many attempts to rehabilitate Stalin, especially during the 20 years of Leonid Brezhnev’s rule, which we now call the period of “stagnation.”
Mikhail Gorbachev continued to uncover the crimes of Stalinism, shedding light on dark pages that Khrushchev lacked the courage to open to public view.
During Boris Yeltsin’s presidency, this criticism became even stronger.
But demolishing the ideological, political and economic structures of the past is not enough to renew society.
Yeltsin understood this.
Eight years ago the remains of the Romanov family were publicly buried in the Peter-Paul castle in Saint Petersburg.
Nicolas II gained the status of saintly martyr.
The reburial of the Romanovs, however, didn’t touch the public’s emotions for long.
Over 50% of Russia’s population, including teachers, scientists, doctors, and military personnel, have seen their quality of life fall since communism’s demise.
No surprise, then, that they are nostalgic for the past, including Stalin.
People of the older generation do, of course, remember the hardships of the 1930’s and 1940’s.
But most Russians do not view the entire Soviet period as some sort of black hole.
They see a time of hardship, yes, but also of great achievements – in economic development, science, culture, education, and defense of the motherland during the war.
Today, Russians listen to old Soviet songs and watch Soviet-era movies.
May 1 (Labor Day), and November 7 (the anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution) remain much more meaningful than newly installed postcommunist holidays, such as June 12 (Independence Day).
In fact, for many Russians, the declaration of Russia’s independence in 1990 represents a low point in the country’s history, a year of anarchy and disarray.
What can Russians be proud of in the 15 years of postcommunism?
Shock therapy that ruined the economy and gave away the country’s wealth to private but rarely clean hands?
Neither democracy nor markets are seen by most Russians as absolute values, because they have failed to deliver either prosperity or security.
What victories has Russia’s army achieved in these years?
It could not even subdue Chechnya, a small republic within the Russian federation.
The Russian federation remains a collection of multinational states in need of some unifying idea of statehood and nationality to keep them together.
The easiest and the most understandable idea for Russians to cling to is patriotism.
Only two events have the power to mobilize and energize this sense of patriotism: the October revolution of 1917 and the Great Patriotic War of 1941-1945, which turned the USSR and Russia into a great world power.
The victory over fascism, because so many of its participants remain active, is a living event in our memory.
Victory Day this year will likely be the last “round” anniversary of 1945 that Russia can commemorate while many thousands of veterans are alive and able to participate.
So the Kremlin is preparing to mark the event on a scale that Russia has never seen before.
Needless to say, Stalin’s name will be mentioned countless times during these celebrations.
But it would be a mistake to see this public recognition of Stalin as a real yearning for every aspect of the system he created.
Instead, acknowledging Stalin is a way for Russians to recall a time of great deeds and perhaps even greater sacrifices.
Patriotism everywhere is always based on such notions.
State Aggression and Judicial Passivity
WASHINGTON, DC – When the member states of the International Criminal Court gather later this month in Kampala, Uganda, for a conference to review the ICC’s work, one issue on the agenda will be whether to amend the Court’s statute to allow it to exercise jurisdiction over the crime of aggression.
That issue was deferred when the ICC Statute was adopted in 1998.
Based on my experience as an international prosecutor, and speaking as a strong supporter of the ICC, I believe that it would be a serious mistake to add the crime of aggression to the Court’s docket now. The issue should be deferred again.
By any measure, the ICC has gotten off to a strong start in generating global support and demonstrating its potential to address the problem of official impunity for serious international crimes.
But it also has encountered charges of politicization, and it is still learning, as an institution, how to exercise effectively its jurisdiction over genocide, crimes against humanity, and war crimes.
The experience of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), which also addressed genocide, crimes against humanity, and war crimes, should sound a cautionary note for ICC members as they debate whether to add the crime of aggression to their jurisdiction.
One of the greatest challenges I faced as the ICTY prosecutor was convincing the Serbian public that the court was not a politically motivated conspiracy against Serbia.
This challenge would have been immensely greater – perhaps impossible – if the Tribunal’s jurisdiction had included the crime of aggression.
Indeed, including aggression would have required me to investigate and potentially prosecute the decision to go to war – inherently a profoundly political decision.
Prosecuting that decision would have inflamed suspicions of an anti-Serbian plot; choosing not to prosecute would have incited countervailing charges that the Tribunal was not fulfilling its mandate.
Such a debate would have diverted attention and energy from the imperative of fairly and effectively providing justice and accountability for the grave crimes then being committed against civilians in the former Yugoslavia.
Now is not the time for the ICC to risk embroiling itself in similar controversy.
The issues that would arise from dealing with allegations of aggression would give ammunition to the ICC’s critics who claim that it is a highly politicized institution.
Moreover, as a young institution, the Court still has much work to do in effectively investigating and prosecuting the crimes over which it already exercises jurisdiction.
Cooperation from member states and the relationship between peace and justice are just two vital issues that require sustained attention at Kampala and beyond.
Grappling with the crime of aggression also threatens to open rifts among members of the Court and other Court supporters.
Despite years of complex negotiations, deep disagreements persist over key issues related to amending the statute on aggression, such as state consent and how cases would be initiated.
It is unrealistic to expect consensus to be reached on these issues in the days remaining before the Kampala meeting.
And attempting to force a decision in the absence of consensus would vitiate one of the strongest assets the Court has had – the solidarity of its members in the face of efforts to undermine the project of an effective and independent international mechanism for justice and accountability.
The ICC review conference in Kampala will not be the last opportunity to amend the statute. The Court’s members can choose to do so at any time in the future.
They should wait at least until the Court is more established institutionally and a broader consensus emerges on the relevant issues.
State of the Art, or Art of the State?
September is traditionally the time when opera companies and orchestras return to their home cities from Aix, Salzburg, Tanglewood, and countless other summer festivals.
This rentrée is also marked (on both sides of the Atlantic) by the return of worries about how classical music is financed.
American symphonic life is Euro-centric in almost every respect except for its funding.
Whereas Americans depend upon tax-deductible private donations and box office receipts to finance live classical music, Europeans prefer direct government support for the arts.
Ironically, while arts advocates in the United States have long argued for adoption of the “European model” – which has produced a rich and varied artistic life for Europeans –Europe is being forced to change its system of support to one that depends more on private money and the box office.
Unfortunately, Europe’s system of direct government financial support is falling victim to Europe’s slow economic growth and budget deficits.
Particularly for those countries that have adopted the euro, government spending on the arts will be constrained for some time by the requirement that fiscal deficits be kept to 3% of GDP.
The resulting pressure on Europe’s performing arts institutions is causing concern at various different levels.
Traditionally, Europe’s social democracies have preferred allocating scarce goods and services like concerts and operas by queues (financed by huge subsidies to keep prices low) rather than by willingness to pay.
Now, this will change.
Performing arts advocates in Europe point to the US where, among other things, music directors of even major orchestras are now expected to fully participate in fundraising activities and be active in the local community on the orchestras behalf.
The same thing, they fear, will happen in Europe.
Some conductors, not wanting to carry a tin cup as they wave their batons, have rejected important posts in the US for this reason, feeling that it would interfere with their art.
Daniel Barenboim is rumored to have left the Chicago Symphony Orchestra in part because he objected to the fundraising demands that were being made of him.
But US experience shows that getting artistic leaders like orchestra music directors to participate in fundraising need not be bad for the artistic side of the job.
Michael Tilson Thomas in San Francisco, for example, has combined effective fundraising and artistic leadership to propel the San Francisco Symphony to the top rank of US orchestras.
It also should be reassuring to Europeans who are concerned that greater reliance on private money necessarily means conservative programming that the San Francisco Symphony has one of the most adventuresome repertoires in the US.
If the audience has progressive tastes, private money and innovative programming are entirely compatible.
A corollary is that public money makes it possible for adventuresome programming even if audience tastes run to the conservative side.
This is one reason performing artists in Europe like public money – it liberates them from a diet of only Beethoven and Mozart.
Moreover, the audience may come to appreciate an adventuresome repertoire the more it becomes exposed to it.
Of course, with reduced public spending on the performing arts, not only will there be greater reliance on private money, but ticket prices will have to rise as well.
Some argue that this is a bad thing, because they prefer queuing to the price system and fear that higher prices will compromise future audiences by excluding young people.
But cheap prices for the performing arts do not solve the thorny problem of access for youth.
First, youth may not take advantage of cheap tickets to the extent that they are not interested in going to hear live classical music at any price.
Second, even if they do want to go, they may not be able to get seats, which often are not available because subscriptions stay in the same hands year after year.
What good are cheap prices, which serve mainly to subsidize the same subscription holders, if there are no seats?
If a taste for classical music is to be subsidized, some more targeted subsidies should be preferred to cheap prices.
The best way to bring youth to the performing arts is through education.
Because American orchestras can’t count on schools or government to provide the basic music education necessary to ensure a continuing audience for classical music, some orchestras are doing it themselves with private money.
In San Francisco, for example, the Symphony runs a $23 million privately funded project – called Keeping Score – that includes a national public television series, radio shows, interactive music learning, and school music programs.
This type of innovative program is relevant for European as well as American orchestras.
The problem of youth and access to the performing arts exists on both sides of the Atlantic.
So does poor music education in state schools.
If orchestras don’t look after their own futures, they may well not have one to look after.
States of Risk
LONDON – The Great Recession of 2008-2009 was triggered by excessive debt accumulation and leverage on the part of households, financial institutions, and even the corporate sector in many advanced economies.
While there is much talk about de-leveraging as the crisis wanes, the reality is that private-sector debt ratios have stabilized at very high levels.
By contrast, as a consequence of fiscal stimulus and socialization of part of the private sector’s losses, there is now a massive re-leveraging of the public sector.
Deficits in excess of 10% of GDP can be found in many advanced economies, and debt-to-GDP ratios are expected to rise sharply – in some cases doubling in the next few years.
As Carmen Reinhart and Ken Rogoff’s new book This Time is Different demonstrates, such balance-sheet crises have historically led to economic recoveries that are slow, anemic, and below-trend for many years.
Sovereign-debt problems are another strong possibility, given the massive re-leveraging of the public sector.
In countries that cannot issue debt in their own currency (traditionally emerging-market economies), or that issue debt in their own currency but cannot independently print money (as in the euro zone), unsustainable fiscal deficits often lead to a credit crisis, a sovereign default, or other coercive form of public-debt restructuring.
In countries that borrow in their own currency and can monetize the public debt, a sovereign debt crisis is unlikely, but monetization of fiscal deficits can eventually lead to high inflation.
And inflation is – like default – a capital levy on holders of public debt, as it reduces the real value of nominal liabilities at fixed interest rates.
Thus, the recent problems faced by Greece are only the tip of a sovereign-debt iceberg in many advanced economies (and a smaller number of emerging markets).
Bond-market vigilantes already have taken aim at Greece, Spain, Portugal, the United Kingdom, Ireland, and Iceland, pushing government bond yields higher.
Eventually they may take aim at other countries – even Japan and the United States – where fiscal policy is on an unsustainable path.
In most advanced economies, aging populations – a serious problem in Europe and Japan –exacerbate the problem of fiscal sustainability, as falling population levels increase the burden of unfunded public-sector liabilities, particularly social-security and health-care systems.
Low or negative population growth also implies lower potential economic growth and therefore worse debt-to-GDP dynamics and increasingly grave doubts about the sustainability of public-sector debt.
The dilemma is that, whereas fiscal consolidation is necessary to prevent an unsustainable increase in the spread on sovereign bonds, the short-run effects of raising taxes and cutting government spending tend to be contractionary.
This, too, complicates the public-debt dynamics and impedes the restoration of public-debt sustainability.
Indeed, this was the trap faced by Argentina in 1998-2001, when needed fiscal contraction exacerbated recession and eventually led to default.
In countries like the euro-zone members, a loss of external competitiveness, caused by tight monetary policy and a strong currency, erosion of long-term comparative advantage relative to emerging markets, and wage growth in excess of productivity growth, impose further constraints on the resumption of growth.
If growth does not recover, the fiscal problems will worsen while making it more politically difficult to enact the painful reforms needed to restore competitiveness.
A vicious circle of public-finance deficits, current-account gaps, worsening external-debt dynamics, and stagnating growth can then set in.
Eventually, this can lead to default on euro-zone members’ public and foreign debt, as well as exit from the monetary union by fragile economies unable to adjust and reform fast enough.
Provision of liquidity by an international lender of last resort – the European Central Bank, the International Monetary Fund, or even a new European Monetary Fund – could prevent an illiquidity problem from turning into an insolvency problem.
But if a country is effectively insolvent rather than just illiquid, such “bailouts” cannot prevent eventual default and devaluation (or exit from a monetary union) because the international lender of last resort eventually will stop financing an unsustainable debt dynamic, as occurred Argentina (and in Russia in 1998).
Cleaning up high private-sector debt and lowering public-debt ratios by growth alone is particularly hard if a balance-sheet crisis leads to an anemic recovery.
And reducing debt ratios by saving more leads to the paradox of thrift: too fast an increase in savings deepens the recession and makes debt ratios even worse.
At the end of the day, resolving private-sector leverage problems by fully socializing private losses and re-leveraging the public sector is risky.
At best, taxes will eventually be raised and spending cut, with a negative effect on growth; at worst, the outcome may be direct capital levies (default) or indirect ones (inflation).
Unsustainable private-debt problems must be resolved by defaults, debt reductions, and conversion of debt into equity.
If, instead, private debts are excessively socialized, the advanced economies will face a grim future: serious sustainability problems with their public, private, and foreign debt, together with crippled prospects for economic growth.
Stay the Course in North Korea
NEW YORK – Barack Obama’s election was historic on many levels.
Between now and his inauguration on January 20, he will need to hone his policies.
Much of the early focus of the Obama administration will undoubtedly be on the economy and the war in Iraq.
But it is critically important that the new administration pay serious attention to other foreign-policy issues right from the start.
American relations with North Korea, and the ongoing six-party talks, certainly belong at the top of the list.
Here, the United States must not only stay the course, but also build on the efforts of the last few years.
The risks of changing course cannot be overstated.
Not long after President George W. Bush came into office, his administration took a hard-line stance against the North Korean regime, calling for a review of the Clinton administration’s policy, and eventually tagging North Korea as a member of the “axis of evil.”
While North Korea had done much over the preceding years to warrant a more critical eye, in retrospect these policies set back prospects for peace and stability in the region.
After all, North Korea’s reaction to the Bush administration’s policies was to drop out of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, restart its nuclear program, and further develop its weapons production.
Indeed, it is believed that North Korea during this time increased its stockpile of nuclear weapons.
Moreover, while there is plenty of blame to go around on all sides, America’s change of policy stalled for years the potential for progress in relations between the six parties.
It is only more recently, under the watch of US Assistant Secretary of State Christopher Hill, that the Bush administration’s policy toward North Korea has become more pragmatic.
After North Korea threatened to restart its nuclear facility at Yongbyon, the Bush administration in early October removed the country from its terrorism blacklist.
In exchange, North Korea promised to allow access to its facilities for inspections, while also dropping its opposition to Japanese and South Korean participation in inspections.
At this point, the road forward is fraught with peril and uncertainty.
As a presidential candidate, Obama spoke of the need for “sustained, direct, and aggressive diplomacy” to deal with North Korea.
This formulation seems to suggest an understanding of the often-lengthy process of dealing with its regime, but it remains unclear how far Obama might be willing to go to secure America’s interests. 
At the same time, Obama’s advocacy of direct diplomacy caused concern during the campaign, with some questioning whether this meant that he would meet a leader such as Kim Jong-il without preconditions.
While it is difficult to predict how far he might move in this direction, it would be politically difficult for Obama to meet the North Korean leader in such a manner, something that he is likely to learn early in his presidency.
The on-again, off-again talks on North Korea can fluster even the most experienced of negotiators.
That being the case, Obama needs to build a strong team of experienced Korea hands to push the agenda forward.
While trying to build on the limited progress of recent years, they will have to confront a number of additional obstacles in building a cohesive and sustainable peace on the Korean Peninsula.
North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-il, is reportedly ill.
What this means for continuing the negotiations remains to be seen.
Relations between North and South Korea have taken a turn for the worse this year, following the election of South Korean President Lee Myung-bak, who has taken a more hard-line approach toward the North.
And then there is Japan, a member of the six-party talks and a steadfast US ally, which was angered by the recent delisting of North Korea, because the North has yet to satisfy fully Japanese inquiries into the abduction of its citizens by North Korean agents decades ago.
These are just a few of the issues that will complicate US relations with North Korea and the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.
But America must stay the course. As Obama’s new administration takes over, the choice is between making some progress, as has occurred in recent years, and facing a nuclear North Korea.
The choice is now Obama’s.
The future of peace and stability in Northeast Asia hangs in the balance.
The Resource Revolution
SAN FRANCISCO – The world is on the threshold of the biggest business opportunity in a century, rivaling both the first Industrial Revolution, which transformed labor productivity, and the second,which mobilized unprecedented amounts of capital to build cities.
The new revolution centers on the third primary factor of production: natural resources.
The revolution arrives not a moment too soon.
After centuries of wasteful production and consumption practices – facilitated by ever-lower commodity prices that have declined by an average of 0.7% a year in peacetime over the past century – the world is in dire need of technologies that enable producers and consumers alike to do more with less.
Making matters more urgent, resource extraction is becoming increasingly expensive, as production shifts to locations that present difficult logistical – and often political – challenges.
Meanwhile, levels of air, water, and soil pollution are rising rapidly in China, India, Indonesia, Brazil, and other emerging economies.
In order to achieve their growth objectives, companies must fundamentally rethink the way they integrate technology and use natural resources in their productive processes.
Over the last two decades, companies have had to improve their performance by only 1-2% annually to achieve an increase in profits, and many have focused almost exclusively on capital and labor productivity.
As a result, even the most successful managers lack the skills to cope with today’s resource-constrained markets.
In this environment, companies cannot compete on the basis of twentieth-century (if not nineteenth-century) technologies and practices.
There is much more value in pioneering new, higher-productivity business models, based on five key changes:
•        Substituting costly, toxic, or scarce materials with cheaper, more efficient, higher-performance, and more abundant alternatives.
•        Embedding software in resource-intensive industries to optimize their production processes or products.
•        “Virtualizing” processes – that is, moving them out of the physical world.
•        Embracing circularity, which entails finding value in products after their initial use.
•        Eliminating waste.
The good news is that progress is already being made.
America’s burgeoning shale oil and gas industry, for example, has transformed its entire energy sector by revolutionizing resource extraction.
Today, drilling is not only a dirty process characterized by heavy equipment, toxic mud, and sulfurous fumes.
With the integration of information technology and hydraulic-fracturing (“fracking”), the central players are experts using joysticks and high-resolution screens to maneuver drill bits through geological formations.
Individual companies have pioneered change in other sectors.
Cree and Philips have developed LED lighting technologies that offer 23 times longer life, measurably better color, easier control, and 85% lower operating costs than traditional incandescent bulbs.
Similarly, OPower has used behavioral science and cloud-based software to motivate consumers to cut their energy consumption by 2-4% annually – a change that is beginning to reshape power markets.
And DIRTT (Doing it Right This Time) is building office interiors at as little as half the traditional cost through software-enabled virtualization, waste elimination, and optimization of the construction process.
These innovations exemplify the massive potential for businesses to improve resource productivity.
Indeed, using tools provided by information technology, biology, and nanotechnology, the world can triple growth in resource productivity, raising it to 3 to 5% annually over the next two decades.
But this cannot occur without strong and forward-thinking leadership, which, unfortunately, is sorely lacking in today’s business environment.
Indeed, managers today seem consistently surprised by the pace of change and thus find themselves behind the curve.
For example, many automobile manufacturers ignored the shift toward electric and hybrid vehicles – though sales were increasing at a rate of more than 50% annually – until their sales of conventional cars plummeted in key markets.
Likewise, many are shocked that the cost of solar power is increasingly undercutting that of nuclear, coal, and gas technologies, even though this shift is in line with a trend that began in 1970.
Companies should devote more attention to developments in related industries as well.
Automakers must monitor the consumer electronics industry to track advances in battery technology.
And power companies need to analyze the development of semiconductors to anticipate the likely drop in demand for electricity, after more than a century of growth.
To win in the resource revolution, companies must balance technological, physical, and human-capital inputs, while adopting a more intelligent approach to organizational design and talent management.
Whether the primary imperative is spotlighting data and analytics or forming new partnerships in other sectors to gain access to specialized expertise, aggressive innovation, and ambitious efficiency goals are critical.
Forward-thinking entrepreneurs are already reaping the benefits of this fast-moving revolution.
Those who fail to adapt will fail to survive – and soon.
Stem Cell Obscurantism
On May 19, a group of Korean scientists published in the magazine Science the results of research that for the first time isolated human embryonic stem cell lines specifically tailored to match the DNA of male and female patients of various ages.
The next day, British scientists at Newcastle University announced that they had successfully produced a cloned human embryo using donated eggs and genetic material from stem cells.
Both breakthroughs constitute a stunning advance in stem cell research.
Embryonic stem cells are pluripotent, meaning that they have the ability to develop into any type of human tissue.
This carries great promise, in particular, for sufferers of spinal cord injuries and diseases.
Years of studies, and the passionate pleas of patients worldwide, are finally opening the way to a technique – somatic cell nuclear transfer, also known as “therapeutic cloning” – that may bring about epochal changes for the health of us all.
No less remarkable than the latest discoveries was the timing of their announcement, which came on the eve of a vote in the United States Congress to expand federal funding for research on embryonic stem cells created during in vitro fertilization (but never implanted in a womb).
Both announcements also came a month ahead of an Italian referendum – the largest popular consultation on the matter ever held anywhere – that seeks to change a law adopted last year that prohibits both in vitro fertilization and stem cell research.
The debate over therapeutic cloning is, of course, hardly limited to the US and Italy.
The UN General Assembly ended a two-year debate on the matter in March 2005 by approving a non-binding declaration that calls upon states to “prohibit all forms of human cloning inasmuch as they are incompatible with human dignity and the protection of human life.”
The declaration passed with 84 votes in favor, 34 against, and 37 abstentions.
Last summer, in response to the UN decision, 78 Nobel laureates signed a petition discouraging the adoption of an international ban on human cloning, because “it would condemn hundreds of millions of individuals afflicted by debilitating diseases to a life deprived of hope.”
The petition, initiated by Luca Coscioni Association, an NGO devoted to the promotion of the freedom of scientific research, called on governments to reject prohibitions in favor of “rules that protect the right to life and health by ensuring freedom of research, choice, and knowledge.”
There is, of course, widespread consensus against cloning devoted to the reproduction of human beings, and most of the world has outlawed the technique.
So this is not the issue.
The Nobelists’ point is that, as far as therapeutic cloning is concerned, rather than attempting global prohibition, it would be much wiser, and possibly more effective, to promote an international regulatory regime through ample legalization of stem cell research.
But, as the UN declaration – and the long debate surrounding its adoption – illustrate, scientific arguments are not at the center of national and international debates, which revolve around questions concerning the beginning of “human life.”
As we know, science and religion offer different answers.
Some Christian theologians, for example, believe that life begins at conception, while scientists maintain that nerve and brain cells emerge around 14 days after conception.
Scientists generally agree that research should be done within that period – and always allowed on spare embryos that will never be implanted.
In such a crucially important debate, the quality of the information offered is paramount, and it is no coincidence that those who oppose stem cell research prefer to avoid a public debate that would force them to confront scientific arguments.
They know all too well that whenever a secular and scientific debate has been permitted and encouraged, the general public – regardless of nationality and religious or political affiliation – has overwhelmingly expressed itself in favor of stem cell research.
We saw a clear example of this last November in California, where 60% of the electorate voted in favor of Proposition 71 on state funding for stem cell research.
Similarly, the latest polls in Italy suggest that the overwhelming majority of those who intend to vote are in favor of therapeutic cloning.
However, a referendum in Italy requires 50% turnout to validate the outcome.
Revealingly, the Vatican, knowing that it cannot win, is currently campaigning strongly for mass abstention.
More than the advancement of science is at stake here.
The Vatican’s stance on the Italian vote is emblematic of a broader threat to the very foundation of modern liberal democracy: the constitutional separation of Church and State.
In an era of growing concern about religious fundamentalism, liberal democratic institutions must reaffirm their role in protecting individual rights for all.
And, in order to enable the full enjoyment of our freedoms – be they of worship or scientific research – the state must reassert its secular nature.
We need mechanisms to address violations of moral or religious beliefs, but we cannot place restrictions on individuals’ ability to contribute to the public welfare.
Patenting Immaculate Conception?
HAARLEM – In 1899, the German-American scientist Jacques Loeb engineered the asexual reproduction of sea urchins through artificial parthenogenesis (the manipulation of egg cells to enable embryonic development without fertilization).
His speculation about complete parthenogenesis in mammals – not to mention his use of the term “immaculate conception” to describe the process – prompted public concern about whether scientists should be “playing God.”
With the International Stem Cell Corporation (ISCC) seeking patents in Europe for a technology that produces stem cell lines from the parthenogenetic activation of an unfertilized ovum, the time has come to answer that question.
The question is how.
Problems with the patenting of parthenogenetically activated cells are nothing new.
Such cells resemble human embryos, which, under European Union patent law, cannot be patented.
Following a ruling by the European Court of Justice (ECJ) in 2011 that those cells constitute human embryos, patent applications for parthenogenetic cells in the United Kingdom and other countries have been delayed and even rejected.
(The ISCC does hold patents for its stem cells in the United States.)
But on December 18, 2014, the ECJ reversed its 2011 ruling, determining that an unfertilized human ovum stimulated by parthenogenesis “does not constitute a human embryo, if it does not in itself have the inherent capacity of developing into a human being.”
The ECJ based its ruling on written (unpublished) observations submitted by EU member states.
The UK High Court then remitted the application to the UK Intellectual Property Office, which granted the patent in October.
The ECJ did not rule explicitly that parthenogenesis of human ova is patentable.
It did not examine whether parthenogenesis constituted “a process for the cloning of a human being,” which would not be patentable under EU law.
And it did not consider whether the activated egg cell – a “parthenote” – counts as a germ cell, which also cannot be patented in the EU (though it did pose the question to the applicants at the hearing).
The national court and the patent office did not, as far as we can establish from their websites, examine these exclusions from patentability either.
Nor did they consider that parthenotes develop until the blastocyst embryonic stage, harboring the capacity for full attachment.
But even if the ISCC’s patent applications are not excluded on these grounds, there is another potential roadblock for applicants: Under European law, an invention can be patented only if its commercial exploitation is deemed not to controvert “ordre public” or morality.
As Loeb pointed out more than 100 years ago, when it comes to inventions involving bodily materials and biological processes, moral questions are difficult to answer.
They should not, it now seems clear, be left to the patent office or even the courts.
In fact, the European Patent Office (EPO) is not particularly committed to assessing the moral implications of the patents it grants; in its view, “ordre public” would be violated only in the extreme case of a truly outrageous invention.
As a result, while the application procedure allows for third parties to submit to the patent office their observations on the claimed invention’s patentability, it is unlikely to spur a genuine assessment of an application’s moral implications.
An opposing third party would have to shoulder the entire burden of proof, while the patent office avoided taking any real action, in order to avoid “presumptuous” interference in the public debate.
As for the courts, the recent case highlighted the absence of a procedural mechanism to ensure consideration of a patent’s morality.
So who should answer questions about an invention’s implications for “ordre public”?
The answer is straightforward: the public itself.
Inclusive, transparent, and effective public debate about these potentially consequential issues demands, first and foremost, that citizens are well informed.
After all, when it comes to technological advances relating to biological materials and processes, this is only the beginning.
On December 24, 2014, just six days after the ECJ’s ruling, scientists published the results of their efforts to make rudimentary egg and sperm cells starting from a person’s skin cells.
There are also pending patent applications for a novel form of genetic manipulation – CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene editing – which a team of Chinese researchers has already attempted to use to edit the genome of a human embryo.
Notably, under the ECJ’s “inherent capacity” definition, the embryos used in that experiment would not constitute a human embryo, and thus would not be excluded from patentability.
As the International Summit on Human Gene Editing recently stated, it would be irresponsible to proceed with a clinical use of germline editing without broad societal agreement.
The same should go for patenting it.
If, based on an understanding of the processes and their implications, a majority of a country’s citizens find them to controvert morality, democratic principles would demand a government response.
In line with the EU’s 1998 biotech directive, debates should occur on a country-by-country basis.
Already, European states have made conflicting decisions on these topics.
In Switzerland, a substantial majority of voters decided in 2004 to ratify the Stem Cell Research Act, which regulates how human embryonic stem cells are produced and used in research.
Swiss stem-cell law is now more restrictive than that of, say, the UK, but less restrictive than that of Germany.
Specifically, Swiss law prohibits the development of parthenotes, the derivation of stem cells from parthenotes, and the use of such stem cells.
It also excludes from patentability processes for parthenogenesis using human germ cells, as well as parthenotes created by such processes.
These prohibitions are based not just on the need to protect human embryos, but also on concerns relating to the availability of donated egg cells, on which parthenogenesis depends – an issue that neither the courts nor the patent office have considered.
A country-by-country, public-driven approach to assessing the morality of inventions involving biological materials and processes would reinforce both EU law and democratic principles.
As recent rulings have made clear, the current system is far from adequate when it comes to upholding ordre public.
A Floor for the Renminbi
BEIJING – The People’s Bank of China (PBOC) faces a dilemma.
After nearly a decade of trying to curb expectations of continued currency appreciation (spurred by China’s current- and capital-account surpluses), it finally succeeded in the first quarter of 2014, when its forceful market intervention drove down the renminbi’s exchange rate to discourage carry trades.
Now, however, the PBOC is facing an even more difficult challenge, as seemingly irreversible depreciation expectations undermine economic stability at a moment when China can least afford additional uncertainty.
Because the 2014 intervention coincided with the weakening of China’s economic fundamentals, it ultimately amounted to pushing on an opening door.
Instead of providing credible resistance to upward pressure on the exchange rate, as intended, it triggered an outright reversal, with depreciation expectations beginning to creep into foreign-exchange markets.
Thus, in the second quarter of 2014, China recorded a capital-account deficit for the first time in decades.
And by the first quarter of 2015, that deficit more than offset the current-account surplus, meaning that China registered its first international balance-of-payments deficit in recent memory.
Nonetheless, given the size of China’s foreign-exchange reserves, markets remained confident that the PBOC could fix the renminbi exchange rate at whatever level it wanted, regardless of China’s external balance-of-payments position.
As a result, depreciation expectations were not strong.
Then, last August, the PBOC lowered the renminbi central parity rate by 1.9%, perhaps in response to an International Monetary Fund report encouraging China to align the parity rate more closely with the market rate.
The move roiled markets and intensified depreciation expectations.
The PBOC quickly intervened to avert a panic by halting the depreciation, but it was too late: expectations of further renminbi weakening became firmly established in the market.
As these expectations drive an increasing amount of capital out of China, thereby intensifying depreciation pressure, the PBOC continues to intervene in the foreign-exchange market, often in unpredictable ways (in order to discourage speculation).
As a result, the PBOC has de facto adopted a crawling-peg exchange-rate regime.
While a crawling-peg system can eliminate short-term depreciation expectations, thereby reducing the associated capital outflows, it cannot eliminate depreciation expectations in the more distant future, let alone reduce capital outflows unrelated to depreciation expectations.
In fact, the crawling peg encourages some kinds of capital outflows, such as carry trade unwinding, the dollarization of household accounts, and withdrawal by portfolio investors.
Meanwhile, China’s economic fundamentals continue to worsen.
All of this has forced the PBOC to spend a huge amount of China’s foreign-exchange reserves – more than $500 billion in 2015 alone – to keep the level of renminbi depreciation vis-à-vis the US dollar within 5%.
At this rate, those hard-earned foreign-exchange reserves will soon be exhausted.
That is not an option.
Recognizing the challenge at hand, the PBOC has been allowing the renminbi to fall, slowly but surely, since November.
But while this “stealth devaluation” worked for a while, market participants decided at the beginning of this year to dump their renminbi again.
The PBOC now has three options: it can stop all interventions and let the renminbi float; link it to a basket of currencies; or peg it tightly to the US dollar, as it did during the Asian financial crisis of 1997.
So far, however, the PBOC has offered no indication of its plans, beyond the continuation of its current renminbi-sustaining policy.
In my opinion, the PBOC should reinforce the Chinese government’s market-oriented reform plans and allow the renminbi to float.
China is still running a large current-account surplus and a long-term capital-account surplus, and it has not fully liberalized its capital account; so the chances are good that the renminbi would not fall too far or for too long.
Moreover, even if the renminbi did experience a double-digit depreciation, China would not be thrust into financial crisis.
After all, the country’s stock of corporate external debt is not too large; the currency mismatch within Chinese banks is small; and inflation is just above 1%.
To bolster such financial buffers, China must enforce existing capital controls much more strictly.
Nonetheless, there remains the possibility of a market panic, with all of the uncertainty that such an episode implies.
Given this, the PBOC could engineer a transition during which the renminbi is pegged to a basket of currencies, with an adjustable central parity rate and a wide fluctuation band of 7.5% or even 15%.
It could choose not to announce the (very wide) fluctuation band, so that investors, judging that the renminbi had fallen far enough, might begin to purchase the currency before it actually reached the floor, thereby stabilizing the exchange rate before the PBOC was forced to spend more foreign-exchange reserves.
This year will be another difficult one for China.
But the situation is far from dire.
With the right policy mix, China should be able to stabilize its currency and foreign-reserve position, and return to a sustainable growth path.
The Return of the Renminbi Rant
NEW HAVEN – China’s currency, the renminbi, has been weakening in recent months, resurrecting familiar charges of manipulation, competitive devaluation, and beggar-thy-neighbor mercantilism.
In mid-April, the US Treasury expressed “particularly serious concerns” over this development, underscoring what has long been one of the most contentious economic-policy issues between the United States and China.
This is a timeworn debate – politically inspired and grounded in bad economics – that does a serious disservice to both sides by diverting attention from far more important issues affecting the US-China economic relationship.
Taken to its extreme, America’s accusations risk pushing the world’s two largest economies down the slippery slope of trade frictions, protectionism, or something even worse.
First, the facts: Since hitting its high watermark on January 14, 2014, the renminbi has depreciated by 3.4% relative to the US dollar through April 25.
This follows a cumulative appreciation of 37% since July 21, 2005, when China dropped its dollar peg and shifted its currency regime to a so-called “managed float.”
Relative to where it started nearly nine years ago, the renminbi is still up 32.5%.
Over the same period, there has been a dramatic adjustment of China’s international balance-of-payments position.
The current-account surplus – the most telling symptom of an undervalued currency – has narrowed from a record 10.1% of GDP in 2007 to just 2.1% in 2013.