Conflict prevention and human-rights protection are primarily the responsibility of states, and it is increasingly recognized that businesses must play their part as well.
Indeed, we are now at a critical point in what has become a global movement to stop irresponsible corporate practices from being viewed as business as usual.
Since 2010, companies working in conflict areas have had a global standard at their disposal.
The OECD offers guidance on how to source minerals responsibly.
Developed in close collaboration with the industry, it offers “detailed recommendations to help companies respect human rights and avoid contributing to conflict through their mineral purchasing decisions and practices.”
The United Nations has also endorsed similar requirements.
In 2011, the UN published a set of Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights, according to which companies whose “operating contexts pose risks of severe human rights impacts should report formally on how they address them.”
And yet, with the exception of a few progressive industry leaders, few companies have responded to this voluntary guidance.
In 2013, Dutch researchers surveyed 186 companies listed on European stock exchanges that make use of conflict minerals.
More than 80% made no mention on their Web sites of what they had done to avoid funding conflict or human rights abuses.
Similarly, the European Commission’s Directorate General for Trade found that only 7% of 153 EU companies refer to a due-diligence policy for conflict minerals in their annual reports or on their Web sites.
The United States has already taken the next logical step.
The Securities and Exchange Commission requires companies that use tantalum, tin, gold or tungsten in their products to investigate these raw materials’ origin, and to mitigate risks in their supply chains in line with the OECD Guidance if they are found to originate in certain conflict-affected or high-risk areas.
The 12 member countries of Africa’s International Conference on the Great Lakes Region have committed to similar mandatory due-diligence requirements.
That is as it should be.
Responsible sourcing is a duty, not a choice.
And here, the EU is lagging behind.
In March, the European Commission proposed a plan under which disclosure would continue to be voluntary, meaning that the minerals that enter the EU would not be subject to mandatory checks.
The proposal, furthermore, focuses exclusively on raw ores and metals, and excludes products that contain the relevant minerals, such as mobile phones, vehicles, and medical equipment.
The proposal is now being reviewed by the European Parliament and the European Council.
It is crucial that both institutions seize this opportunity to strengthen the EU’s response by making disclosure and compliance mandatory and extending coverage to include finished and semi-finished products.
Better regulating the trade in these resources will not itself bring peace to conflict-affected areas.
But funding conflict and human-rights abuses is not an acceptable cost of doing business.
Confronting Fear
WASHINGTON, DC – Even as the squeeze in interbank lending has started to ease after the rescue of financial systems across the advanced countries, falling economic indicators have sent stock markets tumbling.
Pressures on emerging-market countries, which were once thought by many to have “decoupled” from the rest of the world, have intensified as foreign loans are called in and assets sold off.
With fear gripping consumers, companies, and countries worldwide, talk has turned from a moderate advanced-country recession to a major world depression.
A sense of despondency has set in that nothing can be done to stop it.
What is going on?
Were the measures taken two weeks ago to shore up the financial system simply wrong?
Absolutely not.
The provision of liquidity, the recapitalization of banks, more uniform deposit insurance across the advanced countries – these were all correct and necessary measures.
But they were only the first installment on what needs to be done.
In the advanced countries, the fall in asset values and, more generally, fear of what comes next has shattered consumer and business confidence. Consumption is dropping, and companies are cutting investment.
The financial crisis has created a sharp fall in demand, what economists call a “Keynesian recession.”
To help confidence revive, there is no alternative but to use macroeconomic tools to boost demand and sustain output.
Monetary policy can be used in countries where interest rates remain high, but its effectiveness in a credit squeeze is likely to be limited.
Fiscal policy must, therefore, play a central role.
Fiscal expansion is always risky, as it adds to debt and raises dangers later.
But, given where we are, the benefits exceed the costs in countries with sustainable debt.
But the recent prosperity of many of these countries has come from access to global capital.
A sudden stop to such flows is a severe blow and raises special challenges that cannot be solved by these countries alone.
So the advanced countries must be ready to provide the required financing, and to do so on an unprecedented scale.
The alternative is the prospect of widespread debt default, banking controls, and protectionism – an outcome that would set back these countries, and the global economy as a whole, for years to come.
The IMF has the wherewithal to commit up to $250 billion.
We have set in motion the internal procedures and facilities that will allow us to provide resources quickly, with conditions limited to the core crisis-policy response at hand.
In addition, the Fund is working on a new liquidity line to provide resources immediately to strongly performing emerging markets with sound policies and fundamentals.
This should give confidence to investors.
But, given the scale of capital flows, I am also urging the governments and central banks of the advanced countries to provide parallel financing to the IMF’s crisis-response programs.
I also am convinced of the need to find ways to bring into play the resources of countries with large reserves.
The Fund will play its part, but all these actions are needed to reinforce the credibility of the coordinated global response to the crisis.
We must also think ahead – especially in regard to low-income countries in Africa.
Because of their limited participation in international financial markets, these countries have, so far, been somewhat shielded from the storm.
But it is an uneasy calm that probably will not last.
Many low-income countries will suffer from the decline in commodity prices.
Others, including those that were becoming the new frontier in emerging markets, may see their access to foreign capital dry up.
They, too, will need help from the international community.
Lending by the IMF and global development banks, and the maintenance of donor aid at current levels, will be essential if we are to avoid new human tragedies.
The dynamics of fear are potentially catastrophic, but these dynamics can be broken.
Whatever the problems in the financial system, the massive improvements over the years in technology, productivity, and social progress – the real fundamentals – are a genuine testament to the power of globalization as a force for good.
It may be too late to avoid a recession in the advanced countries and a slowdown in emerging and low-income countries. But it is not too late to avoid a global depression.
Confronting the Populists
SAINT-MARTIN-LAGUÉPIE – Here’s a confession: I don’t lie in bed at night missing mainstream politics.
Instead, I am spending a week at my house in southwest France, walking around the countryside.
The early autumn sun is warm on my back, the trees are starting to change color, and local farmers are preparing for this year’s grape harvest.
What’s not to like?
Back in the political world, the answer is quite a lot.
On the left and right – few mainstream leaders are having such a good year.
In fact, one must search for any notable achievements.
In France, President François Hollande looks like damaged goods as he prepares for next spring’s election.
The French economy benefits from high productivity potential and a well-educated work force, but trade unionists and other members of Hollande’s Socialist Party are blocking measures that would restore strong growth.
Meanwhile, former President Nicolas Sarkozy and former Prime Minister Alain Juppé are vying for control of the center-right opposition in order to challenge Hollande and head off Marine Le Pen of the far-right National Front.
Opinion polls indicate that there will be a second-round run-off between Le Pen and either Sarkozy or Juppé, which means that those on the left will have to choose a conventional right-wing candidate if they want to beat Le Pen.
She is unlikely to win; but, then again, that’s what most people said about the United Kingdom’s vote in June to leave the European Union and Donald Trump’s campaign in the United States for the Republican Party’s presidential nomination.
In Germany, Chancellor Angela Merkel – Europe’s foremost politician – has attracted voters’ ire, owing to her principled policy to welcome refugees.
The opposition Left Party is barely credible as an electoral force; but the far-right Alternative for Germany has been exploiting anti-immigrant sentiments and chipping away at the support of the government parties (Merkel’s Christian Democrats and the center-left Social Democrats) in subnational elections, including in Merkel’s home state of Mecklenburg-West Pomerania.
In Italy, Prime Minister Matteo Renzi is flailing as he tries to kick a flatlining economy into gear.
The center-right opposition, a shifting firmament led by former Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, is lost in the political wilderness, and his main opponents are now the populist Five Star Movement and regional politicians who offer little more than disdain for the national political establishment.
In Spain, Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy of the center-right People’s Party is struggling to form a government after the opposition Spanish Socialist Workers’ Party refused to support him, while Catalan separatists continue to beat the drum for independence.
In the UK, where older, alienated working- and middle-class voters (mainly in England) pushed through Brexit, the new prime minister, Theresa May, is fighting to hold her party together.
Some cabinet members are pushing for a complete break from Europe – a so-called hard Brexit – while others press more sensibly for a middle-ground approach to maintain trade with the biggest market for British goods and services.
As these examples indicate, populists are resurgent across Europe – even in unlikely places like Sweden and the Netherlands.
Now that Trump would feel quite at home almost anywhere on the continent, it is imperative to respond to the pan-Western anti-establishment rage that he represents.
To be sure, slow economic growth in the years since the 2008 global financial crisis has sapped voters’ enthusiasm for traditional parties fighting over the middle ground.
Governing parties on the left and the right have generally agreed on issues such as international cooperation, free trade, public spending, and tax cuts.
While Ronald Reagan, today’s Republican patron saint, was a big-government spender, Democrat Bill Clinton cut welfare entitlements and balanced the budget.
Today’s populists, however, demand simple – indeed, simplistic – answers outside the scope of mainstream consensus.
They blame globalization for damaging their livelihoods and economic prospects, and they seek an enemy – some “other” – whom they can vilify for the uncertainty and downward mobility they have experienced.
The populist worldview admits no shades of gray.
There can be no middle way; on the contrary, searching for consensus or accommodation is tantamount to treachery.
Through bluster and demagogy, populist politicians are turning back the clock to a pre-empirical world, in which superstition and obscurantism were apparently better for everyone.
Of course, populists’ halcyon past is a dreamland.
But how do we deal with the reality that so many voters prefer fiction to fact?
We certainly should not give up on democracy, or side with those in the West who, like Trump, admire and seek to emulate Russian President Vladimir Putin’s demi-tyrant vision.
Populists must be confronted head-on.
Their shoddy arguments must be rebuked point by point, and their fugues of outrage must be met with calm, rational deliberation.
It is no less important to address the causes of economic alienation, which means, for starters, providing better public services for disadvantaged communities, and investing in education, technology, and high-wage, high-skill jobs.
If we run away from populists, or try to copy their tactics and arguments, we will further undermine the social contract underpinning Western democracies.
Mainstream political leaders face a challenging road ahead.
They will need to adopt a fighting spirit and signal confidence in their cause, rather than succumbing to complacency or resigning themselves to a long-drawn-out retreat.
This is a battle that must be won.
Confused by the Veil
On July 23 millions of Turks will wake up into a new, post-elections Turkey.
What will happen is hard to foresee.
Turkish politics is full of surprises that only foreigners find surprising .
Today, and this seems to surprise most people outside Turkey, it is women, not men, who are at the heart of political debate.
Indeed, in these elections the number of women candidates from all parties has visibly increased and so has female political overall activism.
This election is taking place because when the AKP party, the conservative party now in power, designated Foreign Minister Abdullah Gul as its candidate for president, the country’s secular elite cringed.
Gul was not the issue; the issue was his wife.
Had Gul been chosen as president, Turkey would have had its first headscarf wearing First Lady.
Gul’s wife’s headscarf was interpreted as the symbol of darker changes to come.
If the First Lady wears a headscarf, maintained the secular-minded elite, the whole secular system could be undermined.
What followed was unprecedented political turbulence, including mass demonstrations on a scale never seen before.
There was feverish talk of a possible military takeover, and the army again proved itself to be a seminal political actor.
Through all this, Turkish women were at the forefront.
In particular, Turkey’s Westernized, modernized, secular women seemed determined to show their opposition to the existence of “the other” Turkish woman.
Gender issues have always been vital in the Turkish nation-state.
Kemalism (the beliefs associated with the founder of modern Turkey, Musfafa Kemal Atutűrk) is unique among all Muslim reform movements in that it transformed not only the public sphere, but also the private sphere – the domain of mothers, wives, sisters, daughters.
In the 1920’s and 1930’s – the years of Atutűrk’s rule &#45;&#45; the “new Turkish women” became the icon of the modern, secular regime.
The difference between what the French call laicité and secularism is more than a linguistic nuance for Turkey, which adopted its Kemalist system not long after France entrenched its secular republic.
Religious symbols and references have to a large extent been removed from the public sphere here, and religion is thought to be a private matter.
Many Turks who go to the US for the first time are puzzled, indeed, by its religiosity .
It comes as a surprise to see religious symbols and statements at the entrance of public buildings, on money, inside the courtroom.
But in Turkey the headscarf is not seen as a trivial symbol.
Eighty years after the republic’s founding the trouble with headscarved women is that they do not fit into the picture of the ideal modern Turkish woman.
At the first glance there seems to be a huge mental, cultural and political gap dividing Turkey’s women.
Yet if we look closer this gap becomes illusory.
In everyday life the two types of Turkish women are more mixed than they are usually assumed to be.
It is not uncommon for one sister to wear a headscarf while another does not, or a mother to wear a headscarf while her daughters do not.
Sometimes among two best friends, one is covered and one is not.
Any stroll along a crowded Istanbul street will show covered and uncovered women effortlessly &#45;&#45; almost naturally &#45;&#45; mixing.
Why then can’t a similar sisterhood be achieved in the realm of politics?
A recent opinion poll shows that around 60% of women in Turkey cover their heads outside their homes.
But does this mean 60% wear the veil?
Does it mean that they all support Islamic fundamentalism?
The answer to both questions is negative.
As a novelist, when writing in Turkish I can encounter more than eight different words to stand for the headscarf. Yemeni, türban, eşarp, çarşaf,… Each is different.
Different women wear the headscarf for different reasons.
Some wear it out of habit or for traditional reasons rather than religious ones.
For others the motivation is political.
Not all women wear a headscarf because of religious conservatism. And not all headscarved women are “ignorant” or “repressed.”
But this complexity is lost due to the concept of “the veil.”
If one makes no distinctions and disregards nuances one will end up believing that 60% Turkish women wear the veil.
The same poll, however, revealed that the percent of women who cover their heads fully and for more political than traditional reasons is no more than 11%.
Paying attention to nuances makes a huge difference– the difference between saying that 60% women wear the veil and saying that 11% do.
This complexity is lost not only on Western observers but also on Turkey’s elite.
Because ideological clashes here seem to center around women’s bodies and clothes perhaps it is time we stopped asking “how should an ideal Turkish woman look?” and start asking “should there be an ideal woman Turkish woman at all?”
After all, pluralism is not only a political principle, it is one a free society applies to individuals – male and female – as well.
We in Turkey have been tackling the question of whether Islam can coexist with Western democracy for more than 150 years.
After150 years of Westernization and modernization, the answer we have come up with is a definite “yes.”
Turkey is a complicated country, with multiple dilemmas.
Its women both heal and intensify its tensions.
Congo’s Infinite War
HARARE – Some time ago, the head of the United Nations refugee agency, Antonio Guterres, said of the Democratic Republic of Congo: “Nobody in the outside world feels threatened, and so the international community is not really paying attention.”
Not anymore: currently, Congo’s eastern province of North Kivu is in the headlines almost every day.
Last August, fighting to the north of the provincial capital Goma flared up again, provoking a major humanitarian crisis that has no end in sight.
Like the eight-year civil war (in what was then known as Zaire) that nominally ended in 2002, the current fighting involves many different local groups: not only the Congolese government forces, which oppose the insurgents loyal to the Tutsi General Laurent Nkunda, but also the Rwandan Hutu rebels who were responsible for the genocide in Rwanda in the 1990’s and a jungle force known as the “Mai-Mai” militias.
“It is a basket of crabs,” one Congolese friend told me.
As always, the main victims are civilians caught in the crossfire.
The renewed fighting, coming eight months after a promising peace initiative known as the “Goma Agreement,” means more civilian deaths and little chance of normality returning to the eastern part of Congo.
Yet, even at times when fighting is less intense Congo suffers from the indirect effects of the war.
A mortality survey conducted by the International Rescue Committee (IRC) and released earlier this year demonstrates that this conflict is the world’s most deadly crisis since World War II: an estimated 5.4 million people have died as a consequence of the war and its lingering effects in the last decade.
Today, a quarter of a million people are on the run, almost half of them on territory under rebel control and with almost no access to aid.
They need food and shelter, clean water and latrines, medical care, and education.
Women and girls need protection from sexual violence, which flares up when families are forcibly displaced.
It may sound strange, but from the point of view of a humanitarian relief agency, it is not important on whose territory civilians in need are, as long as there is access to them.
Aid workers who have been in the country for a dozen years, especially from groups like my own IRC, must work with all parties to the conflict because civilians in need are everywhere.
But aid agencies need access.
The UN peacekeeping force in Congo, MONUC, has a mandate from the Security Council for full intervention in order to provide protection to the civilian population.
So when aid workers are stopped at gunpoint and cannot talk their way through, humanitarian agencies naturally turn to MONUC to guarantee access.
Humanitarian workers are not military strategists, so they cannot judge what kind and what size of deployment of peacekeepers is adequate.
But the aid agencies that work on the ground have first-hand experience of the impact of peacekeepers’ presence, and we have the authority to say that protection of aid workers can be dangerously inadequate.
Indeed, at the height of the fighting for control of the northern town of Rutshuru last October, the IRC teams that were stationed there decided to evacuate temporarily because the risk was simply too great.
Together with other aid agencies, IRC staff formed a convoy and MONUC offered armed vehicles to protect it.
But when armed men stopped the convoy on the road, the Uruguayan peacekeepers from MONUC simply turned around and vanished, leaving the aid workers to their fate.
What followed were many hours of harassment, humiliation, threats with live hand grenades, shots fired at the feet of one of our colleagues, and looting and ransacking of the IRC premises.
Finally, another group of MONUC peacekeepers – this time from India – came to the rescue and helped evacuate the aid workers on helicopters.
Protecting the humanitarian effort now underway is essential to the sheer physical survival of the Congolese displaced in North Kivu, but the only lasting solution is a ceasefire followed by a peace treaty, possibly along the lines of the “Goma agreement.”
Paradoxically, the current fighting and the masses of displaced persons that it produced have helped to draw attention to the crisis.
This moment must be seized not only to beef up MONUC, but, more importantly, to use all existing leverage with the combatants and the governments that back them to get all the parties to return to the negotiating table.
The televised tragedy, and the shortcomings that can be observed close up, can and must be stopped, lest – as often happens with Congo – the crisis disappears from the front pages, while the killing continues unseen.
The New Health-Care Continuum
DAVOS – The health-care industry has changed dramatically over the past few decades.
Research and development have given us astonishing new treatments, powerful diagnostics, and a rapidly growing wealth of knowledge.
Medical specializations and providers have proliferated.
Governments and insurers have become powerful players.
And the patient has become a vocal and proactive consumer, ready to search for better options, even if that means going abroad.
But, even as health care has become more effective, it has also become more complex and costly.
Growing and aging populations are putting increased pressure on health-care systems that are already buckling under the burden of chronic diseases like cancer and diabetes.
The Institute of Medicine estimates that in the United States alone, some $750 billion a year – about 30% of total health-care spending – is “wasted on unnecessary services, excessive administrative costs, fraud, and other problems.”
If we are to ensure that health care remains affordable and widely available for future generations, we need to rethink radically how we provide and manage it.
Crucially, health care needs to become connected.
It should become effortless for medical professionals to share relevant data with colleagues around the world.
Medical devices and systems in hospitals should be able to combine multiple sources of information.
A new generation of consumer technology, such as wearable health sensors, could automatically alert doctors to potential medical problems before they become acute episodes.
Though such innovations must confront challenges like system interoperability and the need to protect patients’ privacy, the Internet’s integration into the travel and banking industries shows what is possible.
Indeed, connected health care is already becoming a reality.
Philips, for example, has developed a technology that allows doctors to share medical data from a prostate cancer biopsy with colleagues around the world.
In the past, the biopsy could be shared only physically, which made diagnosing the exact type of prostate cancer difficult.
As a result, surgeons and patients may have opted for invasive surgery just to be safe.
Now, teams of doctors worldwide have an additional tool, enabling them to work together toward more accurate diagnoses and enhanced treatment plans for individual patients.
The entire patient experience will be transformed, with better prevention, quicker diagnoses, shorter hospital stays, and longer independent living becoming the norm.
If patients return to the hospital, they will bring useful data, captured by wearable devices, about the evolution of their vital signs.
They can continue to track themselves as their treatments progress, and their data can be integrated with medical records to provide a long-term view of their health, rather than an episodic snapshot of the day they visit a doctor.
With access to professional coaching and support around the clock, patients will feel more empowered to manage their own physical wellbeing.
Connected health care can also provide access to life-saving treatment to more people, particularly in developing countries and rural areas.
In Indonesia, which has one of the world’s highest infant mortality rates, midwives in the rural area of Medan collect medical data from pregnant women using a mobile app.
The data are analyzed by obstetricians and gynecologists elsewhere, allowing women at high risk of illness to be identified and treated early.
In Uganda, midwives in village health centers send compressed ultrasound scans to remote specialists, nearly doubling the number of newborns that can be delivered by a skilled health worker.
More broadly, connected health technology will cause professional health care and consumer markets to converge.
This will create a continuum that starts with a focus on healthy living and prevention, empowers consumers to take control of their own health, and enables countries to improve their citizens’ overall wellbeing.
The continuum will then move on to definitive diagnostics and minimally invasive treatments, optimized for quality and cost, and, finally, to recovery and home care, shifting medical care as soon as possible to more comfortable and cost-effective non-hospital settings.
Governments, insurers, medical professionals, patients, and caregivers need to work together to ensure that the transition to this health continuum is well managed, so that access can be expanded, outcomes can be improved, and productivity can be enhanced.
Together, we have the opportunity to improve the lives of billions of people, create healthier societies, save costs, and boost economic growth.
Conquering Europe’s Debt Mountain
BERLIN – The International Monetary Fund estimates that the crisis-induced net cost of financial-sector support provided by G-20 countries in 2009 amounted to 1.7% of GDP ($905 billion), while discretionary fiscal stimulus amounted to 2% of GDP in both 2009 and 2010.
Interest payments, which consume more than 10% of Germany’s federal budget, will grow along with the mounting debt burden – and even faster if interest rates rise.
Yet the financial crisis and the ensuing recession go only so far towards explaining these high levels of indebtedness.
The truth is that many European and G-20 countries have lived far beyond their means – including Germany, despite its reputation as a paragon of fiscal rectitude.
Even in good times, governments have for too long been spending more than they received.
Perhaps worse, some also spent more than they could easily repay, given their economies’ declining long-term growth potential because of the aging of their populations.
Such profligacy has led to levels of debt that will become unsustainable if we do not act.
This is why Germany decided in 2009 to enshrine strict fiscal rules in its constitution.
The Schuldenbremse, or “debt brake,” requires the federal government to run a structural deficit of no more than 0.35% of GDP by 2016, while Germany’s Länder will be banned from running structural deficits at all as of 2020.
The current federal government will certainly abide by these rules, which implies reducing the structural deficit to approximately €10 billion by 2016 – a reduction of about €7 billion a year.
Welfare benefits account for more than half of Germany’s federal spending this year.
So there is little choice but to cut welfare spending, at least moderately.
But this sort of fiscal consolidation can be achieved only if a majority perceives it as being socially equitable.
Recipients of social and corporate welfare alike, as well as civil servants, must share the sacrifice.
Thus, German corporations will have to contribute to fiscal consolidation through reductions in subsidies and additional taxes on major energy companies, airlines, and financial institutions.
Similarly, civil servants must forego promised pay increases, and the government is looking for annual savings in the federal armed forces of up to €3 billion through structural reforms.
Germany’s binding fiscal rules set a positive example for other eurozone countries.
But all eurozone governments need to demonstrate their own commitment to fiscal consolidation in order to restore the confidence of markets – and of their own citizens.
Recent studies show that once a government’s debt burden reaches a threshold perceived to be unsustainable, more debt will only stunt, not stimulate, economic growth.
Greece’s debt crisis was a clear warning that European policymakers must not allow public debt to pile up indefinitely.
The EU was right to react decisively to ensure the euro’s stability by providing short-term assistance to Greece and establishing the European Financial Stabilization Mechanism.
But, while the EFSF is a necessary step towards restoring confidence, the Greek crisis has revealed structural weaknesses of the European Monetary Union’s fiscal-policy framework that cannot, and should not, be fixed by routinely throwing other countries’ money at the problem.
Indeed, I consider the EFSF to be a stopgap measure while we remedy the fundamental shortcomings of the Stability and Growth Pact, whose fiscal rules lack both substantive and formal bite.
This is why we need a more effective crisis-prevention and crisis-resolution framework for the eurozone, one that strengthens the Pact’s preventive and corrective provisions.
Sanctions for eurozone countries that seriously infringe EMU rules should take effect more quickly and with less political discretion, and also should be tougher.
Germany and France have proposed stricter rules on borrowing and spending, backed by tough, semi-automatic sanctions for governments that do not comply.
Countries that repeatedly ignore recommendations for reducing excessive deficits, and those that manipulate official statistics, should have their EU funds frozen and their voting rights suspended.
Monetary union was intended to be neither a panacea for eurozone members nor a get-rich scheme for financial speculators.
Nor was it meant to be a system of redistribution from richer to poorer countries via cheaper borrowing for governments by means of common Eurobonds or outright fiscal transfers.
It won’t succeed if some countries persistently run deficits and weaken their competitiveness at the expense of the euro’s stability.
EMU was designed to encourage structural reforms.
Profligate members were supposed to be forced by the Stability and Growth Pact, as well as by their peers, to live within their means and thus strengthen their competiveness.
Instead, Germany’s former social-democratic government weakened the pact when doing so was politically convenient, while less competitive eurozone members allowed wages to rise and the public sector to become bloated, and then looked away as easy credit fueled both debt and asset bubbles.
We cannot foster sustainable growth or preempt a sovereign-debt crisis in Europe (or anywhere else) by piling-up more debt.
European countries need to reduce their deficits in a growth-friendly fashion, but reduce them they must.
It can be done: Germany is reducing its debt burden to sustainable levels while strengthening its long-term growth prospects.
Its course of pro-growth deficit reduction, together with its suggestions for strengthening Europe’s fiscal framework, could serve as a blueprint for European economic governance.
Solidaritas kepada Ikan Hiu
SAN JOSE – Kita sering mendengar bahwa manusia lebih tahu banyak tentang alam semesta dibandingkan lautan.
Bagaimanapun juga, 12 orang sudah berjalan di permukaan bulan namun hanya 3 orang yang pernah menyelam ke bagian terdalam laut.
Tapi kini terkesan bahwa semakin sedikit pengetahuan yang kita miliki tentang lautan – atau barangkali kita justru telah membuat lebih banyak kerusakan daripada yang kita sadari.
Sebuah penelitian terbaru menemukan bahwa selama bertahun-tahun jumlah penangkapan ikan sangat jauh di bawah perkiraan.
Hal ini harusnya menarik perhatian organisasi pengelolaan perikanan regional, yang mengawasi penangkapan ikan komersial di laut bebas dan memantau kepatuhan pelaksanaan Konvensi PBB tentang Konservasi Spesies Satwa Liar yang Bermigrasi(Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Spesies of Wild Animals atau CMS) yang meliputi spesies bermigrasi yang terancam punah.
Menurut CMS, beberapa spesies yang saat ini memerlukan perlindungan ketat – termuat dalam Appendix I – termasuk hiu putih (great white shark), lima spesies sawfish, dan sebelas spesies pari (ray).
Pertemuan CMS mengenai hiu bermigrasi (migratory sharks) yang akan diselengarakan bulan ini di San Jose, Kosta Rika,  mencerminkan peluang penting untuk memperkuat peraturan agar menjamin konservasi dan pemanfaatan spesies ini secara berkelanjutan, sehingga mereka bisa terus memenuhi peran ekologisnya yang penting sebagai predator tingkat atas (apex predator).
Pada konferensi terakhir yang diselenggarakan di Quito, Ekuador pada tahun 2014, negara-negara pihak CMS menambahkan beberapa spesies hiu ke dalam daftar spesies yang harus menerima perlindungan negara melalui perundingan sejumlah perjanjian internasional.
Salah satu perjanjian disepakati pada tahun 2010 dan sejauh ini telah ditandatangani oleh 39 negara peserta adalah Nota Kesepahaman tentang Konservasi Hiu Bermigrasi (Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation of Migratory Sharks).
Meskipun tidak mengikat secara hukum, inisiatif ini menyediakan forum penting untuk mencapai kesepakatan tentang kebijakan untuk menjamin setiap kegiatan eksploitasi hiu bermigrasi akan dilakukan secara berkelanjutan.
Namun, sebagaimana digarisbawahi oleh studi terkini tentang penangkapan ikan, sering kita alami kekurangan data yang diperlukan untuk menentukan seberapa besar tingkat konsumsi yang berkelanjutan.
Tanpa data tersebut, prinsip kehati-hatian (precautionary principle) – jika ragu-ragu lebih baik jangan – harus diberlakukan.
Permasalahannya adalah ketidakadaan data yang dapat dipercaya bisa membuat tuntutan untuk melindungi spesies terlihat lebih abstrak dan kurang mendesak, sehingga melemahkan kemampuan pemerintah untuk menolak kebutuhan yang lebih urgen, terutama kebutuhan mempertahankan mata pencaharian tertentu.
Sementara itu, konsumsi sumber daya lautan terus melonjak.
Selama dua generasi terakhir, ketika populasi dunia bertambah dua kali lipat menjadi 7,3 juta jiwa, jumlah ikan yang ditangkap dari laut setiap tahunnya naik lebih cepat, dari 20 juta metrik ton pada tahun 1950 menjadi 77 juta pada tahun 2010.
Angka ini menunjukkan angka resmi yang tidak termasuk hasil penangkapan ikan yang tidak sah, tidak dilaporkan, dan tidak sesuai aturan.
Mengingat bahwa hiu adalah ikan komersial, komoditas perikanan tangkap kedua terpenting (biasanya target pertama adalah tuna), organisasi pengelolaan perikanan regional cenderung tidak menguraikan peraturan spesifik.
Dengan demikian lebih mudah bagi hiu untuk mengelak dari celah-celah hukum internasional, dibandingkan jaring nelayan – terutama jaring berukuran besar dan khusus yang kini digunakan dalam penangkapan ikan.
Memang, berbeda dengan nelayan artisanal, kini kapal-kapal buat pabrik dan teknologi modern memungkinkan peningkatan hasil tangkapan secara besar-besaran untuk memenuhi tidak hanya pemintaan lokal, tapi juga luar negeri.
Dengan demikian, bertambahnya beberapa spesies ke dalam daftar satwa terancam punah selama beberapa tahun terakhir tentu tidak mengejutkan lagi.
Dalam kondisi yang penuh tantangan ini, inisiatif seperti Nota Kesepahaman tersebut menjadi lebih krusial sebagai alat untuk mendorong tindakan (yang spesifik bagi kawasan tertentu).
Beberapa negara penandatangan termasuk beberapa negara kepulauan Pasifik, telah menyatakan zona ekonomi eksklusifnya yang luas sebagai kawasan perlindungan hiu (shark sanctuaries) dan menetapkan kawasan yang dilarang untuk penangkapan ikan.
Untuk kepentingan nasional, beberapa negara seperti Australia, Selandia Baru, dan Amerika Serikat telah menetapkan skema pengawasan dan sistem penghitungan dan pengelolaan stok ikan.
Selain itu, sebagai respon terhadap protes keras akibat praktik perburuan sirip hiu yang berlebihan, Uni Eropa kini mewajibkan hiu yang diangkut ke darat harus dalam keadaan utuh dan melarang pengambilan sirip hiu di laut dan pembuangan sisa tubuhnya ke laut.
Hal serupa juga diperkuat oleh janji pemerintah Cina yang melarang sup sirip hiu – yang dianggap kuliner lezat – untuk dihidangkan di perjamuan resmi.
Bahkan perusahaan jasa angkutan barang dan maskapai penerbangan juga terpacu untuk bertindak dan semakin banyak yang menghentikan angkutan sirip hiu.
Meskipun kemajuan tersebut layak diberi tepuk tangan, perbaikan ke depan masih panjang.
Misalnya, perlu ada upaya untuk mengatasi bycatch (hiu yang tertangkap tidak sengaja ketika mengambil ikan lain, terutama tuna).
Kuncinya adalah semua pihak yang kepentingan – mulai dari nelayan dan pemerhati lingkungan hingga pemerintah dan forum internasional – harus bekerja sama melalui Nota Kesepahaman yang ada dan inisiatif serupa.
Dampak negatif terhadap ekonomi yang ditimbulkan oleh upaya-upaya tidak sebesar yang diharapkan; dalam banyak kasus, itu bisa diimbangi dengan aktivitas komersial lain yang memanfaatkan hiu hidup.
Kegiatan ekowisata yang berkembang di Maladewa, Kenya, Afrika Selatan, Fiji, dan sejumlah negara di Amerika Tengah dan Karibia hanya beberapa contoh.
Dijadikan atraksi pariwisata yang dapat dilihat dari jarak dekat di habitat alaminya, ikan pari manta bernilai ribuan dolar; dalam keadaan tergeletak mati di dermaga, daging dan insangnya dihargai lebih rendah.
Pemikiran jangka pendek yang menghambat upaya pelestarian lingkungan bisa sangat merusak, sekarang pun sudah menimbulkan bahaya.
Jika kita terus menguras ekosistem yang penting, pada akhirnya ekosistem ini tidak mampu melakukan regenerasi.
Hanya melalui upaya bersama dan urgen yang bertujuan melestarikan lingkungan dan melindungi mata pencaharian warga yang bergantung padanya, lautan akan bisa senantiasa menghidupi – dan mempersona – generasi masa depan.
Debating the Confidence Fairy
LONDON – In 2011, the Nobel laureate economist Paul Krugman characterized conservative discourse on budget deficits in terms of “bond vigilantes” and the “confidence fairy.”
Unless governments cut their deficits, the bond vigilantes will put the screws to them by forcing up interest rates.
But if they do cut, the confidence fairy will reward them by stimulating private spending more than the cuts depress it.
Krugman thought the “bond vigilante” claim might be valid for a few countries, such as Greece, but argued that the “confidence fairy” was no less imaginary than the one that collects children’s teeth.
Cutting a deficit in a slump could never cause a recovery.
Political rhetoric can stop a good policy from being adopted, but it cannot stop it from succeeding.
Above all, it cannot make a bad policy work.
I recently debated this point with Krugman at a New York Review of Books event.
My argument was that adverse expectations could affect a policy’s results, not just the chances that it will be adopted.
For example, if people thought that government borrowing was simply deferred taxation, they might save more to meet their expected future tax bill.
On reflection, I think I was wrong.
The confidence factor affects government decision-making, but it does not affect the results of decisions.
Except in extreme cases, confidence cannot cause a bad policy to have good results, and a lack of it cannot cause a good policy to have bad results, any more than jumping out of a window in the mistaken belief that humans can fly can offset the effect of gravity.
The sequence of events in the Great Recession that began in 2008 bears this out.
At first, governments threw everything at it.
This prevented the Great Recession from becoming Great Depression II.
But, before the economy reached bottom, the stimulus was turned off, and austerity – accelerated liquidation of budget deficits, mainly by cuts in spending – became the order of the day.
Once winded political elites had recovered their breath, they began telling a story designed to preclude any further fiscal stimulus.
The slump had been created by fiscal extravagance, they insisted, and therefore could be cured only by fiscal austerity.
And not any old austerity: it was spending on the poor, not the rich, that had to be cut, because such spending was the real cause of the trouble.
Any Keynesian knows that cutting the deficit in a slump is bad policy.
A slump, after all, is defined by a deficiency in total spending.
To try to cure it by spending less is like trying to cure a sick person by bleeding.
So it was natural to ask economist/advocates of bleeding like Harvard’s Alberto Alesina and Kenneth Rogoff how they expected their cure to work.
Their answer was that the belief that it would work – the confidence fairy – would ensure its success.
More precisely, Alesina argued that while bleeding on its own would worsen the patient’s condition, its beneficial impact on expectations would more than offset its debilitating effects.
Buoyed by assurance of recovery, the half-dead patient would leap out of bed, start running, jumping, and eating normally, and would soon be restored to full vigor.
The bleeding school produced some flaky evidence to show that this had happened in a few instances.
Conservatives who wanted to cut public spending for ideological reasons found the bond vigilante/confidence fairy story to be ideally suited to their purpose.
Talking up previous fiscal extravagance made a bond-market attack on heavily indebted governments seem more plausible (and more likely); the confidence fairy promised to reward fiscal frugality by making the economy more productive.
With the help of professors like Alesina, conservative conviction could be turned into scientific prediction.
And when Alesina’s cure failed to produce rapid recovery, there was an obvious excuse: it had not been applied with enough vigor to be “credible.”
The cure, such as it was, finally came about, years behind schedule, not through fiscal bleeding, but by massive monetary stimulus.
When the groggy patient eventually staggered to its feet, the champions of fiscal bleeding triumphantly proclaimed that austerity had worked.
The moral of the tale is simple: Austerity in a slump does not work, for the reason that the medieval cure of bleeding a patient never worked: it enfeebles instead of strengthening.
Inserting the confidence fairy between the cause and effect of a policy does not change the logic of the policy; it simply obscures the logic for a time.
Recovery may come about despite fiscal austerity, but never because of it.
Although Krugman invented his discourse for an American readership, it perfectly fits the British case as well.
In his first budget in June 2010, Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne warned that “you can see in Greece an example of a country that didn’t face up to its problems, and that’s a fate I am determined to avoid.”
In presenting the United Kingdom’s 2015 budget in March, Osborne claimed that austerity had made Britain “walk tall” again.
On May 7, that claim will be put to the test in the UK’s parliamentary election.
British voters, still wobbly from Osborne’s medicine, can be forgiven if they decide that they should have stayed in bed.
Creative Self-Disruption
LAGUNA BEACH – Like many readers, I still vividly recall when Nokia was the dominant player in mobile phones, with over 40% of the market, and Apple was just a computer company.
I remember when Amazon was known only for books, and when dirty taxis or high-priced limousines were the only alternative to public transport or my own car.
And I recall when the Four Seasons, Ritz Carltons, and St. Regises of this world competed with one another – not with Airbnb.
Now, I may be old, but I am not that old.
These changes happened recently – and fast.
How did they occur?
Will the pace of change remain so rapid – or even accelerate further?
And how should companies respond?
An industry can be transformed by top-down economic, financial, political, and regulatory changes.
But companies like Airbnb, Amazon, Apple, and Uber exemplify a different kind of transformation: agile players invade other, seemingly unrelated industries and brilliantly exploit huge but previously unseen opportunities.
Importantly and counter-intuitively, doing so serves their own core competencies, rather than those of the industry that they seek to disrupt.
Indeed, rather than using existing approaches and processes to compete, these entrants created radical new game plans, rewriting the target industry’s rules.
Their creativity and passion enabled them to subdue – and in some cases even destroy – less adaptable giants remarkably quickly.
Central to these companies’ success has been their understanding of a fundamental trend affecting nearly all industries: individual empowerment through the Internet, app technology, digitalization, and social media.
Most traditional companies, meanwhile, remain focused on their macro environment, at the expense of responding adequately to the new micro-level forces in play.
If existing companies hope to compete in this new environment, shaped by both top-down and bottom-up forces, they will to have to adapt, preempting disruptive new players by figuring out how to disrupt themselves.
Otherwise, they could face a fate similar to Nokia, which was disintermediated by one tech company (Apple) and acquired by another (Microsoft).
In this effort, companies must recognize that both demand and supply factors are or will be driving the transformation of their competitive landscapes.
On the demand side, consumers expect a lot more from the products and services they use.
They want speed, productivity, and convenience.
They want easy connectivity and expanded scope for customization.
And, as the success of services like TripAdvisor show, they want to be more engaged, with companies responding faster to their feedback with real improvements.
On the supply side, technological advances are toppling long-standing entry barriers.
The online car service Uber adapted existing technologies to transform a long-sheltered industry that too often provided lousy and expensive service.
Airbnb’s “supply” of rooms far exceeds anything to which traditional hotels could reasonably aspire.
An existing company would have to be highly specialized, well protected, or foolish to ignore these disruptions.
But, while some well-established companies in traditional industries are already looking for ways to adapt, others still need to do a lot more.
One traditional industry in which progress is being made is the automotive branch, where companies are pursuing digitalization.
Though new entrants could undoubtedly disrupt incumbents’ production platforms – Elon Musk’s Tesla Motors is a clear example – they are rare.
These days, the more pervasive competitive threat comes from companies in other domains that can erode the customer value proposition after the car is sold.
Automotive companies are recognizing that, over time, the digital experience in the cars they produce will command a larger share of the consumer surplus, owing largely to the potential for substantial profit margins and economies of scale.
As a result, they are adapting their vehicles to the new sharing economy, helping people to remain well-connected in the car, expanding the scope of after-sale services, and preparing for the shift away from individual car ownership toward car sharing.
Banks are also adapting, but much more slowly and hesitantly.
If they are to make progress, they must move beyond simply providing apps and online banking.
Their aim should be holistic engagement of clients, who seek not only convenience and security, but also more control over their financial destiny.
In these and many other industries, the competitive landscape is undoubtedly becoming more complicated and unpredictable.
But four general guidelines can help managers effectively adapt their mindsets and business models to facilitate orderly and constructive self-disruption.
· First, companies should modernize core competencies by benchmarking beyond the narrow confines of their industry.
· Second, they should increase their focus on customers, including by soliciting and responding to feedback in an engaging way.
· Third, managers should recognize the value of the data collected in their companies’ everyday operations, and ensure that it is managed intelligently and securely.
· Finally, the micro-level forces that have the potential to drive segment-wide transformations should be internalized at every level of the company.
Companies that apply these guidelines stand a better chance of adapting to what is driving today’s rapid reconfiguration of entire industries.
The bottom line, once again, is supply and demand: More than ever, people want – indeed, feel empowered to expect – cheaper, smarter, safer, and more efficient tools to live a more self-directed life.
Companies that fail to deliver will find that their days are numbered.
Containing Financial Turmoil
Today’s ongoing financial market turmoil comes as no surprise to those who have been warning about the risks to the world economy from the end of the housing market bubble in the United States.
Back in January, the United Nations’ outlook for the global economy raised concerns about the economic pain this might impose on heavily indebted US households.
It also emphasized how weakly regulated, closely interconnected global financial markets, together with persistent global macroeconomic imbalances, jeopardize growth and development prospects in the world economy, including poorer countries.
The US current account deficit has been the most widely discussed indicator of global imbalances.
For the past five years, the US has been sucking in more than $2 billion a day of other countries’ savings, as the easy provision of domestic credit on an unprecedented scale has allowed households to spend more than they earn.
Such borrowing was especially attractive as asset (housing and equity) prices kept rising, interest rates remained low, and succeeding generations of financial market innovators could convince investors that they had mastered the exigencies of risk.
Thus, further lending, even against over-valued collateral, was “sold” as a sign of good times ahead.
Warnings about irrational market exuberance were largely ignored, especially as US consumer spending helped fuel strong growth across the global economy.
Robust exports from Japan and Europe supported economic recovery and steadied investor confidence, providing, in turn, further export opportunities for newly industrializing countries, most notably China.
Meanwhile, heightened international competition kept the lid on inflation, and interest rates remained low, giving a further boost to consumer spending and completing what looked like a virtuous growth circle.
Even many of the poorest countries seemed, at long last, to be joining in, posting strong growth on the back of rising energy and raw material prices, renewed mining investments from abroad, and increasing fiscal revenues.
Although the numbers were never as rosy as market enthusiasts seemed to think, they did divert attention away from the shaky foundations of the newfound prosperity.
The growing need for measures to correct global imbalances was met with disbelief by influential policymakers and market analysts alike: “Why change a winning formula?”
The fate of the rest of the world depends on the responses to the unfolding financial turmoil.
The contraction of property and stock markets will undoubtedly dampen US household borrowing and demand, potentially triggering a downward spiral.
If protection is sought through tariff and other trade-related measures, then the knock-on effects could have even more devastating consequences for all.
In recent weeks, leading central bankers have injected over $300 billion into the financial system, lowered the rates at which they lend to private banks, and announced that such activism will continue until calm returns.
This may be enough to calm financial markets for now, but it will not redress the more fundamental problems behind the current turmoil.
In today’s interdependent world, a coordinated strategy is needed to avoid recession and to return lasting stability to financial markets.
Indeed, the fact that the world is again worrying about the economic fallout from financial shocks highlights the lack of progress since the Asian crisis a decade ago in moving towards a new international financial architecture.
While there has been some progress on harmonizing standards and extending surveillance, there has been far too much emphasis on strengthening governance in developing countries and not enough on systemic problems linked to unregulated private capital flows.
With the imminent threat of global recession, austerity measures are not the way to correct global imbalances.
Rather, deficit countries need to export their way back to balance, while imports should increase in surplus countries.
Moreover, productive investments are needed in the poorest countries to resume or sustain economic development.
Policymakers need the fiscal and monetary space to move in this direction.
Institutionalizing a mechanism for broad-based international economic surveillance and policy coordination will be an important longer-term goal, but at this point, world leaders urgently need to rebalance global demand and improve the management of the exchange-rate system.
Moving forward requires all governments to act through inclusive multilateral organizations and arrangements.
Despite the IMF’s undemocratic and corporate-like governance, which has undermined its legitimacy and credibility in the developing world and distorted efforts to extend its surveillance role, there is no alternative multilateral body available.
Such a coordinated response will need to address immediate short-term problems as well as provide medium-term solutions without plunging the world economy into another painful recession.
And it is imperative that this time around, reforms offer a lasting solution to global imbalances and tackle head on the most unruly elements of international financial capital.
Containment Begins at Home
NEW YORK – Earlier this month, Muhammad Youssef Abdulazeez, a 24-year-old US citizen of Middle Eastern descent, opened fire at two military sites in Chattanooga, Tennessee, killing five.
This act of local horror was also one of national significance, for it vindicated the late US diplomat and strategist George F. Kennan’s warning that American foreign policymakers should hold in check their urge to act, especially militarily.
One can never know when the blowback will come, Kennan warned, but it will.
Indeed, unforeseeable consequences were precisely what concerned Kennan when the United States charged into Afghanistan in 2001 and Iraq two years later.
After all, it was no coincidence that many of those the US was fighting in Afghanistan, including Osama bin Laden himself, had been associated with the Mujahedeen, the guerilla-style units of Muslim warriors whom US forces trained as insurgents during the 1979-1989 Soviet occupation.
Likewise, the US had armed Saddam Hussein’s Iraq to go to war with Iran in the 1980s.
Following the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, Americans asked, “Why do they hate us?”
Yet, though the US has experienced no attack on its soil since then, US President George W. Bush’s administration pursued, virtually unchecked, the destruction of two Muslim countries – and the devastation has continued beyond Bush’s tenure with an ever-intensifying campaign of drone strikes.
These policies have helped push Afghanistan to the precipice of state failure, while opening the way for the Islamic State to take over more than one-third of Iraq’s territory.
The resulting discontent in those countries and across the Muslim world has increasingly been felt in Europe – and now is emerging in the US, too.
To be sure, US criminal investigators have not officially identified the motives of the Kuwaiti-born Abdulazeez, who does not seem to have belonged to a terror network.
But there is plenty of precedent for an alienated and disenchanted young man, brought up in the West (Abdulazeez attended high school and college in Chattanooga), to seek a cause worth fighting for – and to find it in the perceived humiliation of Islam by America and the West.
Of course, as soon as the word “Islam” appears, Western media start painting such “lone wolves” as agents of some vast Islamic conspiracy, rather than deeply wounded and desperate individuals.
Such an interpretation makes the act easier to understand: a cog in a terrorist network would be compelled, even brainwashed, to mount such an attack.
But when the attacker is a solitary individual – an American citizen, no less– it raises serious questions about the system from which he or she (though almost always a he in these cases) emerged.
According to some press accounts, Abdulazeez felt a sense of failure at his inability to meet America’s standard of success, of which money is the primary measure.
Though he did not appear deeply religious, he allegedly praised the late Anwar al-Awlaki, a US-born al-Qaeda cleric and an advocate of attacks on “hypocritical” America, as a model of triumph over failure.
Another question about the US system stems from the refusal of Abdulazeez’s health insurer to approve his participation in an in-patient drug and alcohol program.
This is far from the first time the US has experienced a mass murder by someone whose mental-health issues, including addiction, had been overlooked.
Does this reflect a systemic failure?
More fundamentally, does it controvert America’s principles?
Rather than considering such questions, the US remains focused on the external scourge of Islamic terrorism.
Kennan recognized this tendency decades ago, when he warned that shortsighted policies at home and abroad had already put America in a vulnerable position.
Instead of basking in its own superiority, he advised, the US should learn from the mistakes of its enemies, including Russia.
In the 2000s, Kennan compared the Bush administration’s “global war on terror” to Russia’s wars against Chechen separatists in the North Caucasus.
When the Soviet Union dissolved in 1991, Boris Yeltsin, Russia’s first president, promised its subjects “as much sovereignty as they can swallow.”
The Chechens, who had sought independence from Russia for centuries, took this promise as an opportunity for self-determination.
But Yeltsin, unwilling to lose any more territories after the Soviet Union’s initial breakup, reneged on his pledge.
In 1993, the first Chechen war erupted.
Russia managed to defeat the separatists and maintain control over Chechnya.
But it was a Pyrrhic victory, given that it drove many disillusioned and angry Chechens toward religious fundamentalism.
As a result, when the second Chechen war began in 1999, the fight was no longer just about Chechen independence from Russia; it was a fight for Islam, waged against Christians everywhere.
Russia, under Yeltsin’s successor, Vladimir Putin, defeated the separatists again, restoring federal control over the territory.
Fifteen years later, Chechen extremists are fighting alongside the Islamic State.
One might object to comparing America’s desire to export democracy at the barrel of a gun to Russia’s imperial death spasms under Yeltsin and Putin.
But, whether we like it or not, there is a strong parallel between them: both countries are perceived to be dictating to Muslims.
And, in fact, it was Kennan who first drew my attention to this similarity, when in a private conversation about 9/11, he noted that, for many Muslims, Russia and the West were becoming indistinguishable.
Both were viewed as secular states antagonistic to Islam.
Kennan warned that, just as the first Chechen war bred national and individual resentment, America’s wars in Afghanistan and Iraq would only fuel more hatred and frustration – which would eventually blow back onto the US.
“The failure to fit the system makes people attack that system,” he said, “so it is never wise to bomb nations to freedom.”
Containment, not Appeasement
America and the world are focused on whether the Bush administration will adopt the Iraq Study Group’s recommendations for an exit strategy from Iraq.
That is the most pressing immediate question, but America’s leaders should also be thinking ahead.
America needs a post-occupation strategy for Iraq and the Middle East, one grounded in a viable national security strategy for the twenty-first century. That strategy is containment.
In the run-up to the Iraq invasion, the Bush administration rejected containment as an obsolete Cold War hangover.
The weapons inspectors were pulled out, and America opted for preemptive war.
Bush was portrayed as facing down a new Hitler with Churchillian resolve, and advocates of containment were accused of appeasement.
But now we know that the containment regime worked.
Saddam Hussein’s Iraq was in no position to threaten anyone, let alone the United States.
This was not the first time that containment – a strategy devised by George Kennan, the director of the US State Department’s Policy Planning Staff under President Harry Truman, in response to the Soviet threat after World War II – has been rejected as appeasement.
In the 1952 presidential election campaign, Dwight Eisenhower and his future secretary of state, John Foster Dulles, heaped scorn on containment, calling instead for a “rollback” of the Soviets in Eastern Europe.
Fortunately, once in office, the Eisenhower administration had the sense to stick with containment in Europe, continuing a policy that is widely credited for winning the Cold War.
President John F. Kennedy’s insistence, against much advice, on containment during the Cuban missile crisis saved the world from nuclear war.
This was calculated resolve, not appeasement.
Containment’s goal was to prevent Soviet expansion without saddling the US with unsustainable military obligations.
So long as the USSR did not stage a military attack, containment’s reliance on economic sticks and carrots, competition within the world communist movement, intelligence and diplomacy, and promoting the vitality of the capitalist democracies would guarantee security.
Kennan was right: the dysfunctional features of Soviet system, and its over-extension internationally, would lead to its demise.
When containment has been abandoned, America has paid a high price.
The Eisenhower administration toppled Iran’s elected government in 1953 believing it to be too pro-Soviet.
The hugely unpopular Shah they installed was swept away in the Islamic revolution in 1979.
America made comparable errors in Guatemala and elsewhere in Latin America.
Vietnam was America’s costliest departure from containment.
As Kennan explained, when America goes to war over something less than a vital interest, the adversary – for whom vital interests are at stake – will fight long after the war has become too unpopular at home to sustain.
Bush repeated this mistake in Iraq.
Containment is hardly a relic of the Cold War.
It worked against Libya, leading Muammar Khadafi in the late 1990’s to stop sponsoring terrorism, turn over the Lockerbie bombers for trial, and pay compensation to British and French victims of Libyan-sponsored terrorism.
Claims that he abandoned his nuclear program in response to the US-led invasion of Iraq have been refuted by Flynt Leverett, director for Middle Eastern affairs at the US National Security Council from 2002 to 2003.
According to Leverett, Khadafi’s decision predated the invasion and was a response to an explicit quid-pro-quo to end international sanctions against Libya.
Containment against Libya was not appeasement.
It should have been the model in Iraq, as it now should be the model in Iran.
Instead, defenders of the contemporary equivalent of “rollback” advocate attacking Iran because it is developing nuclear weapons.
This makes about as much sense as it would to attack China in the 1950’s.
One of Kennan’s great insights was that the US is well served by conflict among America’s adversaries.
He welcomed Tito’s rise in Yugoslavia as an internal challenge to Moscow’s hegemony that he hoped others would emulate.
This lesson is lost on the Bush administration, which senselessly alienated Iran in 2002, when moderates had the upper hand there and were cooperating in Afghanistan, and reversed decades of US policy by insisting that any Middle East settlement must accept changed “realities on the ground” in the West Bank.
The administration seems bent on herding adversaries together – transforming Samuel Huntington’s “clash-of-civilizations” dystopia into a self-fulfilling prophecy.
Kennan maintained that the US should work to create a world that no one can dominate, and that the best way to spread democracy is to demonstrate its superiority.
Ramming democracy down people’s throats is self-defeating.
Just as it produced a potent fusion of communism and anti-American nationalism in Southeast Asia and Latin America, it is now producing a similar combination of radical Islam and anti-American nationalism across the Middle East.
Terrorist groups can be minimized if their enabling states are contained.
Defenders of the Bush doctrine claim that this is impossible when they operate out of failed states that cannot police their borders.
But, given that the Bush doctrine has compounded the failed-state problem, this is a bogus argument.
However many failed states there were in the world before America invaded Iraq, there is one more now.
To build a containment regime against terrorism emanating from the Middle East, a date for America’s departure from Iraq must be set.
There is no other way to reverse the widespread perception across the region that the US has imperial ambitions.
The other essential step is to place resolution of the Israel-Palestine conflict at the center of America’s foreign policy agenda.
America must push for a solution that can garner the support of significant majorities of all the peoples between the Jordan River and the Mediterranean.
That is the surest means of protecting and promoting democracy.
The Right Stuff in Foreign Policy
CAMBRIDGE – Some critics complain that US President Barack Obama campaigned on inspirational rhetoric and an ambition to “bend the arc of history,” but then turned out to be a transactional and pragmatic leader once in office.
In this respect, however, Obama is hardly unique.
Many leaders change their objectives and style over the course of their careers.