It’s not at all clear which will have the greater power to decide the outcome.
This uncertainty is beginning to focus attention on the fundamental question of whether the EU can continue to choose its leaders in such a strange and furtive manner.
When the Union was smaller and more modest, inter-governmental horse-trading seemed acceptable, not least because national politicians could downplay the importance of “Europe.”
Today, with the EU eager to play a forceful role on the world stage, a move towards a more open system appears to be inevitable. The EU’s interlocutors in Washington, Beijing, and elsewhere already make it plain that national leaders claiming to speak for Europe lack credibility, as do EU leaders who so evidently have no convincing political mandate.
Two clearly defined schools of thought are emerging.
There are those who argue that these are sensitive and complicated issues beyond most voters’ understanding, and that more democracy would result in either populism or embarrassingly widespread abstentions.
The outcome, however, was often not good for the IMF, the World Bank, or the world.
Most notorious was the appointment of Paul Wolfowitz, one of the main architects of the Iraq War, to lead the World Bank.
His judgments there were no better than those that got the United States involved in that disastrous adventure.
Having placed fighting corruption at the top of the Bank’s agenda, he left in the middle of his term, accused of favoritism.
Finally, as a new order seemed to emerge in the aftermath of the US-made Great Recession, the G-20 agreed (or so it was thought) that the next IMF head would be chosen in an open and transparent manner.
The presumption was that the outcome of such a process almost surely would be a managing director from an emerging-market country.
After all, the IMF’s main responsibility is to fight crises, most of which have been in developing countries – more than a hundred since the disastrous policies of financial deregulation and liberalization began some 30 years ago. There were many heroes of these battles in the emerging markets.
Crises need to be carefully managed.
In 1997, the mismanagement of the East Asia crisis by the IMF and the US Treasury transformed downturns into recessions, and recessions into depressions. The world cannot afford to repeat that performance.
Today, the imminent crisis is in Europe, where the European Central Bank seems to be putting its own balance sheet and those of European banks – loaded with debt from Ireland, Greece, and Portugal – above the well-being of these countries’ citizens.
This debt almost surely needs to be restructured, but, having allowed the banks to leverage themselves beyond any level of prudence and load up on toxic derivatives, the ECB is now warning against any sort of restructuring or write-down.
But it is a bit late for the ECB to describe debt restructuring as “unthinkable.”
The ECB should have done some thinking before it let this state of affairs arise.
Indeed, more than thinking, it should have done some regulating to prevent Europe’s banks from becoming so vulnerable.
Now the ECB needs to think about how to help everyone, not just the bankers who bought the bonds.
The new thinking should put people first, and banks’ shareholders and bondholders second.
Even if the shareholders and bondholders lose everything, with the right restructuring, we can still save the banks and protect taxpayers and workers.
Where the IMF’s next managing director will come down on this issue – and on whether fiscal salvation is to be achieved through austerity, with costs borne by ordinary citizens, even as bankers get only a mild slap on the wrist – is critically important, but hard to predict.
Despite the failure of the IMF’s strategy in East Asia, Latin America, and elsewhere, it still has adherents, even within the emerging markets.
The leadership contest has turned out differently from what many had expected.
Some of the most qualified candidates (in both developed and developing countries) have not received the support of their own governments that the political process seems to require.
Other qualified people from emerging markets have been reluctant to put their hats into the ring – it is a brutal job, with a travel schedule that requires physical stamina to match wisdom and experience.
Much as I would like to see someone from the emerging markets and the developing world head the IMF, the first priority is to choose a leader with the requisite skills, commitments, and understandings in an open and transparent process, someone who will continue along the reform path on which the Fund has embarked.
Realpolitik might mean that there will be senior people from both China and the US in the top management team, but the presumption that the number two position should be filled by an American also has to go.
Whatever the outcome, the IMF, the World Bank, and the international community need to reaffirm their commitment to an open and transparent process – and ask how that process can be improved.
For example, rather than nominations from governments, which often are reluctant to support excellent candidates from opposition parties, an international nominating committee could put forward names.
Similarly, changes in voting procedures (public voting by countries, rather than through constituencies, or a requirement that candidates win the support of a majority of developing and emerging countries) could persuade more emerging-market officials to put their names forward.
What we are seeing now – open campaigning, as opposed to selection behind closed doors – seems to be a move in the right direction.
But one hopes that campaign promises won’t tie the new leader’s hands, as so often happens in electoral politics.
STOCKHOLM – The Nordic countries’ economies are performing well, and a part of the reason is that they are gradually reforming their “social model,” adapting it to new realities in ways that respond to people’s demands.
But there is nothing uniquely “Nordic” about this change.
On the contrary, it is one that others can emulate. 
Obviously, such a policy requires significant investment in research and development.
Sweden, for example, invests more than any other European country in this area – well above the EU target of 3% of GDP.
Many countries invest less, and even Sweden’s 4% of GDP might not be enough, given higher spending on R&amp;D in China, India, and the United States. 
Moreover, large investments in R&amp;D may be of limited use if knowledge can’t be transformed into successful businesses.
That requires adopting policies that cover everything from kindergarten training to collaboration between universities and companies, as well as an overall business climate in which success is rewarded and failure is not treated as a human catastrophe.
America’s success is to a great extent based on this kind of thinking.
Unfortunately, most European educational systems are based on outdated practices and theories.
Although educational possibilities and structures have gradually been diversified, the major shortcoming of most European educational systems remains: students have too few choices, and teachers, if they want to remain in their profession, must adhere to a severely compartmentalized pedagogy.
As with corporate monopolies, the consumers (students) are often seen as a homogeneous mass, where all students can be educated according to the same pedagogical approach.
But schools must be able to meet the needs and abilities of individual children in a way that makes learning a stimulating adventure. 
Other countries might find Sweden’s system worth studying.
Its schools are financed by local communities and work within the framework of a national curriculum designed by the parliament and government.
But, while everyone must follow these rules, individual schools are run in a competitive manner.
Anyone – parents, teachers, or even companies – can apply for a license to operate a school.
The National School Board is, in principle, instructed to approve an application if the proposed school is likely to fulfill the national goals and has a solid financial base.
Moreover, private schools are not seen as mere supplements to public schools, but as fully-fledged alternatives, so they need not offer something different.
A community where a private school offers its services must support it with the same amount of money, or vouchers, per student that it provides to public schools.
The amount of financing per student is the same, and schools that receive vouchers cannot charge additional fees.
After this system was adopted in the 1990’s, many non-public schools were established.
The pioneers were often parents’ or teachers’ cooperatives, usually with a special pedagogical philosophy.
Companies operating chains of schools later came to play an important role as well.
As a result, the variety of schools has increased throughout Sweden.
The voucher system means that all students, irrespective of family income, can attend the school of their choice.
Even in rural areas, there is now a wide choice of schools, and it seems that competition has improved the overall quality of Swedish schools, as non-public schools’ very existence has created a demand for reform of public schools.
If there is any difference, it seems that non-public schools often are better than public schools in dealing with children with learning problems.
This is all the more remarkable insofar as the principle of competition on which it relies has taken root in a country where competition within the area of public services has not generally been accepted.
Reuniting the United Kingdom
LONDON – In the end, democracy came to the rescue.
The people of Scotland voted by a comfortable margin of about 10% to remain part of the United Kingdom – not least because of the campaigning of three Labour politicians, Alastair Darling, Gordon Brown, and Jim Murphy.
At times, it seemed that the result would be much closer, or even that we British might engineer the dismemberment of our country, which for centuries has brought together four national communities: England, Wales, Northern Ireland, and Scotland.
The Scots have been part of the British state for more than 300 years, at the heart of the Protestant, imperial, adventuring, outward-looking culture that forged Britain’s identity.
Still, that identity has been fractured; I hope not beyond repair.
In any case, things will never be quite the same again.
Now, the people of England, Wales, and Northern Ireland – not rejected, after all – must behave as well as possible to salvage something workable from the sometimes bitter and divisive arguments.
We have to display magnanimity – a difficult enough virtue to practice at the best of times.
Before trying to rise to this challenge, what can we learn from this walk along the cliff edge?
Despite the huge turnout on polling day in Scotland, referendums are a lamentable way of trying to settle big political issues.
Those who established and developed parliamentary democracy in Britain knew this very well.
Referendums are the favorite device of populists and would-be dictators.
One vote on one day subsumes complex matters with one ballot question, which in any event is frequently not the question that many people actually answer.
Parliamentary democracies should have nothing to do with them.
In the event, we did not dispose of 300 years of shared experience and common prosperity on one Thursday in September 2014.
But there are three reasons why we seemed at times to come so close to that outcome, none of which reflect well on the British political process or, in my view, justify the claim that our future will, and must, be different.
First, while Scottish nationalism has many honorable roots and aspirations, the campaign and its incubation showed a nasty tinge of chauvinism and an occasionally brutish hostility toward pluralism, reflected, for example, in the intimidation of some journalists.
Overall, the English took on the role of what philosophers and social scientists call the “other,” an alien threatening force, in the pro-independence campaign.
The English were every day’s villains.
Now we have to try to forget all of that.
Second, Britain, like other countries in Europe, is suffering from the rise of angry, populist, anti-enlightenment political forces, fueled by conspiracy theories.
In England, the electoral success of the UK Independence Party is one such example.
Demagogues stack prejudices atop half-truths, and any attempt to connect discussion with reality is shot through with contemptuous accusations of dishonesty and self-interest.
Responsible political leaders will have to be more aggressive, bold, and vigorous in confronting such interlocutors.
Finally, as far as policy is concerned, we Britons have deluded ourselves to think that our system of government – increasingly shown to be unrepresentative, inefficient, and over-centralized – could survive with a little tinkering here and there.
This belief has suited the two main political parties.
Labour has sought to avoid a constitutional debate, because any move in the direction of federal institutions requires addressing the party’s over-representation in the UK parliament.
It is unfair to give ever more power to a Scottish parliament while continuing to give Labour, which controls 41 Scottish constituencies in the House of Commons, disproportionate say over what happens in England.
As for the Conservatives, the party has allowed its belief in the union of the country’s constituent parts to foreclose any discussion of how that union can be modernized.
If we are to prevent the UK from rattling to pieces, we have to change the way we govern ourselves.
The pace that Prime Minister David Cameron has now proposed for this process is breathtaking.
Conservatives held a majority of the seats in Scotland less than 60 years ago.
Today, there is one Scottish Conservative MP out of 59 in the UK Parliament, a mark of how the Tories have allowed themselves to be frozen out of some parts of the country.
In some respects, this is the biggest challenge of all to the UK’s political culture.
Conservatives are losing touch with parts of the country where once they were strong – not just Scotland, but also cities and the north of England – and there is a growing disconnect between the party and Britain’s increasingly important minority ethnic groups.
Some of the same problems affect Labour.
Both big parties will have to address these issues as we start on the long and difficult task of reforming a UK that has lost some of the glue of affinity and solidarity that has held it together for so long.
For some British citizens south of the Scottish border, it will be difficult to act with the goodwill now required to recover from the referendum episode.
I do not know how much Alex Salmond, the now-resigned Scottish Nationalist Party leader who pressed for the referendum, is responsible for the surge in his own party’s support; but I suspect that he may, alas, have galvanized all too much nationalist sentiment in England.
I heard one commentator claiming that the referendum campaign was “beautiful.”
Perhaps in the end, we really could “trust the people,” and that is an invigorating thought.
Let others, who oppose democracy in their own countries, take note.
But the campaign did come perilously close at times to being a triumph for un-reason.
The challenge now is to figure out how to banish half-truths and big lies from our politics and restore reason and moderation to our divided land.
What I Learned From Vladimir Putin
LONDON – Is Russian President Vladimir Putin, like most political leaders, predisposed to spinning the truth for his own benefit?
Or does he go far beyond that, governing Russia and dealing with his neighbors and the rest of the world with reckless mendacity, abetted by a supine national media?
Sometimes, in answering questions like this, we can draw not only on what we have heard and seen, but also on personal experience.
I first met Putin in October 1999 in Helsinki, when I was attending a European Union-Russia summit as the EU’s external affairs commissioner.
President Boris Yeltsin canceled his attendance at the last moment; he was “indisposed.”
In his place, Yeltsin sent the new acting prime minister, Vladimir Putin, whose behavior confirmed the wisdom of the observation that you can take the man out of the KGB, but you can’t take the KGB out of the man.
Preparing for the meeting in the early morning, the EU team heard that there had been an explosion in Grozny, Chechnya’s capital, killing several people.
When Putin arrived, we asked him about it.
He claimed to know nothing, but promised to find out by lunch what had happened.
At our lunchtime discussion, he reported that the explosion had been caused by Chechen terrorists who were running their own arms bazaar.
By this time, we knew that the deaths had been caused by a Russian military assault; it subsequently came to light that a wave of Russian ballistic missiles (probably Scuds) had killed more than a hundred people.
Putin had looked us in the eye and lied, almost certainly aware that we knew he was lying.
The communiqué that day made no mention of Chechnya, but enunciated the usual “blah blah” about shared values, belief in democracy, human rights, and the rule of law, and the need for strategic cooperation.
I can recall countless instances of – how can I best put it? – Putin and his colleagues economizing with the truth on a spectacular scale.
On Chechnya, they regularly reported either that they had received no complaints from the EU about humanitarian relief, or that they were complying with the United Nations code on relief efforts; they were duplicitous on both counts.
Similar dissembling characterized negotiations on trade, partnership agreements, the enlargement of the EU to Eastern Europe, and access to Kaliningrad.
Against this background, I find it difficult to believe any of Putin’s account of what has been happening in Ukraine – a view shared by many seasoned observers in Poland and the Baltic states.
Putin does not want to preside over a country with a declining population and a footprint that is largely Asian.
He wishes, like a modern czar, to re-create the historic Slav state of Russia, incorporating Ukraine, and to rebuild, albeit in a different form, the Kremlin’s lost empire.
The Eurasian Union – Russia, Belarus and Kazakhstan – is to be its heartland.
To this end, Putin has always resisted Ukraine’s historic turn to the West, about which the EU itself has been standoffish in the past.
The EU was prepared to recognize Ukraine’s “European vocation,” but it did as little as it could to encourage this outcome.
When Ukrainians earlier this year ousted their corrupt president, Viktor Yanukovych, after he backed out of an association agreement with the EU, Russia set out to destabilize the country.
Crimea was annexed on the spurious grounds that it had once been part of Russia – a justification that, if applied elsewhere, could underwrite the violent redrawing of boundaries in much of Europe.
Then came Russia’s fomenting of, and participation in, armed separatists’ effort to take over parts of eastern Ukraine, which led directly to the downing last month of Malaysian Airlines Flight 17 and the death of all 298 people on board.
Though likely an accident, it was an accident that happened only because of Russia’s duplicitous and lethal meddling.
So, though I am saddened by the Putin regime’s behavior, I am not surprised by it.
I do hope to be surprised by the EU’s recognition that what has happened in Ukraine requires Europe to stand up for international decency and the rule of law.
There should be no more happy talk about shared values.
This is a time for steely principle.
That will not be welcomed by Europe’s far right, from Hungary’s Jobbik to France’s National Front.
They love Putin.
But Ukraine has proved a step too far for some of his erstwhile admirers, like Nigel Farage, the leader of the United Kingdom Independence Party.
If Farage had had some first-hand experience dealing with Putin, he might have reached an accurate assessment much sooner.
From Beethoven to Beijing
LONDON – On July 1, 17 years ago, I was sailing on Britain’s Royal Yacht away from Hong Kong where, at midnight the previous day, China assumed sovereignty under the terms of an international agreement with the United Kingdom (tabled at the United Nations) known as the Joint Declaration.
That agreement guaranteed Hong Kong’s way of life for 50 years under Deng Xiaoping’s slogan “One country, two systems.”
The rule of law and the freedoms associated with pluralism – due process and the freedom of speech, assembly, and worship – were to remain the bedrock of Hong Kong’s prosperity and stability.
Fast forward to this year.
On a date that meant so much to me personally as the colony’s last governor, and much more to the citizens of Hong Kong, I attended a magnificent production of Beethoven’s “Fidelio” on the grounds of a country house near Oxford.
Beethoven’s only opera, written in 1805 (the year of Napoleon’s victory at Austerlitz) and rewritten in 1814 (when Napoleon abdicated), is one of the supreme cultural expressions of fundamental human values – freedom and opposition to tyranny – that resonate in every society.
“Fidelio’s” most dramatic moment comes when political prisoners are briefly released from their dungeons.
“Oh Heaven!
Salvation!
Happiness,” they sing. “Oh Freedom!
Will you be given us?”
As they sang of liberty, the setting sun’s rays dazzled the prisoners and the Oxfordshire audience.
Nature underlined the importance of the message.
Much of the history of the two centuries since Beethoven composed his opera has centered on that quest for freedom: the fight against colonial powers, the campaigns for basic human rights, the resistance to modern totalitarian and authoritarian regimes.
On the whole, liberty has triumphed.
The extent to which concern for human rights should be a consideration in setting foreign policy is a contentious issue in most democracies, which often believe that their own record entitles them to lecture others.
Sometimes it does; often it does not.
For example, the United States’ own record, at Guantánamo Bay and elsewhere, has undermined American politicians’ credibility on this subject.
There is also the question of consistency.
One cannot credibly thump the table about human rights in one country, but keep one’s opinions to oneself in another – an all-too-common occurrence when, say, a trade deal might suffer.
A lack of consistency has been one of the European Union’s sins in attempting to establish a value-based foreign policy.
The EU sought to build a partnership of economic and political cooperation in the Mediterranean region, for example, in which financial assistance and trade liberalization would be contractually linked to progress in advancing human rights and developing democratic institutions.
This sensible objective was sabotaged by the tendency to overlook what was actually happening in some countries.
Many suspect that some EU member states, while insisting on robust human-rights clauses in bilateral agreements with countries known to torture prisoners, secretly aided in the rendition of suspected terrorists to these same countries.
I have no doubt that it is in the national interest of democracies to promote freedom and human rights.
Though these values cannot be imposed by force or manufactured like instant coffee, the world is likely to be more peaceful, stable, and prosperous the more that countries treat their own citizens decently.
This is not a prescription for a soggy policy that denies the demands of the real world.
But reliance on realpolitik as the guiding light of foreign policy has a pretty shabby track record.
Realpolitik brought us the bombing of Cambodia and the mass killings under Pol Pot.
Moreover, “realist” assumptions often turn out to be remarkably implausible.
Trade deals often are not secured or sustained by political kowtows.
Countries buy what they need and sell what they can at the best price they can get, regardless of whether another country has or has not written a ministerial communiqué.
Rather, all relevant policies – from aid to political and security cooperation – should be related to strengthening the institutions and values to which one adheres.
All of this brings me back to July 1 of this year.
While I was listening to “Fidelio,”tens of thousands of Hong Kongers (organizers say hundreds of thousands) were demonstrating for liberty.
They want a fair and open system for electing their government, and to defend the freedom and rule of law that make Hong Kong so special and successful, a genuinely liberal – in the classical sense – society.
Eventually, Hong Kong’s people will get what they want, despite China’s objections; freedom invariably wins in the end.
But China’s rulers would take a giant step forward by recognizing that such aspirations are not a threat to the country’s wellbeing.
For now, however, China, a great country and a growing power, is handling its economic affairs with more sophistication and a surer touch than it is addressing its political challenges.
The High Cost of Cheap Meat
BERLIN – Factory-style livestock production is a critical driver of agricultural industrialization.
Its remorseless expansion is contributing to climate change, deforestation, biodiversity loss, and human-rights violations – all to satisfy Western societies’ unhealthy appetite for cheap meat.
Europe and the United States were the largest meat consumers in the twentieth century, with the average person eating 60-90 kilograms (132-198 pounds) annually – far more than is required to meet humans’ nutritional needs.
Though Western consumption rates are now stagnating and even declining in some regions, they remain far higher than in most other regions in the world.
Meanwhile, in emerging economies – especially the so-called BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) – members of the burgeoning middle class are changing their diets to resemble those of their rich-country counterparts.
In the coming decades, as incomes continue to rise, so will demand for meat and dairy products.
To meet this demand, the world’s agribusiness firms will attempt to boost their annual&nbsp;meat output from 300 million tons today to 480 million tons by 2050, generating serious social challenges and ecological pressures at virtually every stage of the value chain (feed supply, production, processing, and retail).
One major problem with factory-style livestock production is that it leads to considerable greenhouse-gas emissions – and not just because the digestive processes of ruminant animals produce methane.
The waste from the animals, together with the fertilizers and pesticides used to produce feed, generate large quantities of nitrogen oxides.
Indeed, the factory model implies significant land-use change and deforestation, beginning with the production of feed.
As it stands, about one-third of existing agricultural land is used for feed production, with the total share used for livestock production, including grazing, amounting to about 70%.
With expanded meat consumption, soybean production alone would nearly double, implying a proportional increase in the use of inputs like land, fertilizer, pesticides, and water.
Increased crop diversion to feed livestock will put upward pressure on food and land prices, making it increasingly difficult for the world’s poor to meet their basic nutritional needs.
Making matters worse, the shift from mixed-use or indigenous systems of raising livestock to large-scale operations jeopardizes rural livelihoods, particularly in developing countries.
Pastoralists, small producers, and independent farmers simply cannot compete with low retail prices that fail to account for the industry’s&nbsp;true environmental and health costs.
And the industrial livestock system, with its low wages and poor health and safety standards, does not provide a good alternative for employment.&nbsp;
Finally, there is the public-health impact of industrial livestock production.
For starters, excessively high levels of meat and dairy consumption are contributing to nutrition-related health problems like obesity and cardiovascular disease.
Moreover, keeping large concentrations of animals in confined spaces facilitates the proliferation of infectious diseases that can spread to humans, such as avian flu.
And measures used to mitigate that risk, such as the administration of low doses of antibiotics to prevent disease (and promote growth), are creating a public-health crisis by strengthening resistance to antimicrobial drugs.
Add to this the horrific conditions suffered by the animals themselves, owing to the industry’s resistance to applying reasonable animal-welfare standards, and one might wonder how the industry could have been allowed to grow so large.
The answer lies in its oligopolistic power, which enables industrial livestock producers to externalize their true social and environmental costs, which must then be covered by workers and taxpayers.
The reality is that there are other ways to meet the world’s need for meat and dairy.
In the European Union, only two key elements of the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) would have to be changed to reduce drastically the distortions in the production system.
Implementing these changes would send a clear signal that European policymakers take consumers’ wishes seriously.
The first change would be to prohibit imports of genetically modified feed, and require that farmers produce at least half of their animal feed on their own farms.
A clear set of rules on feed procurement would eliminate international imbalances in nutrients, and diminish the power of multinational agricultural biotechnology corporations like Monsanto.
Moreover, slurry and manure would no longer be transported long distances, and could be used to fertilize farmers’ own land to produce feed.
Second, the unnecessary administration of antibiotics in feed and watering systems should be prohibited.
This would force farmers to treat animals individually for illnesses, based on veterinary diagnosis.
In the United States, the Food and Drug Administration could ban the non-therapeutic use of antibiotics.
And the US Department of Agriculture’s farm bill programs could provide increased support for free-range livestock operations, in order to encourage more sustainable approaches to meat production.
Of course, these actions would be only important first steps.
As emerging-economy middle classes grow, it is vital to recognize that existing Western models of meat production and consumption do not provide a sound blueprint for the future.
It is time to create a system that adheres to our ecological, social, and ethical boundaries.
Getting to Yes on Transatlantic Financial Regulation
WASHINGTON, DC – As 2014 gets underway, signs of a fraying regulatory relationship between the European Union and the United States seem to be everywhere.
The US Federal Reserve’s tough new regulations on foreign banks have spurred the European Commission to threaten retaliation.
Progress toward reconciling US and EU rules on derivatives – one of the main causes of the financial crisis – has fallen apart.
And plans by the EU and the United Kingdom to “ring-fence” bank deposits are poised to depart in form and substance from one another and from the newly unveiled Volcker rule in the US.
But the lesson that most observers draw from these increasingly high-profile disputes – that, even in financial regulation, power politics trumps the common good – is incomplete.
After all, regulatory disparities are not just a product of divergent national interests; how effectively diplomacy is practiced and coordinated can play a role as well.
For example, a recent study highlighted the failure of G-20 leaders to define a consistent and achievable roadmap for implementing the financial-reform agenda announced after the 2008 crisis.
For roughly the past decade, heads of state have been calling on regulators to tackle big issues, such as capital standards, along with other matters like over-the-counter derivatives and credit-ratings reforms.
But, during this period, officials have acted more or less at their discretion, leaving problems to be addressed according to different economic and political cycles.
Radical disparities between the rule-making cultures of the US and the EU are exacerbating the problem.
Unlike the US, where independent agencies lead the rule-making process according to Congressional dictates, legislative actors in Brussels and Strasbourg – the European Commission, the European Council, and the European Parliament – set regulatory agendas and write the rules.
And, though EU agencies like the European Central Bank are assuming an increasing share of regulatory responsibility, divergences in decision-making procedures continue to affect the rate and nature of transatlantic coordination.
Making matters worse, market and monetary reforms have occasionally merged, with rule-making becoming partly dependent on the decisions of disparate agencies and institutions.
Meeting enhanced Basel III capital standards, for example, is about more than just rules; it requires the recapitalization of banks – a process that is taking longer in Europe than in the US, partly because the eurozone has had to negotiate funding mechanisms for banks and cash-strapped governments.
Now these delays are raising doubts in the US about the EU’s commitment to reform.
All of these problems reflect the simple fact that policymakers lack suitable tools for conducting regulatory diplomacy in a world of dynamic market reform.
The conventional means for doing so – mutual recognition and substituted compliance – were developed in an environment in which countries would spur each other to raise standards by offering foreigners easier access to domestic markets once regulations in their home countries mirrored their own.
Neither mechanism foresees a situation whereby all countries simultaneously seek to upgrade their financial systems across a variety of sectors.
Meanwhile, the traditional forum for EU-US talks, the Financial Markets Regulatory Dialogue – which brings regulators together at irregular intervals to haggle over lists of divergent regulations one by one – is all too often slow and circumvented.
The good news is that European and American policymakers have options for clearing the structural roadblocks.
They should begin by developing a new “toolkit” to help countries not just meet existing standards, but also work together to improve standards in an environment of rapidly changing markets.
Whether implemented as part of the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership talks or on an informal basis, mutual-recognition and substituted-compliance programs should become more robust, and they should provide procedural mechanisms for coordinating rule-making and administrative processes in real time.
Moreover, coordinating mechanisms should be – to the extent possible – objectives-based processes measured against international commitments and best practices.
Finally, given the interface between financial supervision and monetary relations, the Financial Markets Regulatory Dialogue should be revived alongside G-20 meetings of treasury officials and central bankers.
Instead of relying on the multi-regional Financial Stability Board to hash out differences and set the regulatory pace, EU and US regulators should be encouraged to present joint solutions and reforms for wider international consideration.
Of course, reforming the transatlantic regulatory architecture can do only so much for financial diplomacy, and national interests will always be important.
But, in a world of trillion-dollar capital flows and ever-higher stakes in a sound global financial system, even modest improvements can make a big difference.
Better rule-making mechanisms are a good place to start.
The Obama Anti-Doctrine
DENVER – US President Barack Obama was right to forego the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) meeting in Bali, Indonesia, and focus instead on dealing with the political pathologies of the US Congress.
But his decision, while correct, had the effect of reviving an increasingly common refrain in the East Asian region: What happened to the “pivot”?
Conceived as a long-overdue shift in resources and attention from wars and other urgent challenges in the Middle East toward the vast expanse of opportunities in the Asia-Pacific region, America’s much-vaunted strategic pivot immediately ran into a gauntlet of unintended consequences (the handmaidens of inconsistent and poorly articulated policy).
For starters, there was the perception that the withdrawal of US troops from Iraq and Afghanistan amounted to a downgrading of US interests in the Middle East.
Coming as it did on the eve of the cataclysmic Arab Spring, the Obama administration has struggled with this unintended consequence of the pivot ever since.
Whoever in the administration devised the phrase “leading from behind” only compounded the problem.
Second, many Europeans understood the pivot to Asia as implying a reduction in America’s commitment to the Atlantic alliance.
Though several European countries have done relatively well in terms of maintaining consultations and commitments with the US, Europe’s leaders have watched with growing concern as the postwar security structure has faltered.
To be sure, Europeans have contributed to this dynamic: witness their own haste in exiting the NATO mission in Afghanistan.
But the increased sense of drift in Euro-Atlantic structures, fueled principally by Europe’s financial crisis and America’s prolonged political rift, leaves little room for optimism.
Finally, efforts to explain the pivot’s goal – US affirmation that Asia is now at the center of the world economy – have fallen flat from the start.
The Chinese believed that the entire purpose was to confront and contain their country’s geopolitical rise.
And who could blame them, given the drumbeat of US policy pronouncements expressing concern about China?
Indeed, in the weeks that followed the initial announcement of the pivot (which came just as the 2012 US election campaign was getting under way), China-bashing by American officials got worse.
A perfectly normal extension of the US-Philippine security agreement turned into an occasion to bemoan China’s claims on what former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton called the “West Philippine Sea.”
In this environment, the Chinese perceived a routine decision to send US marines to train in Australia as another link in the chain meant to hold China down.
Even the opening to Myanmar was briefed to the press as a move designed to counter Chinese influence in that resource-rich country.
Soon after these episodes, the US Department of Defense announced that it would begin relocating American forces to the western Pacific, focusing China’s attention further.
Likewise, the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), a proposed mega-regional free-trade deal from which China has so far been excluded – has fueled concern in China regarding US intentions.
But China has been far from blameless: witness its heavy-handed approach to its Asian neighbors in pressing its territorial claims in the East and South China Seas.
And, while growing signs of impatience with North Korea have been welcomed as a harbinger of an eventual policy shift, fresh thinking in China has not been sufficient to forestall US efforts to step up military cooperation with South Korea and Japan.
But perhaps China does not need to do anything to change US policy again.
Since Obama’s re-election, there appears to have been a pivot away from the pivot, toward something that can be described only as retro.
Secretary of State John Kerry’s effort to jump-start the Arab-Israel peace process was a laudable initiative.
But, if the Arab Spring has taught us anything, it is that the Middle East’s real fault lines have little to do with Israel and much to do with the Arab world’s deepening secularist-Islamist divide and growing sectarian struggle between Shia and Sunni.
Israel is but a small part of this overall pattern.
More recently, there was America’s event-driven shift toward cooperation with Russia on ending Syria’s civil war, following a chemical-weapons attack that left at least 1,400 people dead.
All of this raises a fundamental question: Does the US even need an overarching design for its foreign policy?
If the outcome is to make its foreign policy less reliable and predictable – or, worse, susceptible to misunderstanding – then it certainly does not.
The new world order has given way to an order-less world, in which reliability and predictability have given way to rapid shifts in focus and fickle commitments.
And, sadly, this state of affairs seems to be emanating not from countries in crisis, but rather from the US itself.
Now that Obama appears to have a brief respite from his domestic problems, this might be an opportune moment for him to set out America’s foreign-policy priorities and explain how the US plans to pursue them.
Is the pivot to Asia sustainable?
What are America’s objectives in the Middle East?
Is the US to be a kind of hectoring NGO, lecturing friends and detractors alike for not being more like Americans?
And just what is the US trying to accomplish with Russia?
Can it identify ways to cooperate with this difficult, undemocratic state, in order to address issues of mutual concern?
It is time for a tour d’horizon from Obama.
His administration still has three years to go, and the world is waiting, watching, and, frankly, wondering.
Facing Up to Chronic Disease
MONTREAL – Many of us are terrified by the prospect of having a debilitating stroke or a fatal heart attack.
Few of us, however, respond as emotionally to the threat of chronic disease, a vague and elastic term that is mainly useful for organizing health services.
And yet chronic disease has become a major social problem that requires a collective response.
Historically, chronic disease referred to conditions lasting over a long period.
But, with the increasing organization of medicine around specific diseases, the term has come to refer to an open-ended set of conditions including cardiovascular disease, cancer, and diabetes, but not infectious diseases, such as tuberculosis and malaria, or mental illness.
In the nineteenth century, chronic disease was considered problematic in part because sufferers took up scarce beds in hospitals that were increasingly focused on treating acute, curable diseases.
But chronic disease soon became a wider public-health issue as the death toll from cancer, cardiovascular disease, and diabetes seemed to rise.
In fact, the initial increase in the number of reported deaths from these diseases most likely reflected better identification and diagnosis.
Filling in death certificates is not an exact science, and doctors focus on causes with which they are familiar.
Over time, though, the incidence of chronic disease almost certainly did rise in developed countries.
As infectious diseases have been brought increasingly under control, more people live into old age, when they become susceptible to long-term illnesses.
As a result, chronic diseases now comprise a large proportion of health-care systems' total caseloads.
Our collective interest in addressing the problem of chronic diseases does not rest only on epidemiological statistics.
It also reflects deep, long-standing concerns about the effects of civilization: urban overcrowding, sedentary lifestyles, unhealthy habits like tobacco and alcohol consumption, overeating, and stress.
Moreover, we have come to believe that most diseases, including previously hopeless conditions, can be prevented, cured, ameliorated, or controlled by scientific medicine, and that even those patients unlikely to benefit have a right to medical care.
As chronic disease has become an increasingly prevalent social problem, it has been dealt with in two ways.
The most common response is disease-specific.
The American Cancer Society and the American Heart Association, as well as the disease-based research institutes of the National Institutes of Health, are notable examples.
An alternative approach is to treat these illnesses as a single, comprehensive problem.
The earliest example occurred in the United States, where a focus on welfare measures and health insurance for vulnerable populations – the elderly, the disabled, and the very poor – led to a strong push to confront the chronic diseases widespread among them.
European countries, preoccupied with national health-care systems that addressed the needs of the entire population, took longer to move toward comprehensive strategies.
Both approaches have given rise to new forms of epidemiological surveillance.
Since the 1950s, for example, the field has been extended to risk factors, a concept that grew out of debates about the health effects of tobacco and studies of cardiovascular diseases with multiple potential causes.
Some risk factors – moderate hypertension and high cholesterol, for example – have themselves become chronic diseases, requiring medical (and sometimes surgical) treatment and further contributing to the rise in illness rates.
A new vision of health care, which has grown out of the US managed-care movement, has recently heightened the relevance of embracing a comprehensive approach to treating these conditions.
Originally intended to cut costs, the goal now is to provide more appropriate care for a new era, the premise being that long-term care for many diseases requires forms of medical organization that are different from those geared toward acute care.
Acute episodes and expensive hospitalization can be avoided by providing expert team support for patient self-care.
The most successful and radical of these initiatives is the Chronic Care Model developed by Edward Wagner, an American doctor.
Less sweeping is the Medical Home Model, also developed in the US, which seeks to create teams of caregivers to provide better access and continuity of care to patients suffering from multiple diseases.
Massive health-care systems cannot shift course easily or quickly.
But efforts like these, by focusing on the need to provide appropriate and less expensive care for chronic diseases, constitute a small step in the right direction.
Chronicle of a Currency Crisis Foretold
CAMBRIDGE – The crisis in Greece and the debt problems in Spain and Portugal have exposed the euro’s inherent flaws.  No amount of financial guarantees – much less rhetorical reassurance – from the European Union can paper them over. After 11 years of smooth sailing since the euro’s creation, the arrangement’s fundamental problems have become glaringly obvious.
The attempt to establish a single currency for 16 separate and quite different countries was bound to fail.
The shift to a single currency meant that the individual member countries lost the ability to control monetary policy and interest rates in order to respond to national economic conditions.
It also meant that each country’s exchange rate could no longer respond to the cumulative effects of differences in productivity and global demand trends.
In addition, the single currency weakens the market signals that would otherwise warn a country that its fiscal deficits were becoming excessive.
And when a country with excessive fiscal deficits needs to raise taxes and cut government spending, as Greece clearly does now, the resulting contraction of GDP and employment cannot be reduced by a devaluation that increases exports and reduces imports.
Why, then, is the United States able to operate with a single currency, despite major differences among its 50 states?
There are three key economic conditions – none of which exists in Europe – that allow the diverse US states to operate with a single currency: labor mobility, wage flexibility, and a central fiscal authority.
When the textile and shoe industries in America’s northeastern states died, workers moved to the West, where new industries were growing. The unemployed workers of Greece, Portugal, and Spain do not move to faster-growing regions of Europe because of differences in language, history, religion, union membership, etc.
Moreover, wage flexibility meant that substantially slower wage growth in the states that lost industries helped to attract and retain other industries. And the US fiscal system collects roughly two-thirds of all taxes at the national level, which implies an automatic and substantial net fiscal transfer to states with temporarily falling incomes.
The European Central Bank must set monetary policy for the eurozone as a whole, even if that policy is highly inappropriate for some member countries.
When demand in Germany and France was quite weak early in the last decade, the ECB reduced interest rates sharply.
That helped Germany and France, but it also inflated real-estate bubbles in Spain and Ireland.
The recent collapse of those bubbles caused sharp downturns in economic activity and substantial increases in unemployment in both countries.
The introduction of the euro, with its implication of a low common rate of inflation, caused sharp declines in interest rates in Greece and several other countries that had previously had high rates.
Those countries succumbed to the resulting temptation to increase government borrowing, driving the ratio of government debt to GDP to more than 100% in Greece and Italy.
Until recently, the bond markets treated all euro sovereign debts as virtually equal, not raising interest rates on high-debt countries until the possibility of default became clear.
The need for massive fiscal adjustment without any offsetting currency devaluation will now drive Greece and perhaps others to default on their government debt, probably through some kind of IMF-supported debt restructuring.
The euro was promoted as necessary for free trade among the member countries under the slogan “One Market, One Money.”
In reality, of course, a single currency or fixed exchange rate is not needed for trade to flourish.
The US has annual trade turnover of more than $2 trillion, despite a flexible exchange rate that has seen sharp ups and downs in recent decades.
The North American Free Trade area increased trade among Canada, Mexico, and the US, all of which have separately floating exchange rates.
Japan, South Korea, and other major Asian trading countries have very flexible exchange rates.
And, obviously, only 16 nations within the 27-member EU’s free-trade area use the euro.
Despite its problems, the euro is very likely to survive the current crisis.
But not all of the eurozone’s current members may be there a year from now.
In retrospect, it is clear that some of the countries were allowed to join prematurely, when they still had massive budget deficits and high debt-to-GDP ratios.
Moreover, some countries’ industrial composition and low rates of productivity growth mean that a fixed exchange rate would doom them to increasingly large trade deficits.
For the rest, some mechanism of enhanced surveillance and control may be adopted to limit future fiscal deficits.
But, even with a smaller group of member countries and some changes in budget procedures, the fundamental problems of forcing disparate countries to live with a single monetary policy and a single exchange rate will remain.
Rank Stupidity?
BLOOMINGTON – “Cite your sources.”
The admonition rings in the ear of every slapdash undergraduate and corner-cutting postdoc.
But have we taken the emphasis on citation too far?
From an early age, we are taught to acknowledge those whose ideas and insights have shaped our thinking.
During our academic careers, we learn to provide correct attribution for the existing words, data, or images that we are using.
And “credit where credit is due” is the axial principle around which the entire scholarly publication system revolves.
In academia, citing the work of others is not a mere courtesy; it is a normative requirement.
Indeed, it is almost impossible to imagine an article being published in a reputable journal without an accompanying list of references.
Plagiarism is one of the few acts that can bring a glittering academic career to a halt.
Citations contextualize research and help to orient the reader.
They allow the reader to evaluate the author’s work on the basis of the perceived quality of the selected references.
And they enable the reader to track down previously unknown but potentially useful work.
Eugene Garfield understood this.
In 1955, Garfield created the Science Citation Index (SCI), a database containing all of the cited references across the most highly respected scientific journals, thereby capturing the sprawling web of connections among texts.
As he put it, “By using the authors’ references in compiling the citation index, we are in reality utilizing an army of indexers, for every time an author makes a reference, he is in effect indexing that work from his point of view.”
The SCI would enable researchers to follow chains of knowledge backward and forward along the citation links embedded in scientific literature.
The SCI’s potential was not lost on the scientific community, whose members quickly adopted it – but not for the reasons one might expect.
The enrichment of the subject matter with previous analyses, connections, and conclusions regarding the same cited texts was certainly part of the attraction.
More appealing, however, was the possibility of tracking the scholarly influence of oneself and others over time and across fields, and identifying the most highly cited scientists, papers, journals, and institutions.
Almost overnight, the humble bibliographic reference acquired symbolic&nbsp;significance, and science gained a scorecard.
But did science really need one?
The SCI gave rise to multiple citation-based measures, with two, in particular, warranting mention.
The first – another brainchild of Garfield’s – is impact factor (IF), which offers a putative indication of an academic journal’s quality based on the average number of times its articles were cited during the previous two years.
A high impact factor instantly boosts a journal’s prestige.
Another notable measure is the h-index – conceived by the physicist Jorge Hirsch – which aims to measure scholars’ productivity and impact.
H-index accounting is straightforward: if a researcher publishes 20 papers that have each been cited at least 20 times, she has an h-index of 20.
If she publishes 34 papers, each cited at least 34 times, she earns an h-index of 34.
Despite the well-documented limitations of these measures, their simplicity – not to mention the competition inherent to scientific progress – makes them widely appealing.
As a result, they have been deemed meaningful by people who should know better.
Indeed, citation data have become&nbsp;the vital statistics of academia, with researchers routinely including IF data and h-indexes – along with raw citation scores generated from sources like Thomson Reuters’ Web of Science (Garfield’s database), Elsevier’s Scopus, and Google Scholar – on their curricula vitae.
Likewise, several annual university rankings – including the CWTS Leiden Ranking, the Shanghai Academic Ranking of World Universities, QS World University Rankings, and the World University Rankings – rely on publication and citation data in their calculations.
University presidents must work to boost their institutions’ citation records, even though they know that the validity and reliability of these data, and the rankings that they inform, are questionable.
The problem is not limited to academia.
Administrators are using such measures to assess the productivity of those they hire and fund, and track the downstream impact of the research and development projects they underwrite, with little regard for the limitations of such indices.
In countries like the United Kingdom, Australia, Germany, and Italy, research-assessment exercises are inexorably creating a culture of quantification and accountability, in which citation data play an increasingly important role.
The more these “objective” indicators are used in research assessment and personnel evaluation, the more scientists feel obliged to play the citation game.
Increasingly, that means gaming the system, by focusing on work that promises short-term yields, pursuing “hot” research topics, spending more time on self-promotion (facilitated by the proliferation of social media), and slicing and dicing their work to attract maximum attention.
The recent emergence of so-called “alternative metrics” (such as downloads, recommendations, Facebook likes, and Tweets) has intensified the pressure on researchers to stockpile multidimensional evidence of their influence.
To be sure, the application of social analytics to the world of research and scholarship may yet provide important insights that make it easier to assess a scholar’s “true” contributions.
The challenge will be to manage the trade-off between transparency and triviality.
As Einstein purportedly said: “Not everything that can be counted counts, and not everything that counts can be counted.”
Pertumbuhan Inklusif Bergantung pada Kota
PARIS, WASHINGTON, DC – Kita hidup di masa yang penuh gejolak, dan ketidakpuasan terhadap status quo semakin meningkat.
Alasan atas ketidapuasan ini berbeda dari satu negara ke negara lain, namun terdapat benang merah, yaitu perasaan bahwa perekonomian hanya menguntungkan sekelompok orang saja. 
Memang benar, keuntungan dari perkembangan ekonomi semakin menguntungkan kelompok yang berpendapatan terbesar.
Di negara-negara OECD, orang yang termasuk dalam 10% pendapatan teratas mendapatkan sekitar sepuluh kali lipat dari orang yang termasuk dalam 10% pendapatan terendah – meningkat dari tujuh kali lipat di 30 tahun lalu.
Pada tahun 2012, diantara 18 negara OECD dengan data pembanding, orang yang termasuk dalam 10% pendapatan teratas mendapatkan 50% dari total kekayaan rumah tangga, sementara orang yang termasuk dalam 40% pendapatan terendah mendapatkan hanya 3% total kekayaan rumah tangga.   
Kita semua akan menanggung akibat jika ketimpangan meningkat.
Di antara negara-negara OECD, peningkatan ketimpangan mengurangi 6-10 angka dari keseluruhan PDB antara tahun 1990 dan 2010.
Ketika kelompok orang termiskin tidak dapat memenuhi potensi mereka, hal ini akan berdampak buruk pada pertumbuhan ekonomi.
Pada saat pembuat keputusan dan pemimpin politik mencari solusi agar pertumbuhan ekonomi lebih inklusif, kota akan memainkan peranan penting dalam setiap solusi.
Survei di negara-negara OECD menunjukkan bahwa setengah dari total populasi hidup di kota-kota dengan lebih dari 500,000 penduduk, dan kota-kota tersebut menyumbang 60% dari total pertumbuhan lapangan kerja dan PDB sejak 2001.   
Namun, pertumbuhan ini tidak inklusif: ketimpangan pendapatan di kota-kota besar lebih tinggi dari rata-rata nasional di seluruh negara OECD yang di survey, kecuali Kanada.
Di Amerika Serikat, 95 dari 100 daerah metropolitan terbesar menambah pekerjaan dan meningkatkan output ekonomi mereka dalam lima tahun setelah Great Recession, namun hanya terdapat 20 pertumbuhan median upah berpengalaman.  
Pertumbuhan ekonomi di beberapa tahun terakhir tidak menjadikan kebanyakan pekerja lebih baik, tapi orang kaya mendapatkan manfaat dari pertumbuhan ekonomi, sementara kemiskinan menjadi lebih terkonsentrasi.
Menurut penelitian oleh Brookings Institute, jumlah daerah sangat miskin di Amerika Serikat meningkat lebih dari dua kali lipat sejak tahun 2000.  
Hal ini berdampak luas.
Tumbuh di daerah miskin telah terbukti mengurangi prospek hidup seseorang secara dramatis, bahkan ketika pendapatan tetap konstan.
Dan di daerah metropolitan seperti London dan Baltimore, perbedaan harapan hidup di daerah miskin dan kaya yang hanya berjarak beberapa mile bisa mencapai lebih dari 20 tahun.
Sebagai tempat kesempatan ekonomi dan ketimpangan, kota adalah tempat dimana kita harus mengatasi ketimpangan.
Pada bulan Maret, OECD, Ford Foundarion, Brookings, dan institut lainnya meluncurkan Inisatif Pertumbuhan Inklusif di Perkotaan, dengan kemitraan dengan Walikota New York Bill de Blasio dan 20 Walikota lainnya di seluruh dunia.
Dengan menyatukan “Walikota Juara” untuk mendefinisikan agenda pertumbuhan inklusif bersama, Inisiatif ini mengakui peran penting Walikota dalam menciptakan kesempatan ekonomi dan meningkatkan kapasitas produktif individu dan perusahaan.
Pada acara Brooking baru-baru ini, Sekretaris Jenderal OECD Angel Gurria mendiskusikan empat hal utama dimana kota dapat mengurangi ketimpangan.
Ide-ide akan dikembangkan lebih jauh pada pertemuan di Paris tanggal 21 November, yang diselenggarakan oleh Walikota Paris Anne Hidalgo.
Pertama, kota harus membuat sistem pendidikan lebih inklusif dengan berinvestasi pada sekolah kejuruan dimana orang dari berbagai usia dan latar belakang dapat mempelajari keterampilan berharga.
Misalnya, di Atlanta, Walikota Kasim Reed meluncurkan kemitraan antara inkubator startup lokal, badan pengembangan tenaga kerja kota, dan sekolah koding untuk memberikan kaum muda bimbingan jaringan, dimana mereka dapat mengembangkan pengetahuan finansial dan kemampuan berpikir kritis, sambil belajar koding.   
Kedua, kota harus memastikan lapangan pekerjaan dan kesempatan wirausaha tersedia untuk semua orang, termasuk wanita, kaum muda, imigran, dan populasi marginal.
Di Stockholm, kota yang menampung 8,000 pencari suaka antara musim gugur 2015 hingga musim semi 2016, Walikota Karin Wanngård, mengembangkan sekolah jenis baru untuk orang dewasa.
Sebagai bagian dari strategi integrasi komprehensif, sekolah baru ini akan mengajarkan bahasa, budaya, dan kecakapan teknik yang diperlukan untuk berpartisipasi di pasar kerja Stockholm.
Di Seoul, Walikota Park Won-soon menyamakan ketimpangan antara usaha kecil dan medium dengan bantuan finansial, transaksi yang lebih adil dan peraturan sub-kontrak, dan regularisasi pekerjaan informal.   
Ketiga, kota harus memastikan perumahaan yang berkualitas dan terjangkau bagi semua orang di daerah yang aman dan sehat.
Di Paris, rencana “hak penolakan pertama” Hidalgo memungkinkan pemerintah kota untuk mendapatkan rumah yang dipasarkan di daerah tertentu sehingga pemerintah dapat menyediakan rumah tersebut untuk penduduk miskin yang bersiko terlantar.   
Yang terakhir, kota harus memastikan infrastruktur dan layanan umum – termasuk transportasi umum, air, energi, pengolahan sampah dan broadband – dapat diakses dengan mudah oleh semua orang.
Di New York, inisiatif IDNYC de Blasio menyediakan kartu identitas gratis dari pemerintah untuk semua penduduk kota – termasuk tuna wisma, imigran yang tidak terdokumentasi, dan mantan napi – sehingga kelompok marginal dapat menggunakan sumber daya kota.
Upaya seperti Pertumbuhan Inklusif di Kota dan konferensi United Nation Habitat III membantu mengatasi peningkatan ketimpangan satu kota pada satu waktu.
Semakin kita memanfaatkan solusi lokal untuk masalah umum global, lebih banyak kemajuan yang dapat kita buat.     
Break Up Citigroup
WASHINGTON, DC – America’s presidential campaign is already well underway.
The election is not until November 2016, and very few candidates have formally thrown their hats into the ring, but the competition to promote and develop ideas – both behind closed doors and publicly – is in fully swing.
Earlier this month, Citigroup took advantage of this formative political moment by seizing an opportunity to score a tactical victory – but one that amounts to a strategic blunder.
Using legislative language apparently drafted by Citi’s own lobbyists, the firm successfully pressed for the repeal of some of the 2010 Dodd-Frank financial reforms.
The provision was then passed after it was attached to a last-minute spending bill – a tactic that ensured very little debate in the House of Representatives and none at all in the Senate.
At a stroke, Citi executives demonstrated both their continued political clout in Washington and their continued desire to take on excessive amounts of financial risk (which is what this particular legal change permits).
Lobbying to be allowed to load up on risk is exactly what Citi did during the 1990s and 2000s under Presidents Bill Clinton and George W. Bush – with catastrophic consequences for the broader economy in 2007-09.
As a result, breaking up Citigroup is under serious consideration as a potential campaign theme.
For example, in a powerful speech – watched online more than a half-million times – Senator Elizabeth Warren responded uncompromisingly to the megabanks’ latest display of muscle: “Let’s pass something – anything – that would help break up these giant banks.”
Defenders of the megabanks – Citi, JP Morgan Chase, Bank of America, Wells Fargo, Goldman Sachs, and Morgan Stanley – dismiss Warren as an avatar of left-wing populism.
But this is a serious misconception; in fact, Warren is attracting a great deal of support from the center and the right.
Senator David Vitter of Louisiana is the most prominent Republican member of Congress in favor of limiting the size and power of the biggest banks, but there are others who lean in a similar direction.
Similarly, the vice chair of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Thomas Hoenig, a political independent, consistently warns about the dangers associated with megabanks.
And former FDIC Chair Sheila Bair, a Republican from Kansas, argues strongly for additional measures to rein in the biggest banks.
From the perspective of anyone seeking the nomination of either of America’s political parties, here is an issue that cuts across partisan lines.
“Break up Citigroup” is a concrete and powerful idea that would move the financial system in the right direction.
It is not a panacea, but the coalition that can break up Citi can also put in place other measures to make the financial system safer – including more effective consumer protection, greater transparency in markets, and higher capital requirements for major banks.
From the left, the emphasis has been on the megabanks’ abuse of power and the great rip-off of the middle class.
From the right, the stress is on the hazards of crony capitalism, owing to the massive implicit government subsidies that these banks receive.
But both left and right agree on the fundamental asymmetry that the recent “Citigroup Amendment” implies: Bankers get rich whether they win or lose, because the US taxpayer foots the bill when their risky bets fail.
Potential Republican presidential candidates have hesitated to take up this issue in public – perhaps feeling that it will inhibit their ability to raise money from Wall Street.
Among the Democrats, however, the opportunity seems to be much more compelling; indeed, avoiding a confrontation with Wall Street might actually create problems for a candidate (as Hillary Clinton may well find out).
The Progressive Change Institute is currently running “The Big Ideas Project,” whereby people can vote on what they regard as the most important policy proposals.
Three of the top ten ideas under “Economy &amp; Jobs” are about imposing greater constraints on the big banks – and there is a sharp upward trend in support for Break Up Citigroup (full disclosure: I suggested this item for the website).
This idea would play well in the Democratic primary elections (which start in early 2016).
And, because it forms the basis for responsible policies, it would attract support from centrists.
And voters on the right like proposals that offer a credible way to end the favoritism – if not outright corruption – that has come to define the relationship between the top levels of government and Wall Street.
“Break up Citigroup, end dangerous government subsidies, and bring back the market.”
The US presidential candidate who says this in 2016 – and says it most convincingly – has a good chance of winning it all.
Wall Street for President?
WASHINGTON, DC – America’s presidential election is still nearly two years away, and few candidates have formally thrown their hats into the ring.
But both Democrats and Republicans are hard at work figuring out what will appeal to voters in their parties’ respective primary elections – and thinking about what will play well to the electorate as a whole in November 2016.
The contrast between the parties at this stage is striking.
Potential Republican presidential candidates are arguing among themselves about almost everything, from economics to social issues; it is hard to say which ideas and arguments will end up on top.
The Democrats, by contrast, are in agreement on most issues, with one major exception: financial reform and the power of very large banks.
The Democrats’ internal disagreement on this issue is apparent when one compares three major proposals to address income inequality that the party and its allies have presented in recent weeks.
There are only small differences between President Barack Obama’s proposals (in his budget and State of the Union address), those made in a high-profile report from the Center for American Progress, and ideas advanced by Chris Van Hollen, an influential member of Congress. (For example, Van Hollen recommends more redistribution from higher-income people to offset a larger tax cut for middle-income groups.)
Against this backdrop of programmatic unity, the difference of opinion among leading Democrats concerning Wall Street – both the specifics of the 2010 Dodd-Frank financial reforms and more broadly – stands out in bold relief.
On Dodd-Frank, Democrats – including Obama – are apparently of two minds on the extent to which they should stick up for their own reforms.
In December, the White House agreed to a Republican proposal to repeal a provision of Dodd-Frank that would have limited the risk-taking of the country’s largest banks (in fact, the proposal’s language was drafted by Citigroup).
More recently, however, Obama has threatened to veto any further attempts to roll back financial reform.
And now he is proposing to impose a small tax on the largest banks’ liabilities, which he hopes will encourage “them to make decisions more consistent with the economy-wide effects of their actions, which would in turn help reduce the probability of major defaults that can have widespread economic costs.”
In contrast, the Center for American Progress report devoted very little space to financial-sector reform – in the authors’ view, such issues hardly seem to be a high priority.
Van Hollen does have some concerns – and proposes a financial transaction tax to reduce speculative activities.
But a serious challenge to all of these views has now emerged, in proposals by Senator Elizabeth Warren, a rising Democratic star who has become increasingly prominent at the national level.
In her view, the authorities need to confront head-on the outsize influence and dangerous structure of America’s largest banks.
Warren’s opponents like to suggest that her ideas are somehow outside the mainstream; in fact, she draws support from across the political spectrum.
In last month’s fight against Citigroup’s successful effort to roll back Dodd-Frank, for example, Warren’s allies included the House Democratic leadership, the Independent Community Bankers of America, Republican Senator David Vitter, and Thomas Hoenig (a Republican-appointed vice chair of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation).
Warren’s message is simple: remove the implicit government subsidies that support the too-big-to-fail banks.
That single move would go a long way toward reducing, if not eliminating, crony capitalism and strengthening market competition in the financial sector.
This is a message that plays well across the political spectrum.
And growing support for Warren’s ideas helps the Federal Reserve and other responsible regulators in their efforts to prevent big banks from taking on dangerous levels of risk.
The big Wall Street banks have enormous influence in Washington, DC, in large part because of their campaign contributions.
They also support – directly and indirectly – a vast influence industry, comprising people who pose as independent or moderate commentators, edit the financial press, or produce bespoke “research” at think tanks.
These megabanks are making a determined attempt to repeal as much of Dodd-Frank as possible, and the House Republicans seem keen to help them.
This is not an issue that will fade away.
The Democrats need to figure out their policy on Wall Street.
In the past, they have simply gone for the campaign contributions, doling out access and influence in exchange.
It is now obvious that this is not consistent with defending what remains of Dodd-Frank.
Warren offers a plausible, moderate alternative approach to financial-sector policy that would play well in the primaries and attract a great deal of support in the general election.
Will the Democrats seize the opportunity?
Citizens versus Extreme Poverty
Twenty years ago, a grass-roots movement led by Rotary International, a voluntary organization with around 1.2 million members in more than 200 countries, decided to attack.
As of the mid-1980’s, there were more than 300,000 cases of polio per year worldwide, despite the disease’s virtual elimination in the richest countries, where vaccination was routine.
Rotary took on the challenge of getting vaccines to the poor, in regions with weak or non-existent public health systems.
Rotarians dreamed not only of reducing the number of polio cases, but of eradicating the disease entirely.
This goal is now within reach.
Rather than wait for politicians to take up the fight against polio, Rotarians led the way.
A few years later, the World Health Organization, and then other international agencies and donor countries, joined the cause, creating a coalition of official and private organizations that now support Rotary’s vision.
By 2006, the number of polio cases had been cut dramatically, to well under 3,000 cases per year.