Bush has said that history will redeem him, and compares himself to President Harry S. Truman, who left office with low poll ratings because of the Korean War, yet is well regarded today.
Will history really be so kind to Bush?
Truman biographer David McCullough warns that about 50 years must pass before historians can really appraise a presidency.
But one decade after Truman left office, the Marshall Plan and the NATO alliance were already seen as solid accomplishments.
Bush lacks comparable successes to compensate for his mismanagement of Iraq.
History tends to be unkind to the unlucky, but historians also judge leaders in terms of the causes of their luck.
Good coaches analyze their game and their opponent’s game, so that they can capitalize on errors and benefit from “good luck.”
By contrast, reckless reality-testing and unnecessary risk-taking are often part of “bad luck.”
Future historians are likely to fault Bush for these shortcomings.
Even if fortuitous events lead to a better Middle East in another ten years, future historians will criticize the way Bush made his decisions and distributed the risks and costs of his actions.
It is one thing to guide people up a mountain; it is another to lead them to the edge of a cliff.
The Irish Think Again About the Lisbon Treaty
MAYNOOTH, IRELAND – For months, the European Union has been battered by economic storms that now seriously threaten a protracted Europe-wide recession.
But, although banking and finance have taken center stage, the EU’s constitutional problem refuses to go away.
The Irish rejection of the Lisbon Treaty in June plunged the EU into a renewed period of uncertainty about the Union’s future.
Now, in the run-up to the European Council summit on 11-12 December, expectations are growing that Irish Prime Minister Brian Cowen will provide a clear roadmap for an Irish solution to the EU’s constitutional dilemma.
Pragmatists acknowledge that the ratification crisis set in train by the Irish rejection of the Lisbon Treaty has grown into a wider European problem.
The Irish “No” emboldened Euro-skeptics in other member states, not least the irascible Czech president, Václav Klaus, who has signaled that he may refuse to sign the Lisbon Treaty until Ireland’s ratification is secured.
With the Czech Republic set to assume the presidency of the EU on January 1, 2009, there is a distinct fear that Klaus will use his position as Czech head of state to try to sabotage efforts to rescue the Lisbon Treaty.
These concerns remain acute, even in the aftermath of the decision by the Czech Constitutional Court on November 26 that the Lisbon Treaty is compatible with the Czech constitution and can be ratified in the normal way by the Czech Parliament.
But the current constellation of Czech political forces is finely balanced between pro-Treaty and anti-Treaty forces.
So the inter-linkage between the ratification crises in Ireland and the Czech Republic is now explicit and threatens to spill over into the wider EU arena in 2009.
One reason Irish voters rejected the Lisbon Treaty lay in concerns that Ireland’s voice and representation within EU institutions would be eroded, in particular through the periodic loss of Irish representation on the European Commission.
As a first step toward convening a second poll, Cowen has sought EU-wide agreement that, rather than reducing the size of the Commission, the provision of the Lisbon Treaty that allows for a “one member state, one commissioner” rule will be enacted, allowing Ireland to retain a permanent place.
Although this concession is not yet a done deal, there is increasing acknowledgment that it would give Dublin considerable breathing space to conduct a more effective second referendum campaign.
The second part of the plan is for the EU to provide the Irish with a series of clarifications on other key issues. These include Ireland’s exclusive right to decide policy on issues such as abortion and corporation tax as well as participation in European security and defense operations.
The model for this approach is Denmark’s attainment of legal opt-outs in defined areas.
Political declarations on the issues outlined would be registered as international treaties at the United Nations to provide binding legal force. The Lisbon Treaty would remain unchanged.
The paradox of the Irish position is that opinion polls continue to demonstrate strong popular attachment to the EU.
A total of 82% of Irish people surveyed earlier this year believed Ireland had benefited from EU membership, the highest score in Europe, where the average was 54%.
The most recent opinion poll on attitudes about the Lisbon Treaty also demonstrates a “bounce” in favor of the Yes side.
But the problem for Cowen (and for the EU) is that this level of support does not seem to translate to the ballot box: the Irish rejected EU treaties on two of the last three occasions when they were asked to vote.
The gap between the Yes and No sides remains within the margin of error and could easily reverse itself, as it did in the weeks leading up to the June referendum.
One positive development for Cowen is that a second referendum would most likely bring back into play the significant economic dimension of Ireland’s EU membership.
Ireland has been a major beneficiary of EU subvention since joining in 1973, and, in 2007, it was still receiving a net total of €500 million from the EU budget.
Reminding voters of the potentially catastrophic cost of being excluded, not just from core parts of the Single Market, but from the vital decision-making structures in the Council of Ministers and the European Central Bank, reinforces what is at stake in a second referendum campaign.
The extraordinary implosion of global financial markets may also work to the advantage of the Yes side in a second referendum, because Ireland’s economic future cannot be contemplated seriously outside of EU structures.
Indeed Irish ministers argue that Ireland would have gone the way of Iceland in recent months were it not for EU membership and the protections afforded by euro-zone membership.
The Irrepressible 1930’s
LONDON – The just concluded G-20 meeting in Seoul broke up without agreement on either currencies or trade.
China and the United States accused each other of deliberately manipulating their currencies to get a trade advantage.
The Doha Round of global trade talks remain stalled.
And, amid talk of the “risks” of new currency and trade wars, such wars have already begun.
Thus, despite global leaders’ vows to the contrary, it seems that the dreadful protectionist precedent of the 1930’s is about to be revived.
That decade’s trade war was started by the US with the Smoot-Hawley tariff of 1930.
The British retaliated with the Import Duties Act of 1932, followed by Imperial Preference.
Soon, the world economy was a thicket of trade barriers.
Britain fired the first shot in the 1930’s currency war, leaving the gold standard in September 1931.
The US retaliated by leaving the gold standard in April 1933.
The pound fell against the dollar, then the dollar against the pound.
While the two main currencies of the day were slugging it out, France headed a European “gold bloc” of countries whose currencies became increasingly overvalued against both, until the bloc collapsed in 1936.
A world economic conference, convened in London in 1933 to end the currency war, adjourned without reaching any decision.
Substitute China for Britain and today’s eurozone for the gold bloc and the trend of events today has the same ominous feel.
The US Federal Reserve now proposes to stimulate the American economy by printing more money – a second round of (quantitative easing, or QE2), to the tune of $600 billion.
Almost no one remembers that President Franklin Roosevelt tried the same thing in 1933.
Prices had started falling in September of that year, following a brief commodity boom.
George F. Warren, a professor of farm management at Cornell University, told FDR that the way to raise prices was by reducing the gold value of the dollar.
Under the gold standard, the dollar was convertible into gold at a fixed price of $20.67 an ounce.
To stabilize the price level, the economist Irving Fisher had produced a plan for a “compensated dollar,” which would vary the dollar’s gold value to offset rising or falling prices, in effect allowing the Fed to issue more or fewer dollars as dictated by business conditions.
In response to deflationary pressure, Fisher’s plan would have enabled banks to draw down their reserves and thus, supposedly, increase their lending (or create deposits).
The extra spending would cause prices to rise, which would stimulate business activity.
Fisher provided a new rationale for an old practice of debasing the coinage called seignorage.
The variant proposed by Warren, and followed by FDR in 1933, was to raise the price at which the government bought gold from the mint.
Since a higher price meant that each dollar cost less in terms of gold, the result would be the same as in the Fisher plan.
Domestic prices would rise, helping farmers, and the external value of the dollar would fall, helping exporters.
Starting on 25 October 1933, Roosevelt, Henry Morgenthau, his acting Secretary of the Treasury, and Jesse Jones, head of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, met every morning in Roosevelt’s bedroom to set the price of gold.
One day, they increased it by $0.21, since 21 seemed like a lucky number.
At first, they bought only newly minted gold in the US.
Later they bought up gold supplies from abroad.
The gold-buying policy raised the official gold price from $20.67 an ounce in October 1933 to $35.00 an ounce in January 1934, when the experiment was discontinued.
By then, several hundred million dollars had been pumped into the banking system.
The results were disappointing, however.
Buying foreign gold did succeed in driving down the dollar’s value in terms of gold.
But domestic prices continued falling throughout the three months of the gold-buying spree.
The Fed’s more orthodox efforts at quantitative easing produced equally discouraging results.
But money includes bank deposits, which depend on business confidence.
As the saying went, “You can’t push on a string.”
Keynes wrote at the time: “Some people seem to infer…that output and income can be raised by increasing the quantity of money.
But this is like trying to get fat by buying a larger belt.
In the United States today, the belt is plenty big enough for the belly….It is [not] the quantity of money, [but] the volume of expenditure which is the operative factor.”
Now the US, relying on the same flawed theory, is doing it again.
Not surprisingly, China accuses it of deliberately aiming to depreciate the dollar.
But the resulting increase in US exports at the expense of Chinese, Japanese, and European producers is precisely the purpose.
The euro will become progressively overvalued, just as the gold bloc was in the 1930’s.
Since the eurozone is committed to austerity, its only recourse is protectionism.
Meanwhile, China’s policy of slowly letting the renminbi rise against the dollar might well go into reverse, provoking US protectionism.
The failure of the G-20’s Seoul meeting to make any progress towards agreement on exchange rates or future reserve arrangements opens the door to a re-run of the 1930’s.
Let’s hope that wisdom prevails before the rise of another Hitler.
The Islamic Democratic Paradox
The rage across the Arab world over the publication in Denmark (months ago) of cartoons depicting the prophet Mohammed, together with the victory of Hamas in Palestine and the increasing radicalization of Iran’s politics, has made “political Islam” a fundamental question of international diplomacy.
But a one-size-fits-all response won’t work.
Indeed, we need to abandon the idea that there is a holistic or global Islamist movement.
Political Islam of all colors has emerged as the main alternative to secular Arab nationalist regimes whose legitimacy, based on the struggle for national liberation, has evaporated due to their inability to resolve economic and social problems, establish the rule of law, and guarantee fundamental freedoms.
In Palestine, for example, the Islamists triumphed over Fatah because of years of bad governance under the harsh conditions spawned by Israeli occupation.
Successive European and American governments share an atavistic fear of the “Islamic alternative” to Arab secular nationalists like Fatah, and so have defended the status quo.
But repression of all Arab opposition movements by the region’s monarchs and secular dictators meant that “protection of the Mosque” became the only umbrella under which to engage politically.
Now political Islam can no longer be contained, because democracy cannot be built by driving underground parties that have a strong social base, as was tragically demonstrated in Algeria 15 years ago.
The only alternative to authoritarianism is to craft a transition that allows Islamists to participate in public life and encourages them to accept unequivocally the rules of the democratic game.
There are already many examples of more or less conservative Islamist parties that are willing to play along.
It is no accident that there are Islamists in the legislatures of all the countries undergoing some form of political reform, including Lebanon, where Hezbollah is part of a freely elected government, as well as Jordan and Morocco.
In Egypt, the Muslim Brotherhood has become a strong force in parliament despite the limits imposed on the participation of Islamist groups in last year’s elections.
In Iraq, free elections have revealed the enormous influence of Islamist currents.
In Turkey, the transition to democracy led the Islamist Justice and Development Party to power.
That government has undertaken various important democratic reforms and initiated accession negotiations with the EU.
These Islamist parties have nothing to do with Al Qaeda, even though some of the most conservative among them have adopted somewhat similar ideological positions.
The risk of political transitions that may lead to the victory of Islamist parties is a democratic paradox that Europe and the US must accept if they are to devise inclusive reform policies – in other words, policies that are the polar opposite of the type of democratic imposition practiced in occupied Iraq.
Indeed, one of the less fortunate consequences of the intervention in Iraq was to reinforce the notion of a “clash of civilizations” between the West from Islam, which in turn serves to create a climate favorable to Islamist movements.
After all, political reform movements in the Muslim world emerged long before the US-led “war on terror,” and reformists were not waiting for the EU to become stronger to press for change.
These movements were not created in the US or Europe after September 11, 2001, and they will not wait for or depend on the US or the EU to act.
Nevertheless, the success of Muslim moderates may well depend on how the EU and the US respond to pressure for reform and how they decide to encourage change.
It is now necessary to show that democracy is the best path for Palestinians to attain their national goals.
This depends largely on the new Hamas government and its transformation into a democratic force that respects the rule of law, democracy, and international legality.
But it also depends on Israel and the international community, which must do all they can to ensure a future Palestinian state with Jerusalem as its capital.
Supporting Palestinian democratization does not mean that the international community should not demand that Hamas abandon terror for once and for all, demilitarize, respect the Palestinian constitution, and accept the existence of the state of Israel.
But it also does not mean supporting sanctions that would hurt the Palestinian people after they have expressed their will democratically.
This would be a terrible mistake in any effort to consolidate Palestine’s new democracy, with a negative impact in other reforming countries in the Arab world.
Similarly, accepting the right of non-violent Islamists to participate in public life does not mean giving up on the political and ideological struggle to defeat ultra-conservative, and in some cases totalitarian, conceptions of society.
Combating racism, promoting tolerance, and respecting the religious sentiments of others does not mean that we need to question press freedom or accept Islamists’ demands for censorship, even when real religious sentiments are offended, as in the case of the Danish caricatures.
Islamist conceptions of society that violate individual rights must be rebutted politically.
That political challenge is one of the paradoxes of democracy, which allows all ideas to compete freely with each other.
Political Islam is a risk, but we can minimize it only by devising intelligent, case-sensitive strategies that promote democracy, not by denouncing the results of democratic choice.
The Joblessness Threat
NEW YORK – Recent data suggest that job market conditions are not improving in the United States and other advanced economies.
In the US, the unemployment rate, currently at 9.5%, is poised to rise above 10% by the fall. It should peak at 11% some time in 2010 and remain well above 10% for a long time.
The unemployment rate will peak above 10% in most other advanced economies, too.
These raw figures on job losses, bad as they are, actually understate the weakness in world labor markets.
If you include partially employed workers and discouraged workers who left the US labor force, for example, the unemployment rate is already 16.5%.
Monetary and fiscal stimulus in most countries has done little to slow down the rate of job losses.
As a result, total labor income – the product of jobs times hours worked times average hourly wages – has fallen dramatically.
Moreover, many employers, seeking to share the pain of recession and slow down layoffs, are now asking workers to accept cuts in both hours and hourly wages.
British Airways, for example, has asked workers to work for an entire month without pay.
Thus, the total effect of the recession on labor income of jobs, hours and wage reductions is much larger.
A sharp contraction in jobs and labor income has many negative consequences on both the economy and financial markets.
First, falling labor income implies falling consumption for households, which have already been hard hit by a massive loss of wealth (as the value of equities and homes has fallen) and a sharp rise in their debt ratios.
With consumption accounting for 70% of US GDP in the US, and a similarly high percent in other advanced economies, this implies that the recession will last longer, and that economic recovery next year will be anemic (less than 1% growth in the US and even lower growth rates in Europe and Japan).
Second, job losses will lead to a more protracted and severe housing recession, as joblessness and falling income are key factors in determining delinquencies on mortgages and foreclosure.
By the end of this year about 8.4 million US individuals with mortgages will be unemployed and unable to service their mortgages.
Third, if you plug an unemployment rate of 10% to 11% into any model of loan defaults, you get ugly figures not just for residential mortgages (both prime and subprime), but also for commercial real estate, credit cards, student loans, auto loans, etc.
Thus, banks losses on their toxic assets and their capital needs will be much larger than recently estimated, which will worsen the credit crunch.
Fourth, rising job losses lead to greater demands for protectionist measures, as governments are pressured to save domestic jobs.
This threatens to aggravate the damaging contraction of global trade.
Fifth, the higher the unemployment rate goes, the wider budget deficits will become, as automatic stabilizers reduce revenue and increase spending (for example, on unemployment benefits).
Thus, an already unsustainable US fiscal path, with budget deficits above 10% of GDP and public debt expected to double as a share of GDP by 2014, becomes even worse.
This leads to a policy dilemma: rising unemployment rates are forcing politicians in the US and other countries to consider additional fiscal stimulus programs to boost sagging demand and falling employment.
But, despite persistent deflationary pressure through 2010, rising budget deficits, high financial-sector bailout costs, continued monetization of deficits, and eventually unsustainable levels of public debt will ultimately lead to higher expected inflation – and thus to higher interest rates, which would stifle the recovery of private demand.
So, while further fiscal stimulus seems necessary to avoid a more protracted recession, governments around the world can ill afford it: they are damned if they do and damned if they don’t.
If, like Japan in the late 1990’s and the US in 1937, they take the threat of large deficits seriously and raise taxes and cut spending too much too soon, their economies could fall back into recession.
But recession could also result if deficits are allowed to fester, or are increased with additional stimulus to boost jobs and growth, because bond-market vigilantes might push borrowing costs higher.
Thus, even as mounting job losses undermine consumption, housing prices, banks’ balance sheets, support for free trade, and public finances, the room for further policy stimulus is becoming narrower.
Indeed, not only are governments running out of fiscal bullets as debt surges, but monetary policy is having little short-run traction in economies suffering insolvency – not just liquidity – problems.
Worse still, in the medium turn the monetary overhang may lead to significant inflationary risks.
Little wonder, then, that we are now witnessing a significant correction in equity, credit, and commodities markets.
The irrational exuberance that drove a three-month bear-market rally in the spring is now giving way to a sober realization among investors that the global recession will not be over until year end, that the recovery will be weak and well below trend, and that the risks of a double-dip W-shaped recession are rising.
The Judicial Massacre of Srebrenica
The judgment of the International Court of Justice (ICJ) concerning Serbia’s involvement in the massacre of Bosnian Muslims at Srebrenica in 1995 should be greeted with considerable ambivalence.
On the one hand, the fact that an international tribunal has pronounced on the responsibility of a state in the matter of genocide is an undeniably positive development.
On the other hand, however, the Court’s decision is one of those judicial pronouncements that attempts to give something to everybody and leave everything as it was.
The Court was not supposed to hold specific individuals criminally responsible; that is the job of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
The ICJ, which instead deals with controversies between states, was faced with Bosnia’s claim that Serbia was responsible for the Srebrenica massacre.
Although the Court ruled that genocide had taken place, it decided that Serbia was not responsible under international law.
According to the Court, the Bosnian Serb generals who were guilty of this genocide, the various Mladic’s and Kristic’s, were neither acting as Serbia’s agents nor receiving specific instructions from Belgrade.
The genocide could not therefore be imputed to Serbia, even if the Serbian government was paying salaries to Mladic and his colleagues, as well as providing them with financial and military assistance.
Nor was Serbia guilty of complicity, because, though it exercised considerable influence over Mladic and his people, it did not know, at the moment when the genocide was taking place that such a crime was being committed.
Having “absolved” Serbia from the principal crime, the ICJ offered a sort of “consolation prize” to Bosnia, affirming that the killings in Srebrenica had the character of genocide – a conclusion already reached by the ICTY.
Moreover, according to the ICJ, Serbia violated international law by failing to prevent genocide, because, though it could have thwarted the massacres, it did not, and subsequently did not help the ICTY arrest Mladic (who, notoriously, is still hiding in Serbia).
The Court’s decision thus attempts to run with the hare and hunt with the hounds.
To decide whether Mladic acted on Serbia’s account when he was planning and ordering the Srebrenica massacre, the Court demanded proof that Serbian officials sent him specific “instructions” to commit this act of genocide.
Obviously, such instructions would never be found.
Why was it not enough to prove that the Bosnian Serb military leadership was financed and paid by Serbia and that it was tightly connected to Serbia political and military leadership?
More importantly, the ICJ’s decision that Serbia is responsible for not having prevented a genocide in which it was not complicit makes little sense.
According to the Court, Serbia was aware of the very high risk of acts of genocide and did nothing.
But Serbia was not complicit, the Court argued, because “it has not been proven” that the intention of committing the acts of genocide at Srebrenica “had been brought to Belgrade’s attention.”
This is a puzzling statement at best.
The massacre was prepared in detail and took place over the course of six days (between July 13 and 19).
Is it plausible that the Serbian authorities remained in the dark while the killing was in progress and reported in the press all over the world?
It seems far more reasonable to believe that Serbia’s leaders were informed about what was going on, and that, despite this, Serbia’s military, financial, and political assistance to Mladic was never interrupted.
The fundamental problem with the ICJ’s decision is its unrealistically high standard of proof for finding Serbia to have been legally complicit in genocide.
After all, one can also be guilty of complicity in a crime by not stopping it while having both the duty and the power to do so, and when, through one’s inaction, one decisively contributes to the creation of conditions that enable the crime to take place.
The survivors of Srebrenica, for whom Bosnia was seeking damage awards, will receive nothing from Serbia.
And if former Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic were alive, he would be absolved of the charge of genocide.
The Keynes-Hayek Rematch
LONDON – The Austrian economist Friedrich von Hayek, who died in 1992 at the age of 93, once remarked that to have the last word requires only outliving your opponents.
His great good fortune was to outlive Keynes by almost 50 years, and thus to claim a posthumous victory over a rival who had savaged him intellectually while he was alive.
Hayek’s apotheosis came in the 1980’s, when British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher took to quoting from The Road to Serfdom (1944), his classic attack on central planning.
But in economics there are never any final verdicts.
While Hayek’s defense of the market system against the gross inefficiency of central planning won increasing assent, Keynes’s view that market systems require continuous stabilization lingered on in finance ministries and central banks.
Both traditions, though, were eclipsed by the Chicago school of “rational expectations,” which has dominated mainstream economics for the last twenty-five years.
With economic agents supposedly possessing perfect information about all possible contingencies, systemic crises could never happen except as a result of accidents and surprises beyond the reach of economic theory.
The global economic collapse of 2007-2008 discredited “rational expectations” economics (though its high priests have yet to recognize this) and brought both Keynes and Hayek back into posthumous contention.
The issues have not changed much since their argument began in the Great Depression of the 1930’s.
What causes market economies to collapse?
What is the right response to a collapse?
What is the best way to prevent future collapses?
For Hayek in the early 1930’s, and for Hayek’s followers today, the “crisis” results from over-investment relative to the supply of savings, made possible by excessive credit expansion.
Banks lend at lower interest rates than genuine savers would have demanded, making all kinds of investment projects temporarily profitable.
But, because these investments do not reflect the real preferences of agents for future over current consumption, the savings necessary to complete them are not available. They can be kept going for a time by monetary injections from the central bank.
But market participants eventually realize that there are not enough savings to complete all the investment projects. At that point, boom turns to bust.
Every artificial boom thus carries the seeds of its own destruction.
Recovery consists of liquidating the misallocations, reducing consumption, and increasing saving.
Keynes (and Keynesians today) would think of the crisis as resulting from the opposite cause: under-investment relative to the supply of saving – that is, too little consumption or aggregate demand to maintain a full-employment level of investment – which is bound to lead to a collapse of profit expectations.
Again, the situation can be kept going for a time by resorting to consumer-debt finance, but eventually consumers become over-leveraged and curtail their purchases.
Indeed, the Keynesian and Hayekian explanations of the origins of the crisis are actually not very different, with over-indebtedness playing the key role in both accounts. But the conclusions to which the two theories point are very different.
Whereas for Hayek recovery requires the liquidation of excessive investments and an increase in consumer saving, for Keynes it consists in reducing the propensity to save and increasing consumption in order to sustain companies’ profit expectations.
Hayek demands more austerity, Keynes more spending.
We have here a clue as to why Hayek lost his great battle with Keynes in the 1930’s. It was not just that the policy of liquidating excesses was politically catastrophic: in Germany, it brought Hitler to power.
As Keynes pointed out, if everyone – households, firms, and governments – all started trying to increase their saving simultaneously, there would be no way to stop the economy from running down until people became too poor to save.
It was this flaw in Hayek’s reasoning that caused most economists to desert the Hayekian camp and embrace Keynesian “stimulus” policies.
As the economist Lionel Robbins recalled: “Confronted with the freezing deflation of those days, the idea that the prime essential was the writing down of mistaken investments and…fostering the disposition to save was…as unsuitable as denying blankets and stimulus to a drunk who has fallen into an icy pond, on the ground that his original trouble was overheating.”
Except to Hayekian fanatics, it seems obvious that the coordinated global stimulus of 2009 stopped the slide into another Great Depression.
To be sure, the cost to many governments of rescuing their banks and keeping their economies afloat in the face of business collapse damaged or destroyed their creditworthiness.
But it is increasingly recognized that public-sector austerity at a time of weak private-sector spending guarantees years of stagnation, if not further collapse.
So policy will have to change.
Little can be hoped for in Europe; the real question is whether President Barack Obama has it in him to don the mantle of President Franklin Roosevelt.
To prevent further crises of equal severity in the future, Keynesians would argue for strengthening the tools of macroeconomic management.
Hayekians have nothing sensible to contribute.
It is far too late for one of their favorite remedies – abolition of central banks, supposedly the source of excessive credit creation.
Even an economy without central banks will be subject to errors of optimism and pessimism.
And an attitude of indifference to the fallout of these mistakes is bad politics and bad morals.
So, for all his distinction as a philosopher of freedom, Hayek deserved to lose his battle with Keynes in the 1930’s. He deserves to lose today’s rematch as well.
China’s End of Exuberance
MILAN – China’s growth has slowed considerably since 2010, and it may slow even more – a prospect that is rattling investors and markets well beyond China’s borders.
With many of the global economy’s traditional growth engines – like the United States – stuck in low gear, China’s performance has become increasingly important.
But now growth rates for Chinese exports and related indices in manufacturing have fallen, largely owing to weak external demand, especially in Europe.
And the Chinese authorities are now scaling back the other major driver of their country’s growth, public-sector investment, as low-return projects seem to generate aggregate demand but prove unsustainable fairly quickly.
The government is using a variety of instruments, including financial-sector credit discipline, to rein in investment demand.
Essentially, the government guarantee associated with financing public-sector investment is being withdrawn – as it should be.
But, to circumvent the restrictions in the state-dominated financial system, a shadow banking system has developed, raising new risks: economic distortions; reliance on excess leverage to drive growth in the consumer, real estate, corporate, and government sectors; and dangers associated with inadequate regulation.
As a result, investors are worried that China could slip into the excess-leverage growth model that has served many developed economies so poorly.
Much has been made of domestic consumption as a driver of Chinese growth in the future.
But Justin Lin, a former World Bank chief economist, has argued forcefully that investment will and should remain a key growth driver, and that domestic consumption in China’s growth pattern should not be pushed beyond its natural limits into a high-leverage model based on rising consumer debt.
That seems right.
The risk is that Lin’s warning will be interpreted as an argument for sticking with an investment-led model, which would imply more low-return public-sector projects and excess capacity in selected industries.
The right target for generating growth is domestic aggregate demand based on the right mix of consumption and high-return investment.
Analysts and investors have at least two related concerns.
One is that, facing declining growth, policymakers will resort to excess investment or leverage (or both), creating instability.
The other is that they will resort to neither, and that no alternative growth engines will have been started, leading to an extended slowdown with unpredictable political consequences at home and serious economic consequences abroad.
In short, many investors are nervous because China’s future growth story is unclear to them.
It is certainly less clear than the previous story, which cannot be retold.
There is no real way to allay these concerns quickly.
Only time, implementation of the policy and systemic reforms to be revealed this fall, and actual economic performance will settle the matter one way or the other.
The shift in the growth pattern, if successful, will occur over several years.
So, what one should be looking for is movement in the right directions, which are fairly clear.
One is a shift in comparative advantage.
Rising incomes require rising productivity.
That means increasing capital and human capital intensity across both the tradable and non-tradable sectors of the economy.
On the tradable side, one should look for structural change and a shift in output to higher-value-added components of global supply chains.
Here, innovation and the conditions that support it – including competition and free entry and exit from the market – play an important role.
If policymakers choose a model based on a large state-dominated sector protected from internal and external competition, innovation objectives are unlikely to be met, adversely affecting future growth.
Meanwhile, the non-tradable side should grow.
As China becomes richer, its middle-class citizens will not just buy more tradable goods like cars, electronics, and appliances; they will buy housing and a host of non-tradable services, too.
An efficient supply-side response to this large and growing source of demand requires regulatory reform in many services, including finance, product safety, transport, and logistics.
But households still control too little income and save at very high rates.
The control of income by the overlapping corporate and public sectors makes it easier to push the investment-led growth model to the point of low (or even negative) returns.
So the entire fiscal system is a crucial item on China’s reform agenda, especially management of public capital.
Fiscal reform will determine many things: the components of domestic income and demand that will drive structural change on the supply side, the allocation of income and expenditure across levels of government, and the embedded incentives that this allocation implies.
Outside of China, this part of the reform agenda is the least well understood.
Moreover, social services and social security will need to be strengthened in order to reverse a pattern of rising inequality.
Beyond that, more inclusive growth depends on the completion of the urbanization process that underpins the creation of a modern economy; addressing corruption and unequal access to market opportunities; and aggressively mitigating well-known and serious environmental problems.
With significant elements of the global economy and external demand facing headwinds, China’s acceptance (so far) of a growth slowdown, while its new growth engines kick in, is a good sign, in my view.
It suggests that policymakers are playing for longer-run sustainable growth and have become warier of policies that, if used persistently, amount to a defective, unsustainable growth model.
Watching for progress on these key elements of structural change and reform seems to be the right stance.
If markets are confused or pessimistic about China’s longer-term agenda, but if the direction of structural change and reform is positive, there may be investment opportunities that were absent in the more exuberant recent past.
The Key to Ending Hunger
EUGENE, OREGON – The recent news that two-thirds of adults in the United States are overweight or obese – and the number continues to grow – brings to mind a question that has bothered me since the 1970’s: Why aren’t we all starving? 
It was not that long ago that experts were predicting that our skyrocketing human population would outstrip its food supply, leading directly to mass famine.
By now millions were supposed to be perishing from hunger every year.
It was the old doom-and-gloom mathematics of Thomas Malthus at work: population shoots up geometrically while food production lags behind.
It makes eminent sense.
I grew up with Malthus’s ideas brought up-to-date in apocalyptic books like 
 The Population Bomb
 . 
But someone appears to have defused the bomb.
Instead of mass starvation, we seem to be awash in food.
And it’s not just the US.
Obesity is on the increase in Mexico.
Fat-related diabetes is becoming epidemic in India.
One in four people in China is overweight, more than 60 million are obese, and the rate of overweight children has increased almost 30-fold since 1985.
Everywhere you look, from Buffalo to Beijing, you can see ballooning bellies.
Instead of going hungry, humans around the world on a per capita basis are eating more calories than ever before. 
If you’re looking for reasons behind today’s obesity epidemic, don’t stop with the usual suspects, all of which are being trotted out by the press: fast food, trans fat, high sugar, low exercise, computer games, strange bacteria in your gut, weird molecules in your blood.
I personally blame some hardwired human instinct for sitting around eating salty, greasy, sugary snacks in preference to hard physical labor.
All of these factors are certainly related to the "insidious, creeping pandemic of obesity . . . now engulfing the entire world," as one gung-ho expert recently put it.
But they are only bits of the puzzle. 
The underlying answer is this: 
 There’s a lot of cheap food around
 .
Yes, walk into your local mega-grocery-emporium or just about any food-selling area anywhere in the world and stare the problem in the face.
There’s inexpensive, high-calorie food piled all over the place. 
Somehow we outsmarted Malthus.
Food production has not only kept up with population growth but has managed somehow to outstrip it.
There are ups and downs from year to year because of the weather, and there are pockets of starvation around the world (due not to a global lack of food, but to a lack of ways to transport it where it’s needed).
In general, silos are bursting. 
Tons of food gets plowed under the ground because there’s so much of it farmers can’t get the prices they want.
Tons of cheap food (corn, for instance) is used to create more expensive food (like steak).
Lots of food means lots of grease, and meat, and sugar, and calories.
Lots of food means lots of overweight people. 
If you like the idea of avoiding mass starvation – and I certainly do – you owe thanks to two groups of scientists: one that gave us the Green Revolution back around the 1980’s via strains of hardy, high-yielding grains, and another that figured out how to 
 make bread out of air
 . 
You heard me right.
If you’re looking for someone to blame for today’s era of plenty, look to a couple of German scientists who lived a century ago.
Or that without the added food made possible by their discovery, the earth could only support about 4 billion people – at least 2 billion less than today. 
And yes, before you email me, I understand the concomitant problems: stress on ecosystems, pollution (including nitrogen pollution), etc. etc.
But I am an optimist, so instead of moaning I will leave you with some more good news.
Even with a world population that continues to add tens of millions of new mouths every year, given continuing growth in Haber-Bosch fertilizer and a surprising trend toward a worldwide decline in birth rates (if you live about 50 years longer, according to the best estimates, you’ll see humanity reach zero population growth), it might be within humanity’s grasp to avoid mass starvation forever. 
The Key to Stability in South Asia
NEW YORK – Few places in the world offer as daunting a set of challenges as South Asia.
A narcotics-fueled insurgency threatens newly democratic Afghanistan.
A resurgent Taliban in its tribal areas has destabilized Pakistan.
The recent carnage in Mumbai has prompted another standoff between nuclear-armed India and Pakistan.
Each of these crises calls for urgent action.  But as a new Asia Society task force argues, in tackling them the world must not lose sight of the great promise of the India-U.S. relationship.
Today, both countries stand on the brink of an historic opportunity: a new international relationship that will foster global security, stronger economies, nuclear nonproliferation, and progress in combating climate change.
But these potential gains will be realized only if US President Barack Obama gives India the attention it deserves, and if both countries broaden the strategic stake by involving their private sectors in issues that governments alone cannot resolve.
Already, the end of the Cold War and painstaking diplomacy have brought the US-India relationship to a point unimaginable just ten years ago.
Both governments now understand each other better, and the two countries’ interests are more aligned than they have ever been.
The US presence in Afghanistan highlights the need for stability in South Asia.
India’s democracy and burgeoning economy make it a major factor in the Asian balance of power, and the recent terrorist attacks in Mumbai underscore a shared struggle against violent Islamic extremism.
The recent civil nuclear agreement between the two countries paves the way for cooperation in halting the spread of nuclear weapons.
At the same time, bilateral trade has soared to more than $40 billion in 2008, from about $12 billion in 1998.
Even where the two governments continue to disagree – for example, on the Doha round of trade negotiations and on the solution to climate change – the potential for new and creative cooperation outweighs their differences.
To begin with security, India is a vital piece of the puzzle on questions of stability in Afghanistan and the balance of power in Asia.
On global nonproliferation, the US should push for a role for India in next year’s Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) review conference in order to complete the country’s transformation from being part of the problem to being part of the solution.
In terms of counterterrorism, the tragic events in Mumbai present an opportunity to ratchet up intelligence sharing, joint response training, and personnel exchanges to defeat the defining threat of our times.
Over the past decade, economics has pulled the US and India closer.
It will continue to power the relationship in the future, even as both countries experience a slowdown during the current economic crisis.
The US should tap India’s potential as an engine for economic recovery, and consult much more closely with it on matters of finance, trade, and investment.
In the long run, a global trade agreement will not be completed without India’s engagement.
By getting India into the G-8 and other multilateral institutions, the US can ensure that India’s growing role in the world carries commensurate responsibilities.
Beyond government cooperation, the creativity and dynamism of businesses, NGOs and private citizens in both countries hold the key to what India and the US can offer each other and the world.
Obama should tap the expertise and energy in the Indian and American private sectors to foster public-private partnerships on complex global problems such as climate change, agricultural transformation, education and HIV/AIDS.
Consider climate change.
Without India, it is hard to imagine a successful conclusion to the 2009 Copenhagen conference to draft a successor agreement to the Kyoto Protocol.
Reaching an agreement will require tough diplomacy, difficult compromises, technological innovation, and changes to our carbon-intensive way of life.
India and the US are natural partners in meeting this challenge, with innovative scientists and venture capitalists who can take technology breakthroughs from the lab to the market, and NGOs with vast grassroots conservation and public advocacy experience.
Similar coalitions can be assembled to dent global poverty by fostering a second green revolution in Indian agriculture, to enhance India’s role in the global economy through vocational and higher education, and to tackle the worldwide spread of AIDS.
For too long, the world’s oldest and largest democracies have failed to fulfill the promise of their relationship.
But if Obama seizes what we believe is a rare historic opportunity this could change decisively – for the long-term benefit of America, India, and the world.
The Khmer Rouge in the Dock
These days suspected war criminals - from Rwanda to Serbia to Sierra Leone - are in the dock.
Dozens are still on the run, but hope remains that they, too, will face justice.
This is not true of the perpetrators of the Cambodian genocide of the 1970's.
They remain free, and nobody is looking for them.
A quarter of Cambodia's population of eight million was executed, starved to death, or succumbed to disease during the Khmer Rouge's rule from 1975-79.
There has been no real trial, no truth commission, and no official acknowledgement of one of the most heinous crimes in human history.
As a result, many Cambodians born since 1979 do not understand the scope and gravity of the atrocities.
Meanwhile, the anguish and sorrow of survivors - almost all of whom lost loved ones - have not found redress.
This may be about to change.
A year ago, the United Nations and the Royal Government of Cambodia agreed in principle to establish an "Extraordinary Chambers" composed of Cambodian and international prosecutors and judges to investigate and try the "senior leaders of Democratic Kampuchea and those who were most responsible for crimes" under Khmer Rouge rule.
Ratification of the agreement has been delayed by the stalemate among Cambodia's bickering political parties following last year's elections. But a breakthrough appears close.
The formal decision to create a tribunal for the Khmer Rouge represents a major achievement after a decade of diplomatic effort.
To implement it, however, a number of hurdles remain to be overcome.
The first obstacle is cost.
Cambodian authorities can help build their credibility by curbing the temptation to pad bills and inflate salaries. But outsiders will inevitably bear the lion's share of the budget for the tribunal.
The current estimate - $50 million over three years - has shocked donor governments.
But this compares favorably with the Special Court in Sierra Leone (more than $70 million over three years), and the $100 million spent annually on the international courts for Rwanda and Yugoslavia.
The price is appropriate.
The United States and other western governments fueled Cambodia's civil war in the 1970's, then lent the Khmer Rouge legitimacy in the 1980's by insisting that they continue to occupy Cambodia's seat at the UN.
If the Khmer Rouge trials are to proceed, donor countries must see the Extraordinary Chambers as a prudent investment toward a stable and productive Cambodia.
Given how long it has taken to get this far, donors must act quickly to come up with the necessary funds.
The second hurdle stems from the fact that Cambodia's tribunal will be the first internationalized court in which domestic judges form a majority.
This poses a particular challenge in a country where lawyers were among the targets of genocidal violence, where few sitting judges possess formal legal training, and which has little tradition of judicial independence.
There is thus concern that some in Cambodia's government - which includes officials who once served under the Khmer Rouge - will seek to hijack the trials for political ends.
In order to ensure a credible process, Cambodia and the UN must select judges of the highest caliber, not those that toe a party line.
Prosecutors must follow the evidence wherever it leads.
The trials should be conducted transparently and with broad public involvement.
Non-governmental monitors need to scrutinize the proceedings to ensure that errors are identified early enough to be corrected.
The UN must make clear that it will halt the tribunal if it falls short of international standards.
The third hurdle is the danger that the Extraordinary Chambers will be regarded as the end rather than the beginning of a long-term search for accountability and legal reform.
Given time and resource constraints, it is unlikely that more than a dozen defendants will be tried.
But thousands of others took part in the violence.
Their many victims will rightly seek some form of accounting - at a minimum, an official record of the crimes they suffered.
Before long, an effort to document and publish the truth will be necessary.
Done properly, the proceedings of the Extraordinary Chambers could have further positive ramifications by contributing to lasting changes in Cambodia's ordinary courts.
By highlighting positive models of judging and legal advocacy, the trials may stimulate public demand for domestic tribunals that dispense justice fairly and effectively.
Cambodia's government and international donors should respond to this demand by launching reform programs that extend beyond the life of the Extraordinary Chambers.
The Khmer Rouge prosecutions will not be perfect. But they are necessary.
Pol Pot died in 1998, but aging senior associates like "Brother Number Two" Nuon Chea and ex-Khmer Rouge president Khieu Samphan live freely in Cambodia.
With sufficient resources, and a determination not to compromise on quality, the Extraordinary Chambers can provide a measure of justice for the victims and an example of law's power to serve the public good.
The Killings in Colombia
The murder of 11 provincial legislators held hostage by Colombia’s FARC guerrillas is a reminder of that country’s eternal agony.
But strange to say, Colombia is in better shape today than it has been for years, thanks largely to President Alvaro Uribe’s leadership.
Of course, as the murders show, Colombia remains a bizarre place, one facing strange and intractable challenges.
The FARC guerrillas have held some of their kidnapping victims for many years.
Child soldiers still linger in paramilitary groups, and there are compromising video recordings of leading Colombian politicians and drug lords.
Perhaps weirdest of all, there are imprisoned guerrillas who refuse to be set free, and a government that insists on liberating them, even against their will.
Uribe was re-elected just over a year ago by a landslide, a tribute to the popularity and effectiveness of his “democratic security” policy of combating both the guerrillas and the country’s generalized violence.
Latin America’s oldest standing two-party system was decimated in that election, as the Polo Democrático presidential candidate won more votes than the Liberal Party’s contender, finally giving electoral expression to left-wing forces that had never been able to see more potential for change at the ballot box than by fighting in the mountains.
Negotiations on Colombia’s Free Trade Agreement (FTA) with the United States had been finalized.
Even the questionable deal Uribe cut with the right-wing paramilitary AUC groups, pardoning up to 30,000 of their members for often horrendous crimes in exchange for their disarmament, appeared successful.
With Uribe in charge, Colombia seemed to be on a roll.
But much of this success has since been squandered, with both Colombia and Uribe now in deep trouble.
The so-called parapolítica scandals have rocked Uribe’s government, forcing the resignation of some cabinet ministers, and embarrassing others, including the president himself.
Photographs, videos, and audio recordings of politicians and paramilitary thugs (including one who boasts of having personally killed more than 300 of his enemies) have discredited a political elite that, while never very popular, has now had some of the worst suspicions that many held about it graphically confirmed.
For years human rights activists and scholars suspected the obvious: the emergence of an enormous, vicious, well-armed, and well-trained parallel army to fight the guerillas was not some spontaneous act.
It was, many believed, a deliberate policy devised and carried out by the official military and the political elite to wage war “off the books.”
The parapolítica or paragate revelations seem to confirm another suspicion as well: the distinction between the paramilitaries and the drug cartels, like that between the guerrillas and the cartels, is a nuanced one.
Unfortunately, these revelations come at the worst possible moment.
Colombia’s FTA with the US was in danger the moment the US Republicans lost their majority in both houses of Congress last November.
Still, it seemed more likely to pass than the other two pending Latin American trade deals with Panama and Peru.
Now it appears that President George W. Bush’s closest ally in the hemisphere will not only have its FTA rejected, owing to human rights concerns in the US House and Senate. Moreover, it might also lose Plan Colombia, the huge – and hugely controversial – American aid program that has funneled tens of billions of dollars into Colombia since the late 1990’s, ostensibly to fight the drug cartels, but also, in fact, to wage counter-insurgency.
Uribe has spent weeks directly and personally lobbying key American legislators, and he is undoubtedly his own best advocate.
But, just as former US Vice-President Al Gore recently refused to share a dais with Uribe in Miami, many members of Congress refuse to approve a trade agreement or an aid package that may link them to a government tainted by egregious human rights abuses, complicity with drug lords, or both.
The US has never really wanted to include human rights issues in trade agreements; at best, and only when forced, US presidents have consented to incorporating labor and environmental chapters.
The European Union thinks differently; in its economic cooperation and free trade agreement with Mexico, for example, it insisted on – and achieved – the inclusion of a “democracy clause” that made its economic benefits conditional on ongoing respect for democratic rule and human rights.
Colombia’s blemished human rights record is affecting its government’s international standing and providing ammunition for those who wish to sabotage the FTA.
For example, protectionist Democrats in the US Congress have been able to insulate themselves from charges of opposing free trade if they scuttle Colombia’s FTA, because they will most likely ratify the deals for Panama and Peru.
Can Uribe survive his current travails?
The answer is almost certainly yes, unless the parapolítica mess reaches him directly, or the US explicitly rejects the FTA and postpones or attaches conditions to renewal of funding for Plan Colombia.
Uribe’s political demise would hurt everyone, but the rejection of the FTA on human rights grounds could set a healthy precedent.
In a region where threats to democracy and human rights are growing, linking trade and economic policy to these considerations is not a bad idea.
Uribe may not deserve such a fate, but history works in strange ways.
The Kindness of Strangers
NEW HAVEN – I admit that it is an unusual way to see the world, but, when reading the newspaper, I am constantly struck by the extent of human kindness.
The newest bit of good news comes from The Center on Wealth and Philanthropy at Boston College, which estimates that Americans will give about $250 billion in individual charitable contributions in 2010, up several billion from last year.
People donate their blood to strangers, travel on humanitarian missions to places such as Haiti and the Sudan, and risk their lives to fight injustice elsewhere.
And New Yorkers have grown accustomed to reading about subway heroes – brave souls who leap onto the tracks to rescue fallen commuters and then often slip away, uncomfortable with attention or credit.
As a psychologist, I am fascinated by the origin and consequences of such kindness.
Some of our moral sentiments and moral motivations are the product of biological evolution.
This accounts for why we are often kind to our own flesh and blood – those who share our genes.
It also can explain our moral attachments to those we see as members of our immediate tribe.
There is an adaptive logic to being kind to those with whom we continually interact; we scratch their backs, they scratch ours.
But there is no Darwinian payoff to sacrificing our resources to anonymous strangers, particularly those in faraway lands.
The explanation for our expanded morality comes from intelligence, imagination, and culture.
One powerful force is the use of language to tell stories.
These can motivate us to think of distant people as if they were friends and family.
The vicarious experiences generated by Greek tragedies, televised sitcoms, and newspaper stories have all played an important role in expanding the scope of moral concern.
Another factor is the spread of ideologies, both secular and religious, that encourage us to care for distant others, that persuade us to expand our kindness beyond our immediate circle.
Even the much-maligned force of capitalism might make us nicer.
A recent study of 15 diverse populations, reported in the journal Science, found that the societies that treat anonymous strangers most fairly are those with market economies.
As Robert Wright has emphasized, as people become increasingly inter-dependent, the scope of moral concern expands accordingly.
Nobody would argue that we are losing the distinction between those who are close to us and distant strangers.
I can’t imagine that this would ever happen.
An individual who didn’t distinguish between his or her own child and an unknown child in a faraway land – who felt the same love and the same obligation toward both – would hardly be human anymore.
What has happened, though, is that the distinction between “us” and “them” is not as sharp as it used to be.
The effects of our kindness are not zero-sum.
Those who receive charity have their lives improved, but those who provide it also benefit. It feels good to be good.
Indeed, one recent study found that spending money on others is more rewarding than spending it on oneself.
It’s not just short-term pleasure: those who donate wealth and time to others tend to be a lot happier in their entire lives than those who do not.
The paradoxical finding here is that one great trick to being happy is to forget about being happy and instead try to increase the happiness of others.
All is not sweetness and light, though; morality is more than compassion and charity.
As moral creatures, we are driven to enforce justice.
Experimental economists have found that people will sacrifice their own resources to punish cheaters and free riders, and will do this even to anonymous strangers that they will never again interact with – a behavior dubbed “altruistic punishment.”
There is a pleasure to this as well.
Just as giving to someone in need elicits a positive neural response, so does taking from someone who deserves it.
This is the flip side of charity.
We are motivated to be kind to anonymous others, but we are also motivated to harm those who treat these anonymous others badly.
This can drive our powerful impulse to deal with distant evils through sanctions, bombings, and war.
We want these wrongdoers to suffer.
The problem that arises is that our gut moral feelings are poorly attuned to consequences.
The patterns of charitable donation to foreign countries often have more to do with the salience of news reports than to actual considerations about where the money is most needed.
And laboratory findings show that people will continue to punish even if they are well aware that doing so is actually making things worse.
It is not difficult to see the consequences of this in the real world.
The extension of human morality is a wonderful development for humanity, but it would be even better if it were tempered by cold-blooded rationality.
The Kremlin Two Step
Moscow – Westerners often see Russian politics in terms of a high-level struggle between liberals and conservatives: Ligachev and Yakovlev under Gorbachev; reformers and nationalists under Yeltsin; siloviki and economic liberals under Putin.
They also view Russia in terms of a tradition whereby every new tsar partly repudiates the legacy of his predecessor, creating a political thaw at the beginning of a new reign.
Khrushchev’s de-Stalinization is Exhibit A.
Both methods were used to describe the Putin-Medvedev relationship – to understand its nature and dynamic, and what it portends for Russia.
But observers remain puzzled.
To dismiss Medvedev as a mere Putin puppet, a constitutional bridge between Putin’s second and third presidential terms, would be both unfair and wrong.
Russia’s third president has a broader role and a distinct function.
Conversely, portraying Putin as “a man from the past,” and Medvedev as “a hope for the future,” exaggerates the differences between them and omits the more important factors that unite them.
A better analytical model is needed.
For all the apparent freshness of Medvedev’s recent pronouncements, including his now famous article “Go Russia!” – which sounded a clarion call for modernization and liberalism – he is borrowing massively from Putin’s vocabulary of 2000.
This suggests that the issue of modernization, which lay dormant throughout the fat years of high oil prices, is back on the Kremlin agenda.
In 2008, Medvedev was installed in the Kremlin as part of “Putin’s plan,” the substantive part of which was known as “Strategy 2020,” a blueprint for continued economic growth and diversification.
The intervening crisis only made the Kremlin modify and sharpen its plan.
And Medvedev is a key agent in its execution.
Putin chose Medvedev carefully, and not only for his unquestionable loyalty, vitally important as that is.
Putin, among other things, is a combative nationalist, and he wants Russia to succeed in a world of competing powers.
He is certainly conservative, but he is also a self-described modernizer.
As such, he might be compared to Pyotr Stolypin, another conservative prime minister who famously asked for 20 years of peace and quiet – mostly from liberals and revolutionaries – to transform Russia. Stolypin never got the chance – a revolutionary assassinated him in 1911 – and neither did Russia, which stumbled into World War I, leading directly to the collapse of the monarchy and the Bolshevik revolution.
Putin wants to finish the job, and much works in his favor.
He is the tsar.
He has both money – the government’s budget and the oligarchs’ fortunes – and the coercive power of the state firmly in his hand.
He is the arbiter at the top and the trouble-shooter in social conflicts below.
His most precious resource is his personal popularity, which a flavor of consent to his authoritarian regime.
But none of that is good enough.
The 75% of Russians who make up the Putin majority are essentially passive, and seek only the preservation of a paternalistic state.
Putin can sit on their support, but cannot ride forward with it. The best and brightest are not there.
Enter Medvedev. His Internet-surfing, compassionate, and generally liberal image helps recruit a key constituency – those beyond the reach of Putin himself – to the Putin plan.
Whether the plan succeeds is another matter.
Conservative modernization is a gamble.
To modernize Russia, one must break the stranglehold of corruption, establish accountability, and free the media.
At some point, Putin and Medvedev will have to decide. Either they give priority to the survival of the current system and accept Russia’s steady marginalization, or they start opening up the system, putting its survival at risk.
Given the weight of geopolitical factors in Russian decision-making, it is difficult to foretell which path they will choose.
Putin is no King Lear.
He understands leadership and control, and does not plan to retire.
But Medvedev, today’s front-office guy, is more of a junior partner than a simple salesperson. He may yet grow in stature and influence, and eventually inherit the store.
One thing is clear, though: he does not like raw meat and the taste of blood.
Thus, Putin’s governing pact with Medvedev, his trademark creation, is likely to remain in force.
Both members need each other.
So the real issue is not whether the noises that Putin and Medvedev make suggest real divergence, and a potential for rivalry, but whether there is daylight at the end of the tandem.
Or, to put it differently, whether they choose modernization or marginalization.
The Language of Genomics
DALIAN, CHINA – Last week, a company called Complete Genomics announced 10 new customers for its genome-sequencing service.
The price was not specified, but the company said its goal is to offer the service for $5,000 within a year.
What struck me was not the announcement itself, but the name of the CEO: Cliff Reid, the CEO when I knew him in the 1980’s of a text-search company called Verity.
The connection hit me almost immediately.
Genes are, in a sense, the instruction language for building humans (or any other living thing).