It means, instead, completing key initiatives, most urgently the banking union; improving accountability; and ensuring that the public understands what the EU institutions are doing.
And it means staying out of political conflicts, which neither the European Commission nor the European Parliament are in any position to win.
If this approach seems cautious, that is because it is.
Now is the time not for risky shortcuts, but for meticulous, well-planned, incremental measures that gradually and consistently earn the public’s trust.
The relatively modest list of concrete priorities issued by Juncker and Commission First Vice-President Frans Timmermans is a good start.
Most people are not stupid.
They can generally tell when they are being strung along, and they are tired of empty rhetoric and half-baked initiatives.
Only if the EU institutions deliver genuine action, in a credible and transparent manner, can they ensure that the current inter-governmentalism is just a phase and that the future of Europe is Europe.
The End of Iran’s Islamic Revolution
STONY BROOK – The nuclear deal reached in July by Iran and its international interlocutors marks an obvious turning point in the Islamic Republic’s relations with the outside world, particularly with the United States.
But why has it taken so much longer for the US to come to terms with Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini’s revolution in Iran than it did with Mao Zedong’s revolution in China?
Of course, one explanation for the prolonged bilateral freeze is the warped discourse of what George W. Bush foolishly called the “global war on terror,” in which Iran, along with Iraq and North Korea, was cast as part of an international “axis of evil.”
As a result, US officials viewed any move toward diplomatic normalization as unacceptable “appeasement.”
But the Bush administration’s moralistic foreign policy merely reinforced America’s stance since Iran’s 1979 Islamic Revolution.
And it is in the history and course of that revolution that a fuller and more compelling explanation of recent events is to be found.
Forget the French Revolution as a model: the so-called Thermidorian Reaction, when moderates ended Robespierre’s Reign of Terror, was an exception to the pattern of modern revolutions.
The typical pattern during our living memory is that the hardliners come after the moderates.
In the Soviet Union, for example, it was hardliners after World War II who strove to export Marxist-Leninist revolution, condemning the world to decades of cold war.
So, too, with Iran.
After Khomeini’s death in 1989, the pragmatic Ali Akbar Hashemi-Rafsanjani became President, followed by the reform-minded Mohammad Khatami.
But the hardliners struck back.
When Khatami’s reform program was ineffective, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, an obscure officer of the Basij militia, was elected Mayor of Tehran in 2003 (after just 12% of the city’s voters turned out), and then defeated Rafsanjani in 2005 to become President.
Ahmadinejad, a fanatical devotee of Khomeini, the revolution’s first imam, was a reminder of the revolution’s populist inception.
To promote an aggressive nuclear policy was to vindicate Khomeini’s battle against America, “the Great Satan.”
Only when Iran’s voters lost patience with Ahmadinejad’s incompetence and elected Hassan Rouhani in 2013 could the Islamic Revolution be said to be over.
Could America have avoided the waste of the Ahmadinejad years?
His predecessors had made serious efforts to improve relations with the US.
Encouraged by the victory of the US-led coalition in the 1991 Gulf War against Iraq (the Islamic Republic’s arch-enemy), in 1995 Rafsanjani sent very clear signals to the US of a willingness to restore diplomatic ties.
The Clinton administration ignored Rafsanjani’s effort, and the following year the US Congress unanimously passed the Iran and Libya Sanctions Act.
Admittedly, Bill Clinton and his advisers had plenty of reasons for skepticism.
Rafsanjani was at least partly hostage to hardline opponents keen to sabotage his foreign-policy initiatives with precisely timed acts of terror in France, Germany, and Argentina.
But Clinton and his secretary of state, Madeleine Albright, took seriously the proposal by Khatami, Rafsanjani’s successor, at the UN General Assembly in 2000 for a “dialogue of civilizations” to open what he called “a crack in the wall of mistrust” between Iran and the US.
Sadly, Iran’s Supreme Leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, forced his president and foreign minister to avoid the planned handshakes with their American counterparts.
Worse was to follow for those hoping for better US-Iran relations.
First, there was Bush’s “axis of evil” speech in 2002.
Then, in February 2005, just as the hardline Ahmadinejad was about to begin his first term as president, Bush formally rejected a nuclear deal that had been painstakingly negotiated by Rouhani (then Khamenei’s representative in Iran’s Supreme National Security Council) and signed in late 2004 by France, Germany, and Britain.
As Iran scanned the strategic horizon, it seemed obvious that the US had invaded Iraq because Saddam did not have any weapons of mass destruction.
This made Ahmadinejad’s insistence on Iran’s nuclear “rights” popular with the Iranian masses and the middle class alike.
Despite popular disenchantment with the Ahmadinejad era, that sentiment still prevails in Iran.
But the nuclear accord reached last month is the product of a different political context: President Barack Obama was eager to make a deal with Iran part of his legacy, and this time, Rouhani, as President, was able to negotiate with the full backing of Khamenei, with whom (unlike Khatami) he has worked closely.
But there is a deeper reason for the success of the nuclear negotiations: Khomeini’s Islamic revolution of 1979 has finally ended – and Khamenei knows it.
He must also know that the export of Islamic revolution from Shia Iran has lost its allure, replaced in the Sunni world first by the global jihad of al-Qaeda and now by the so-called Islamic State and caliphate of Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi.
For Iran, what counts now is no longer ideology but national interest and realpolitik.
That is why it finds itself currently backing the opponents of revolutionary Islam: Bashar al-Assad against the Islamists in Syria and the Houthis against al-Qaeda in Yemen.
And it is why it finds itself not only signing a nuclear accord with the Great Satan but also tacitly cooperating with it against the Islamic State, their common enemy.
Now that the revolution is over, cooperation in other areas is likely to become equally appealing.
Endorse the Nuclear Test Ban
STOCKHOLM/MEXICO CITY – Indonesia’s parliament has just taken a historic step, one that makes the planet safer from the threat of nuclear weapons.
The importance of Indonesia’s decision to ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty cannot be overstated. This is a golden opportunity for the remaining eight countries to endorse the CTBT, enabling it to come into legal effect.
For the five decades following World War II, a nuclear test shook and irradiated the planet on average every nine days.
This era was ended in 1996, when the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty was adopted by the United Nations General Assembly.
But, for the CTBT to enter into force, all 44 states specified as holders of nuclear technology must ratify it. Until they do, the specter of nuclear testing will continue to haunt us.
It is urgent that the CTBT take full legal effect around the world as soon as possible.
A complete ban on all nuclear explosions would hamper the upgrading of existing nuclear arsenals and the development of new weapons, diminishing the capabilities of both current and potential nuclear-armed states.
The CTBT reinforces both nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament, and is essential for global, regional, and national security.
We applaud the fact that all of the nuclear-capable countries in Europe and Latin America and many in other regions in the world have ratified the CTBT.
With Indonesia’s ratification, the number of countries that have yet to do so has decreased to eight: China, Egypt, India, Iran, Israel, Pakistan, North Korea, and the United States.
These countries have a responsibility to make the legal ban on nuclear testing a reality.
We strongly urge them to reconsider the CTBT; this important instrument for peace and security will bring us a step closer to a world without the threat of nuclear weapons.
The CTBT has already had a dramatic impact, despite not yet being in force.
Since its adoption, nuclear testing has virtually stopped, and all 182 signatory states have abstained from testing nuclear explosives.
The three countries that have failed to ratify the CTBT and have tested such devices – India, Pakistan, and North Korea – have faced universal condemnation from the UN Security Council, and UN sanctions.
A key measure of the viability of any arms-control treaty is how effectively it can be verified.
In this respect, the international community has a formidable instrument at its disposal.
The Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization (CTBTO) is creating a verification regime that has repeatedly proven its reliability in detecting even small underground nuclear tests.
In addition to its verification mandate, the CTBT monitoring system also helps to mitigate disasters.
During the tragic catastrophe in Japan last March, CTBTO data helped local authorities to issue timely alerts. The CTBTO continued to help by monitoring the global dispersion of radioactivity from the damaged Fukushima nuclear power plant.
Mexico and Sweden are longstanding supporters of the CTBT.
Over the coming two years, our countries will jointly oversee the process of bringing the CTBT into force.
We pledge to spare no effort to advance this aim. We vow to:
·&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; Call upon political leaders in the states that have not yet ratified the CTBT to act without delay and take concrete steps to this end;
·&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; Encourage civil-society groups – NGOs, media, universities, and youth organizations – in these countries to urge their decision-makers to ratify the CTBT;
·&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; Use national, regional, and international meetings and conferences to promote the CTBT at every level of decision-making;
·&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; Complete the CTBTO’s verification regime, which all states should support as a powerful deterrent to any would-be nuclear testers.
It is time to end this destructive experiment and close the door on nuclear testing once and for all.
We appeal to decision-makers in the eight states that have not yet ratified the CTBT to move forward.
Indonesia has set an example; now the spotlight is on you.
Building Up the BRICS
MANCHESTER – This year’s meeting of the BRICS in India is taking place just a fortnight after the 15th anniversary of the creation of the term “BRICs,” which I coined to refer to the major emerging economies: Brazil, Russia, India, and China (South Africa was added in 2010).
Recently, my brief tenure in the British government came to an end, following the completion of an independent review on antimicrobial resistance (AMR) that I had been chairing.
As I ponder what to do next, and as the BRICS leaders meet, I can’t help but wonder about the term’s meaning today.
Have these large and promising emerging economies fulfilled expectations?
Perhaps the simplest way to answer this question relates to my work on the AMR review, which was launched by former British Prime Minister David Cameron in 2014.
On September 21, we achieved a major victory: a high-level agreement by the United Nations on the topic.
After the agreement was reached, a German television crew that had occasionally followed my team and me as we worked to spread awareness of AMR asked me, on air, whether the outcome was more important than the BRIC concept.
Without even waiting for me to answer, they declared that it obviously was.
And they were right: no economy, emerging or otherwise, can hope to be successful if it is plagued by a health threat as serious and uncontrollable as AMR.
But there is more to the story: the BRICS are just as important to tackling AMR as tackling AMR is to the BRICS.
South Africa, for one, was a key supporter of the United Kingdom in discussions about AMR at the recent G20 summit in Hangzhou, China, and the issue might not have ended up in the meeting’s communiqué without its support.
And that is the point.
The BRICS today, like in 2001, have a vital role to play in tackling the most pressing international challenges.
In fact, I came up with the acronym not just because the letters fit together, but also because of the word’s actual meaning: these emerging economies, I argued in my 2001 paper, should be the building blocks of freshly overhauled global financial and governance systems.
Yet, as we approach this year’s autumn meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, the BRICS remain severely underrepresented by these critical institutions.
If this does not change, with reforms going much further than they have so far, we will soon find that “global governance” is no longer global at all.
To be sure, the BRICS have lately been going through a rough time.
The economic performance of Brazil and Russia, in particular, has been very disappointing so far this decade, to the point that many now perceive those countries as unworthy of the status the acronym afforded them.
But the suggestion that the BRICS’ importance was overstated is simply naïve.
The size of the original four BRICs economies, taken together, is roughly consistent with the projections I made all those years ago.
Both Russia and Brazil now account for a similar share of global GDP as they did in 2001, though Russia, according to my simple calculation, might currently be outside the world’s ten largest economies.
Brazil, for all of its considerable problems, is higher in the world ranking today than even I had envisaged back then.
India continues along roughly the same path it was on 15 years ago.
With the right structural reforms, it may even be able to achieve a sustained period of Chinese-style double-digit economic growth.
But the biggest BRICS success story remains China, which, despite its recent slowdown, has far exceeded expectations.
If the economy grows at an annual rate of around 6% for the remainder of the decade, it will fulfill my 20-year projection.
This is not to diminish the challenges confronting China.
But if it manages to address the most urgent among them – downside deflationary risks – its much-discussed debt challenge will become far more manageable.
Fortunately for China, other countries want – or should want – it to succeed.
After all, a dynamic Chinese economy is in the interest of many other countries, especially those that can export the goods and services that a more modern, consumer-driven China needs.
In fact, the rise of the Chinese consumer may well be the most important single global economic variable today – even more important than, say, the economic problems afflicting Europe and Japan or questions about India’s enduring global relevance.
The potential barriers to the BRICS’ growth and development are many, including health threats like AMR, educational challenges, inadequate representation in global governance bodies, and a number of short-term cyclical problems.
Policymakers worldwide must commit themselves to dismantling these barriers, and enabling the BRICS to fulfill, finally, their true potential.
Energizing Europe
In France’s pre-presidential electoral campaign, European affairs are mentioned or whispered, but almost never debated.
France is mostly concerned with its own problems, particularly the supposed malfunctioning of its political class and the apparent laziness of the French public, which is blamed for weak economic growth, especially when compared to the United States.
France needs a debate on European Union affairs, but only as long as it does not degenerate – as is common in Europe – into self-flagellation.
But the germ of such a debate exists, and it sounds very different from that which dominated the failed constitutional referendum campaign in France two years ago.
The operation of European institutions – the European Central Bank, the European Commission, and the Stability Pact – is facing severe criticism, but not in the name of a nostalgia for national sovereignty.
Europe is not being rejected; instead, the criticism has been in the spirit of improving European institutions in the name of the common good.
Both of the major candidates for the French presidency, Ségolène Royal and Nicholas Sarkozy, have called for the creation of an economic government for the euro zone.
Of course, such a “government” already exists in the form of the European Central Bank.
But what is needed is an institutional framework that would establish greater political responsibility concerning the primary economic objectives that Europe should pursue – full employment and growth – and that would at least partly close the democratic deficit implied by the ECB’s takeover of monetary policy from euro-zone states.
A moment of seeming political disunity, such as exists today, may not seem the right one to initiate such a project.
But, historically, Europe has succeeded when, at moments of danger, it has initiated irreversible processes that outweigh any other consideration.
Europe’s founding fathers understood this when they hatched the idea of creating the European Coal and Steel Community: encouraging old enemies to pool some of the most powerful tools of war under the pretext of advancing their economic interests was a strategy of rare intelligence.
We now live in a similar moment of uncertainty and danger, and this time, too, there is a project, both economic and political, that can unite the Union: energy independence, a key factor in national sovereignty.
Today, there is nothing on a pan-European scale that guarantees the responsibility of each member state to ensure the security of its future supplies.
The European Commission is weary of trying to build a single energy market, which has required it to persuade governments that they must dismantle their existing monopoly operators – a prerequisite to competition.
Although member states appear to have resigned themselves to this, they fervently resist other European firms taking control of their “national champion” companies.
To be sure, governments cannot escape their responsibilities to their citizens, and only the most naïve technocrat believes that the market alone can ensure energy independence.
At the same time, however, purely bilateral negotiations between individual EU members and oil- and gas-producing countries weakens the member states’ bargaining power, as well as undermining Europe’s geopolitical weight in world affairs.
Yet, fortunately, there is no need for resignation.
There is an obvious solution, similar to the Coal and Steel Community implemented by our founding fathers: a European energy, environment, and research community (E3RC).
It is a mistake to believe that ecological concerns can be addressed only through negative growth.
In fact, the opposite is true.
New energy and environmental technologies will undoubtedly drive growth in the future.
But only if research is doubled to create new energy-efficient technologies will we eventually consume less energy overall and more energy in an environmentally friendly way.
The ecological disasters that today’s economic activity has already produced and the catastrophic potential of those to come have at last brought home the fact that energy policy and environmental protection cannot be separated.
As it is, the E3RC would pursue two directly related objectives: European energy independence, which would be helped by new energy and environmental technologies, and Europe’s increased bargaining power in global markets.
Its creation would also send out a new message to the European public: competition alone is not the only thing on Europe’s horizon.
Above all, the EU requires cooperation.
Energy Independence in an Interdependent World
CAMBRIDGE – When President Richard Nixon proclaimed in the early 1970’s that he wanted to secure national energy independence, the United States imported a quarter of its oil.
By the decade’s end, after an Arab oil embargo and the Iranian Revolution, domestic production was in decline, Americans were importing half their petroleum needs at 15 times the price, and it was widely believed that the country was running out of natural gas.
Energy shocks contributed to a lethal combination of stagnant economic growth and inflation, and every US president since Nixon likewise has proclaimed energy independence as a goal.
But few people took those promises seriously.
Today, energy experts no longer scoff.
By the end of this decade, according to the US Energy Information Administration, nearly half of the crude oil that America consumes will be produced at home, while 82% will come from the US side of the Atlantic.
Philip Verleger, a respected energy analyst, argues that, by 2023, the 50th anniversary of Nixon’s “Project Independence,” the US will be energy independent in the sense that it will export more energy than it imports.
Verleger argues that energy independence “could make this the New American Century by creating an economic environment where the United States enjoys access to energy supplies at much lower cost than other parts of the world.”
Already, Europeans and Asians pay 4-6 times more for their natural gas than Americans do.
What happened?
The technology of horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing, by which shale and other tight rock formations at great depths are bombarded with water and chemicals, has released major new supplies of both natural gas and oil.
America’s shale-gas industry grew by 45% annually from 2005 to 2010, and the share of shale gas in America’s overall gas production grew from 4% to 24%.
The US is estimated to have enough gas to sustain its current rate of production for more than a century.
While many other countries also have considerable shale-gas potential, problems abound, including water scarcity in China, investment security in Argentina, and environmental restrictions in several European countries.
The American economy will benefit in myriad ways from its change in energy supply.
Hundreds of thousands of jobs are already being created, some in remote, previously stagnating regions.
This additional economic activity will boost overall GDP growth, yielding significant new fiscal revenues.
In addition, the lower energy-import bill will cause America’s trade deficit to narrow and its balance-of-payments position to improve.
Some US industries, such as chemicals and plastics, will gain a significant comparative advantage in production costs.
Indeed, the International Energy Agency estimates that the additional precautions needed to ensure shale-gas wells’ environmental safety – including careful attention to seismic conditions, properly sealed shafts, and appropriate waste-water management – add only about 7% to the cost.
With respect to climate change, however, the effects of greater reliance on shale gas are mixed.
Because natural-gas combustion produces fewer greenhouse gases than other hydrocarbons, such as coal or oil, it can be a bridge to a less carbon-intensive future.
But the low price of gas will impede the development of renewable energy sources unless accompanied by subsidies or carbon taxes.
At this stage, one can only speculate about the geopolitical effects.
Clearly, the strengthening of the US economy would enhance American economic power – a scenario that runs counter to the current fashion of portraying the US as being in decline.
But one should not jump to conclusions.
A balance of energy imports and exports is only a first approximation of independence.
As I argue in my book The Future of Power, global interdependence involves both sensitivity and vulnerability.
The US may be less vulnerable in the long run if it imports less energy, but oil is a fungible commodity, and the US economy will remain sensitive to shocks from sudden changes in world prices.
In other words, a revolution in Saudi Arabia or a blockade of the Strait of Hormuz could still inflict damage on the US and its allies.
So, even if America had no other interests in the Middle East, such as Israel or nuclear non-proliferation, a balance of energy imports and exports would be unlikely to free the US from military expenditures – which some experts estimate run to $50 billion per year – to protect oil routes in the region.
At the same time, America’s bargaining position in world politics should be enhanced.
Power arises from asymmetries in interdependence.
You and I may depend on each other, but if I depend on you less than you do on me, my bargaining power is increased.
For decades, the US and Saudi Arabia have had a balance of asymmetries in which we depended on them as the swing producer of oil, and they depended on us for ultimate military security. Now the bargains will be struck on somewhat better terms from America’s point of view.
Likewise, Russia has enjoyed leverage over Europe and its small neighbors through its control of natural gas supplies and pipelines.
As North America becomes self-sufficient in gas, more from various other regions will be freed up to provide alternative sources for Europe, thereby diminishing Russia’s leverage.
In East Asia, which has become the focus of US foreign policy, China will find itself increasingly dependent on Middle Eastern oil.
American efforts to persuade China to play a greater role in regional security arrangements may be strengthened, and China’s awareness of the vulnerability of its supply routes to US naval disruption in the unlikely event of conflict could also have a subtle effect on each side’s bargaining power.
A balance of energy imports and exports does not produce pure independence, but it does alter the power relations involved in energy interdependence.
Nixon got that right.
Energy Markets or Energy Governance?
MADRID – This month, the International Energy Agency will publish its annual report, the internationally definitive World Energy Outlook, which will confirm that we are not on the right track to reduce global warming.
If the current trend in energy production continues, the earth’s average temperature will be more than 2ºC higher in 2100 than it was in 1990, irreversibly harming the planet and conditions for human life.
Other, more immediate crises are occupying the world’s attention almost completely, distracting governments and citizens alike from the energy challenges that are still before us.
In the United States, there has been no energy debate at the federal level for a long time; the European Union is in the eye of a financial hurricane; and the emerging countries want to maintain rapid economic growth in order to lift millions out of poverty.
In this context, the next meeting of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), set for the end of November in Durban, South Africa, is passing totally unnoticed.
But energy is fundamental for humanity, not only because of its potentially negative externalities, but also given its economic relevance: Western countries spend 8-10% of their GDP on energy, and developing countries spend double or triple that amount.
For this reason, we need a system to govern energy.
Owing mainly to its environmentally negative externalities, an unregulated energy market is not a useful governing mechanism, because it is unable to internalize the environmental costs.
It has been calculated that the most contaminating energy sources would have to pay a 70% tax to reflect their negative externalities.
A substantial lack of information in this field is another reason why the free market doesn’t work.
Often, as with the properties of a gas reserve, for example, information is technically difficult to obtain.
In addition, governments consider natural resources to be strategic and don’t release information about them.
Finally, time frames related to energy are usually long: centuries for environmental effects or decades for investments to pay off.
Thus, energy must be governed through a system of cooperation and regulation.
That will be complicated, of course.
Managing energy requires taking into account technical, political, and economic dimensions simultaneously.
Energy exploration and production requires many different disciplines and technologies – eolic (wind), photovoltaic, nuclear, coal, etc.
Something similar exists in the political sphere, where industrial and economic sectors are organized but divided.
And the need for international coordination poses an additional difficulty.
The energy sector exemplifies the inadequacy of our multilateral institutions.
Energy policy is national, but the sector’s externalities are global.
A radioactive leak, the rupture of an undersea oil well and, above all, CO2 emissions do not threaten just one country.
On the other hand, energy’s benefits adhere to specific agents, be they consumers, producers, or sellers.
This imbalance creates a clear incentive for free riders: they benefit, while the rest of us pay.
Moreover, global governance is necessary because energy supply and demand around the world are disconnected.
Few countries have a neutral energy balance.
Oil, the world’s main source of energy, is indicative in this regard.
The Middle East has a 266% commercial surplus of oil, and the US a 65% deficit.
This geographical imbalance requires an ordered system of trade, clear regulations, and a well-structured global market.
Today, however, opaque bilateral agreements abound, and very different environmental requirements and contradictory subsidies coexist.
As a result, our global energy institutions are woefully inadequate.
The International Energy Agency admits only OECD countries, which excludes China, the largest energy consumer.
The intergovernmental Energy Charter Treaty, which obliges signatories to apply impartial market rules to energy products and services, has not been signed by the US, the world’s second-largest energy consumer, or ratified by Russia, the world’s largest oil producer.
World Trade Organization agreements apply to energy only tangentially, because energy is considered an exhaustible natural resource, and in many cases is thus exempt from the rules.
Moreover, non-Western countries – which include big consumers like China and India, and the largest producers (the Gulf states and Russia) – don’t trust the institutional system created mainly by the West.
The emerging countries rightly argue that the West is responsible for today’s climate-change problem.
From the Industrial Revolution until very recently, the West’s development was free of any environmental restrictions, and the emerging countries believe that they should not have to bear the adjustment cost.
Likewise, producing countries oppose giving up one of the few bases of power they have.
The solution must include a new institution.
Perhaps, for a start, it would be a good idea for the world’s largest emitters to negotiate through the G-20, or something like it, for energy.
Later, negotiations could be opened up to all states, placing them under the ambit of the UNFCCC, for example.
The focus of the negotiations must be comprehensive, resulting in emission limits and financial and technological support for energy sources that are less harmful to the environment.
Limiting emissions would impose costs disproportionately on oil-exporting countries, and on consumers in emerging countries, where technology is less sophisticated.
At the UNFCCC’s meeting in Durban, all countries – developed, emerging, with or without natural resources – must join together to ensure that when the other crises currently roiling the world are finally resolved, the biggest crisis of all does not catch us off guard.
Apakah kekurangan energi benar terjadi?
MARTIGNY, SWISS – Apabila kita mampu menyimpan dan memanfaatkan energi dari cahaya matahari yang menyinari bumi selama dua menit saja, energi tersebut cukup untuk menjalankan kendaraan, menerangi dan menghangatkan gedung, dan memenuhi seluruh kebutuhan listrik kita selama satu tahun.
Singkatnya, kita umat manusia tidak sedang menghadapi kekurangan energi.
Kita justru menghadapi tantangan teknis dalam menyimpan energi dan menyalurkannya kepada konsumen, dan salah satu cara paling efisien untuk mengatasi kesulitan tersebut ialah berinvestasi pada teknologi penyimpanan energi yang lebih baik.
Beberapa permasalahan di dunia saat ini mungkin berasal dari penggunaan energi, mulai dari konflik karena pasokan minyak dan kekhawatiran akan emisi gas rumah kaca, hingga hilangnya produktivitas dan output yang diakibatkan oleh kekurangan atau pemadaman listrik.
Di sejumlah kawasan termiskin di dunia, kekurangan energi melumpuhkan pembangunan ekonomi.
Secara global, lebih dari 1,3 miliar penduduk dunia tidak memiliki akses terhadap listrik; dan sekitar 2,6 miliar penduduk tidak mampu mengakses alat memasak modern.
Lebih dari 95% diantaranya berada di Sub-Sahara Afrika atau kawasan berkembang di Asia dan 84% tinggal di wilayah pedesaan.
Pada awal pemilihan presiden di Nigeria belakangan ini, seorang wanita ditanya harapannya atas apa yang harus dipenuhi calon presiden.
Satu kata jawabnya: “Penerangan”.
Listrik, sebagai komoditas dasar, memungkinkan ia terus bekerja dan anak-anaknya pun bisa belajar.
Energi yang tidak dapat diandalkan atau tidak tersedia merupakan permasalahan bagi sebagian besar negara-negara di Afrika dan sub kontinen India, serta beberapa negara lainnya di Asia.
Berdasarkan  laporan dari International Energy Agency, penyempurnaan pada sektor energi akan menghasilkan perbaikan yang setara dengan satu dekade pembangunan/peningkatan pendapatan per kapita pada beberapa negara-negara termiskin di dunia.
Krisis energi global diperburuk dengan rendahnya inovasi.
Berdasarkan studi yang dilakukan laboratorium milik pemerintah Amerika Serikat, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, lebih dari 60% energi yang kita gunakan sebetulnya hilang selama periode antara waktu energi dihasilkan dan saat dikonsumsi.
Hal ini meliputi ketidakefisienan dalam konversi bahan bakar fosil menjadi listrik, kehilangan energi selama transmisi, perilaku konsumen yang boros, dan pentingnya memiliki cadangan untuk mencegah pemadaman listrik.
Pembaruan inovasi sangat diperlukan, bentuk-bentuk inovasi yang dapat menghilangkan pemborosan (waste), mengurangi polusi, dan memperluas akses perolehan energi di seluruh dunia.  Upaya ini berarti berfokus pada teknologi yang dapat meningkatkan efisiensi, seperti komunikasi nirkabel, komunikasi antar peralatan (machine-to-machine), meteran listrik cerdas, dan manajemen produksi yang lebih baik.
Berbagai sumber energi terbarukan, termasuk tenaga surya dan angin, berada pada posisi yang tepat untuk berkontribusi pada produksi energi yang dibutuhkan oleh negara-negara ekonomi maju dan berkembang.
Akan tetapi karena matahari tidak bersinar setiap saat dan angin tidak selamanya bertiup, energi yang dihasilkan dari sumber tersebut tidak stabil dan tidak tersedia secara terus-menerus.
Kondisi seperti ini akan terus menjadi persoalan, kecuali dan hanya jika kita mampu menyimpan energi dari sumber-sumber terbarukan secara efisien.
Beberapa studi yang dilakukan US Western Electricity Coordinating Council menyimpulkan bahwa penemuan cara-cara terbaik dalam penyimpanan energi dapat mengurangi keseluruhan pemborosan (waste) hingga 18% dan meningkatkan efisiensi penggunaan listrik hingga 11%.
Metode-metode penyimpanan energi yang lebih baik juga akan mempermudah penyaluran energi ke daerah-daerah sulit dijangkau yang saat ini tidak terlayani, serta memaksimalkan pemanfaatan sumber-sumber energi yang jumlahnya terbatas.
Salah satu metode penyimpanan energi yang sudah teruji adalah penggunaan kapasitas berlebih untuk memompa air ke dalam reservoir, sehingga dapat digunakan di kemudian hari untuk menggerakkan turbin saat permintaan sedang tinggi.
Namun pendekatan semacam ini hanya bermanfaat di daerah pegunungan, sehingga tidak cocok diterapkan sebagai solusi massal.
Potensi penelitian meliputi grid-scale battery yang bisa mengisi ulang dan mengeluarkan daya puluhan ribu kali lebih besar dan memiliki data analytics untuk memaksimalkan penggunaan baterai dan menjadikan grid seefektif mungkin.
Menghasilkan energi saja tidak cukup, kita juga harus menggunakannya secara efisien, dan penerapan teknologi penyimpanan termutakhir, sekaligus tercanggih, secara massal merupakan unsur penting dalam solusi ini.
Menjamin pasokan energi global tersedia secara stabil, efisien, mudah diakses, dan terjangkau akan memerlukan waktu.
Akan tetapi sejumlah terobosan semakin dekat dan menjadi tugas kita untuk berupaya keras mewujudkannya.
Engaging the Islamists
The massive victory of Hamas in the Palestinian parliamentary elections stunned much of the world, but the outcome should not have been so surprising.
Indeed, Hamas’s moment of triumph is part of a growing regional pattern.
Four years ago, Turkey’s Islamic-oriented Justice and Development Party won a plurality in parliamentary elections and formed a government.
A month later, a similarly named Islamic party in Morocco, Parti de la Justice et du Development (PJD), finished third in legislative elections.
Last December, the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt (legally banned since 1954) scored equally impressive results, garnering 20% of the popular vote and 88 seats in the Parliament, making it the main opposition bloc to Mubarak’s ruling National Democratic Party (NDP).
Hezbollah in Lebanon and Shiite parties in Iraq have also performed well in elections.
Despite this democratic endorsement, most Western governments have been reluctant to engage with these parties or to prepare for Islamists coming to power through the ballot box.
The irony is obvious: Islamists, who seem suspicious of democracy as a Western plot, took President George W. Bush’s promotion of democracy in the Muslim world more seriously than America’s autocratic friends – and possibly more seriously than Bush himself.
In his first press conference after Hamas’s victory, Bush was visibly at a loss for words in responding to this “unexpected development.”
The truth is that over the last three years, some regional insiders, including me, had several lengthy discussions with Bush’s advisors on the National Security Council (NSC) and in the State Department.
We urged the Bush administration to formulate a consistent policy that engages the region’s Islamists who are willing to rule by democratic principles.
Some of this debate was widely publicized.
Part of America’s reluctance to deal with Islamists reflected concern over the reaction of autocratic regimes, some of which are long-time allies.
This fear proved not only unwarranted, but also counterproductive, for it has not stopped the march of the Islamists in the Arab Middle East.
Now it is time for a fresh and bold approach toward all contending political forces in the Muslim world.
First, America and the West must stop supporting autocrats with aid, trade, and arms.
Second, there must be a push to expand the public space for the Muslim world’s democrats, so free media and independent judiciaries to protect press freedom need to be boosted.
Third, an active dialogue that engages the Islamists, no matter how difficult, must begin and continue.
The West needs to establish clear and consistent rules of engagement.
It is legitimate and imperative to make resumption of aid to Palestinians contingent on Hamas’s recognition of Israel’s right to exist and on its commitment to all international agreements previously signed by the PLO and the Palestinian Authority.
In an earlier step toward recognition by the world community, the PLO had to revamp the Palestinian Covenant, which called for the destruction of Israel.
There is no reason why Hamas would not follow that precedent, if the demand to do so were made relentlessly.
In fact, all militant liberation movements have renounced violence in due time, from the IRA to the Sandinistas to the African National Congress.
Likewise, Israel must reciprocate every gesture of good will from Hamas, however psychologically difficult this may be.
After all, in 1947 similar Jewish “freedom fighters” blew up the King David Hotel, killing tens of British officers.
Until the 1970’s, these Zionist guerillas were wanted as terrorists by British authorities.
Then one of them, Menachem Begin, was elected Prime Minister of Israel and became a partner in peace with Egypt’s President Anwar Sadat.
Sadat himself was a suspected terrorist, according to Egyptian authorities, for having plotted and taken part in assassinating a prominent political figure.
But both Sadat and Begin became respected worldwide for taking risks for peace and won a joint Nobel Peace prize.
So, for Hamas as well as for America, the West, and Israel, it is futile to look back in anger and frustration.
Instead, they all should look forward to creating anew the more positive legacies of Sadat, Begin, Rabin, and even Ariel Sharon.
If those leaders could disavow their own violent pasts and take practical steps toward peace in the region, why can’t Hamas?
A New Century’s New Technologies
DAVOS – This year’s World Economic Forum meeting in Davos, Switzerland, addresses threats to geopolitical stability and human life, and seeks ways to accelerate the design of more effective political, economic, and technological tools to address them.
Among this generation’s most daunting challenges are food, water, and energy shortages; climate change and rising sea levels; and the spread of new, drug-resistant diseases.
Humanity has faced threats to its existence and the health of the planet before, yet we have managed to avoid the apocalypse, or at least postpone it, through ingenuity and invention.
This year’s Davos meeting will offer a glimpse of where the next life-, planet- and economy-saving discoveries and products will come from, and where we should invest our talents and treasure to fuel the next generation of transformative technologies.
An accelerating convergence of the biological, physical, and engineering sciences promises a stunning array of new technological solutions.
Imagine a coal-fueled power plant that emits only water and clean air.
Inside the plant, designer yeast cells transform the carbon dioxide released during the coal’s combustion into raw materials for floor tiles and other construction supplies.
Or imagine a simple and inexpensive urine test that can diagnose cancer, eliminating the need for a surgical biopsy.
And, when cancer treatment is needed, its toxic punch hits cancer cells selectively, with far fewer damaging side effects.
Or imagine a future with plentiful food and fuel crops.
Through improved seed stocks and more efficient water management, we can have crops that require less water, grow at higher density, and thrive in wider temperature ranges.
And data-driven agriculture supply chains will move them more effectively to the market.
These advances will enable us to feed and provide power – at a lower economic and environmental cost – to the anticipated 2050 population of nine billion people.
These and other innovations are emerging from the convergence of biology and engineering that is now upon us.
A new generation of scientists, engineers, and clinicians, educated more broadly than their predecessors, speak the languages of both and are working together in unprecedented ways.
They are conversing across disciplines – not only engineering and biology, but also chemistry, physics, mathematics, and computation – and setting new paths for innovation, from initial discovery to the launch of advanced applications in the marketplace.
The technologies on which many of us depend today arose from a parallel convergence of discoveries in physics and engineering in the early twentieth century.
In 1900, the world did not have ready access to electricity, automobiles and aviation, or telecommunications.
In much of the world, we now take these conveniences for granted; indeed, we regard them as necessities.
What began as esoteric explorations of the workings of the physical world – the nature of electromagnetism and the atomic structure of matter, for example – became, in the hands of inventors and innovators, telecommunications, new drugs, medical imaging and devices, nuclear power, the computer chip, and the Internet.
There are now more connected mobile devices than there are people on the planet.
The products of electronic and digital industries will continue to expand their impact, with “big data,” the “Internet of things,” and the “industrial Internet” becoming increasingly prevalent.
Beyond the extension of these twentieth-century technologies, we can also anticipate a new set of transformational industries – as yet nameless – as we advance into the new millennium.
At the same time, just as the twentieth century’s convergence of physics and engineering transformed our lives, the accelerating convergence of biology and engineering is driving unprecedented discoveries that promise to create another platform for innovation, the rise of new industries, and economic growth.
The manufacture of fuels and pharmaceuticals already relies on purpose-developed microbes that create sophisticated biological products.
New manufacturing processes will incorporate specially designed microbes and computer-characterized compounds into an array of products.
Likewise, the dramatic reduction in the cost of gene sequencing, from roughly $40 million per human genome in 2003 to about $5,000 today, together with a rapid increase in computational power, is boosting the speed, accuracy, and robustness of medical diagnostic tests.
That promises not only more timely and effective therapies for cancer, but also similar advances against other currently intractable diseases.
The industries and economic drivers of the twenty-first century will arise from the increasingly combined efforts of biology and engineering.
It is this convergence that will help deliver the technological solutions needed to supply enough clean energy, food, and water, as well as better health, to sustain the world’s nine billion people in 2050.
The Great Bank Escape
STANFORD – This year has proven to be yet another replete with futile efforts to manage the outsize grip that banks and bankers have on the world economy.
The global financial system remains distorted and dangerous.
Since the 1980’s, “shareholder value” has increasingly become the focus of corporate governance.
Managers and board members often receive stock-based compensation, which gives them equity ownership rights and, in turn, creates a powerful incentive to maximize the market value of their companies’ shares.
But actions taken in the name of shareholder value often benefit only those whose wealth is closely tied to the company’s profits, and may actually be harmful to many shareholders.
Despite their claims that they are pursuing shareholder value, the actions of top managers, in particular, often reflect only their own interests, rather than those of shareholders who often hold the great majority of the shares.
This discrepancy can be seen clearly in the banking sector.
Before 2007, banks enjoyed high returns and soaring stock prices.
But excessive indebtedness and losses on the risky investments that had been made triggered the global financial crisis and led to the failure, or near-failure, of many major financial institutions.
Banks with substantial overhanging debt reduced lending, and, despite the massive intervention of governments and central banks, the crisis dragged down the global economy.
As a result, since 2008, shareholders have lost substantially on their investments in banks.
The crisis – together with the prolonged economic downturn that followed – caused diversified shareholders to lose on their other investments, too.
Furthermore, many bank shareholders have suffered from the disruption in lending, either directly or via their businesses or employers.
Some have even lost their jobs.
And, along with other taxpayers, they incurred some of the cost of the bailouts.
And yet, despite large losses on their holdings in 2007-2008, top bankers fared significantly better than most of their shareholders did in 2000-2008.
Even executives of the failed investment banks Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers walked away with hundreds of millions of dollars in compensation, while the companies’ shareholders, who received some dividends along the way, fared much worse – not even considering their other crisis-related losses.
To safeguard their interests, bankers have lobbied relentlessly against regulations that would require them to rely less on borrowing and more on retained earnings or new equity to fund their lending and investments.
They cite the need to deliver high returns for shareholders, implying that tighter regulations undermine shareholders’ interests.
But safer, less indebted banks are better able to continue lending without becoming distressed or needing support.
As a result, they are less likely to destabilize the global financial system or impose harm on most shareholders and the public.
Bankers also claim that higher equity requirements would restrict credit and hinder economic growth.
But their arguments are flawed and misleading.
For example, they use return on equity as their primary measure of profitability, but neglect to distinguish between ROE and shareholder value.
In fact, in the single-minded quest for higher returns, bankers might expose shareholders to excessive risk, without compensating them adequately.
And bankers neglect to acknowledge the role of government guarantees and subsidies in making so much borrowing possible and attractive.&#160;
Contrary to bankers’ claims, increasing equity requirements significantly, and thus safeguarding the financial system’s stability, is in the public interest – including the interest of most shareholders.
By contrast, preserving the status quo, or implementing inadequate regulation, would allow bankers to continue to profit at the expense of others.
Small shareholders cannot easily influence banks’ decisions, especially on complex risk-related issues.
And banks’ boards of directors, which wield ultimate control, are not legally required to consider the broader impact of their actions on others.
Instead, their narrow perspective – which tends to coincide with executives’ preferences even at the expense of other shareholders – dictates their decision-making.
Even from banks’ narrow standpoint, higher equity requirements would cost less than other proposed regulations.
And such requirements would reduce the likelihood that strong banks would be called upon to finance the resolution of failed institutions.
(Of course, these considerations are less relevant if bankers expect to succeed in blocking all regulation aimed at reducing excessive risk-taking, and to be bailed out in a crisis.)
As matters stand, bankers continue to benefit fully from the upside of their investments, while sharing the downside with creditors and taxpayers – and sometimes with shareholders.
Although some progress has been made in improving regulation and enforcement, industry lobbies have largely succeeded in delaying essential reforms needed to ensure global financial stability.
JPMorgan Chase’s CEO Jamie Dimon reportedly told his daughter that a financial crisis “happens every five to seven years.”
Last month, the bank paid $1.1 billion in dividends, reducing its ability to absorb future losses on its investments.
If policymakers and regulators do not strengthen their reform efforts, taxpayers and shareholders – not bankers like Dimon – will be the ones who suffer the consequences of the next crisis as well.
Enlightenment on Trial
Ugly debates about religion and science usually seem to be confined to the United States.&#160; In recent months, however, such debates have begun to spread – first to Europe and then around the world.
Science, it seems, is drifting into political dangers it has not faced since before the Enlightenment.
Europe began its own American-style debate on the origins of life when Cardinal Christoph Schönborn of Vienna cast doubt on the acceptability of Darwinism and evolutionary theory to people who see themselves as faithful Roman Catholics.
The Cardinal argued that evolution is the work of God and that evolutionary theory should be interpreted in that light and no other.
With Cardinal Schönborn’s intervention, the peace between science and religion that in Old Europe had held almost since the Enlightenment – and at least since the historically hard-won eviction of the Church from politics in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries – seemed suddenly to have been broken.
Revealed truth, the Cardinal seemed to say, must be accorded primacy over the truths science reveals through reason.
This is not to say that religious sentiment or, in the case of Germany, bitter historical experience stemming from the Nazi era, had not informed other European debates, say, on the ethics of stem-cell research.
Indeed, the religious background of Europe’s nations clearly manifested itself in various European laws on such research, with the United Kingdom and Sweden being the most liberal and Italy, Austria, and Poland the most restrictive.
But none of these debates directly challenged the role of science in society or posed, as Cardinal Schönborn did, the idea that religion and science are potentially incompatible.
Following the Cardinal’s declaration, many pointed to the US as a warning sign of the dangers inherent in politicizing science through religion.
They noted that President Bush had sided openly with those who want to make evolutionary theory optional in schools’ science curricula.
The reason that such pseudo-science has prevailed in so many American schools is directly related to America’s tremendously decentralized school system, which allows committed local groups of the religious-minded to reshape the curriculum.
The power of faith-based movements in the US is undeniable, and their influence in other areas where science and politics meet, including the availability of certain drugs – the so-called “morning after” pill being one example – is growing.
It is unlikely that European schools, because of their structure, can be invaded by “creationism.”
Yet Europe should not think itself immune to this problem.
When dogmatic faith enters politics, compromises on controversial issues, which are indispensable in a democracy, become difficult to achieve.
This is because fundamental values – as opposed to, say, the distribution of material resources – are seen as being non-negotiable.
The danger is that scientific decisions with a scientific-technical component are no longer subject to study or rational argument, but instead are fought over by various interest groups, with some invariably claiming that their taxes should be used to fund only research that is compatible with their values.
Debates about the nature and benefits of science are not confined to the US and Europe.
When South Korea’s National University announced the first-ever successful cloning of a dog, the news triggered arguments about science and society throughout Asia.
Although the language of religion was not used overtly, the debate in Asia reflected the same fears that science is somehow “out of control” and far too powerful.
One key reason for this is the fact that China is pouring vast resources into research and development.
Between 1995 and 2002, it doubled the percentage of its rapidly growing GDP that it invests in R&amp;D, with biotechnology and other high-tech fields enjoying the highest priority.
Science, it seems, is becoming a partner in the unnerving development of a new global superpower.
Today, science belongs to a rapidly globalizing world.
It is perceived as a motor of economic growth, but also as a threat to our security and beliefs.
Cultural worldviews and religion, of course, will continue to shape the overall cultural and value context within which science and technology interact.
But values are subject to change, often in response to past experience and fears about the future.
It took centuries for science to carve out its sphere of autonomy, always a relative one, from politics and religion alike.
This autonomy has served science well, and independent and accountable science has served society and the economy well.
If this beneficial relationship is to be maintained, scientific independence – from both religious dogmatism and governmental intervention – must be defended.
Who would have thought that, at the dawn of the twenty-first century, the old Enlightenment debates would still be so potent?
The Deflated Helium Industry
OXFORD – Helium is vital in today’s technology-based world.
It cools, with precision, the superconducting coils of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) machines, as well as the silicon used to make chips for devices like smart phones or the glass that is drawn into optic fibers.
For pressure-fed rockets, Big Physics, or even party balloons, there is no realistic alternative to helium.
Until recently, the world’s seemingly abundant supply of helium was extracted solely as a by-product of natural-gas production in just two dozen helium-rich fields.
But global helium production shortfalls have driven double-digit inflation of helium prices and fueled rising anxiety in the scientific community.
Now, prospectors in the United States – the world’s largest helium exporter – are exploring fields in search of helium exclusively.
Helium shortages inevitably spur debate about production and preservation practices.
Since the 1996 US Helium Privatization Act (HPA) – which required the government to sell off its helium reserves using a rigid price formula in order to repay the debt accrued from a large helium buy-up in the 1960’s – there have been three such shortfalls.
Given that the HPA calls for helium sales to cease once the debt is paid – that is, this October – the scientific, medical, and technology communities have become increasingly concerned about a massive helium shortage and ballooning costs.
This, together with the fact that helium underpins much US employment, may have contributed to the US Congress’s recent efforts to keep one-third of the world’s helium supply flowing, but at higher prices.
The move is timely, because the mandated disposal of such a large volume of helium from the US Federal Helium Reserve over the last 15 years has displaced many helium producers in the American Midwest and deferred projects elsewhere (see graph).
Indeed, by artificially constraining helium prices, the HPA weakened companies’ incentive to invest in separating helium from natural gas.
As a result, many thousands of tonnes of helium have simply been vented into the atmosphere at source or when the natural gas has been burned.
Ending this lamentable squandering of helium requires a fundamental shift in thinking in the natural-gas industry.
As helium is a by-product of its much larger energy counterpart, it is fair to say that helium that is not used will not be preserved.
Today, the upstream helium market is structurally weak.
Helium-bearing Hugoton, America’s largest natural-gas field, is in decline.
And sustaining the US Federal Helium Reserve’s high production capacity, which used to enable it to offset global helium-supply disruptions, is no longer geologically viable.
Moreover, the rapid expansion in the US of shale gas, which contains no economically recoverable helium, has squeezed marginal conventional-gas supplies.
For example, Oklahoma’s Keyes natural-gas field – which relieved a major helium shortage just as the US government started purchasing the gas from private producers during the space race – now lies dormant.
And helium extraction is not economical without natural-gas production.
As it stands, natural-gas companies have little incentive to adapt their operations to enable helium extraction.
In Algeria, a giant gas field, the helium-rich Hassi R’Mel, is also a gas hub for the Sahara region.
Rich and lean streams are blended there.
This reduces the helium concentration and makes extraction difficult.
Clearly, the problem is not insufficient helium, but the economic, legal, and physical constraints on helium resources.
In fact, Arizona alone has enough helium to supply the US for a decade.
But the St. John’s Dome natural-gas field is dominated by CO2, which the Ridgeway Arizona Oil Corporation aims to use to enhance oil-recovery projects in the area.
Given that the CO2 is not yet being produced and will not be vented, the field’s helium remains inaccessible.
Despite these challenges, the industrial gas companies are gaining access to helium in low-grade gas sources.
Although some producers – including Exxon Mobil’s Shute Creek plant near La Barge, Wyoming (until 2013, home to the world’s largest helium refinery) – once vented waste CO2 into the atmosphere, they are now installing carbon-capture facilities to reduce or eliminate emissions.
Moreover, nitrogen – a gas that can be vented without consequences – always coexists with helium.
Coincidentally, the initial discovery of abundant helium in the US in 1903 occurred at a dud gas well in Dexter, Kansas, which contained a gas mixture comprising more than 70% nitrogen and 1.84% helium.
As helium prices rise, nitrogen-rich sources are becoming economical.
But such small-scale schemes will be inadequate to meet escalating demand for helium in Asia.
For that, firms should look to liquefied natural gas (LNG) – the precursor to shale gas – which enables the production of helium from natural gas containing just 0.04% helium.
The first helium-producing LNG plant was commissioned in 1994 in Algeria.
Qatar has one operating helium refinery, and another recently started up.
Together, they should produce 25% of the world’s helium during 2014.
Over the next ten years, the helium industry will undergo a fundamental transformation.
With such Middle Eastern supplies – as well as major new supplies from Russia – dominating the global market, the US may begin to import helium.
Given that much of the helium supply will be channeled toward Asia, the European Union – which consumes more than 20% of the world’s commercially available helium – must act now to develop a helium policy that secures its future supply of this strategic commodity.
Although high-tech industries in Europe depend on a steady supply of helium, the gas has received scant attention there.
In 2011, the United Kingdom, a center of MRI manufacturing, excluded helium from a parliamentary hearing on strategically important elements, because it was “outside of the scope of [the] inquiry.”
Meanwhile, more than half of Algeria’s helium molecules head north, unrecovered, in gas pipelines via Spain and Italy.
Given the importance of Algeria to Europe as an alternative to Russian gas supplies, the EU should be focusing on developing its helium policy accordingly.
Beyond Silicon Valley
BERKELY – Once again, California’s Silicon Valley is confirming its status as a mecca of high-tech entrepreneurship and wealth creation.
But it is not a model for job creation and inclusive growth that policymakers and entrepreneurs elsewhere can emulate – at least not without making some fundamental adjustments.
To be sure, what is happening in Silicon Valley today is nothing short of dazzling.
Venture capital (VC) investment has reached near-record highs.
Overnight millionaires – even billionaires – are proliferating.
Twenty-something software coders are commanding six-figure salaries.
The boom has driven California’s economic recovery.
And, along with courageous political leadership, it has enabled the state to escape from a seemingly hopeless fiscal crisis.
But the Silicon Valley superstar tech companies and their VC champions populate an isolated island of prosperity.
Indeed, just 100 miles inland, in California’s Central Valley, unemployment rates remain in the double digits (11.2% in Fresno and 10.4% in Modesto), with average family income amounting to less than half of that in Palo Alto, the heart of Silicon Valley.
If the venture capitalist Tim Draper had succeeded in his misguided initiative to divide California into six states, Silicon Valley would have become the richest state in the US, and the Central Valley the poorest.
The key question, then, is how to harness Silicon Valley’s entrepreneurial and innovative prowess to the goal of inclusive economic growth in America’s heartland.
To some extent, this is already happening, with visionary entrepreneurs in cities like Nashville, Cincinnati, New Orleans, Wichita, and Salt Lake City adapting Silicon Valley’s recipe for success to local conditions and opportunities – and creating much-needed middle-class jobs in the process.
But more can and should be done to support this trend.
The University of Virginia’s Miller Center recently created a commission (of which one of us, Lenny, was a member) to identify strategies to support the creation of middle-class jobs through entrepreneurship.
The ideas proposed in the commission’s report include providing training and mentors for prospective entrepreneurs and startups, creating “ecosystems” of supporting infrastructure, and reducing regulatory barriers.
The report also highlights the importance of unlocking capital for “Main Street” entrepreneurs, who struggle to find the funding they need to launch, sustain, or scale up their operations, particularly as the recent recession drove out many of the community banks on which they had traditionally relied for credit.
Silicon Valley startups, by contrast, enjoy the generous support of VC funds, having received 30-35% of all venture investment deployed in the US since the 1980s.
Not only is VC investment concentrated in a small part of the country; it has recently tended to support the expansion of later-stage investments, rather than the launch of startups.
In other words, VC funds are not well suited to support new businesses that may generate a large number of jobs and boost prosperity locally, but that are not close to launching a billion-dollar IPO.
Before the global economic crisis, entrepreneurs often relied on personal savings, credit cards, home equity loans, and investments by friends and family for start-up capital.
Since 2008, however, few aspiring entrepreneurs have been able to borrow significant amounts of money from banks.
And most people do not have wealthy relatives or classmates.
Main Street entrepreneurs do, however, have two major – and underused – financing options.
The first lies in the public sector.
In the US, the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) – created to ensure that banks that gather deposits in low- or middle-income communities reinvest some of their earnings in those communities – supports more than $60 billion in community finance, compared to the $48 billion of VC funding that was deployed last year.
Though much of that reinvestment has traditionally been channeled toward housing, a growing number of investors and banks – including the Bay Area Equity Fund, Village Capital, and the Roberts Enterprise Development Fund – are investing CRA funds in entrepreneurs.
Others – such as Bridges Ventures and Pacific Community Ventures – are using Community Development Financial Institutions and insurance-company balance sheets to expand the financing pool available to start-ups in disadvantaged communities.
A second key source of capital lies with private and community philanthropic foundations, which are required by US law to donate at least 5% of their assets to charitable causes annually.
In 2012, such foundations distributed about $52 billion to support their philanthropic missions.
They channeled most of the rest of their $715 billion in assets into traditional investments, in order to generate returns that would expand their capital base.
But a growing number of foundations – such as the Bill &amp; Melinda Gates Foundation, the Rockefeller Foundation, and the Kresge Foundation – are increasing the share of assets they direct toward investments that further their philanthropy.
Such investments can help to accelerate impact investing, which aims to yield both a social and a financial return.
Unfortunately, program-related spending still represents only 1% of capital deployed by foundations, with just 0.05% of that going toward equity investments.
Public and philanthropic investments in local startup businesses are already paying off, both in terms of creating jobs and generating financial returns.
An early leader, the Bay Area Equity Fund, raised $75 million from banks, insurance companies, pension funds, and individuals; created about 15,000 jobs, 2,218 of which were in low- and moderate-income neighborhoods; and generated a 24.4% annual return for its investors.
The government can do much to promote such investment.
For starters, it should refine the rules governing which investments meet CRA requirements.
Likewise, as the US taskforce on impact investing recommended, the authorities should clarify the permissible investment activity of tax-exempt foundations.
Just as Silicon Valley’s dynamism should not be diminished, the rest of the country’s entrepreneurial potential should not be underestimated.
With the right incentives and funding from philanthropic sources, job-creating entrepreneurs could serve as engines of more inclusive growth in communities across the US.
Entrepreneurship as a Diplomatic Tool
WASHINGTON, DC – Armenia and Turkey have long been at odds.
Divided over a tragic past, the neighboring countries do not have diplomatic ties, and their border remains closed.
Despite this, in November 2014, a group of Turks traveled to Armenia for Startup Weekend, an event where aspiring entrepreneurs hone and pitch their ideas to investors and experts.
In mixed teams, young Armenians and Turks worked together to build new ventures.
“We weren’t focused on being Armenian or Turkish – just on being the best,” a Turkish participant noted.
That sentiment is exactly what the people who backed the trip – diplomats from the United States and the European Union – had hoped to achieve.
For decades they have struggled to find common ground for Armenians and Turks to begin a dialogue.
The common personality types, values, and single-minded focus of entrepreneurs created an opening.
Entrepreneurship has become a catalyst for progress in similarly thorny situations worldwide.
The focus on job and wealth creation has become a “talking point” upon which nearly all governments can agree – or at least find little with which to disagree.
That has made it a handy tool for a new form of diplomacy.
Whether in Africa, Asia, Latin America, or the Middle East, entrepreneurship has improved individual capability, capacity, and connectivity.
It has stimulated not only economic activity but also social mobility.
An emphasis on entrepreneurship stands the traditional foreign-aid paradigm on its head, because it is based on the assumption that the engine of development is local talent, a class of people – equally distributed throughout the world – with the capacity to innovate and commercialize their innovations.
In Africa, mobile money platforms such as M-Pesa in Kenya and Paga in Nigeria have solved a key problem for millions in their respective countries and across several continents: the lack of financial services.
Through a simple text message, anyone with a cellular handset is able to send and receive money.
That has helped move money.
More importantly, it has given millions of individuals an opportunity to start their own businesses.