This created a two-speed Europe, with debtor countries sinking under the weight of their liabilities, and surplus countries forging ahead.
As the largest creditor, Germany could dictate the terms of assistance, which were punitive and pushed debtor countries towards insolvency.
Meanwhile, Germany benefited from the euro crisis, which depressed the exchange rate and boosted its competitiveness further.
As integration has turned into disintegration, the role of the European political establishment has also reversed, from spearheading further unification to defending the status quo.
As a result, anyone who considers the status quo undesirable, unacceptable, or unsustainable has had to take an anti-European stance.
And, as heavily indebted countries are pushed towards insolvency, nationalist political parties – for example, Finland’s True Finns – have grown stronger, alongside more established counterparts elsewhere in Europe.
Yet Europe’s political establishment continues to argue that there is no alternative to the status quo.
Financial authorities resort to increasingly desperate measures in order to buy time.
But time is working against them: two-speed Europe is driving member countries further apart.
Greece is heading towards disorderly default and/or devaluation with incalculable consequences.
If this seemingly inexorable process is to be arrested and reversed, both Greece and the eurozone must urgently adopt a Plan B. A Greek default may be inevitable, but it need not be disorderly.
And, while some contagion will be unavoidable – whatever happens to Greece is likely to spread to Portugal, and Ireland’s financial position, too, could become unsustainable – the rest of the eurozone needs to be ring-fenced.
That means strengthening the eurozone, which would probably require wider use of Eurobonds and a eurozone-wide deposit-insurance scheme of some kind.
Generating the political will would require a Plan B for the EU itself.
The European elite needs to revert to the principles that guided the Union’s creation, recognizing that our understanding of reality is inherently imperfect, and that perceptions are bound to be biased and institutions flawed.
An open society does not treat prevailing arrangements as sacrosanct; it allows for alternatives when those arrangements fail.
It should be possible to mobilize a pro-European silent majority behind the idea that when the status quo becomes untenable, we should look for a European solution rather than national ones.
“True Europeans” ought to outnumber true Finns and other anti-Europeans in Germany and elsewhere.
Necessary Migrants
BERLIN – How heartwarming it is to land in Germany, where football fans hold up banners welcoming refugees from the war-ravaged Middle East.
Germany is the new Promised Land for the desperate and downtrodden, the survivors of war and pillage.
Even the popular German tabloids, not normally of a do-gooding disposition, are promoting a willingness to help.
While politicians in the United Kingdom and other countries wring their hands and explain why even a relatively minor influx of Syrians, Libyans, Iraqis, or Eritreans constitutes a lethal danger to the social fabric of their societies, “Mama Merkel” promised that Germany would not reject any genuine refugee.
Some 800,000 refugees are expected to enter Germany this year, whereas British Prime Minister David Cameron is making a fuss about fewer than 30,000 asylum applications and warning darkly about “swarms of people” crossing the North Sea.
And, unlike Merkel, Cameron was partly responsible for stoking one of the wars (Libya) that made life intolerable for millions.
No wonder Merkel wants other European countries to take in more refugees under a mandatory quota system.
In fact, despite its politicians’ anxious rhetoric, the United Kingdom is a more ethnically mixed, and in some ways more open, society than Germany.
London is incomparably more cosmopolitan than Berlin or Frankfurt.
And, on the whole, Britain has greatly benefited from immigration.
Indeed, the National Health Service has warned that accepting fewer immigrants would be catastrophic, leaving British hospitals seriously understaffed.
The mood in contemporary Germany may be exceptional.
Taking in refugees, or any immigrants, has never been an easy political sell.
In the late 1930s, when Jews in Germany and Austria were in mortal danger, few countries, including the wealthy United States, were prepared to take in more than a handful of refugees.
Britain allowed about 10,000 Jewish children to come in 1939, at the very last minute, but only if they had local sponsors and left their parents behind.
To say that the generous mood in Germany today has much to do with the murderous behavior of Germans in the past is not to make light of it.
The Japanese, too, carry a burden of historical crimes, but their attitude to foreigners in distress is far less welcoming.
Even though few Germans have any personal memories of the Third Reich, many still feel the need to prove that they have learned from their country’s history.
But the almost exclusive focus by politicians and the media on the current refugee crisis conceals wider immigration issues.
Images of miserable refugee families drifting in the sea, at the mercy of rapacious smugglers and gangsters, can easily inspire feelings of pity and compassion (and not just in Germany).
Even Cameron has had to soften his tone, promising to accept a few thousand refugees, because he was moved “as a father” by the picture of a drowned Syrian boy.
But most people crossing European borders to find work and build new lives are not refugees. When British officials said that it was “clearly disappointing” that about 300,000 more people came to Britain than left in 2014, they were not mainly talking about asylum-seekers.
The majority of these newcomers are from other European Union countries, such as Poland, Romania, and Bulgaria.
Some enter as students, and some come to find jobs.
They do not come to save their lives, but to improve them.
By lumping asylum-seekers together with economic migrants, the latter are discredited, as though they were trying to squeeze in under false pretenses.
It is widely assumed that economic migrants, from inside or outside the EU, are mainly poor people out to live off the tax money of the relatively rich.
In fact, most of them are not spongers.
They want to work.
The benefits to the host countries are easy to see: Economic migrants often work harder for less money than locals.
This is not in everyone’s interest, to be sure: Pointing out the benefits of cheap labor will not persuade people whose wages might be undercut.
It is, in any case, easier to appeal to compassion for refugees than to the acceptance of economic migrants. Even in Germany.
In 2000, German Chancellor Gerhard Schröder wanted to issue work visas to about 20,000 foreign high-tech experts, many of them from India.
Germany needed them badly, but Schröder met swift opposition.
One politician coined the slogan “Kinder statt Inder” (children instead of Indians).
But Germans, like many other rich countries’ citizens, are not producing enough children.
These countries need immigrants with youthful energy and skills to fill jobs that locals, for whatever reason, are unable or unwilling to take.
This does not mean that all borders must be opened to everyone.
Merkel’s idea of quotas on refugees should be applied to economic migrants, too.
So far, however, the EU has not come up with a coherent policy on migration.
Citizens of the EU can move freely within the Union (Britain wants to stop this, too, though it is unlikely to succeed).
But economic migration from non-EU countries, under carefully managed conditions, is both legitimate and imperative.
This is not because the migrants deserve Europeans’ sympathy, but because Europe needs them.
It will not be easy.
Most people appear to be more easily swayed by emotions – which can lead them to mass murder or warm compassion, depending on the circumstances – than by the cool calculus of rational self-interest.
Europe needs to make up its mind
The celebrations to mark the 50th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome this month come at an opportune moment.
For now is the time for the European Union to call an end to its self-imposed “reflection period” following the rejection of the European Constitution by the French and the Dutch, and make up its mind about the future.
The reflection period has been mostly devoid of actual reflection, and Europe’s leaders have failed to offer Europe’s citizens any new, fundamental vision.
So how should a “refounding” (Neubegründung) of Europe – as called for by German Chancellor Angela Merkel in her first parliamentary statement on European policy – be accomplished?
In theory, there are three competing, fundamentally different visions of the EU’s future.
Some still take the form of a “state of nation states.”
These thinkers – often imprecisely called “Federalists” – refer to the Constitution as a necessary step towards a European federation.
Such a federal state can be justified by claiming that the moral substance of traditional nation states has been deeply compromised by past belligerence, or as a practical preventive measure to keep the potential of new nationalist passions in check.
Moreover, the British political scientist Glyn Morgan has argued that a robust concept of pan-European security also requires a pan-European state, and that it is irresponsible on the part of Europe’s elites to maintain a permanent position of strategic dependency on the United States.
Related to this is the idea that only a strong EU can save the “European social model.”
But the last few years have made clear the absence of majority support for a European federation by the states that make up Europe, a point underscored by the debate surrounding the failed Constitutional Treaty.
In fact, many of the “federalist” arguments look dubious: in particular, there is no single European social model.
The differences for instance between the Scandinavian countries, the Mediterranean countries, and the “liberal Atlantic countries” like Ireland and the UK are sometimes more pronounced than those between Europe as a whole and the US.
In recent years, an alternative view of the EU that can be described as “supra-national multiculturalism” has taken root.
This view entails a Union whose main function is to allow – and to maintain – diversity and difference.
Instead of traditional homogeneous states, this Europe seeks to be a “Community of Difference,” a kind of “People of Others,” to borrow a phrase from the jurist Joseph Weiler.
Tolerance becomes the cardinal European virtue in this vision, and the EU’s character as an entity with federal law but without federal statehood is viewed as a strength, not a weakness.
The prophets of supra-national multiculturalism thus reject a federal democracy.
What is feasible is, they believe, at best a so-called “demoi-cracy” &#45;&#45; that is, the rule not of one people or “demos,” but of many peoples or “demoi” who deliberately assure and seek to maintain their diversity.
Central banks are the classic example.
Those policy areas that citizens consider the most significant – in particular welfare and education – remain under the direction of member states.
Consequently Brussels is no government to be, but a regulatory authority – and this often to the benefit of European consumers.
This authority, the technocrats claim, in turn is part of a system of national and supra-national checks and balances which, while not resembling a national democracy, would reliably prevent despotism from taking root in Brussels.
None of these three visions entirely misses the EU’s current reality or its future possibilities.
The federation has become a distant prospect, but still receives homage in politicians’ speeches, as if a different end result was inconceivable.
The demoi-crats win support because their vision tends to reinforce the status quo and leaves nearly all options open.
The technocrats in turn see their position confirmed with every passing day that the alleged crisis of legitimacy fails to appear.
But is there any kind of pan-European consensus on where Europe should go next, whether federal state, demoi-cracy or status quo?
If the answer is no, adhering to a pragmatic approach to the Union as a kind of continuously expanding “Commonwealth” is the most honest alternative to any high-minded visions.
The classic argument that the EU, like a bicycle, must always keep moving forward to avoid falling over, is simply not true: the reflection period may be frustrating for federalists, but it also proves that, even at a standstill, the EU continues.
The Brussels elites are not likely to admit this fact without further ado: their rhetoric still oscillates between doom-and-gloom pessimism and a kind of pro-European PR that is concerned only with how best to “sell” the Union to Europe’s citizens.
But PR won’t work unless there is a vision that ultimately sells itself.
Europe’s Refugee Amnesia
BARCELONA – After World War I, when millions of European civilians were made refugees, forced out of their homelands by enemy occupation or deportation, an international regime was developed to coordinate effective responses and ease the suffering of those who had been uprooted.
A century later, another refugee crisis is underway, and this time, it is Europe that has the power to provide safe haven to desperate people.
Yet it has not risen to the occasion, with many of its responses failing to match the urgency of the situation.
In just the first few months of 2015, more than 38,000 people have attempted to reach Europe by crossing the Mediterranean from North Africa.
Some 1,800 people have died as a result – more than twice the number of such deaths in all of 2013.
Disappointingly, many Europeans have responded to this humanitarian crisis, which closely resembles the one that Europe endured a century ago, by opposing their countries’ acceptance of any more refugees.
How quickly we forget our past.
Worse, some Europeans want us to forget.
Today’s sentiment has been fueled by populist parties positioning themselves as guardians of national identity.
Europe, they argue, faces a mass influx that threatens to place even greater strain on its economies, labor markets, and cultures.
One does not have to look back a century to see how dangerous the consequences of such rhetoric can be.
But the populists’ narrative is not just inflammatory; it is false.
Although it is sometimes difficult to distinguish the drivers of displacement, data from the United Nations refugee agency show that at least half of those trying to reach Europe from North Africa are fleeing from war and persecution.
The International Organization for Migration, together with Italy’s navy, has determined that this year’s migrants hail mainly from Eritrea, Gambia, Nigeria, Somalia, and Syria ‒ countries where conditions entitle their citizens to request asylum.
In short, this is a crisis not of immigrants, but of refugees – and it is showing no sign of slowing.
Indeed, with instability and violence plaguing much of North Africa and the Middle East, the decline in armed conflict since World War II seems to have slowed – and could even reverse.
The international community is legally bound to protect those who are being forced to flee their homes by conflict and persecution.
Given Europe’s history and values – not to mention its proximity to some of the beleaguered populations – it has a special obligation to contribute to this effort.
But Europe is not the only region that has been burdened by today’s migration flows – or even the most affected.
Nine out of ten refugees do not leave their region, fleeing to countries very close to or bordering their own.
The Jordanian refugee camp Zaatari alone shelters more than 82,000 people; if it were an official city, it would be among the country’s most populous.
Lebanon, a country of just 4.5 million people, has taken in an estimated 1,116,000 refugees – roughly equivalent to the population of Brussels.
Given this, it is difficult to justify Europe’s failure to agree on a system of relocation and resettlement for a total of, say, 20,000 refugees this year, distributed among 28 countries according to individual quotas.
Indeed, many European countries have accepted very few refugees so far, making their inaction even more difficult to comprehend.
Spain and Greece, for example, have each accepted only about 4,000 – a meager amount, when compared to Jordan or Lebanon.
A quota-based agreement could help to disperse the burden across European countries.
As it stands, major differences among countries’ asylum policies have meant major disparities in refugee numbers.
Indeed, just four countries – France, Germany, Italy, and Sweden – accounted for two-thirds of all refugees accepted in Europe last year.
When a network of human traffickers turns the Mediterranean into a mass grave, Europe cannot simply turn away.
Instead of succumbing to destructive populism and dishonorable isolationism, Europe’s leaders must commit to fulfilling their legal and moral responsibility to help the refugees – and, of course, to explain to their citizens why this is so important.
Such an effort would require every European country – not just those situated on the Mediterranean – to contribute resources to support large-scale search-and-rescue operations.
Border control cannot be the only – or even the primary – objective.
Beyond helping to manage the crisis today, Europe must commit to helping fragile and conflict-affected countries overcome the challenges they face, improve their citizens’ wellbeing, and build thriving economies.
To retain its moral and political authority, the European Union – perhaps the most compelling example of how cooperation can support peace and prosperity – must implicate itself beyond its frontiers in a sincere and determined way, reaching mutually beneficial agreements with its southern neighbors.
Behind almost every request for asylum that an EU country receives is a human tragedy – a micro-history of violence, fear, and loss.
The goal of the asylum-seekers is not to reach Europe; it is simply to escape conflict and persecution.
And they should be able to.
Last century – in both world wars – Europeans were the ones fleeing from persecution.
With the number of displaced people now at levels unseen since World War II, Europe has a responsibility to recall its history.
And it should take the opportunity to respond to today’s refugee crisis as it would have liked the world to respond to its suffering – and to prove that the EU’s value extends far beyond its borders.
Why Europe Backs Obama on Iran
PARMA – Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu seems close to ordering a general mobilization of his country’s military, and Republicans in the United States are preparing for a ferocious battle with President Barack Obama’s administration, in the wake of the framework nuclear agreement with Iran.
And yet the framework deal has been almost universally welcomed in Europe.
What accounts for this disconnect within the West over a key regional and global threat?
Several factors are at work.
One, certainly, is that Europe – or, more precisely, the United Kingdom, Germany, and France – has been engaged in the talks with Iran for more than a decade.
Even as former President George W. Bush branded Iran a part of an “axis of evil,” the key European Union members insisted that diplomacy was better than war.
And, step by step, the European approach has been vindicated.
Critical to that outcome, of course, was the US intelligence community’s reports that all the evidence pointed to Iran having long ago – in 2003 – abandoned concrete plans to develop a nuclear weapon.
It is easy to see why the Iranians would have done so.
So long as Saddam Hussein, who had launched a brutal eight-year war against Iran in the 1980s, and whom influential Westerners openly accused of seeking to acquire nuclear weapons, remained in power, the Iranian government’s plan to develop nuclear weapons followed a certain realist logic.
Once the US military ousted Saddam’s regime in 2003, Iran’s most acute security threat vanished.
Moreover, there has long been a tactical difference between US and European policies toward Iran’s nuclear program.
At times, the US seemingly sought to eradicate any knowledge of nuclear technology from a country of which it is deeply suspicious, whereas the European approach was to seek reliable assurances that Iran would never develop a nuclear weapon.
At the end of the day, the US recognized that any realistic policy needed European support, while Europeans saw preventing a rush to war by the US or Israel as a central policy objective.
It should also be said that Europeans have never been overly impressed with America’s hardline approach toward that other charter member of the axis of evil, North Korea, and its nuclear ambitions.
Refusing to negotiate with the North Korean regime, and imposing the most stringent sanctions on it, has not stopped it from either acquiring nuclear weapons or accelerating its development of both nuclear and missile technologies.
Among the significant issues that need to be sorted out before the end-of-June deadline for reaching a final deal with Iran is to agree on the details of the gradual suspension, and eventual repeal, of economic and diplomatic sanctions against the country.
While this will be the subject of a fierce political battle in the US, it is likely that the European Union will be far more willing to move ahead.
Indeed, Europe has sound reasons to lift the restrictions on Iranian oil exports.
Additional supplies of oil to global markets will keep prices down or depress them further.
Apart from the economic gain for Europe’s economies, low oil prices yield important strategic benefits – particularly with respect to constraining Russian President Vladimir Putin’s revisionist ambitions in Ukraine and elsewhere.
Needless to say, the US and Europe should stick to a common approach on the sanctions issue.
But were a more militant policy approach by the Republican-controlled US Congress to prevail, America might well find that it loses the ally that makes the key difference for the sanctions’ success.
Indeed, on this issue, the US might rapidly find itself isolated from all other global actors.
Europe is certainly not naive about the nature of the Iranian regime.
France, with its historically strong convictions on issues concerning nuclear proliferation, has taken a particularly firm stance during the talks.
But Europe is also acutely aware of the consequences of the rapid increase in violent conflict and suffering in its immediate neighborhood; indeed, Europeans see those consequences daily in the flood of refugees trying to reach its shores.
Another war in the Middle East is clearly not in its interest.
Finally, Israel is a key factor underlying the differences between the US and Europe when it comes to Iran.
Though Netanyahu’s shrill words still have an attentive audience in the US, most of Europe regards his position as being only a little short of ridiculous.
Thus, it is nearly certain that, assuming a final agreement with Iran is reached in June, Europe’s backing for it will be unanimous – or close to it – and that it will be eager to support Obama in his battle with opponents of the deal at home.
The framework agreement has vindicated Europe’s approach to resolving the nuclear dispute.
The West has every reason to maintain that approach in the months ahead.
Europe on Holiday
Currently, the average number of hours worked per person aged 15 to 25 each year in France and Germany is about 50% lower than in the United States.
Other European countries (for example, Italy and Spain) fall somewhere between these poles.
Although some Americans always like to boast about their superior work ethic, this disparity in working hours between the US and Europe has not always existed.
Indeed, until the mid-1970's, the number of hours worked on either side of the Atlantic was roughly the same.
From the mid-1970's on, however, Americans continued working more or less the same number of hours, while Western Europeans began working less and less each year.
If Western Europe needs an explanation as to why its rate of economic growth is lagging behind the US, it need look no further.
The average number of working hours per person depends on a variety of factors:
• the level of participation in the labor force;
• the number of vacation days workers have;
• the number of hours worked in a "normal" week, i.e., with no vacation.
Virtually all the difference between the US on one side and France and Germany on the other are due to the first two factors, each with roughly equal weight.
So, lower participation in the labor force explains half of the difference, and longer vacations for those who do work accounts for the other half.
The importance of vacation time should come as no surprise to anyone who has experienced Europe's deserted cities in August, the three-week vacation "bridges" in April and May in France and Italy, the "rush hours" that take place every Friday at 2 PM in German cities, and crowded ski slopes in February due to winter school vacations.
But knowing "how" Europeans work less is one thing; knowing "why" Europeans work less than Americans is another.
One view is that Americans are perceived (and like to see themselves) as Calvinist workaholics, whereas Europeans like to think that they know how to enjoy life's pleasures.
As a European working in the US, I admit that I do take many more vacations than my American colleagues.
So there may be something in this "cultural" explanation.
But why did this start around 1973?
A second argument attributes the difference to income taxes, which, in fact, have increased significantly in Europe since the 1970's, while in the US income taxes fell from the early 1980's onward.
Income taxes certainly must affect willingness to work.
They may not change by much the number of hours worked by the main breadwinner in a family (typically a man), but they do influence the participation of women in the labor force.
After all, why work, when your after-tax salary barely pays for childcare and household help?
But even this is not a sufficient explanation, because studies of how the supply of labor responds to tax changes suggest that something else must explain the enormous gap between US and Europe, especially France and Germany.
For the age group over 50, the structure of pension systems is clearly a major factor.
It was and remains much more profitable to retire earlier in Europe than in the US.
Why should a Frenchman or Italian in his early sixties work today, when in the 1990's he could have retired in his mid-fifties with 80% or more of his last working-age salary?
For women, the retirement age in the mid-1990's was even lower.
Public sector employees had even more advantages.
Nor is that all.
In the 1980's and 1990's, many European labor unions, in response to rising unemployment, adopted the policy of "work less, work all."
In other words, they obtained shorter hours (i.e., more vacations) in order to keep employment up.
The problem is that total compensation did not go down in proportion to the shorter hours, thus leading to an increase in pay per hour.
Lower productivity and higher unit labor costs eroded firms' willingness to hire, leaving Europe with chronically higher unemployment than in the US.
Today's debates about growth in Europe are full of buzz words like "knowledge-based society," "technological progress," and "investment in education."
Europeans certainly need something to compensate for a short working life with many vacations.
But much of this discussion is merely a form of "political correctness." It is more reassuring - and "feels better" - to tell Europeans that growth is sluggish because society is not sufficiently knowledge-based, rather than pointing to the trade-off between vacations and growth.
Europeans tend to prefer vacations over growth.
Personally, I love taking more and more vacations. But I cannot (and do not) then complain if my income does not grow faster and faster.
How EU Overreach Pushed Britain Out
CAMBRIDGE – A thoughtful British friend of mine said to me a few days before the United Kingdom’s “Brexit” referendum that he would vote for Remain because of his concern about the economic uncertainty that would follow if the UK left the European Union.
But he added that he would not have favored Britain’s decision to join the EU back in 1973 had he known then how the EU would evolve.
While voters chose Leave for a variety of reasons, many were concerned with the extent to which EU leaders have exceeded their original mandate, creating an ever larger and more invasive organization.
Jean Monnet’s dream of a United States of Europe was not what the British wanted when they joined the EU 40 years ago. Nor were they seeking a European counterweight to the United States, as Konrad Adenauer, Germany’s first post-war chancellor, had once advocated.
Britain simply wanted the advantages of increased trade and labor-market integration with countries across the English Channel.
The EU began as an agreement among six countries to achieve free trade in goods and capital and to eliminate barriers to labor mobility.
When EU leaders sought to reinforce a sense of European solidarity by establishing a monetary union, Britain was fortunately able to opt out and keep the pound – and control over its monetary policy.
But the opt-out has left Britain a relative outsider within the EU.
As the EU expanded from six countries to 28, Britain could not permanently limit entry to its labor market by workers from the new member states.
As a result, the number of foreign-born workers in Britain has doubled since 1993, to more than six million, or 10% of the labor force, with most now coming from low-wage countries that were not among the EU’s other original members.
Although pro-Brexit voters worry about the resulting pressure on UK wages, they generally do not reject the original goals of increased trade and capital flows that are the essence of globalization.
Some Brexit defenders could point to the example of the successful US free-trade agreement with Canada and Mexico, which contains no provision for labor mobility.
Unlike Britain, the other EU countries, led by France and Germany, wanted more than free trade and an enlarged labor market.
From the start, European leaders were determined to expand the “European project” to achieve what the Treaty of Rome called an “ever closer union.”
Advocates of shifting authority to EU institutions have justified this with the notion of “shared sovereignty,” according to which British sovereignty could be eroded by EU decisions, without any formal agreement from the UK’s government or people.
The “Stability and Growth Pact” of 1998 imposed a limit on member countries’ annual deficits and required that debt-to-GDP ratios shrink toward a maximum of 60%.
When the global financial crisis began in 2008, German Chancellor Angela Merkel saw an opportunity to strengthen the EU even further, by enforcing a new “fiscal compact” authorizing the European Commission to oversee members’ annual budgets and impose fines for violating budget and debt targets (though no fines have been levied).
Germany also led the move to establish a European “banking union” with a single regulatory framework and a binding resolution mechanism for troubled financial institutions.
Not all of these policies directly affected the UK; nonetheless, they widened the intellectual and political gap between Britain and the EU’s eurozone members.
That reinforced the fundamental difference between market-oriented British governments and those of many EU countries, with their traditions of socialism, government planning, and heavy regulation.
The division of powers between the EU bureaucracy and member states is governed by the ambiguous principle – borrowed from Catholic social teaching – of “subsidiarity”: decisions should be made at the “lowest” or least centralized level of “competent authority.”
In practice, that did not limit the rulemaking in Brussels and Strasbourg.
Subsidiarity provides much less protection for EU member governments than the Tenth Amendment of the US Constitution – which denies to the federal government any powers not delegated to it by the Constitution – does for US states.
The British public is of course not alone in its discomfort with the EU.
A recent poll conducted in EU countries by the Pew Foundation found that a majority of voters in three of the largest countries – Britain, France, and Spain – view the EU unfavorably.
In Germany, the public was split 50-50.
In Italy, a clear majority say that they have benefited from EU membership; and yet the populist Five Star Movement, which recently won mayoral elections in 19 of the 20 cities it contested (including 70% of the vote in Rome), has promised a referendum on leaving the eurozone if it wins the parliamentary election later this year.
Although many officials and experts predict that Brexit will have dire economic consequences, this certainly is not inevitable. Much now depends on the terms of the future relationship between the EU and Britain.
The UK is also now in a better position to negotiate a more favorable trade and investment treaty with the US.
Although the proposed US-EU Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) is bogged down, a British government outside the EU could negotiate a deal with the US far more easily.
The US would be negotiating with one country, not 28 — many of which do not share Britain’s pro-market policies.
The question of Britain’s EU membership has been decided.
Now its economic future depends on what it does with its new independence.
Responding to Europe’s Political Polarization
PARIS – In Europe, 2015 began with the far-left Syriza party’s election victory in Greece. It ended with another three elections that attested to increasing political polarization.
In Portugal, the Socialist Party formed an alliance with its former archenemy, the Communists.
In Poland, the nationalist Law and Justice (PiS) party won enough support to govern on its own.
And in Spain, the emergence of Podemos, another new left-wing party, has ended the traditional hegemony of the Spanish Socialist Workers’ Party on the center left and the Partido Popular on the center right.
(In France, moreover, the far-right National Front, led by Marine Le Pen, showed its strength in the first round of December’s regional elections, though it eventually failed to win any).
The message is impossible to miss: Increasingly, voters are deeply dissatisfied with mainstream parties and are willing to give a chance to those proposing radical alternatives.
They are lending support to parties that, though very different from one another, all blame the European Union for the sorry state of their countries’ economies and labor markets.
To be sure, radicalization is not limited to Europe nowadays.
As I have argued elsewhere, American presidential candidate Donald Trump owes his rise to many of the same factors that are driving Le Pen’s growing popularity.
What is particularly problematic in the EU is the clash between radical politics and mainstream governance.
For 30 years, center-right or center-left parties with a broadly shared vision of Europe have governed most EU countries.
Despite their policy disagreements, they jointly embodied the ideological consensus – and formed the political coalition – that built the single market, the euro, and the enlarged EU.
But many voters now feel that mainstream policies have failed.
Governments have proved unable to protect unskilled and semi-skilled employees from the consequences of globalization and technological change.
Mass education, progressive taxation, and social-welfare benefits have not prevented increasing inequality.
And the euro has failed to engineer prosperity and stability.
Those (like me) who think that specific policy errors and institutional flaws are more to blame than European integration itself are being drowned out.
Political realignments are to be expected in democracies; indeed, democratic institutions are designed to make them possible.
Generally, the constitution does not change, or changes only slowly, whereas a new party or coalition redefines the policy agenda and reforms the legislation.
This combination of rigidity and plasticity enables democratic regimes to adapt to shifts in citizens’ preferences.
The same does not apply to Europe, however.
First, political change is not synchronized.
At any given moment, some countries may have voted for radical parties, while others have not (or simply have not held elections).
This clash of legitimacy is what the Greek government initially failed to understand last spring when it sought to ease austerity measures: Syriza had received a mandate for change from Greek voters, but other countries’ representatives had not received such a mandate.
Second, unlike national democracies, the EU does not derive its legitimacy from the process through which political choices are made, but mainly from the output it can deliver.
This is not to say that there is no democratic process: the elected European Parliament is a serious legislative body, and its vetting of European commissioners is often more thorough than personnel selection at the national level.
But it has no visibility, because major decisions are negotiated between national governments.
Third, the boundary between constitutional and legislative matters is peculiar in the EU.
All treaty provisions have constitutional status; indeed, they can be changed only by unanimous agreement.
Furthermore, because governments did not trust one another, they insisted on including in treaties what would normally belong in ordinary legislation.
The many rules that govern economic life in the EU are therefore much more difficult to amend than are similar domestic provisions.
In other words, the scope for redefining the rules is exceedingly narrow, even though they reflect a policy consensus that is no longer widely shared.
What options does this leave the EU for responding to political polarization and the concomitant demands for more policy leeway at the national level?
Of course, the EU could simply ignore these changes, and hope that radicalism will wane once its bearers are confronted with the responsibility of governing.
But that would be foolish.
Syriza was forced to accept tough choices because Greece depends on external financial assistance.
No other country is in the same situation.
Ignoring demands for change would ultimately deepen popular hostility toward the EU.
Another possibility would be to exploit, on an ad hoc basis, the existing flexibility in EU treaty provisions.
Pragmatism can indeed be helpful, and the European Commission headed by Jean-Claude Juncker is willing to embrace it.
But it would be dangerous to turn the EU framework into a thicket of country-specific political bargains.
Those for whom the rule of law and the enforcement of fundamental principles are serious matters – not just Germany – would soon object.
The last solution would be to make the EU more amenable to political change.
This would require explicitly changing the balance between constitutional and legislative matters, so that principles are preserved, but policies can be responsive to politics.
Moreover, the EU should be able to legislate on a wider array of policies, including, for example, taxation.
This would end its awkward impotence on – and apparent indifference to – inequality.
At the same time, the European Parliament should be given a higher profile, as in a truly federal system, so that governments at the national and European level are perceived as equally legitimate.
With such federalization in the EU or, more likely, the smaller eurozone (within which the degree of integration is higher), policy conflicts would place elected national governments in opposition not to an opaque system, but to a politically legitimate federal institution.
This approach confronts formidable obstacles.
An attempt to write an EU constitution was made in the early 2000s.
It failed.
Germany and other countries where mainstream policies still command wide support would vehemently oppose any perceived softening of the common rules and principles.
It will be hard, to say the least, to agree on additional competences and a stronger European Parliament at a time when so many in Europe, starting with the radicals, consider the EU the main culprit for their current woes.
Yet ultimately, the construction of a transnational democracy is the most viable response to political polarization in Europe.
A Five-Step Plan for European Prosperity
WASHINGTON, DC – Though the Greek crisis has been placed on pause, the economic situation in Europe remains bleak.
Eurozone growth is up slightly from its near-recession levels of a few months ago, but projections by the International Monetary Fund for 2015 and 2016 barely exceed 1%.
Unemployment remains above 11% – and twice that among the young (and doubled again in countries like Greece and Spain).
Greece's exit from the eurozone would likely be less disruptive now than it would have been a few years ago.
The countries most at risk of contagion – Portugal, Spain, and Italy – are less vulnerable now in the eyes of the markets; the European Union has established a bailout fund; and the European Central Bank has launched a large bond-buying program.
The real challenge in Europe is continued stagnation and rising public-sector fiscal pressures in bloated welfare states with rapidly aging populations.
Restoring growth, opportunity, prosperity, and financial stability will require bold solutions to five inter-related problems.
The first problem is fiscal.
The math is simple.
The tax rate necessary to fund social spending must equal the ratio of the number of people receiving benefits to the number of taxpayers (the dependency ratio), multiplied by the average benefit relative to the income being taxed (the replacement rate).
It was this math that led Mario Draghi, the president of the European Central Bank, to declare that, “The European social model has already gone."
Too many Europeans are collecting too many benefits, but so far governments have mostly ducked the issue, taking on massive debt in order to postpone the reckoning.
Reform that targets social spending at true need is long overdue.
The second problem is economic: growth in Europe has fallen far short of that in the United States, decade after decade.
Though economic theory predicts convergence in standards of living, Europe lags behind the US by 30% or more.
High taxes and burdensome regulations stifle the labor market and potential new businesses.
Overgenerous social-welfare payments create disincentives to work, hire, invest, and grow.
Chronic sluggish growth is insufficient to create opportunities for the continent's masses of unemployed and underemployed young people.
The third problem is the banking crisis.
In Europe, banks supply roughly 70% of the credit to European economies, compared to 30% in the US.
But many European banks are over-leveraged zombies, kept alive by emergency public infusions of liquidity.
Fourth, there is the currency crisis.
The euro's many benefits – cross-border pricing transparency, lower transaction costs, and inflation credibility – required surrendering independent monetary policies and flexible exchange rates.
But, given limited interregional transfers and labor mobility, this means that the continent has far less ability to absorb disparate shocks through the operation of so-called automatic stabilizers.
In the US, by contrast, people in high-unemployment Michigan move to, say, Texas, where jobs are plentiful, even as the federal tax and transfer system automatically shifts money in the opposite direction, cushioning the local downturn.
Finally, Europe faces a severe governance deficit.
Citizens are becoming increasingly disenchanted with European elites and supra-national institutions such as the European Commission, which impose rules and regulations that conflict with their countries' economic interests and sovereignty.
Voters are restless, as the Greek election result demonstrated.
Nationalist sentiment is rising, and demagogic parties of the far right and left are gaining in every poll.
Addressing these problems will be difficult, but not impossible.
The core challenge is fiscal; Europe cannot escape the need to scale back its sclerotic welfare states.
By recognizing that, and implementing the following series of mutually reinforcing policies, the continent can move beyond its current torpor.
Gradual fiscal consolidation – reducing the projected future size of government spending, and hence future tax rates – will have to be at the center of the effort.
This should be combined with the mutualization of some portion of the liabilities of highly indebted countries – defined as a debt-to-GDP ratio above, say, 60% or 70% – and modest write-downs in exchange for long-term zero-coupon bonds.
The “Brady bonds" that the US used to help resolve the Latin American debt crisis in the 1990s could serve as a model.
Meanwhile, Europe's zombie banks will have to be rapidly resolved by acquisition or temporary takeover, cleanup, and asset sale, as was done by the Resolution Trust Corporation during the US savings and loan crisis in the 1980s.
Structural reforms that increase labor-market flexibility and reduce red tape and related obstacles to new business formation must also be implemented.
Finally, the eurozone should adopt a two-track euro with a fluctuating exchange rate – an idea championed by the American economist Allan Meltzer.
Systematic rules would have to be developed to determine when members of the eurozone are demoted to “euro B" or promoted to “euro A."
Such a halfway house – call it “depreciation without departure" – would avoid some (but not all) of the problems of a country's complete withdrawal from the eurozone.
It would create its own set of incentives, which, on balance, would pressure individual countries to avoid demotion, just as top-tier football (soccer) teams seek to avoid relegation to the minor leagues.
Together, these policies would reduce sovereign debt, lower interest rates, ameliorate tax pressures, enable countries to increase competitiveness with fewer sacrifices to living standards, and provide Europe with a road map to prosperity.
Until now, the EU's leaders have followed the easiest, but least productive path, patching temporary, partial fixes on problems as they erupt.
The possibility of a brighter economic future should be a prize large enough to evoke the same type of leadership through which Europe rose from the ashes of World War II.
A Safer Path to Asylum
LONDON – In 2014, more than 190,000 people risked their lives crossing the Mediterranean Sea from North Africa to Europe.
Some 3,500 lost the gamble, dying as they tried to traverse what has become the world's deadliest frontier.
There can be no doubting that some who undertook the perilous journey did so simply to search for better-paying jobs.
But the origins of those attempting the trip indicate that many are political refugees, not economic migrants.
The majority of those who crossed the Mediterranean last year come from Eritrea and Syria.
Many have been formally recognized as refugees by the United Nations Refugee Agency (UNHCR) in the countries to which they initially fled.
Some 90% of those who apply for asylum in Europe are granted some sort of protection – a further testament to their status as bona fide refugees.
It is time for the European Union to separate the discussion of the crisis in the Mediterranean from its broader immigration debate.
The policies, language, and response to the events unfolding on the EU's southern border must be different from those concerning the voluntary movement of job seekers from one safe country to another.
Indeed, the proper context of the discussion is European countries' obligations under international refugee law.
The policies put in place by the EU and its member states are directly responsible for the plight of those who die attempting to cross the Mediterranean.
Efforts to discourage refugees from arriving have not diminished the number of people who are granted asylum in Europe; they have merely made the process of being granted refugee status more random and dangerous.
Every country in Europe is party to international treaties that recognize the rights of refugees to seek asylum and not be forcibly returned to countries where they will be unsafe.
And yet, despite calls by frontline Mediterranean states to establish systems to improve the handling of the crisis and share the burden, little is being done to make things safer for refugees or more manageable for the countries in which they arrive.
The countries neighboring Syria and Iraq are facing the largest inflows of refugees fleeing the violence there, and the UNHCR has appealed for assistance in resettling a limited number of the neediest.
So far, however, the response from the countries that can most easily afford to take in refugees has been pathetic.
Even worse, many people who, as recently as a few years ago, would have easily obtained permission to study, work, or visit relatives in Europe are being denied visas simply because of their refugee status.
There is no reason to require people seeking an asylum hearing to run a gamut of desert crossings, abuse by smugglers, beatings, extortion, rape, and exploitation – or to have them experience the trauma of watching their friends and family die along the way.
If asylum seekers were provided with opportunities to present their claims in the countries where they currently find themselves, they would not be forced to risk their lives at sea to reach Italy or Greece.
Eritreans could file applications in Khartoum for asylum in Sweden, Germany, or the United Kingdom.
Syrians in Cairo or Beirut could do the same.
The claims could be prioritized and processed in a regular manner, and the refugees could arrive in Europe healthy and ready to work or study.
The crisis in the Mediterranean cannot be managed in a piecemeal manner.
The financial costs of patrolling its waters and rescuing those adrift are exorbitant.
The loss of lives is inexcusable.
But we do not have to wait until the root causes of displacement – state failure and civil war – are addressed.
We need only to find the courage to create a system in which desperate people do not have to risk their lives to apply for asylum and resettlement.
Clarifying Europe’s Refugee Problem
MADRID – Even by European Union standards, the response to the so-called refugee crisis is a mess.
This seems to defy logic: While the crisis is certainly a challenge, human rights – and, indeed, refugee protection – are embedded in Europe’s DNA.
Moreover, the EU’s aging and demographically challenged member states need immigrants.
Yet, instead of spurring solutions, the current crisis has been bringing out all that is ugly, feckless, and dysfunctional about the European project.
What happened?
As is so often the case with the EU, the problem is a lack of clarity.
The blurring of the lines between refugee and immigrant has made it virtually impossible to make compelling arguments in favor of proper refugee protection or more effective immigration policy.
This has thwarted honest and constructive discussion, allowing those who peddle fear and nativism to gain ground.
The conflation of immigrants and refugees was probably not the result of malicious intent.
Following the introduction of German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s open-door policy toward refugees last September, a raft of reports emerged offering economic and demographic arguments within which her decision could be framed.
But such arguments actually poisoned the idea of refugee protection: The focus on the potential economic role of refugees inadvertently reinforced the view that they were, in fact, economic migrants.
Populist parties, which had already gained a foothold by playing on people’s fears of and frustrations with globalization, seized on this notion.
At a time of high long-term unemployment and heavy public-debt burdens, they declared that the refugees would take jobs from Europeans or, worse, drain European taxpayer-funded social benefits.
Some European populations, frustrated with the EU’s handling of past crises, had already begun to fall prey to nationalist sentiment; so it was not difficult for populists to portray the hundreds of thousands of refugees streaming into European countries as a new threat to national identity.
Chaotic border scenes from Calais, Macedonia, and Kos reinforced the image of disorder.
Finally, the horrific terror attacks in Paris and Brussels, though carried out by European nationals, infused a profound sense of insecurity into the discussion.
When all of these challenges are lumped together, the problem seems intractable, creating the impression that an isolationist response is EU countries’ only hope for protecting themselves.
But what Europe actually faces is three distinct challenges: protecting refugees, as required by European and international law; developing an effective and sustainable immigration policy that will benefit the EU; and responding to the discontent of second- and third-generation immigrant communities in Europe.
When considered separately, effective solutions begin to emerge.
In terms of radicalization among communities already living in Europe, much has been said, particularly following the attacks in March in Brussels.
What too few have pointed out is that these are Europeans.
Dealing with their restlessness and frustration within the context of immigration will only alienate them further.
As for the refugee challenge, the solution must begin with clarity about Europe’s actual responsibilities.
The duty to provide protection to those with a “well-founded fear of being persecuted” is contained in the United Nations Convention relating to the Status of Refugees, and reinforced by the Treaty of Lisbon.
In other words, the EU must protect those who face imminent danger if returned to their home country, not everyone arriving at its borders.
Moreover, that protection is not supposed to be permanent.
When it is safe to return home, those who have not obtained permanent residency or citizenship should do so.
Everyone must understand that the obligation to protect people fleeing persecution has its limits.
To be sure, Europe should not be shouldering this burden alone.
The entire international community should be doing its part.
In 1979, an international conference was held to respond to the refugee crisis that arose from the end of the Vietnam War and the mayhem of the Khmer Rouge genocide in Cambodia; over the next two years, more than 620,000 refugees were resettled in 20 countries.
Such cooperative action is badly needed today.
As long as the rest of the international community fails to fulfill its responsibilities toward the refugees, it will remain difficult to convince a skeptical European public to do so.
Clarity is similarly vital in addressing immigration.
Welcoming immigrants is in Europe’s interest.
But precisely which immigrants should be up to Europe.
Yet neither the EU nor any of its member states has a coherent immigration policy with this end in mind.
This must change, with the EU demonstrating its capacity to attract the talent and labor needed to ensure economic growth and competitiveness.
Beyond appropriate refugee and immigration policy, Europe needs proper tools for implementation.
No amount of messaging and incentives will work if the borders are not secure or immigration rules are not being applied effectively.
It has been said that differentiating between refugees and immigrants is code for excluding everyone.
That is not the case.
A more precise understanding of the distinct problems facing Europe is vital to resolving them.
If we are to address the discontent of marginalized communities within Europe, we need to understand the factors underlying it.
If we are to meet our international obligations toward refugees, we need to know what those responsibilities are.
If we are to ensure that immigration benefits both the newcomers and their host communities, we need to identify what benefits we are seeking.
Without such clarity, populists seeking to tear us apart with their simplistic xenophobic propaganda will thrive.
Europe’s Refugee Problem, Then and Now
NEW YORK – Earlier this spring, I drove to a beautiful spot on the southern bank of Lake Geneva.
My destination was the Hotel Royale in Évian-les-Bains.
It was there, in July 1938, that 32 nations met for a shameful discussion that has been virtually airbrushed from our memory.
Convened by US President Franklin D. Roosevelt in response to the massive refugee crisis triggered by Hitler’s virulent anti-Semitism, the Évian conference was a catastrophe.
And its disastrous outcome needs to be recalled in the light of Europe’s current migration crisis.
The Évian conference was supposed to address the plight of hundreds of thousands of German and Austrian Jews who were desperate for refuge.
Roosevelt believed that only a collective solution could meet the challenge.
Hitler, too, hoped that other countries would accept them.
In a speech in Königsberg that March, he jeered, “I can only hope and expect that the other world which has felt such deep sympathy for these criminals will be generous enough to transform this pity into practical aid.
As far as I am concerned we are ready to place our luxury ships at the disposal of these countries for the transportation of these criminals.”
He had already begun to expel Jews, including by placing them forcibly on ships and sending them to various destinations in the Mediterranean and across the Atlantic.
But, throughout Europe, the refugees faced rejection.
On June 6, 1938, as preparations for the conference were underway, the US State Department received a letter concerning 51 Austrian Jewish refugees stranded on a small boat in the international waters of the Danube.
The writer recalled seeing: “the heartrending fate of 51 human beings driven from one frontier to the other.
We have gained personal knowledge of the unspeakable misery that has innocently befallen 100,000 inhabitants of Austria.”
And yet in Évian the following month, although many European delegations voiced eloquent dismay over the torment experienced by the Jews of Germany and Austria, they were unprepared to take concrete action.
The outcome of the meeting was clear: Europe, North America, and Australia would not accept significant numbers of these refugees.
In the verbatim record, two words were uttered repeatedly: “density” and “saturation.”
The European countries were already beset with population “density” and had reached a point of “saturation” – in other words, there was simply no more room at the European inn.
It was an absurd thing to say, of course, in 1938, given the size of Europe’s populations today.
And it would be an equally ridiculous thing to say now, too.
To be sure, the participants in Évian could not have foreseen the Holocaust, or that Europe was being drawn into another devastating war; nonetheless, their lack of moral conscience was breathtaking.
Many of the countries that refused to take in suffering refugees were themselves, in due course, occupied and brutalized by the Nazis – and desperate for the compassion that they denied the Jews in July 1938.
The Nazis must have reveled in the knowledge that their virulent anti-Semitism found an echo – sometimes not so faint – in the rest of Europe.
They also came to realize that if expulsion was not possible, extermination eventually would be.
Today, anti-Semitism, Islamophobia, racism, xenophobia, and anti-migrant sentiment are again rising across Europe, and we must stop now and reassess precisely where we are.
A major British tabloid newspaper recently felt it acceptable to allow one of its columnists to call immigrants “cockroaches.”
Rwanda’s Radio Télévision Libre des Mille Collines used the same word to describe Tutsis in the run-up to the 1994 genocide, as did Julius Streicher’s Nazi newspaper Der Stürmer to describe Jews.
Political leaders across Europe regularly – and shamefully – blame migrants for their national woes.
Attacking migrants or minorities – whether crudely, through language, or more subtly, through policy – is unacceptable everywhere, full stop.
When words are formulated with the clear intention of causing harm and violence on national, racial or religious grounds, freedom of expression becomes incitement to hatred, which is prohibited by law.
Countries that have ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which includes all European Union members, are bound to uphold it.
And yet Europe’s current proposals on migration leave much to be desired.
The continent needs to recall its past more sensitively, and be more generous to the desperate people crossing the Mediterranean.
François Crépeau, the United Nations special rapporteur on the human rights of migrants, observed in a recent interview that Europe, Australia, and Canada could easily resettle one million Syrian refugees over the next five years, and they could add Eritreans to that list and extend this policy to seven years.
So why is Europe proposing to accept a paltry 20,000-40,000 people annually for resettlement?
To the European politician strongly opposed to migration, I suggest that the next time you need hospital treatment, take a look around you: many of the people caring for you have a migrant’s tale.
And should you quench your thirst with the famous water drawn from Évian-les-Bains, you may wish to reflect on the craven failure of a conference that could have saved so many lives – and on what it can still teach us today.
Europe\u0027s Refugee Opportunity
ROME – Europe’s so-called refugee crisis should never have become an emergency.
Accommodating one million asylum-seekers should not be a huge challenge for the European Union – an area with 500 million citizens that welcomes more than three million immigrants every year.
Unfortunately, the lack of a coordinated response is transforming a manageable problem into an acute political crisis – one that, as German Chancellor Angela Merkel has rightly warned, could destroy the EU.
Most EU member states are selfishly focusing on their own interests.
This pits them against one another and has precipitated panic, putting refugees in even greater peril.
A smart, comprehensive plan would calm the fears.
Instead, Europe has preferred to search for scapegoats – and Greece is the latest to be targeted for blame.
Greece has been accused of not doing enough to process and house refugees.
And yet, even if the country were not crippled by economic crisis, it would be unreasonable to expect a single small country to bear the burden alone – especially in a year when more than 800,000 refugees are expected to pass through its territory.
This is a European and global problem, not solely a Greek problem.
There is plenty of blame to go around.
In Greece, George Soros’s Open Society Foundations, acting in partnership with European Economic Area and Norway Grants, anticipated the problems that the lack of a serious European asylum policy would create.
In 2013, the partnership established an organization, Solidarity Now, run by the cream of Greek civil society.
Solidarity Now needs just €62 million ($67 million) to care for 15,000 of the 50,000 refugees who need to be housed in Greece next year.
And yet, though the EU has promised to spend €500 million to help Greece manage the crisis, some member states have failed to pay their share.
In addition to supporting Greece, the EU needs a comprehensive plan for managing the arrival of asylum-seekers in a safe, orderly way.
That means operating beyond Europe’s borders, as, from the donors’ perspective, it is much less disruptive and expensive to maintain asylum-seekers close to their present locations.
For starters, the EU should commit to absorbing at least 500,000 asylum-seekers a year, while working to convince the rest of the world to accept an equal number.
A public commitment of this magnitude should help calm the disorderly scramble for Europe.
Asylum-seekers provided with a clear status and promises of safety could be induced to wait in Turkey and other frontline countries, rather than risk a dangerous Mediterranean crossing.
Second, formal gateways should be established, first in Turkey, and then in Lebanon, Jordan, Tunisia, and Morocco.
Gateway countries would establish, in close cooperation with the United Nations Refugee Agency and the EU, processing centers to register asylum-seekers and assess their applications.
Accepted asylum-seekers would then be placed in a queue and required to remain in the gateway country until an EU country accepts them.
A safe, deliberate process of vetting refugees would quell security concerns in the aftermath of the Paris attacks.
Gateway countries would have to improve reception, asylum, and integration standards.
In exchange, these countries should be helped financially and provided with other incentives – for example, easier access to the EU for their citizens.
Indeed, the EU should establish or expand programs that allow entry to non-asylum-seekers.
Third, political, financial, and technical support must be provided to frontline countries.
Turkey, Lebanon, and Jordan, which have borne most of the burden of the crisis, host more than four million Syrian refugees.
Turkey says it has spent $7.8 billion to care for more than two million refugees; thus far, it has received only $415 million from others (though the EU has promised another €3 billion).
Full support for refugees in frontline countries is estimated to cost at least €20 billion per year.
The EU should commit at least half of this, with the balance coming from the rest of the international community.
Special economic zones that benefit from preferred trade status with the EU and the United States should be created, in order to generate investment, economic opportunities, and jobs for refugees and locals alike.
These zones should be established in both frontline and transit countries.
Fourth, the EU needs a truly common asylum and border-guard system.
The patchwork of 28 separate asylum systems is expensive and inefficient, and it produces wildly uneven results in terms of the reception, status determination, and integration of new arrivals.
The EU should establish a single European Border Guard and a single Asylum and Migration Agency.
Fifth, a global response to the crisis, coordinated by the UN, must accompany the EU’s plan.
This would distribute the responsibility for addressing the refugee crisis over a larger number of states, while helping establish global standards for dealing with the challenge of forced migration.