Japan’s Treacherous Bureaucrats
Much has been made of the massive defeat Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s Liberal Democratic Party suffered in the recent election to Japan’s Upper House.
But, as the smoke dissipates from that vote, it has become clear that the real victor is neither the leading opposition Democratic Party (DPJ) nor the electorate. Instead, it is Japan’s bureaucrats who are celebrating.
The aim of these entrenched mandarins is to block Abe’s plans for extensive civil-service reforms intended to inhibit them from parachuting into lucrative post-retirement jobs in the public corporations and private firms that they once regulated.
They also want to stop Abe from dismantling and privatizing one of their central fiefdoms, the Social Security Agency.
In this struggle, the mandarins are aligning themselves with the DPJ, at least to the general public’s eye, because it has proposed merging the Social Security Agency with the National Tax Agency, a move that would ensure government jobs for the former’s employees.
The LDP’s declining vote is attributable largely to Abe’s mishandling of pension fund issues, particularly his late admission of knowledge last December about 50 million “lost” pension files.
This followed other minor scandals concerning the misuse of political funds, which had led to two resignations and the suicide of one of Abe’s cabinet ministers.
But a close look reveals the hands of the mandarins behind these debacles.
Abe and his ministers were simply not provided with critical facts by the bureaucrats who are supposed to serve them.
Indeed, a DPJ member of the Diet was able to pose pointed questions to Abe and his ministers because he had obtained detailed information from an unidentified Social Security Agency official.
This constant stream of leaks from the bureaucrats has seriously shaken popular confidence in the Abe administration as well as the ruling LDP.
The mandarins are now counting on an Upper House controlled by the DPJ to wreck Abe’s civil-service reforms.
Former Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi handpicked Abe as his successor to continue his administration’s central policies: divorcing the LDP from pork-barrel politics and consolidating the huge non-performing loans in the private sector that resulted from the collapse of Japan’s property market bubble in the early 1990’s.
By revitalizing and modernizing Japan’s financial system, and by getting politicians out of the game, Koizumi intended to reinvigorate the Japanese economy.
Koizumi had real successes in these reform efforts, which significantly transformed a malfunctioning Japanese state that was in the grip of pork-barrel LDP politicians, bureaucrats, and big business elites.
Koizumi had relied on the bureaucrats to implement his reforms, but he did so at the price of postponing an overhaul of the civil service, which became a poisoned chalice that he passed on to Abe.
Moreover, Abe’s lack of Koizumi’s star quality and outsider charisma has made him rely more heavily than his predecessor on the LDP’s existing leadership.
These leaders are less concerned with the reform agenda than with promoting patriotism among Japanese youth, upgrading the Defense Agency to a ministry, and enacting a law to permit a referendum to revise the pacifist constitution.
These are all important matters, but they are not among the electorate’s priorities.
Koizumi’s approach was to defy the LDP’s leaders by appealing over their heads directly to the electorate.
He successfully portrayed himself as a rebel resisting the LDP’s old guard, actually purging some of them, in defense of ordinary Japanese.
But Koizumi’s reforms seemed to abandon not only rent-seekers, but also the disadvantaged who had relied on the state’s protectionist measures.
Abe is now confronting the legacy of this strategy: domestic polarization between highly educated and unskilled labor, between competitive and declining sectors, and between urban and rural areas.
And, to protect their jobs, Japan’s bureaucrats are now aligning their interests with those who see themselves as having lost out in the Koizumi years.
The DPJ, now temporarily aligned with low-profile bureaucrats behind the scene, can now either obstruct any bill in the Upper House that is sponsored by Abe’s administration, thereby cornering him into dissolving the Lower House, or they can engage in meticulous deliberations in the Diet in the hope of demonstrating to the electorate their fitness to govern.
The DPJ’s leader, Ichiro Ozawa, seems to be opting for the obstructionist approach favored by the bureaucrats, which will seek to bring not only a populist reversal of Koizumi’s economic and political reforms, but the shelving of Abe’s civil-service reforms as well.
Japan will now likely face a hung Diet for a year or two.
But, in the end, it will have to decide if it wants to be governed by the LDP, which at least offers the possibility of addressing Japan’s problems, or a DPJ in complete thrall to the bureaucracy and the past.
Until Koizumi, the electorate was never faced with such clear-cut choices, and his administration taught the Japanese to like them.
In the meantime, Japan will drift, unable to take any significant foreign policy decision at a time when Asia’s security landscape is changing rapidly.
Japan’s Unfinished Reformation
TOKYO – Revolutions, it is often claimed, do not happen when people are desperate. They occur in times of rising expectations.
Perhaps this is why they so often end in disappointment.
Expectations, usually set too high to begin with, fail to be met, resulting in anger, disillusion, and often in acts of terrifying violence.
Japan’s change of government in 2009 – when the Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ) broke the almost uninterrupted monopoly on power held by the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) since 1955 – was not a revolution.
But, rather like the election of the first black president of the United States, it was fizzing with popular expectations, promising a fundamental shift from the past.
This was even truer of Japan than the US.
The DPJ not only put many new faces into power, it was going to change the nature of Japanese politics.
At last, Japan would become a fully functioning democracy, and not a de facto one-party state run by bureaucrats.
To judge from the Japanese press, as well as the DPJ’s plunging poll ratings, disillusion has already set in.
The permanent bureaucracy proved resistant, and DPJ politicians, unused to power, made mistakes.
One of the worst was Prime Minister Naoto Kan’s announcement in June of a consumption-tax hike just before the Upper House elections, which the DPJ went on to lose badly.
The other disappointment has been the government’s failure to get the US to move its Marine airbase out of Okinawa.
This promise by the DPJ was meant to be part of Japan’s new assertiveness, a first step away from being a mere “aircraft carrier” for the US, as a former LDP prime minister once described his country.
If Japan’s status quo is to change, the country’s oddly skewed relationship with the US is one key factor.
Too much dependence on American power has warped the development of Japanese democracy in ways that are not always sufficiently recognized by the US.
Japan’s one-party state, under the conservative LDP, was a product of World War II and the Cold War.
Like Italy, the old Axis partner during the war, Japan became a front-line state in the battle against Communist powers.
And, as in Italy, a right-wing party, backed by the US, dominated politics for decades in order to crush any chance for the left to take power.
Even former Japanese war criminals, one of whom became prime minister in the late 1950’s, became subservient allies of the US in the wars (hot and cold) against Communism.
In fact, Japanese dependence on the US was even greater than that of Italy and other European powers.
West European armies were embedded in NATO.
Japan, whose armed forces were entirely blamed for driving the country into the catastrophic Pacific War, was not even supposed to have an army or navy after the war.
During their occupation of Japan in the 1940’s, Americans wrote a new pacifist constitution, which made the use of Japanese military force abroad unconstitutional.
In matters of war and peace, Japan abdicated its sovereignty.
Most Japanese were happy to be pacifists and concentrate on making money.
Japanese governments could devote their energy to building up the country’s industrial wealth, while the US took care of security, and by extension much of Japan’s foreign policy.
It was an arrangement that suited everyone: the Japanese became rich, the Americans had a compliant anti-communist vassal state, and other Asians, even Communist China, preferred Pax Americana to a revival of Japanese military clout.
But there was a steep political price to pay.
A democracy that is over-dependent on an outside power, and monopolized by one party whose main role is to broker deals between big business and the bureaucracy, will become stunted and corrupt.
Italy, under the Christian Democrats, had the same problem.
But the end of the Cold War in Europe changed the political status quo – with mixed results, to be sure.
Old parties lost power, which was a good thing.
The vacuum was filled in Italy by the rise of Silvio Berlusconi, which may have been less of a good thing.
In East Asia, by contrast, the Cold War is not yet entirely over. North Korea still causes trouble, and China is nominally a Communist state.
But it is a very different world from the one left in ruins in 1945.
For one thing, China has become a great power, and Japan, like other Asian countries, must adapt to new circumstances.
But, while it is the only Asian democracy able to balance the power of China, the system established after WWII is not best suited to this task.
This was recognized by the DPJ, which would like Japan to play a more independent role, as a more equal ally, rather than a mere protectorate, of the US, and thus be a more assertive political player in Asia.
Hence, the first symbolic step was to get the US to move its marines from Okinawa, an island that has carried the burden of a US military presence for much too long.
The US did not see things that way.
The DPJ threatened to change comfortable old arrangements, whereby the US could more or less tell the Japanese what to do.
As a result, the US showed little patience with Japan on the question of Okinawa, and has barely concealed its contempt for the DPJ government, feeding popular disappointment with its performance so far.
The US seems to prefer an obedient one-party state to a difficult, faltering, but more democratic partner in Asia.
The Obama administration, struggling to fulfill its own promises of change, should be more understanding of its Japanese counterpart.
If the US is as serious about promoting freedom abroad as it claims, it should not be hindering one of its closest ally’s efforts to strengthen its democracy.
Japan’s War Guilt Revisited
“It is our obligation as Japan’s most influential newspaper to tell our readers who was responsible for starting the Sino-Japanese War and the Pacific War.”
So writes Tsuneo Watanabe, Editor-in-Chief of Japan’s (and the world’s) most widely circulated newspaper, Yomiuri Shimbun , in the introduction to the book From Marco Polo Bridge to Pearl Ha rbor: Who Was Responsible .
Watanabe, who is now in his eighties and served in the Imperial Japanese Army during WWII, was bothered by the way unfinished business concerning the war continued to hinder Japan’s progress.
Although there have been numerous initiatives to investigate its war guilt, especially its occupation of China, there has not yet been an official effort comparable to what the Germans undertook to take collective responsibility for their war crimes.
While Yomiuri’s unique public effort is not a government initiative, it comes as close as Japan will probably ever get to conducting an acceptable “official” inquiry and offering an adequate apology.
Its style is almost scientific – factual, staccato-like, and unemotional – and it goes a long way toward meeting China’s demand for a convincing investigation and act of contrition that might allow the bitter and still poisonous past to be overcome.
Watanabe laments the fact that after Japanese war criminals were tried by the Tokyo Tribunal of 1951, “No efforts were made in the name of Japan or the Japanese people to look into where responsibility for the war rested.”
As a result, “there can be no genuinely honest and friendly dialogue with those countries that suffered considerable damage and casualties in the wars with Japan.”
Indeed, Yomiuri’s report may well have helped convince Japan’s new prime minister, Shinzo Abe, to go to China immediately after being elected in to seek better bilateral relations.
China’s leaders seem to have taken note of this moment of Japanese remorse.
This implies a ray of hope for a bilateral relationship – the most important in Asia – that over the past two decades has been battered by Japan’s reluctance to face its past, which has become a lightning rod for over-heated nationalist sentiment on both sides.
But does the Yomiuri study go far enough?
While it assigns responsibility to Japan for WWII, and even unflinchingly names the political and military leaders who bear responsibility, one can still detect a whiff of reluctance in its failure to fully describe some of Japan’s war-time actions.
For example, the horrors of the Nanjing Massacre in 1937, when Japanese soldiers killed 45,000-250,000 Chinese – many of whom were civilians – are given little more than a brief mention.
But it would be a pity if China’s leaders did not endorse this acknowledgement of Japanese guilt as a manifestation of Japan’s willingness to repent.
The damaged bilateral relationship has only made China’s desire for a “peaceful rise” more uncertain.
At the same time, it has left Japan’s long sought transcendence of its war guilt and quasi-pariah status incomplete.
Watanabe and Yomiuri Shimbun have provided a rare opportunity that should be seized for the greater good of China and Japan and the world.
Of course, it is always easier to export blame than to shoulder it.
And, true, no Japanese prime minister has yet fallen to his knees in Nanjing the way Chancellor Willy Brandt did on the site of the Warsaw Ghetto, where he apologized for the crimes of Germany by saying, “No people can escape from their history.”
But that was in 1970, when memories of the war’s ravages were fresh.
Now, over half-a-century has elapsed.
“If things are left as they are,” writes Watanabe, “a skewed perception of history – without knowledge of the horrors of the war – will be handed down to future generations.”
It would be an immensely encouraging sign of China’s growing maturity if its leaders used this moment to look beyond the bitter past toward a new future with Japan.
Toward an Alliance of Hope
WASHINGTON, DC – At World War II’s close in the Pacific, we Japanese, with feelings of deep remorse, embarked on the path of rebuilding and renewing our country.
Our predecessors’ actions brought great suffering to Asia’s peoples, and we must never avert our eyes from that.
I uphold the views expressed by Japan’s previous prime ministers in this regard.
Given this recognition and remorse, we Japanese have believed for decades that we must do all that we can to contribute to Asia’s development.
We must spare no effort in working for the region’s peace and prosperity.
I am proud of the path that we have taken, but we did not walk that path alone.
Seventy years ago, Japan had been reduced to ashes, and each and every month, citizens of the United States sent and brought gifts like milk for our children, warm sweaters, and even goats.
Yes, 2,036 American goats came to Japan in the years right after the war.
Former enemies had become close friends.
And it was Japan that benefited earliest from the postwar international system that the US fostered by opening up its own market and calling for a liberal world economy.
From the 1980s onward, we have seen the rise of the Republic of Korea, Taiwan, the ASEAN countries, and, before long, China – all taking the path of economic development enabled by the open world order created by the US.
Japan, to be sure, did not stand idly by; it poured in capital and technologies to support these countries’ growth.
Both the US and Japan fostered prosperity – the seedbed for peace – in the region.
Today, the US and Japan recognize that they must continue to take the lead in fostering a rules-based international economic order – fair, dynamic, and sustainable – within which all countries can flourish, free from the arbitrary intentions of any national government.
In the world’s great growth center, the Pacific market, we cannot overlook sweatshops or environmental burdens.
Nor can we simply allow free riders to weaken intellectual property.
Instead, we must spread and nurture our shared values: the rule of law, democracy, and freedom.
That is exactly what the Trans-Pacific Partnership is all about.
The TPP’s strategic value extends far beyond the economic benefits it promises.
It is also about turning an area that accounts for 40% of the world economy and one-third of global trade into a region of lasting peace and prosperity for our children and theirs.
As for US-Japan negotiations, the goal is near.
Let us bring the TPP to a successful conclusion through our joint leadership.
I know how difficult this path has been.
Twenty years ago, I myself opposed opening Japan’s agricultural market.
I even joined farmers’ representatives in a rally in front of Japan’s Diet.
But Japan’s agriculture sector has declined over the last two decades.
Our farmers’ average age has increased by ten years, to more than 66.
If our agriculture sector is to survive, we must follow through on sweeping reforms, including to our agricultural cooperatives, which have not changed in 60 years.
Change is coming to Japanese business, too.
Corporate governance in Japan is now fully in line with global standards because we made it stronger.
And I am spearheading regulatory overhauls in such sectors as medicine and energy as well.
Moreover, I am determined to do whatever it takes to reverse the decline in Japan’s labor force.
We are changing some of our old habits; in particular, we are empowering women to become more actively engaged in all walks of life.
In short, Japan is in the midst of a far-reaching transition to a more open future.
We are determined to press ahead with the structural reforms needed to succeed.
But reform requires the continuation of the peace and security that is the bequest of US leadership.
My grandfather, Nobusuke Kishi, chose the path of democracy and alliance with the US when he was Prime Minister in the 1950s.
Together with the US and other like-minded democracies, we won the Cold War.
I intend to stick to that path; indeed, there is no alternative to it.
Our two countries need to make every effort to strengthen our ties.
This is why I support America’s strategic “rebalancing” to enhance peace and security in the Asia-Pacific region.
Japan will support this effort first, last, and throughout.
Japan is doing so by deepening its strategic relations with Australia and India, and we are enhancing our cooperation with the ASEAN countries and the Republic of Korea.
Adding these partners to the central pillar of the US-Japan alliance will strengthen stability throughout the region.
And now Japan will provide up to $2.8 billion dollars to help improve US bases on Guam, which will have even greater strategic significance in the future.
Regarding Asia’s ongoing maritime disputes, let me underscore my government’s three principles.
First, states must stake their territorial claims on the basis of international law.
Second, they must not use force or coercion to press their claims.
And, third, they must settle all disputes by peaceful means.
We must make the vast seas stretching from the Pacific to the Indian Oceans a zone of peace and freedom, where all adhere to the rule of law.
For this reason, too, it is our responsibility to fortify the US-Japan alliance.
That is why we are working hard to enhance the legislative foundations of our security.
These enhanced legislative foundations should make cooperation between the US military and Japan’s Self-Defense Forces even stronger, and the alliance still more solid, providing credible deterrence in the service of peace in the region.
Once these legal changes – the most sweeping in our post-war history – are in place by this summer, Japan will be better able to provide a seamless response for all levels of crisis.
The new Defense Cooperation Guidelines between the US and Japan will serve the same purpose, and help secure peace in the region for years to come.
Finally, Japan is ever more willing to bear its global responsibilities.
In the early 1990s, Japan’s Self-Defense Forces removed mines in the Persian Gulf.
For ten years in the Indian Ocean, we supported US operations to stop the flow of terrorists and arms.
In Cambodia, the Golan Heights, Iraq, Haiti, and South Sudan, members of our Self-Defense Forces provided humanitarian support and participated in peace-keeping operations.
Some 50,000 service men and women have participated in those activities thus far.
Japan’s agenda is simple and straightforward: reform at home and proactive contributions to global peace based on the principle of international cooperation.
It is an agenda that promises to lead Japan – and Asia – into a more stable and prosperous future.
A Chinese Monroe Doctrine?
NEW DELHI – Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi’s upcoming visit to India will include his first meetings with India’s new government, including Foreign Minister Sushma Swaraj and, more important, Prime Minister Narendra Modi.
But the trip is about more than getting acquainted.
The leaders of both countries will be taking one another’s measure, and their conclusions will determine how the relationship between the world’s two most populous countries evolves.
In some ways, the bilateral relationship is already moving in a positive direction, especially on the economic front.
But, as trade imbalances favoring China become apparent, India is growing increasingly frustrated.
Wang, an establishment figure well versed in Indian affairs, will make every effort to downplay these imbalances and promote deeper ties.
A far more formidable challenge will be resolving the dispute over the countries’ Himalayan frontier – the world’s longest unsettled land border.
Indeed, “special representatives” from the two countries have already met 17 times to settle the issue, but have made precious little progress, not least because of Chinese concerns about the restive border provinces of Tibet and Xinjiang.
As if the conflict were not already complicated enough, China has adopted an increasingly assertive stance in the area, including several incursions into disputed territory.
For example, last year, Chinese troops established a temporary camp in Ladakh’s Depsang valley, leading to a high-stakes standoff with India.
As long as the “line of actual control” remains undefined, tensions will continue to escalate – raising serious risks for both countries.
Another major point of contention is China’s reflexive support for Pakistan’s efforts to destabilize Ladakh and Kashmir, buttressed by deepening military cooperation.
This aspect of China’s foreign policy is puzzling, not only because it undermines relations with India, but also in view of Chinese fears of Islamist radicalism among the Xinjiang’s Uighurs.
All of this highlights a fundamental flaw in China’s external strategy: its efforts to use its increasingly powerful military to intimidate its neighbors come at the expense of its own long-term security.
Indeed, instead of trying to build a mutually beneficial relationship with its largest neighbor, China has sought to encircle India by asserting military control of surrounding territories.
This so-called “string of pearls” strategy directly threatens India’s national-security interests, rendering the type of robust bilateral relationship that would benefit both countries next to impossible.
Of course, China claims that its intentions toward India are peaceful.
For example, it contends that its efforts to establish bases in the Indian Ocean and bolster its blue-water navy are aimed at safeguarding the Malacca Straits, a maritime trade route that is perceived as a choke point for the Chinese economy.
But actions speak louder than words – and the message that China’s behavior is sending is far from peaceful.
Indeed, Chinese leaders seem to be taking advantage of the opening provided by an overstretched United States to assert control over a broad expanse of Asia’s oceans.
To this end, China has created a vast Air Defense Identification Zone covering most of the East China Sea – including territories claimed and controlled by Japan and South Korea – where it has also declared disputed territories to be part of its own exclusive economic zone.
These unilateral moves resemble the announcement by the United States in 1823 of what became known as the Monroe Doctrine, which, among other things, placed Latin America within a strictly US sphere of influence.
At the just-concluded Shangri-La Security Dialogue in Singapore, US Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel called China’s actions “destabilizing.”
Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe echoed this sentiment, declaring that Japan will play a larger role in safeguarding regional security, including by providing patrol ships, training, and military surveillance equipment to countries engaged in territorial disputes with China.
The response from China was immediate and unambiguous.
Wang Guanzhong, Deputy Chief of the General Staff of the People’s Liberation Army, blasted Hagel and Abe for “corroborating and colluding…to provoke and challenge China.”
While Modi has not yet commented on the security challenge that China’s actions are creating, he will have to do so soon.
In fact, Chinese President Xi Jinping practically insisted that India join the discussion when, in a speech in Shanghai last month, he said that “India, the world’s largest weapons-systems importer, must take very serious note” of mounting regional tensions.
But Modi will need to offer more than words to meet India’s national security interests.
Because India has just endured a decade of neglect by the previous Congress government, the new administration will have to act quickly and decisively to safeguard the country’s national-security.
This imperative is made all the more urgent by China’s decision to expand its defense budget by more than 12%, to $132 billion, in the next fiscal year, as well as its recently concluded 30-year energy deal with Russia, which has strategic implications for India.
Wang’s visit thus is coming at a time of fundamental redefinition of Sino-Indian relations.
Given that continued friction is inevitable, even if no conflict occurs, the challenge is to find a way to engage in creative and competitive cooperation that bolsters both countries’ efforts to eradicate poverty and promote economic development.
Xi has said that, “We need to innovate in our security concepts, establish a new regional security-cooperation architecture, and jointly build a shared, win-win road for Asian security.”
But China’s actions suggest that its leaders view Chinese hegemony as the only viable security structure for the region.
Subordination to China is certainly not Modi’s goal.
The question is whether he can work with China and other Asian actors to design an alternative framework for regional peace.
The Election Question
NEW DELHI – With street protests roiling democracies from Bangkok to Kyiv, the nature and legitimacy of elections are once again being questioned.
Are popular elections an adequate criterion by which to judge a country’s commitment to democracy?
Beginning next month, elections in Afghanistan and India will throw this question into even sharper relief.
Afghanistan will hold a presidential election on April 5.
But a smooth electoral process is far from guaranteed – especially given that US President Barack Obama has already informed Afghan President Hamid Karzai that the United States and NATO have no choice but to withdraw their troops by the end of this year.
The US and NATO would prefer to avoid an abrupt and complete withdrawal – a preference that Afghanistan’s neighbors share, fearing that any resulting disorder would spill over their borders.
The problem is that Karzai has refused to sign a painstakingly negotiated bilateral security agreement governing a post-2014 US-NATO mission in Afghanistan, leaving Obama with little choice but to begin contingency planning.
The only conceivable alternative would be to await the next president’s inauguration, in the hope that Karzai’s successor would formally accept the agreement.
Karzai’s intransigence is rooted in his desire to launch a peace process between the government and the Afghan Taliban – similar to that which Pakistan has initiated with its own Taliban.
He believes that the security agreement with the US could be a useful bargaining chip in such negotiations.
But this view fails to account for the potential consequences of a premature withdrawal of US and NATO forces, including diminished morale among Afghan forces and renewed hope among the Taliban that they will be able to retake control of the country relatively soon.
In this context, it is difficult to predict what the presidential election will bring.
Ostensibly, it will strengthen democracy in Afghanistan, given the likelihood of a large voter turnout.
But numbers alone will not be enough to stop the Taliban, which already ruled the country once, despite being a small minority force.
Just two days after Afghanistan’s polls close, India will launch its marathon general election, to be concluded on May 12.
Although India has been a functioning democracy for almost seven decades, its government remains plagued by corruption and inefficiency.
Add to that the logistics of conducting elections in so vast a country, and the complexity of India’s electoral process becomes starkly apparent.
For starters, nearly 100 million people have been added to the voter rolls since the last national election in 2009.
Roughly 814 million people – more than the populations of the US, Indonesia, Brazil, Russia, and Bangladesh combined – will be eligible to vote, making the upcoming election the largest since independence in 1947.
Complicating matters further are geographical and climactic disparities among constituencies.
The Himalayan highlands, for example, will remain snowbound until May, by which time monsoon rains will have begun to sweep southern and northeastern India.
Accommodating this massive pool of voters, without compromising the results, will require roughly 930,000 polling stations, equipped with electronic voting machines, and one million election workers to manage the process.
The elections will occur in nine phases, staggered over five weeks.
Even printing sufficient electoral rolls is no small task, given that each of a party’s 7-10 parliamentary candidates in a constituency is entitled to a copy, with each copy comprising the names of more than one million voters.
Though it is impossible to know at this point how many candidates will run, it is estimated that 53 recognized political parties will be represented in the elections.
Interestingly, India’s election commission has introduced a “none of the above” option to the ballot for this election, following a ruling by the Supreme Court last year.
But, while citizens’ demand for the option reflects widespread dissatisfaction with the current government, the provision ultimately will have little impact, given that candidates with the most votes will be elected, even if a majority of voters rejects all of the candidates.
Nonetheless, the upcoming election will undoubtedly bring a change in government.
The question is whether new faces and a different balance of parties will lead to more stable and effective governance, or to a continuation of the current government’s misrule – what the Indian academic Pratap Bhanu Mehta has called “a plutocracy of the most insidious kind.”
Despite the very different challenges that lie ahead for Afghanistan and India, their electoral experiences will have one thing in common: they will serve as a clear reminder that there is no easy route to democracy.
One hopes that, at the very least, next month’s elections amount to a step forward.
The Afghan Muddle
NEW DELHI – Despite some last-minute brinkmanship by Afghan President Hamid Karzai, the United States and Afghanistan seem to have worked out a bilateral security agreement to govern the 8,000-10,000 (mostly American) troops that will remain in Afghanistan from next year.
But Afghanistan remains a source of significant uncertainty – and high anxiety – in an already unstable region.
Although the Afghan army has performed surprisingly well this year as it has prepared to assume full responsibility for the country’s security, governments in the region remain deeply skeptical of its ability to resist a resurgent Taliban without the strong support that the US has provided.
But the Americans are intent on withdrawal, and no other country is willing to assume the responsibilities that they are relinquishing.
In this context, the fear that Afghanistan will unravel once again risks becoming a self-fulfilling prophecy.
In fact, a closer look at various key governments’ approaches to Afghanistan reveals that only the US is maintaining a coherent stance.
Pakistani policy is practically at war with itself.
Since the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979, Pakistan has viewed the country as a source of “strategic depth” in its decades-old enmity with India.
As a result, it has been playing both sides of the US-Taliban conflict, permitting US drone strikes against Afghan Taliban leaders hiding in its western provinces but making little effort to confront the Taliban on the ground.
This way, the logic went, Pakistan could retain enough influence with the Taliban to secure leverage over Afghanistan’s government.
But it is the Taliban that ultimately gained strategic depth in its Pakistan-based guerrilla war with Afghanistan – a war that has become a serious threat to Pakistan’s security.
The Pakistani Taliban has killed hundreds of Pakistani soldiers this year.
And Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif’s new strategy – to seek a non-interference agreement with the Pakistani Taliban – will probably lead to even more domestic insecurity.
Meanwhile, India has been attempting to counter-balance Pakistan’s influence with the Taliban by providing investment, military training, aid, and other support to the Afghan government.
But this amounts to betting all of its chips on one hand, the Afghan government – an especially risky strategy in such a volatile environment.
China’s Afghan policy also has its pitfalls.
The People’s Republic has invested billions of dollars in Afghanistan, including a $3 billion payment for rights to mine copper at Mes Aynak.
Although the Chinese have offered rhetorical support for international forces’ anti-terror efforts in Afghanistan, they have refused even the smallest military role.
And they have provided only about $250 million in aid over the last decade – a paltry sum, given the potential consequences of Afghan instability for China’s $6 trillion economy.
To be sure, China claims to be upholding its doctrine of non-interference in other countries’ domestic affairs.
But, with the Afghan government asking the entire international community for assistance, Chinese aid would not violate this principle.
Moreover, China’s hands-off policy could end up jeopardizing its investments in Afghanistan – not to mention the security threat that would arise were a re-empowered Taliban to provide aid or sanctuary to the increasingly Islamist Uighur separatists in China’s Xinjiang region.
Iran’s Afghan policy has been reflexively anti-American for much of the last decade.
But back in 2001, Iran’s government, led by reformist President Mohammad Khatami, essentially consented to the US invasion of Afghanistan, even providing discreet assistance.
Iran was scrupulous in closing its border to the Taliban – and about detaining Taliban and Al Qaeda figures who sought refuge.
Indeed, it was Iran that first suggested that Karzai lead the newly formed Afghan government, and Khatami’s government pledged $560 million in assistance over five years at the first donor conference for Afghanistan in early 2002.
But US President George W. Bush’s notorious “axis of evil” speech – delivered just days later, and citing Iran as one of America’s three most dangerous enemies – spurred a reversal of Iranian policy.
Khatami’s successor, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, repeatedly condemned the presence of US and NATO forces in Afghanistan, and even worked to obstruct their efforts.
One hopes that the recent agreement concerning Iran’s nuclear program portends a return to a more flexible Iranian policy toward Afghanistan – essential if there is to be a regional solution to Afghanistan’s problems.
Given America’s looming departure, such a solution is becoming increasingly urgent.
But reaching a regional consensus will not be easy, given the disparate nature and interests of the regimes involved.
Iran, China, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan are all dictatorships – one religious, one market-communist, and two personal.
India is a democracy, and Pakistan a wayward democracy.
Nearby Russia is increasingly a one-man-show under President Vladimir Putin, who seems intent on refighting the Cold War with the US, rather than constructing viable strategic relationships that reflect Russia’s diminished reality.
Nonetheless, all of these countries (perhaps with the admittedly large exception of Pakistan) can agree on certain core objectives.
First, Afghanistan must not become a safe haven for terrorists.
Mullah Mohammed Omar – the Taliban’s leader, who is reportedly in hiding in Pakistan – must understand that if the Taliban uses any formal political influence it gains in Afghanistan to support terrorist activities, it will face united regional opposition.
Second, given their limited leverage, Afghanistan’s neighbors must lean hard on countries that can influence any future Afghan government.
The Gulf states, for example, have the means to invest in building an Afghanistan that provides real opportunities to all citizens – particularly the young men whose lack of options so often drives them into the arms of terrorist recruiters.
Realistically, however, the potential for achieving such an outcome is limited.
Most important, Afghanistan’s neighbors must not play power politics within the country, in the hope of gaining some slight advantage over one another.
That path, as we have seen, leads only to chaos, from which no country benefits.
Asia’s Historical Furies
TOKYO – A country’s foreign policy is supposed to be aimed, first and foremost, at advancing its national interest.
But, in large parts of Asia, the national interest – whether building commercial ties or bolstering security – is often subordinated to history and its hold on the popular imagination.
As US Vice President Joe Biden just discovered on his tour of Japan, China, and South Korea, the American novelist William Faulkner’s observation – “The past is never dead.
It’s not even past.” – could not be more apt.
One commonly cited example of this is the relationship between India and Pakistan.
Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif recognize the vast economic potential of enhanced bilateral trade ties, and the progress that they have sought in this area is clearly in both countries’ national interest.
But their diplomatic overtures have been quickly stymied by those who cannot accept such reasoning, going so far at times as to commit acts of terror and launch military incursions.
But Asia’s history problem is not confined to its democracies, where public opinion directly influences the government’s actions.
China and Vietnam, too, remain in thrall of their long and bitter shared history.
The late General Vo Nguyen Giap, who led Vietnam through wars with France and the United States to independence, spent his final years protesting against Chinese investment in his country.
Perhaps Asia’s most dangerous case of historical obsession is to be found in the relationship between China and Japan.
The current dispute in the East China Sea over the Japanese-controlled Senkaku Islands (the Diaoyu Islands in China) would likely be less tense if the atrocities of the Sino-Japanese War were not rehashed so often in contemporary Chinese life.
In fact, Japan has attempted to atone for its past actions, including by offering enthusiastic support to Deng Xiaoping’s efforts to open up the Chinese economy.
The trillions of yen that Japanese businesses have invested in China since the 1990’s – not to mention the transfer of critical technologies – could not have been about profit alone (and, in any case, Japanese investment has benefited both economies).
But, while these efforts have helped to deepen Japan’s economic ties with China, they have not had the transformative impact on bilateral relations that one might have expected.
Indeed, their relationship is now characterized by what the Japanese call seirei keinetsu (cold politics, hot economics).
Bad history also stalks the relationship between Japan and South Korea – a particularly revealing case, given how closely their strategic interests align.
Here are two democracies, both among America’s closest allies, unable to overcome the burden of the past.
For South Koreans, it is a heavy burden, rooted in Japanese colonization and the myriad horrors of World War II.
But the simple fact is that both countries would benefit substantially, in security terms in particular, from effective cooperation.
In fact, serei keinetsu defines the Asian status quo: countries that cannot seem to overcome their historical animosities when it comes to foreign policy readily acknowledge that better relations means better economies.
East Asia, in particular, has experienced an unprecedented surge in intra-regional trade, investment, and even tourism over the last two decades.
Yet there is reason for hope – and it is coming from an unexpected source.
With China’s efforts to assert itself as a regional hegemon stoking fears across Asia, its neighbors seem to be increasingly willing to vacate old grudges in favor of stronger alliances.
For example, Japan’s relations with Vietnam and Myanmar, both of which border China, have been warming rapidly in recent years – a trend that Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has sought to cultivate.
Likewise, the Philippines – locked in a stand-off with China over the disputed Scarborough shoal – has set aside its resentment over Japan’s wartime occupation and accepted increased aid and naval assistance, including ten patrol vessels, worth $11 million each, to help with maritime surveillance.
Filipino Foreign Minister Albert del Rosario has even declared publicly that the country would welcome a more muscular Japanese defense policy to offset China’s military buildup.
One reason for this turnaround is that many in the Philippines have felt somewhat abandoned by the US in their confrontation with China.
With China increasingly asserting claims to territories in the South and East China Seas, other Asian countries may also find the burden of history to be too great an impediment to their future prospects.
Japan could go a long way toward helping its neighbors overcome the poisoned past that it shares with so many of them as a result of its old imperial ambitions.
Just as US President Richard Nixon’s unyielding anti-communism uniquely suited him to establish diplomatic relations with China, Abe, an affirmed nationalist, may be the Japanese politician best able to blend contrition for the past with forthrightness about the present.
The good news is that Abe has shown signs of this kind of courage.
At a 2006 summit with Chinese leaders during his first stint as Japan’s prime minister, he agreed to establish a joint commission, involving historians from Japan, China, and elsewhere, to study twentieth-century history.
The idea was that the commission could make unbiased recommendations about contentious issues like the contents of history textbooks and even the Yasukuni shrine, a nationalist pilgrimage site where the remains of Japanese war criminals, among others, are interred.
If Abe revived this initiative today, he could help to dampen the regional antagonism he faces in trying to make Japan a “normal” country, with a military capable of participating in collective regional defense.
Such an initiative may not work with China, where the government still uses the war with Japan to rouse nationalist sentiment.
But countries like South Korea that are feeling the pressure of China’s rise – as demonstrated by the current furor over China’s unilateral expansion of its air defense zone – may well reciprocate such an effort.
That alone should be reason enough for Abe to act.
Globalizing European Security
MADRID – Global security – a safe and peaceful environment free of conflict – is a public good.
In other words, all of the world’s citizens and countries benefit from it, regardless of whether they contribute to supplying it.
Given this, free riders (those who enjoy the benefits of the good without investing in its provision) are likely to be plentiful.
But, when it comes to global stability, the world simply cannot afford a free-riding Europe.
To be sure, given Europe’s violent past, the European Union’s greatest contribution to international security has been to ensure stability in its own region.
Today, nearly a century after the outbreak of World War I, peace and stability are firmly entrenched in Europe.
Other regions, however, are volatile and unstable.
For example, strategic tinderboxes like the Middle East and Southeast Asia lack the regional security structures with which Europe is endowed.
The Middle East’s geographic proximity means that Europe cannot ignore it, while it would be folly to ignore Southeast Asia’s economic weight.
The EU is the world’s largest economy, with annual GDP of more than €15.5 trillion ($21.3 trillion), and its greatest trading power, accounting for 20% of world trade.
Clearly, the EU should aspire to increase its contribution to global security beyond maintaining peace among its member states.
This is no time for Europe to rest on its laurels – particularly with the United States moving to extract itself from two wars and confronting isolationist urges.
Enter this month’s European Council meeting: on December 19-20, heads of state and government from the EU’s 28 member countries will convene to discuss the Common Security and Defense Policy (CSDP).
Throughout the discussions, a forward-looking, ambitious vision must be maintained in order to bring a truly global European security strategy into view.
Unfortunately, in national governments and EU institutions alike, the leadership needed to realize this strategic vision is lacking.
The summit will face several hurdles from the outset.
For starters, the ongoing consequences of simultaneous economic, political, and institutional crises continue to determine the European agenda.
Realizing a long-term vision is more difficult than ever when so many short-term imperatives – reviving growth and employment, winning elections, and re-engaging a distrustful public amid growing populist sentiment, to name just a few – materialize simultaneously.
In this environment, deepening Europe’s defense and security integration would appear to be low on the list of priorities.
But the opposite is true: further development of the CSDP is essential to the survival of the European way of life.
This month’s Council will lay the foundations for the CSDP’s further development by addressing three main topics: operational efficiency, defense capabilities, and the state of the European defense industry.
If the EU’s defense and security policy is to be strong, global, and effective, it is imperative to take advantage of both the specialization and pooling of member states’ technology and resources.
As national budgets shrink under the effects of austerity, the EU should review member states’ spending on security.
It is senseless for each national government to invest limited resources identically.
This moment holds potential: spending cuts could be transformed into an opportunity to coordinate and integrate Europe’s defense industry, thus maximizing overall efficiency.
The objective must be to boost European security integration (in its broadest sense), lifting Europe to the forefront of global security.
As member states advance along this path, propelled forward by technological and operational excellence and innovation, they will find avenues to eliminate unnecessary spending and optimize resource use.
Europe’s defense industry will not be able to make progress without a well-functioning market – open, transparent, and with equal opportunities for all European suppliers.
Advances in the defense industry lead to significant positive externalities, such as civil-military synergies and investment in research and development, which is fundamental to growth, innovation, and future competitiveness.
A critical component in the coordination and proper functioning of Europe’s security and defense policy is the European Defense Agency.
At the upcoming summit, leaders should reiterate the importance of the EDA, whose budget has remained frozen at the insistence of certain member states.
It would be irresponsible to treat December’s Council meeting as just another summit.
Europe and an increasingly unstable world need a viable framework for global security.
A fully developed CSDP – itself the cornerstone of further European integration – must be a fundamental component of such a system.
The Shale Revolution’s Global Footprint
MADRID – Thousands of negotiators are currently gathered at the United Nations climate-change talks in Warsaw, creating a blueprint for a comprehensive global agreement to be delivered by 2015.
But, as the negotiators work, the world’s energy landscape is in enormous flux.
Given that most of the world’s CO2 emissions stem from energy production and transport, it is critical to monitor these changes closely.
In particular, the shockwaves triggered by the shale-energy revolution unleashed in the United States are reverberating globally.
With the advent of hydraulic fracturing, or “fracking,” US oil production has risen by 30%, and gas production by 25%, in just five years.
Shale gas contributed almost nothing to US natural-gas supplies at the start of the century; by last year, its share had soared to 34%, with the US Energy Information Administration predicting a further rise to one-half by 2040.
As a result of this bonanza, US domestic energy prices have plummeted.
The US, with all its geographical blessings, is on the road to energy self-sufficiency and is reaping clear economic benefits.
Development of unconventional oil and gas supported 2.1 million jobs and contributed $74 billion in tax revenues and royalty payments to government coffers in 2012.
Industrial competitiveness has soared, owing to much higher gas prices in Europe and Asia.
Refiners and petrochemical companies are flocking to the US.
But this does not mean that the US can withdraw into splendid energy isolation.
After all, energy is a global commodity.
The effect is direct when it comes to oil prices.
Although oil accounts for a smaller part of the energy mix nowadays and spare capacity is currently well ensured, chiefly by Saudi Arabia, a price shock would still have global effects – as such shocks have had in the past.
Gas prices, by contrast, vary widely across regions: from under $4/MMBtu in the US to around $10 in Europe and $15 in Asia.
Until the gas market becomes more liquid and more global, this spread will remain.
Nonetheless, global economic interdependence means that every country has a stake in others’ energy bills.
If one region’s economy falters, all countries feel the effects.
In Europe, shale-energy resources have largely remained in the ground.
Even so, the shale revolution across the Atlantic has been felt in diverse ways.
For example, decreased US demand for liquefied natural gas (LNG) has allowed gas prices to come down in Europe.
European utilities’ bargaining power vis-à-vis Russian gas giant Gazprom has risen considerably – despite long-term oil-indexed supply contracts.
Yet European competitiveness is in danger.
European companies are still buying gas at around triple the price paid by US firms.
This is unlikely to change in the near future, as liquefaction and transport costs will keep LNG prices high even if the US issues more export permits.
Finally, Europe’s energy mix is gradually shifting from the one that it needs to reach its climate-change goals.
As inexpensive natural gas has eroded coal’s traditional share of electricity generation in the US, importing cheap coal from the US has become more attractive to Europe.
Especially in Germany, the Energiewende (the shift away from nuclear energy following the Fukushima catastrophe in 2011) has led to an increase in coal consumption.
Indeed, coal is on track to provide more than half of Germany’s electricity supply.
The EU’s position as a climate-change champion is in danger.
Greenhouse-gas emissions may have dropped as a consequence of reduced production amid the economic recession, but the coal resurgence does not bode well for future targets.
Coal is king in China too, providing two-thirds of its power supply.
But China’s rulers know that this situation is unsustainable.
Not only is air pollution a growing source of concern, but diversification of energy sources is a crucial national-security interest.
The scale of China’s unconventional energy endowments is still relatively uncertain.
But population density and water scarcity will certainly be inhibiting factors in their exploitation.
China maintains robust relationships with energy producers in the Middle East, Russia, and elsewhere (including booming Myanmar) – to secure and diversify its conventional sources.
Just last month, Dmitri Medvedev’s first visit to China as Russia’s prime minister resulted in a ten-year, $85 billion oil-supply deal for the state-owned energy giant Rosneft.
Natural gas, however, is the weak link.
Asia’s pipeline network is far too thin, and gas prices are among the highest in the world.
That implies a potential boon to Russia’s main gas producers, especially as Europe’s energy-diversification campaign weakens export demand.
Indeed, given that oil and gas revenues account for half of Russia’s federal budget, adapting to new realities is virtually an existential imperative for the Russian state.
There is opportunity in Siberia’s frozen taiga, particularly the Bazhenov field, which may hold some of the largest unconventional reserves in the world.
But the investment needed to develop these resources may remain in short supply in the absence of tax reforms.
The shale-energy revolution that started in the US is thus causing sweeping changes worldwide.
And incorporating shale gas into the world’s energy mix could help to combat climate change by creating a bridge to a low-carbon future.
So long as methane leakage is contained, CO2 emissions from natural-gas combustion can be significantly lower than those caused by reliance on oil.
Cheap energy sources, however, can eventually come at a high price, albeit with a politically tricky time lag.
Simply put, the current cost of pollution is too low, while the level of urgency is high.
In Warsaw and beyond, it is vitally important that the international community reaches a sufficiently high common denominator in limiting greenhouse-gas emissions.
If not, we will not be able to limit the global temperature increase to a sustainable level.
Stabilizing Ukraine
MADRID – Even Mikhail Gorbachev, who presided over the dissolution of the Soviet Union with scarcely a shot fired, has proclaimed his support for Russian President Vladimir Putin’s annexation of Crimea.
The people of Crimea, he says, have corrected a historic Soviet error.
Gorbachev’s sentiment is widely shared in Russia.
After the Soviet Union’s disintegration in 1991, Russia went from superpower to backwater.
Three ex-Soviet republics joined the European Union and NATO, asserting their desire not only for democracy and prosperity, but also to avoid being part of Russia ever again.
By moving to annex Crimea, Putin, supported massively – thus far – by domestic public opinion, seems to be ending the post-imperial frustration of the past two decades.
Since 1991, however, Russia explicitly recognized the territorial integrity of Ukraine on several occasions.
Such recognition was part of the 1992 Yalta Agreement, which divided the Black Sea fleet, and of the 1997 leasing contract that allowed the fleet to remain in Sevastopol.
Ukraine’s territorial integrity was also recognized in the 1994 denuclearization agreement, signed by the United Kingdom, Russia, and the United States, and again in April 2011, when then-President Viktor Yanukovych extended the Sevastopol lease.
The Ukrainian constitution prohibited the referendum on independence that was carried out in Crimea in the presence of Russian troops.
With the vote to leave Ukraine and join the Russian Federation illegal by any reckoning, the international community, as the EU has declared, cannot accept the outcome.
Relations between the EU and Ukraine have always been complex.
The Association Agreement that Yanukovych rejected last November – a decision that incited the popular protests that brought down his government – had been under negotiation since 2007.
Essentially a free-trade treaty with additional political elements, its signing was postponed because of the imprisonment of former Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko.
In the end, Yanukovych accepted Russia’s counter-offer: a 30% reduction in the price of Russian gas supplies and $15 billion to stave off default.
Russia needs Ukraine if it is to build the so-called Eurasian Union, the economic bloc that Putin is seeking with Kazakhstan and Belarus.
Unlike the parties to a free-trade agreement, the members of a customs union like the one Putin envisages set trade policy with respect to third states through the establishment of common foreign tariffs.
Thus, Ukraine’s incorporation would be incompatible with its EU Association Agreement.
Russia and Ukraine, however, already have a free-trade agreement, via the Commonwealth of Independent States free-trade agreement signed in October 2011, which is compatible with the proposed EU Association Agreement – in the same way that Mexico maintains free-trade treaties with the EU, as well as with the US and Canada.
Ukraine thus could have maintained normal relations with its neighbors, with the EU, and with Russia.
But Russia needs Ukraine for nationalist as well as economic reasons.
Russian nationalism has always considered Ukraine an extension of Russia itself, by virtue of it being home to places that are among the dearest to Russian identity.
Putin has called Kyiv “the mother of all Russian cities.”
Sevastopol, in turn, is a doubly heroic city: during the siege of the Crimean War in the nineteenth century and during World War II.
But understanding Russia’s frustrations and sentiments does not excuse invasion and annexation.
The EU Association Agreement threatened none of Russia’s interests, whether economic or cultural.
Relations between the EU and Russia cannot be based on zero-sum games or spheres of influence.
Solutions must be found that enable all to win.
Moreover, Russia’s annexation of Crimea will likely damage its core interest: its political relationship with Ukraine, which it wants to keep far from Europe.
So, for Europe, the most important priority now is to help to ensure stability and prosperity in the rest of Ukraine.
The first and most pressing issue is to stabilize the government in Kyiv.
Ukraine’s presidential election on May 25 will be a key moment.
The vote must be free and fair, according to democratic standards.
Moreover, it is essential that the state respects national minorities’ linguistic and cultural rights and promotes social inclusion.
European aid should be conditioned on Ukraine’s performance in this area.
Second, given that the risk of conflict is greatest in Ukraine’s Russophone east, an OSCE mission should be deployed there to ensure stability, security, and respect for minorities, and to condemn, if necessary, violations of specified commitments.
The third issue ‒ and perhaps the most important ‒ is the pressing need for economic aid.
The EU has prepared an €11 billion ($15 billion) aid package, though it is subject to rules and conditions set by the International Monetary Fund, which is contributing part of the total.
Though Ukraine’s economy is collapsing, the government maintains excessive spending on subsidies that are incompatible with IMF aid.
At present, for example, the government spends as much as 16% of its budget to subsidize the price of energy for every citizen.
Russia will not skimp on spending after annexing Crimea, and Crimeans will benefit from that aid and access to cheap energy.
Though the tourism industry is likely to be moribund for some time, Russian subsidies may leave Crimeans relatively better off, especially from the perspective of their ethnic kin in eastern Ukraine.
EU and Western aid packages will need to take this into account.
The problem of Crimea will not be resolved quickly.
Though Putin declared in his annexation speech that Crimea is an “inseparable part” of Russia, his behavior will turn against him.
He and Russia will suffer international isolation, while Ukrainians are likely to become even more insistent on choosing their own path.
The Long Road to Agreement with Iran
MADRID – The latest round of negotiations in Geneva between Iran and the P5+1 (the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council plus Germany) has inspired cautious optimism.
A window of opportunity to reach agreement on Iran’s nuclear program appears to have opened.
Although the details of the meeting are not public, its relative success is clear, as the parties are to reconvene on November 7-8.
Rapprochement between Iran and the West – above all between Iran and the United States – would have positive geostrategic consequences across the Middle East.
Iran has a long way to go, of course, to bring about permanent improvement in its relations with the West; but what Iran needs to do is not the only impediment.
Other strategic actors must also be taken into account.
Without a doubt, Israel will be a major obstacle to reaching an agreement.
At the very moment when negotiations were beginning in Geneva, Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu said in the Knesset (Israel’s parliament) that the possibility of a pre-emptive attack on Iran’s nuclear facilities could not yet be ruled out.
Netanyahu has made Iran’s nuclear program his highest foreign-policy priority.
He is suspicious of Iran’s intentions and wants its nuclear power plants to be completely dismantled.
The fear is that so long as Iran maintains residual nuclear capacity – even for civilian use – it could develop atomic arms that would threaten Israel.
As Netanyahu made clear at the United Nations General Assembly on October 1, Israeli officials do not trust Iran’s new government to change course.
But Israel is not alone.
Sunni-ruled Saudi Arabia, the regional power competing most directly with Shia Iran for regional influence, feels left out by the incipient rapprochement with the Islamic Republic, to the point of refusing a seat on the United Nations Security Council to express its leaders’ anger.
Even in the days of the Shah, the Kingdom feared that a strong Iran might become the dominant regional power.
Heir to the historic Persian Empire, Iran has the region’s second-largest GDP and population (behind Saudi Arabia and Egypt, respectively), and Saudi Arabia worries that a possible agreement – resulting in sanctions being lifted – would allow Iran to revive its economy and extend its influence.
This is not the Saudi-US alliance’s finest hour.
The falling out over Iran follows America’s refusal to bomb Syria (another Saudi rival in the region) and its blessing of the removal in 2011 of former Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak (an important Saudi ally).
Saudi Arabia seeks the overthrow of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, and believes that America’s agreement with Russia to destroy the Assad regime’s chemical weapons amounts to renunciation of that goal.
As a result, the Saudis are now the largest financial backer of the Syrian rebels (and one of the main supporters of the Egyptian Army following its removal in July of Mubarak’s democratically elected successor, Mohamed Morsi).
For the West, however, the most urgent goal should be to put an end to the conflict in Syria.
Too many people have already died in what has become the worst war of this century.
Iran and Russia are the Assad regime’s two main allies and the only external actors able to bring about a change of attitude in Damascus.
The Geneva II talks on Syria are tentatively set to be held on November 23, though Lakhdar Brahimi, Joint Special Representative of the UN and the Arab League for Syria, has already expressed doubts about the suitability of the meeting in the absence of credible representatives of opposition forces.
Saudi Arabia is deeply hostile to Geneva II, because formal diplomatic talks with the Assad regime imply de facto recognition that it retains legitimacy.
For the Saudis, the only acceptable solution starts with the resignation of Assad and his government, while Geneva II envisages a transitional government in which all of the parties are represented.
American policymakers have another major difficulty: the US Congress.
The last-minute agreement to raise the US debt ceiling and reopen the government has left Republican Party extremists in a weakened position, while President Barack Obama has emerged strengthened.
But the episode sets a dangerous precedent.
Any conceivable agreement with Iran would involve lifting economic sanctions, which would require legislative approval – thus making a proposed deal vulnerable to congressional near-sightedness.
For the US, a concomitant problem is that Secretary of State John Kerry has made peace between Israel and Palestine a high priority.
It remains to be seen how Kerry manages to balance the negotiations so that Israeli pressure on the US with respect to Iran does not ruin efforts to achieve peace between Israelis and Palestinians.
But if Iran and the West reach an agreement, it will be very difficult for Israel to remain on the sideline.
Europe, for its part, has a good opportunity to vindicate itself by committing to a united, coherent, and effective foreign policy.
The European Union, now through High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy Catherine Ashton, has always been a key actor in the negotiations between Iran and the P5+1.
Ashton has the confidence of all the parties.
It is important for the EU to be agile and maintain close coordination with the US.
When the time comes to lift the sanctions, Europe must coordinate closely with the US in order to maximize the move’s effectiveness.
Negotiation and diplomacy are the only sure way to resolve the standoff with Iran over its nuclear program.
Another conflict in the Middle East is the worst option.
But seizing today’s unique opportunity with Iran demands long-term vision from all parties.
National interests must be placed above electoral considerations.
The window for negotiation is open; it will not remain so indefinitely.
The Gallic Heart of Europe
MADRID ‒ Europe needs a France that is proud, prosperous, and able to overcome its gloomy suspicions.
We need the great country that was and will be – the France that inspired the entire world with its revolution, culture, and values.
Alain Peyrefitte, the scholar, politician, and confidant of Charles de Gaulle, said that “without Europe, France will be nothing”; but, without France, Europe, too, would be nothing.