Several medieval Muslim historians pointed to the role of the Shia vizier Ibn al-‘Alqami, arguing that he plotted with the Mongols to bring down the caliphate.
Once the preserve of a handful of scholars, the Ibn al-‘Alqami story now plays a prominent part in today’s Sunni- Shia disputes.
Indeed, “‘Alaqima,” the plural form of the Arabic name “‘Alqami,” is now applied to the Shia as short-hand for treachery.
Social media forums are replete with polemics about the Shia role in assisting both Mongol and US invaders.
Many even claim that Iraq’s Shia are al-‘Alqami’s descendants, and that Nouri al-Maliki, Iraq’s Prime Minister, is his modern incarnation.
These diatribes reflect Iraqi’s polarized historical memory.
Despite ample historical evidence of peaceful inter-communal relations, many people – whether through simple ignorance of history or the need to assert the supremacy of one version of the truth – prefer to consecrate narratives of treachery and betrayal that perpetuate hatred.
More important, the current situation reflects a lack of wisdom, responsibility, and basic decency on the part of political and religious leaders, who prefer to fuel, rather than dampen, inter-communal strife.
Sadly, intolerance has now become a generalized condition.
There is too little knowledge about other communities’ beliefs and history, and what little exists has been overwhelmed by sectarian anger and its poisonous rhetoric.
As long as Sunnis and Shia refuse to think about their past together, it is difficult to foresee a tranquil future together.
And if political and religious leaders are unable or unwilling to seek accommodation, it will be up to like-minded individuals, groups, and civil-society institutions to rebuild mutual respect and find ways to cooperate.
Doing so will require knowledge, patience, and, above all, open minds and hearts.
All in the Family
MUNICH – Big economic crises often cause iconic companies to falter.
Rupert Murdoch’s media empire is a model of the modern global enterprise.
A particularly dynamic and innovative business model came from outside and took over central aspects of British and then American public life.
That model is now threatened by the fallout from the scandal that started with phone hacking in Murdoch’s British press operations.
The Murdoch experience is a microcosm of how modern globalization works.
Murdoch always looked like a foreign intrusion into British life. It was not just that he was Australian; he also brought new ideas.
In particular, the application of digital technology, introduced after a ferocious struggle with the powerful print unions, brought substantial cost savings and allowed a new era of journalism.
Even more importantly, Murdoch represented a concept of family business that is common in many parts of the world, but relatively rare in Britain and the United States.
Family capitalism in the continental European model uses relatively little capital to achieve maximum control.
It frequently depends on very complex corporate structures, with multiple layers of holding companies, as well as privileged shares that can guarantee the continuation of control.
This sort of firm is also very common in the most dynamic emerging-market economies in Asia and Latin America.
The Murdoch family holds only 12% of the shares of News Corporation, the top-level holding company, but it wields about two-fifths of the voting rights; other votes are held by a loyal Saudi prince.
For decades, academic analysts have been fighting over whether such large-scale family businesses should be considered beneficial.
Their defenders point out that such companies often have a much longer-term vision than is true of managerial capitalism, which enables them to establish strong and enduring relationships with their customers and suppliers.
At least in the case of the Murdoch empire, it now appears that they pursue long and binding relationships with politicians and the police as well.
Indeed, political entanglements are one of two sources of weakness in European-style family capitalism, as owners seek political advantages and preferred access as much as they strive for technical innovation.
Murdoch’s empire depended on its closeness to politicians.
In retrospect, three successive British prime ministers – Tony Blair, Gordon Brown, and David Cameron – were on overly familiar terms with a manipulative business leader.
Cameron now talks about the need for “a healthier relationship between politicians and media owners.”
And Murdoch apparently is now saying that he wishes that all these prime ministers would “leave me alone.”
The second notorious weakness of family businesses is the problem of succession.
When he appeared before the British parliament in July, Rupert Murdoch looked like an old man, remote and out of control.
In old-style family firms, there is a clear rule of succession that the oldest son takes over.
But that rule is rightly recognized as being potentially dysfunctional.
There is obviously no guarantee that the oldest son is the best businessman, and the result could be bitter and ferocious sibling rivalry.
Such succession disputes become even more acute when there are multiple marriages and multiple sets of competing children.
Until the eruption of the current scandal, the youngest of Murdoch’s three children from his second marriage, James, was generally believed to stand the greatest chance of succeeding his father.
The complexities of modern marriage patterns make family life much more fraught, especially when phenomenal power and huge sums of money are involved.
All three of Murdoch’s marriages have produced children, though those from his current relationship are too young to be considered potential corporate successors.
In addition, succession planning can become complicated by the emergence of “substitute children” from the company’s management.
Rebekah Brooks, the editor of The News of the World at the beginning of the phone-hacking scandal, and subsequently the chief executive of News International, Murdoch’s British subsidiary, played precisely such a role.
The disintegration of the business empire is then accompanied and amplified by bitter disputes between the children and the substitute children.
Indeed, the crisis of the Murdoch family’s business empire is neither unique nor unprecedented.
In the first half of the 1990’s, many observers of the alleged Asian economic miracle emphasized trust and families’ capacity to cooperate with political authorities in order to realize long-term growth plans.
After the 1997-1998 Asia crisis, and as authoritarian regimes in South Korea and Indonesia disintegrated, these relationships were suddenly interpreted as corrupt, and the counter-view – that “crony capitalism” had become entrenched in these countries – soon prevailed.
The Arab Spring has been in large part a movement against corrupt family capitalism, embodied not only in ruling families like the Ben Alis, the Mubaraks, and the Assads, but also in the large family business empires that depended on and supported them.
As a result of globalization, large family firms could increase their size and their geographic range.
But globalization also increases the chances of backlashes that focus on the vulnerabilities, weaknesses, and mistakes of big family firms.
They are vulnerable to an Arab Spring (and a British summer) – and maybe to a US autumn that will focus not just on the Murdochs’ business, but also on its interplay with politics.
All Man’s Land
NEW DELHI – Ernest Hemingway’s collection of stories, Men without Women, examines tense gender relationships.
In a particularly poignant story, a young man convinces his partner to have an abortion, viewing their unborn child as a hindrance to the status quo. Frustrated, the woman gives in.
That story, published more than 80 years ago, remains relevant today in India, where female fetuses face severe risks.
According to the 2011 census, the sex ratio of the country’s children has dipped from 927 females per 1000 males to 914, a 60-year low.
Ratios in the northern states are particularly alarming: only Himachal Pradesh now has a ratio of girls to boys above 900.
Despite being illegal, ultrasound sex-determination tests are being used across India to identify for abortion extraordinary numbers of healthy female fetuses.
But there are serious concerns about legal operations, too.
Genitoplasty – a sex-change operation on newborn girls – is a mushrooming, and deeply disturbing, business in India.
There’s only one word for it: gendercide.
Left unchecked, it will leave India’s next generation of men with a severe shortage of women.
Indian couples have a strong cultural preference, bordering on obsession, for sons over daughters – despite the strides in education and employment that women have made over the last few decades.
Education and wealth have nothing to do with it – in fact, some of the worst-affected areas are in India’s wealthiest cities.
However discomfiting a possibility, the real culprit might be Indian culture and tradition itself.
The expenses and pressure of the dowry system, and the fact that, in most joint families, only sons inherit property and wealth, contribute to this favoritism.
Perhaps just as important is that sons typically live with their parents even after they are married, and assume responsibility for parents in their old age.
Daughters, who live with their in-laws after they marry, are viewed as amanat – someone else’s property.
In short, sons represent income and daughters an expense.
In the old days, when families typically had 5-10 children, this didn’t matter so much.
The number of sons and daughters often evened out.
But, for today’s smaller families, whether the children are two boys or two girls influences everything from financial planning to preparations for old age.
Many have argued that Indian women should stand up to their families and refuse to abort their daughters.
But Indian women want male children just as much.
Unlike Hemingway’s character, they are often more than willing to abort a girl and try for a boy.
The novelist Salman Rushdie once put the question to supporters of abortion rights: “What should be done when a woman uses her power over her own body to discriminate against female fetuses?”
This raises other questions concerning the consequences of a large shortage of girls.
Will women be valued and treasured?
Or will the oversupply of men result in more bride trafficking, sexual violence, and female suicides?
Niall Ferguson, the British historian, cites scholars who attribute Japan’s imperial expansion after 1914 to a male youth bulge, and who link the rise of Islamist extremism to an Islamic youth bulge.
“Maybe the coming generation of Asian men without women will find harmless outlets for their inevitable frustrations, like team sports or video games.
But I doubt it,” he writes.
He warns us not to be surprised if, in the coming generation, “shrill nationalism is replaced by macho militarism or even imperialism.”
Unfortunately, there is no instant solution.
Saving our girls will require radically altering some of Indian society’s family arrangements, traditions, and attitudes.
And there is no easy way to accomplish this.
Legislation alone won’t help, for tradition is a law unto itself.
Hindu religious law, for example, allows a woman to claim an equal share in her parents’ wealth, but few exercise this right.
Culturally, she feels that she does not have an equal claim on her father’s property.
Nonetheless, India does need new laws – direct and enforceable – that clamp down on the cultural practices that underpin destructive traditions.
For example, India could enforce a ceiling on wedding expenditure – typically a father’s biggest expense associated with his daughter.
Constrained from spending on the wedding, he would compensate her differently – perhaps with a larger inheritance.
Gradually, this would become the norm, and tradition would adjust accordingly.
(Interestingly, the state of Kerala, whose people adhere to matrilineal inheritance, has among the most equal sex ratios and literacy rates in India.)
A more radical measure, which some have advocated, would be direction intervene, with the state providing benefits for families with more girls.
Perhaps the authorities could also penalize families with boys, at least temporarily.
India imagines herself as a woman – Bharat Mata, or Mother India.
The irony is that, unless far-reaching changes are made soon, Mother India could eventually be the only woman left in the country.
All Stimulus Roads Lead to China
BEIJING – Now that the “green shoots” of recovery have withered, the debate over fiscal stimulus is back with a vengeance.
In the United States, those who argue for another stimulus package observe that it was always wishful thinking to believe that a $787 billion package could offset a $3 trillion fall in private spending.
But unemployment has risen even faster and further than expected.
Combine this with the continued fall in housing prices, and it is understandable that consumer spending remains depressed.
The banks, having been recapitalized only to the extent necessary to keep them afloat, still have weak balance sheets.
Their consequent reluctance to lend constrains investment.
Meanwhile, state governments, seeing revenues fall as a result of lower taxable incomes last year, are cutting back like mad.
If there was a case for additional stimulus back in February, that case is even stronger now.
But the case against additional stimulus is also strong.
The US federal deficit is an alarming 12% of GDP, and public debt as a share of national income is already projected to double, to 80% of GDP.
The idea that the US can grow out of its debt burden, as did Finland and Sweden following their financial crises in the 1990’s, seems unrealistic.
Given all this, more deficit spending will only stoke fears of higher future taxes and inflation.
It will encourage the reemergence of global imbalances.
And it will not reassure consumers or investors.
It is possible to argue the economics both ways, but the politics all point in one direction.
The US Congress lacks the stomach for another stimulus package.
It has already faced intense criticism for its failure to get the country’s fiscal house in order.
The slowness with which the first stimulus has been rolled out, and the fact that it will take even more time for its full effects to be felt, provides more fodder for the chattering classes.
Disappointment over the effects of the TARP has already destroyed popular – and Congressional – support for more public money to recapitalize the banks.
So, even those who find the economic logic of arguments for fiscal activism compelling must acknowledge that the politics are not supportive.
A second stimulus simply is not in the cards.
If there is going to be more aggregate demand, it can come from only one place.
That place is not Europe or Japan, where debts are even higher than in the US – and the demographic preconditions for servicing them less favorable.
Rather, it is emerging markets like China.
The problem is that China has already done a lot to stimulate domestic demand, both through government spending and by directing its banks to lend.
As a result, its stock market is frothy, and it is experiencing an alarming property boom.
Through May, property prices were up 18% year on year.
Understandably, Chinese officials worry about bubble trouble.
The obvious way to square this circle is to spend more on imports.
China can purchase more industrial machinery, transport equipment, and steelmaking material, which are among its leading imports from the US.
Directing spending toward imports of capital equipment would avoid overheating China’s own markets, boost the economy’s productive capacity (and thus its ability to grow in the future), and support demand for US, European, and Japanese products just when such support is needed most.
This strategy is not without risks.
Allowing the renminbi to appreciate as a way of encouraging imports may also discourage exports, the traditional motor of Chinese growth.
And lowering administrative barriers to imports might redirect more spending toward foreign goods than the authorities intend.
But these are risks worth taking if China is serious about assuming a global leadership role.
The question is what China will get in return.
And the answer brings us back, full circle, to where we started, namely to US fiscal policy.
China is worried that its more than $1 trillion investment in US Treasury securities will not hold its value.
It wants reassurance that the US will stand behind its debts. It therefore wants to see a credible program for balancing the US budget once the recession ends.
And, tough talk notwithstanding, the Obama administration has yet to offer a credible roadmap for fiscal consolidation.
Doing so would reassure American taxpayers worried about current deficits. Just as importantly, it would reassure Chinese policymakers.
We live in a multipolar world where neither the US nor China is large enough to exercise global economic leadership on its own.
For China, leadership means assuming additional risks.
But for this to be tolerable, the US needs to relieve China of existing risks.
Only by working together can the two countries lead the world economy out of its current doldrums.
A Long March with China
BEIJING – US Vice President Joe Biden’s recent four-day visit to China ended on a high note.
He assured Chinese leaders that the United States is committed to honoring all its debts, despite its recent credit downgrade; he talked enthusiastically about US-China interdependence; and he showcased his granddaughter, who has studied Chinese for several years, as a future bridge between the two countries.
But, behind all the smiles and banquet toasts, serious issues and perception gaps continue to divide the world’s two great powers.
For starters, there is always an attitude problem.
To those who view China’s rise in a negative light, the country is simply becoming ever more arrogant.
It is getting tough in its territorial disputes with Japan in the East China Sea; it is becoming assertive in the South China Sea with its neighbors, also over disputed islands; it put its own stealth fighter on display during the US defense secretary’s visit to China; it is sending its first aircraft carrier out to sea for trials, indicating the possibility of establishing naval bases in the Indian Ocean.
Even a brawl between the Chinese and a visiting American basketball team is viewed as evidence of China’s aggressive behavior.
Many Chinese, on the other hand, tend to think that the US is suffering from severe case of conceited superpower syndrome.
As these Chinese see it, the US has a rather dysfunctional government, but nevertheless insists that its political and economic system is the best in the world, and that everyone should emulate it.
It is heavily in debt, but cannot stop spending and borrowing.
It is no longer competitive in manufacturing, but blames others for its huge trade deficit.
And the world’s only military superpower is often seen within China as trigger-happy when intervening in other countries’ internal affairs.
Then, there is the issue of trust.
China’s critics argue that its claims to a peaceful rise are not credible, given the country’s non-democratic, one-party system.
Coupled with this is a zero-sum view of the world, in which any Chinese gain in the share of the global economy, or any increased presence in many parts of the world, must be at the expense of the US or other powers.
Any Chinese military move is portrayed as an expansionary and aggressive act that must be contained.
Any attempts at engagement by Western politicians, such as Biden’s recent trip, are automatically met with doubt and criticism for cozying up to dictators.
Likewise, for those Chinese who are suspicious of US intentions, conspiracy is always in play.
They see a declining superpower using economic, military, and diplomatic means in an unrelenting effort to prevent China’s rise.
Talk of human rights and democracy is nothing but a smoke screen for demonizing China.
Arms sales to Taiwan, Tibetan activism, and “color revolutions” of various kinds are all sponsored by the US and other Western powers, and are aimed at weakening China.
Despite decades of close interaction, with millions of Americans, Europeans, and Japanese visiting China every year and similar numbers of Chinese now visiting the US and other advanced countries, both sides see each other through a glass darkly.
Increased interdependence has not led to better understandings on even some of the most basic issues.
China’s Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs Fu Ying expressed her country’s anxiety about this state of affairs in a recent interview. “The most important thing is the question of whether China and the US are enemies.
Are we going to be in a war?
Are we preparing for a war against each other?”
Biden, while reaffirming that the US does not view China as an enemy, implied that Fu’s worries are not fanciful, saying that the worst scenario is a misunderstanding that leads to an unintended conflict.
So the key issue for China, its neighbors, the US, and rest of the world is not how many aircraft carriers, missiles, submarines, and next-generation fighters China may produce and deploy in the coming years and decades. Rather, it is how China intends to use its newly acquired economic and military strength in pursuing its domestic and foreign-policy goals – and how the world’s leading powers can ensure that they do not end up harming each other by accident or misunderstanding.
To meet these challenges successfully, there is no viable alternative to a positive, continuous, and frank engagement between China and the rest of the world.
The Chinese economy will continue to grow; the Chinese military will continue to modernize; and the Chinese people will remain united in their Great Power aspirations.
A Cold War-style confrontation and containment policy from the West will be met with strong resistance from the Chinese, whose global leverage, particularly in finance, cannot be ignored.
Only a patient, creative, and consistent engagement strategy will mitigate fears on both sides.
China’s rise is a fact; the enduring peacefulness of that rise must be a priority for China, its neighbors, the West, and, most importantly, the US.
Alpine Schadenfreude
Not surprisingly, the atmosphere at this year’s World Economic Forum was grim.
Those who think that globalization, technology, and the market economy will solve the world’s problems seemed subdued.
Most chastened of all were the bankers.
Against the backdrop of the sub-prime crisis, the disasters at many financial institutions, and the weakening of the stock market, these “masters of the universe” seemed less omniscient than they did a short while ago.
And it was not just the bankers who were in the Davos doghouse this year, but also their regulators – the central bankers.
Anyone who goes to international conferences is used to hearing Americans lecture everyone else about transparency.
There was still some of that at Davos.
I heard the usual suspects – including a former treasury secretary who had been particularly vociferous in such admonishments during the East Asia crisis – bang on about the need for transparency at sovereign wealth funds (though not at American or European hedge funds).
But this time, developing countries could not resist commenting on the hypocrisy of it all.  There was even a touch of schadenfreude in the air about the problems the United States is having right now – though it was moderated, of course, by worries about the downturn’s impact on their own economies.
Had America really told others to bring in American banks to teach them about how to run their business?
Had America really boasted about its superior risk management systems, going so far as to develop a new regulatory system (called Basle II)?
Basle II is dead – at least until memories of the current disaster fade.
Bankers – and the rating agencies – believed in financial alchemy.
They thought that financial innovations could somehow turn bad mortgages into good securities, meriting AAA ratings.
But one lesson of modern finance theory is that, in well functioning financial markets, repackaging risks should not make much difference.
If we know the price of cream and the price of skim milk, we can figure out the price of milk with 1% cream, 2% cream, or 4% cream.
There might be some money in repackaging, but not the billions that banks made by slicing and dicing sub-prime mortgages into packages whose value was much greater than their contents.
It seemed too good to be true – and it was.
Worse, banks failed to understand the first principle of risk management: diversification only works when risks are not correlated, and macro-shocks (such as those that affect housing prices or borrowers’ ability to repay) affect the probability of default for all mortgages. 
I argued at Davos that central bankers also got it wrong by misjudging the threat of a downturn and failing to provide sufficient regulation.
They waited too long to take action.
Because it normally takes a year or more for the full effects of monetary policy to be felt, central banks need to act preemptively, not reactively.
Worse, the US Federal Reserve and its previous chairman, Alan Greenspan, may have helped create the problem, encouraging households to take on risky variable-rate mortgages by reassuring those who worried about a housing bubble that there was at most a little “froth” in the market.
Normally, a Davos audience would rally to the support of the central bankers.
This time, a vote at the end of the session supported my view by a margin of three to one. 
Even the plea of one of central banker that “no one could have predicted the problems” moved few in the audience – perhaps because several people sitting there had, like me, explicitly warned about the impending problem in previous years.
The only thing we got wrong was how bad banks’ lending practices were, how non-transparent banks really were, and how inadequate their risk management systems were.
It was interesting to see the different cultural attitudes to the crisis on display.
In Japan, the CEO of a major bank would have apologized to his employees and his country, and would have refused his pension and bonus so that those who suffered as a result of corporate failures could share the money.
He would have resigned.
In America, the only questions are whether a board will force a CEO to leave and, if so, how big his severance package will be.
When I asked one CEO whether there was any discussion of returning their bonuses, the response was not just no, but an aggressive defense of the bonus system. 
This is the third US crisis in the past 20 years, after the Savings &amp; Loan crisis of 1989 and the Enron/WorldCom crisis in 2002.
Deregulation has not worked.
Unfettered markets may produce big bonuses for CEO’s, but they do not lead, as if by an invisible hand, to societal well-being.
Until we achieve a better balance between markets and government, the world will continue to pay a high price.
Effective Altruism
PRINCETON – Can humans really be motivated by altruism?
My new book, The Most Good You Can Do, discusses the emerging new movement called Effective Altruism, and, in doing interviews about the book, I am surprised by how often that question is asked.
Why should we doubt that some people act altruistically, at least some of the time?
In evolutionary terms, we can easily understand altruism toward kin and others who can reciprocate our help.
It seems plausible that once our ability to reason and reflect has developed sufficiently enough to enable us to understand that strangers can suffer and enjoy life just as we can, then at least some of us would act altruistically toward strangers, too.
The polling organization Gallup asked people in 135 countries whether they had, in the last month, donated money to a charity, volunteered their time to an organization, or helped a stranger.
Gallup’s results, which form the basis of the World Giving Index 2014, indicate that approximately 2.3 billion people, a third of the world’s population, perform at least one altruistic act per month.
More objective evidence of altruism buttresses these findings.
In many countries, the supply of blood for medical purposes relies on voluntary, anonymous donations.
Worldwide, more than 11 million people have put their names on donor registries for bone marrow, signifying their willingness to donate their marrow to a stranger.
A small but growing number of people have gone further still, donating a kidney to a stranger.
There were 177 altruistic donations by living donors in the United States in 2013 and 118 in the United Kingdom in the year to April 2014.
Then there are those who donate to charity.
In the US alone, individuals gave $240 billion to charity in 2013.
Foundations and corporations topped this up to a total of $335 billion, or about 2% of gross national income.
The US is often said to be more charitable than other countries; but, in terms of the proportion of the population donating money, Myanmar, Malta, Ireland, the UK, Canada, the Netherlands, and Iceland all do better.
In Myanmar, 91% of the people surveyed had given money in the past month (the corresponding figure for the US is 68%), indicating the strong hold of the Theravada Buddhist tradition of donating to support monks and nuns.
Myanmar also had the highest percentage of people volunteering time (51%).
The US did, however, have the highest ranking for “helping a stranger.”
That, together with a high ranking for volunteering time, led it to tie with Myanmar as the most generous nation in the world.
Admittedly, not all of this giving is altruistic.
New York’s Lincoln Center announced last month that the billionaire entertainment industry mogul David Geffen has donated $100 million toward the renovation of its concert facility, Avery Fisher Hall, on the condition that it is renamed David Geffen Hall.
That gift seems motivated more by a desire for fame than a desire to do good.
After all, as Geffen presumably knew, the family of Avery Fisher had to be compensated with a payment of $15 million in order to agree to the renaming.
In any case, in a world with a billion people living in extreme poverty, it would not be difficult for an altruist to appreciate that there are many ways of doing more good than renovating a concert hall for well-off music lovers.
At the opposite end of the giving spectrum, psychologists who study giving behavior have suggested that people who give small sums of money to a large number of charities may be motivated less by the desire to help others than by the warm glow they get from making a donation.
By contrast, other donors give larger sums, usually to only a handful of charities chosen on the basis of some knowledge about what the charity is doing.
They want to have a positive impact on the world.
Their gifts may also make their lives better, but this is not what motivates them.
The Effective Altruism movement consists of people who give in the latter way, combining the head and the heart.
Their aim is to do the most good they can with the resources that they are willing to set aside for that purpose.
Those resources may include a tenth, a quarter, or even half of their income.
Their altruism may include their time and talents, and influence their choice of career.
To achieve their aims, they use reason and evidence to ensure that whatever resources they devote to doing good will be as effective as possible.
Several studies show that people who are generous are typically happier and more satisfied with their lives than those who do not give.
And other studies show that giving leads to activity in the reward centers of the brain (the areas of the brain that are also stimulated by tasty food and sex).
But this does not mean that these donors are not altruistic.
Their direct motive is to help others, and their giving makes them happier only as a consequence of the fact that it does help others.
If we had more such people, we would have more giving, and that is what we want.
To define “altruism” so narrowly that the term can be applied only when giving is contrary to a person’s overall interest would miss the point that the best situation to bring about is one in which promoting the interests of others harmonizes with promoting one’s own.
Testing Times for Alzheimer’s
LONDON – Alzheimer’s disease is by far the most common cause of dementia and one of the world’s most feared disorders.
By 2050, there will be 135 million Alzheimer’s sufferers worldwide, a threefold increase from today, with three-quarters of cases occurring in low- and middle-income countries.
Predicting the onset of Alzheimer’s, let alone preventing or curing it, remains an immense challenge.
Alzheimer’s disease was identified more than a century ago from autopsy results that showed characteristic brain lesions called “amyloid plaques.”
The disease is more difficult to diagnose in the living.
Doctors rely on observation of memory loss and other thinking deficits (such as reasoning or language comprehension) – signs that plaques are already present in the brain.
But any cure&nbsp;would have to be administered before the plaques form, and years before symptoms of dementia appear.
Alzheimer’s might be more predictable if scientists had the time and resources to conduct far-reaching longitudinal studies over many years.
Such studies ideally would involve blood, imaging, memory, and medical tests, as well as detailed lifestyle questionnaires filled out by thousands of young and middle-aged people.
Study participants would be followed over decades to see who developed the disease, and which tests proved positive before Alzheimer’s was diagnosed.
In fact, two famous longitudinal studies – the Framingham Heart Study in Massachusetts and the Kungsholmen Project in Sweden – have led to important progress in predicting the disease.
These studies found that short-term memory may be impaired for up to ten years before an Alzheimer’s diagnosis.
Major advances have since been made in brain imaging, biochemical analysis, and, perhaps most important, genetic testing.
Indeed, the risk of Alzheimer’s doubles if a parent or sibling has it, probably due in large part to the presence of the ApoE gene.
The risk triples for Europeans who inherit a particular type of ApoE, called ε4; inheriting two copies of ε4 increases the risk roughly tenfold.
But genetic testing alone is unlikely to be an accurate predictor, because around half of Alzheimer’s sufferers do not carry ε4, and probably half of those with ε4 do not develop the disease.
Moreover, though international studies of more than 70,000 people have found over 20 other genes linked to Alzheimer’s, their impact is minimal.
That said, a&nbsp;groundbreaking 2012 study&nbsp;published in the&nbsp;New England Journal of Medicine, analyzed a rare genetic mutation found in just 500 families around the world, which would lead to Alzheimer’s before the age of 50.
The study showed which tests were able to predict the outcome most accurately decades ahead of onset.
The research found that amyloid-beta – the substance that clumps together and forms amyloid plaques – becomes depleted in the cerebrospinal fluid around the brain as long as 25 years before the onset of dementia.
Fifteen years prior to onset, a positron emission tomography (PET) scan showed amyloid-beta being deposited in plaques in the brain itself.
And detailed short-term memory tests were abnormal ten years before onset, as suggested in the Framingham and Kungsholmen studies.
These tests are now becoming part of clinical practice, and are available commercially.
Memory and other cognitive tests can reveal whether one has minor problems with some aspects of thinking – a condition known as “mild cognitive impairment” that precedes Alzheimer’s disease.
The problem is that the tests must be administered by a trained neuropsychologist and take more than an hour to complete; moreover, many people with mild cognitive impairment do not progress to dementia.
Sampling cerebrospinal fluid via a lumbar puncture (or “spinal tap”) can predict which people with mild cognitive impairment will progress to dementia with over 80% accuracy, but this still means a misdiagnosis for one in five patients.
PET scans are slightly less accurate, while routine MRI brain scans can reveal with perhaps only 70% accuracy subtle abnormalities in people with mild cognitive impairment.
Scientists are therefore still searching for an accurate predictive test that is cheaper, quicker, and less invasive than PET scans or lumbar punctures.
This year, two small studies of blood tests seemed to predict Alzheimer’s 1-3 years before it occurred, but the tests are complicated and require the measurement of ten or more substances.
Whichever predictive methods doctors use over the next few years will probably enable them to inform those patients with mild cognitive impairment about their chances of developing Alzheimer’s in the short term.
The trickier question is whether we will be able to predict Alzheimer’s disease accurately in those with normal cognition and memory, or to predict it more than five years in advance.
Even if accurate early prediction of Alzheimer’s eventually is achieved, there are currently no drugs available to prevent or cure it before the amyloid plaques start destroying the mind.
That will be our next great challenge.
A Mania for Diagnosing Bipolar Disorder
PROVIDENCE, RI – During the past few years, many experts have suggested that bipolar disorder – a serious illness resulting in significant psychosocial morbidity and excess mortality – is under-recognized, particularly in patients with major depression.
Even patients who are diagnosed with bipolar disorder often wait more than 10 years after initially seeking treatment for the correct diagnosis to be made.
The clinical implications of the failure to recognize bipolar disorder in depressed patients include the under-prescription of mood-stabilizing medications, and an increased risk of rapid “cycling” – swings between manic and depressive phases.
But, perhaps as a consequence of concerted efforts to improve the recognition of bipolar disorder, during the past few years we have observed the emergence of an opposite phenomenon – over-diagnosis.
In my own practice, my colleagues and I have encountered patients who reported that they were previously diagnosed with bipolar disorder, despite lacking a history of manic or hypomanic episodes.
To be sure, we have also seen patients seeking treatment for depression who really did have bipolar disorder.
However, there seemed to be more over-diagnosis than under-diagnosis.
We therefore conducted a study to examine empirically how often bipolar disorder might be over- and under-diagnosed.
Seven hundred psychiatric outpatients were interviewed with the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV (SCID) and completed a self-administered questionnaire that asked whether they had been previously diagnosed by a health-care professional with bipolar or manic-depressive disorder.
Family history information was obtained from the patient regarding their immediate relatives.
Slightly more than 20% (145 patients) in our sample reported that they had been previously diagnosed as having bipolar disorder, significantly higher than the 12.9% rate based on the SCID.
Less than half of those who reported that they had been previously diagnosed with bipolar disorder were diagnosed with bipolar disorder based on the SCID.
Patients with SCID-diagnosed bipolar disorder had a significantly higher risk of bipolar disorder in their immediate family members than patients who self-reported a previous diagnosis of bipolar disorder that was not confirmed by the SCID.
Patients who self-reported a previous diagnosis of bipolar disorder that was not confirmed by the SCID did not have a significantly higher risk for bipolar disorder than the patients who were negative for bipolar disorder by self-report and the SCID.
Our findings, validated by family history, thus suggest that bipolar disorder was over-diagnosed.
Any study seeking to determine whether a psychiatric disorder is over-diagnosed will find that some patients with the condition do not have it upon re-interview.
Such is the nature of the imperfect reliability of psychiatric diagnosis.
The question, then, is not whether
Over-diagnosis of bipolar disorder has costs.
Mood stabilizers are the treatment of choice, and, depending on the medication, they can produce potentially significant health complications affecting renal, endocrine, hepatic, immunologic, or metabolic function.
Thus, over-diagnosing bipolar disorder can unnecessarily expose patients to serious side-effects of medication.
The impact of marketing efforts by pharmaceutical companies and publicity probably plays a role in the emerging tendency to over-diagnose bipolar disorder.
Direct-to-consumer advertisements that refer individuals to screening questionnaires can result in patients suggesting to their doctors that they have bipolar disorder.
We have seen evidence of this in our practice.
This does not necessarily reflect a problem with the performance of a screening questionnaire, but rather how these scales are used.
Screening questionnaires maximize sensitivity, at a cost of false positives, because it is presumed that they are followed by expert clinical evaluation.
But insufficient diagnostic rigor can result in over-diagnosis.
Clinicians are inclined to diagnose disorders that they feel more comfortable treating.
We believe that the increased availability of medications that have been approved for the treatment of bipolar disorder might be influencing clinicians who are unsure whether or not a patient has bipolar disorder or borderline personality disorder to err on the side of diagnosing the disorder that is responsive to medication.
This bias is reinforced by the marketing message of pharmaceutical companies to physicians, which has emphasized research on delayed diagnosis and under-recognition of bipolar disorder, possibly sensitizing clinicians accordingly.
The campaign against under-recognition has probably resulted in some anxious, agitated, and/or irritable depressed patients who complain of insomnia and “racing thoughts” being misdiagnosed with bipolar disorder.
The results of our study are consistent with prior studies suggesting possible problems with the diagnosis of bipolar disorder.
With the greater number of medications approved for the treatment of bipolar disorder, along with multiple reports cautioning clinicians against under-diagnosis, it appears that over-diagnosis has become a greater problem than under-diagnosis.
Both can have negative consequences.
While there is still some uncertainty as to the best assessment approach, we recommend that clinicians use a standardized, validated method.
When Tweets Trump Diplomacy
NEW DELHI – Diplomacy often witnesses unusual spats.
There was the Pig and Potato War of 1859, the Affair of the Dancing Lamas in 1924, and the Bogotá Bracelet incident of 1970, to name just a few.
But few were more surprising than the just-concluded Episode of the Offensive Doormats.
The e-commerce giant Amazon – which has lately been cultivating India as the next frontier of its global expansion, reflected in plans to invest $5 billion in the country – was recently startled by a series of intemperate tweets from Indian External Affairs Minister Sushma Swaraj.
In just a few 140-character messages, Swaraj denounced the company and threatened to cancel its employees’ visas and refuse visas to its executives in the future.
What provoked Swaraj’s outburst was a Twitter user’s complaint to her that the Amazon Canada website offered for sale doormats depicting the Indian flag.
The notion that dirty shoes would be wiped on a representation of the Indian flag had outraged the tweeter, Atul Bhobe, who contacted – and found an advocate in – Swaraj.
Amazon was swift to respond.
After clarifying that the offending doormats were technically being offered by a third-party supplier, not Amazon itself, the company removed them from the Amazon Canada website and “implemented measures to ensure that these products could not be sold on any of our other marketplaces or websites.”
Amazon’s India country manager offered an apology to Swaraj for “hurting Indian sensibilities” and, recalling the company’s $5 billion investment commitment, reiterated Amazon’s dedication to the country.
Less than 24 hours after the doormat crisis erupted, the matter was defused.
But the episode raises a number of broader issues that won’t disappear so quickly.
The first issue is Swaraj’s use of Twitter.
Swaraj stands out among her peers in India for her trigger-happy approach to tweeting (though her use of the platform is still dwarfed by that of US President-elect Donald Trump, who often uses Twitter as a bully pulpit).
I certainly do not oppose the use of Twitter by public officials.
On the contrary, I view the growing comfort of government ministers with social media as a matter for celebration.
It is a welcome change from my time as Minister of State for External Affairs, under the previous government, when official computers were barred from accessing social media, and the tweets I issued from my own devices would often become the stuff of needless controversy.
But Swaraj may well be going too far, responding to every individual case of a lost passport or delayed visa tweeted to her – an approach that has earned her the not-entirely-flattering sobriquet of “India’s Minister for Consular Affairs.”
That a foreign minister would respond to a Twitter complaint on such trivial matters, some would argue, seems to indicate that she lacks more important things to do.
(The suggestion undoubtedly reflects the fact that, under Prime Minister Narendra Modi, substantive foreign policy is conducted largely by him and his office, rather than by the External Affairs Ministry that Swaraj leads.)
But the problem extends beyond Swaraj’s communication with ordinary citizens.
In the recent doormat drama, she also used Twitter to issue instructions to her own diplomats, tweeting at the Indian High Commission in Canada to deal with the “unacceptable” matter, by taking it up with Amazon “at the highest level.”
Such a move is unprecedented, and not particularly welcome.
Social media is no substitute for a diplomatic cable.
Also less than diplomatic was the language Swaraj used in her warning to the company.
“Amazon must tender unconditional apology,” she tweeted.
“They must withdraw all products insulting our national flag immediately.
If this is not done forthwith, we will not grant Indian Visa to any Amazon official. We will also rescind the Visas issued earlier.”
A profession famed for summoning ambassadors for a discreet dressing-down has been reduced to upbraiding companies on Twitter.
The final issue that the doormat incident brought to the fore is Indians’ tendency to take offense at the slightest affront – a tendency that is now being elevated, by the thumbs of a top minister, to the level of official policy.
Of course, disrespect for the national flag is derided in most countries, and has been a criminal offense in India since 1971, with the adoption of the Prevention of Insults to National Honor Act, which threatens whoever “mutilates, defaces, disfigures, destroys, tramples upon, or otherwise shows disrespect to” the Indian flag with imprisonment.
But Indians have a particularly low threshold for what qualifies as disrespect.
Whereas in other democracies, flags are used freely and harmlessly on t-shirts, boots, bikinis, and even underwear, in India, the majesty of the flag can, it seems, be tarnished by any tawdry manufacturer of gewgaws.
And it’s not just the flag.
Last year, Amazon enraged many Indians by offering doormats with pictures of Indian gods and goddesses, prompting the furious hashtag #BoycottAmazon.
Two years earlier, the company’s website had caused similar outrage by selling women’s leggings with images of Hindu gods.
So Amazon is no stranger to the anger of offended Indians.
But the company’s swift capitulation in the latest incident – which will surely not be the last – shows that the value of a gigantic market like India far outweighs that of any single product.
China has already proved that it can dictate terms to multinationals that covet its vast market.
India, it seems, will follow suit.
But whoever has emerged as the winner of the doormat debacle – outraged Twitter users, perhaps – diplomacy has been the loser.
Ambivalent Arabia
A democratic tide seems to be sweeping across the Arab world.
Even the traditional Arab monarchies and Emirates are changing in its wake.
Kuwait now allows women to vote, Qatar has embraced an ambitious reform program, Bahrain has shown great tolerance of mass demonstrations, and the U.A.E. is allowing something like a free press.
But Saudi Arabia continues to be deeply wary of any sort of change, and thus remains a huge and seemingly immovable obstacle to region-wide reform.
Although the Saudi ruling family, the al-Saud, is under enormous pressure to follow the example of its neighbors, internal resistance to doing so remains very strong.
So the al-Saud have become Janus-faced: looking in one direction, the royal family encourages democratic reformers to speak out; looking in the opposite direction, it jails them when they do.
On May 15, in a closed trial without legal representation for the accused, three leading reformers – Ali Al Dumaini, a well-known journalist and poet, and university professors Abdullah Al Hamid and Matruk al Falih – were condemned and sentenced to prison terms ranging from six to nine years.
Their crime was to call for a constitutional monarchy.
The official verdict states that they threatened national unity, challenged those in authority, and incited public opinion against the state while using “foreign,” that is, Western, terminology.
Not long after the September 2001 terrorist attacks in the United States, these liberal reformers joined with 160 other professionals to write and sign a petition to Crown Prince Abdullah asking for reforms.
The petition called for the monarchy to work within constitutionally prescribed limits, and for an independent judiciary.
The reformers believe that such reforms are the only way for Saudi Arabia to survive the threat of violence, instability, and national fragmentation that is looming on its horizon.
Only a constitution, they argue, can restore much needed legitimacy to a political system that is widely perceived as deeply corrupt and inept.
Crown Prince Abdullah, Saudi Arabia’s de facto ruler in place of his incapacitated half-brother King Fahd, is keen to be seen as a champion of reform.
He received these proposals with a warm welcome in January 2003.
But his half-brother and more powerful rival, Prince Naif, the Minister of Interior, ordered the arrests, trial, and imprisonment of 13 reformers in March 2004.
Crown Prince Abdullah offered not a peep of opposition, leaving the reform agenda that he initiated in a political netherworld.
In order to maintain absolutist power and to minimize public anger, the Saudi princes, led by Prince Naif, asked the reformers to sign an agreement that they would never again ask for reform.
Prince Naif bans the very word “reform” from public discourse, because it suggests that there is something wrong with the system; his preferred term is “development.”
Of the thirteen reformers who were arrested, ten submitted to this demand, but the other three refused and have paid the price.
They remained in jail in Riyadh without legal representation until the final verdict.
Those who submitted had their passports withdrawn, lost their jobs, and were forbidden to speak to the press.
Under regional and international pressure, the Saudi ruling family has constructed a Potemkin village of reform while retaining absolute control over all political developments.
Earlier this year, they staged partial, and tightly regulated municipal elections, with no independent opinion permitted to influence when and how the ballots were held.
These entire female population was excluded, and only one-quarter of the male population was eligible to vote.
Inevitably, Wahhabi Islamists did best.
The al-Saud face two threats: one from violent Islamists, and the other from liberal reformers.
There is every indication that they fear the reformers far more.
Perhaps the princes believe that it is easier to kill “terrorist” criminals than to crush demands for social justice.
Indeed, killing violent Islamists and al-Qaeda affiliates is applauded by the international community, especially the United States, as success in the “war on terrorism.”
But as they hunt down and kill violent domestic extremists, they are quietly tightening the noose around all those who want moderate reform.
This repression of liberal reformers passes unnoticed in the wider world, with America’s silence particularly noticeable.
This silence is vital to the princes, for what the al-Saud care about most is US support.
As things stand in Saudi Arabia, the US administration has no credible ally for change outside of the existing regime.
So, unlike in Ukraine, Georgia, Kyrgizstan, and Lebanon, it does nothing to encourage popular opposition.
As long as the Saudi regime meets America’s oil needs and fights Islamist radicals, it will continue to receive US support and silence – and hence its tacit consent.
But turning a blind eye is shortsighted, for America and for the Saudis.
Those who make peaceful revolutions impossible make violent revolutions inevitable.
The liberal reformers who have been jailed could have paved the way for a peaceful transition to a reformed Saudi Arabia.
By jailing them, the regime has made it clear that violence is the only avenue open to those seeking change.
Algeria’s Dying Dictatorship
ALGIERS – Despite his failing health, Algerian President Abdelaziz Bouteflika won a fourth term last month, with 81% of the vote – or so the regime claimed.
In fact, far from signaling growing political stability, the 77-year-old incumbent’s sham victory underscores just how few options Algerians have to effect change from within the system.
Under Bouteflika’s leadership, Algeria’s government has failed to address the country’s most pressing economic and social challenges.
And there is no reason to expect this to change.
Since suffering a stroke last year, Bouteflika has barely appeared in public, whether to campaign ahead of the vote or to acknowledge his victory after it.
As a result, the regime is finding it increasingly difficult to claim, as it has for the last 15 years, that Bouteflika’s leadership represents civilian control over the military.
So it has devised a new strategy, aimed at creating a sense of transition: the constitution will be revised to designate a vice president as the president’s legitimate successor.
Of course, the move’s true purpose will be to allow the army to rally around the next compliant “civilian leader.”
The regime will also propose a “national contract,” supposedly to initiate a dialogue with the opposition.
But, in the wake of Bouteflika’s bogus victory, the opposition can no longer accept a sham role in the regime’s reform plans.
In fact, the announcement that Bouteflika planned to run was enough to unite Islamists and leftists – even parties that had previously been co-opted by the regime – and spur them to stage a boycott of the vote.
When the election results were announced, they swiftly rejected the new government as illegitimate.
But, to gain credibility, the opposition parties will have to extend their criticism beyond Bouteflika to the system as a whole.
This has become crucial to their survival, as younger opponents are seeking new ways to bring about political change outside state-controlled politics.
One important development is the growing influence of non-partisan voices of dissent.
Non-violent movements have formed to protest not only Bouteflika’s continued leadership, but also the pervasive role of the army and intelligence services in civil society.
Such movements, like the much-publicized “Barakat” (“Enough”), have encouraged a shift among Algerians from resentful abstention to active boycott.
Underground unions – which mount demonstrations and strikes to protect workers’ rights, while refusing to cooperate with the regime’s official unions – have also criticized the election.
Moreover, young people have assumed a prominent role in opposition efforts, such as by disrupting Bouteflika’s campaign rallies.
Demonstrations by unemployed young people in southern Algeria, the center of the oil industry, drew a direct link between high unemployment and the military’s control of the country’s natural resources.
By organizing peaceful protests to demand accountability for public spending, these movements are raising issues that were not addressed during the election campaign.
More immediately, they are also challenging the government’s ban on street demonstrations – a vestige of the state of emergency that lasted from 1992 until 2011.
With the civil war of the 1990’s long over, security officials cannot explain why Algerians are being arrested for demanding jobs.
Of course, repression continues to intimidate many Algerians.
But it is becoming increasingly easy to rouse their sympathy for their fellow citizens through Twitter, YouTube, and Facebook.
By stimulating daily public debate about local human-rights violations, they spread the message of discontent more efficiently than traditional parties ever have.
By demanding better state services, rather than an “Arab Spring,” Algerians have walked a fine line, highlighting the regime’s inability to deliver security and economic prosperity, despite its efforts to stifle all debate.
Thus, even without explicitly talking about politics, ordinary Algerians are mobilizing in growing numbers against the government.
The majority of street protests have occurred in the most deprived and neglected areas, and the primary demands have been economic: better jobs, housing, health-care services, and infrastructure.
For some, the right to make a living through the informal market would be sufficient.
And demonstrators have gone to great – sometimes destructive – lengths to be heard, blocking roads, occupying factories and government buildings, and sabotaging water and electricity infrastructure.
More than 150 Algerians have even set themselves on fire since 2011, usually in front of public services buildings.
In this context, the failure of the government’s half-baked attempts to buy off protesters is unsurprising.
In 2011, the government, fearing contagion from Tunisia and Egypt, where long-established dictatorships had just been toppled, responded to the spread of protests by public-sector workers by raising their salaries by 100% – retroactively to 2008.
But the plan backfired; protests intensified, with other workers demonstrating for similar benefits and railing against the inflation that the move engendered.
To be sure, street protests have already had a profound impact on Algeria’s authoritarian politics, with official fears of massive uprisings affecting public budgets and political appointments.
But the decision to prolong Bouteflika’s presidency will not provide the kind of strong, transformational leadership that Algeria needs to materialize the regime’s stability promises. 
The Algerian authorities face a major challenge, because rejection of pluralist institutions makes it more difficult to find negotiating partners.
The more the regime tries to buy off the protesters, the more overweening it appears – and the angrier citizens become.
And the enraged younger generation, in particular, is not especially fearful of losing the limited benefits offered by the status quo.
America After the Election
NEW YORK – The ongoing presidential campaign in the United States stands out for its lack of civility and the vast differences between the candidates: the anti-establishment businessman Donald Trump on the Republican side and the polished politician Hillary Clinton representing the Democrats.
The contest has exposed deep fault lines within American society and damaged the country’s global reputation.
No surprise, then, that one of the few things Americans seem to agree on is that the campaign has gone on for too long.
But soon it will be over.
The question is: what comes next?
Polls suggest that Clinton, a former senator and secretary of state, will defeat the controversial Trump.
But polls are not to be confused with reality.
After all, going into June’s Brexit referendum, most observers believed that a victory for “Remain” was a sure thing.
More recently, Colombian voters rejected a peace accord that was widely expected to receive popular approval.
All of this is to say that, while a Clinton victory may be likely, it is no certainty.
The only poll that counts is the one on November 8.
Until then, all we can do is speculate.
Yet some predictions can be made with greater confidence.
There is little doubt that the US will emerge from this election a divided country with a divided government, regardless of who is president or which party has a majority in either chamber of Congress.
Neither Democrats nor Republicans will be able to realize their objectives without at least some support from the other.
But no one should think that the only divide in American politics is between Republicans and Democrats.
In fact, splits within the two major parties are just as deep, with large and highly motivated factions pulling each to their respective extremes – Democrats to the left and Republicans to the right.
This makes compromise on centrist positions all the more difficult to achieve.
The rapid resumption of presidential politics will undermine compromise further.
If Clinton wins, many Republicans will assume that it was only because of Trump’s flaws, and they will judge her likely to be a one-term president.
A country favoring change, they will conclude, is unlikely to keep a Democrat in the Oval Office for a fourth term.
Many Republicans (especially those who deny the legitimacy of a Clinton victory) will thus seek to frustrate her administration, lest she be able to run again in 2020 as a successful incumbent.
Similarly, if Trump manages to win, most Democrats (and even some Republicans) will – after recovering from their surprise and dismay – make it their highest priority to ensure that he does not have an opportunity for a second term.
Given how much of Trump’s agenda his fellow policymakers would likely find objectionable, governing would be very difficult during his administration.
In either scenario, it may still be possible to make progress in a few key areas.
The next US government might manage to enact legislation to fund the modernization of America’s aging infrastructure, a policy that both candidates and many in Congress favor.
It might also be able to cobble together a majority to reform the US tax code – in particular, lowering the high rate for corporations and raising taxes on the wealthy.
There could even be some reform of health care, President Barack Obama’s signature achievement, owing to serious implementation problems with the current system.
But other issues requiring cooperation between Congress and the president are unlikely to be addressed any time soon.
One is immigration reform, which is as controversial in the US as it is in Europe.
Another is trade: because the domestic political environment makes policymakers wary of supporting positions with dedicated opponents, both Trump and Clinton oppose the Trans-Pacific Partnership, even though its ratification would benefit America’s economy and strategic standing.
Meanwhile, America’s deficit and debt are certain to rise, as there seems to be little or no will to reduce entitlement spending.
The foreign-policy implications of the election are somewhat different, because, under the US Constitution, the president enjoys considerable latitude.
While only Congress can officially declare war or ratify treaties, presidents may use (or refuse to use) military force without explicit congressional approval.
They can also enter into international agreements other than treaties, appoint powerful White House staff, and change US foreign policy by executive action, as Obama recently did regarding Cuba.
Under Clinton, this discretion could translate into establishing one or more safe areas in Syria, providing more defensive arms to Ukraine, and taking a tougher line toward North Korea as it continues its nuclear and missile buildup.
It is more difficult to guess what Trump would do.
He is, after all, a political outsider, so no one knows how much of his campaign rhetoric would be translated into policy.
Still, one could anticipate a Trump administration distancing itself from some traditional allies in Europe and Asia and standing mostly aloof from the Middle East.
What exactly will happen to America after the presidential election remains an open question.
Though some outcomes can reasonably be expected, the only genuine certainty is that the 96% of the world’s population that does not vote in US elections will feel the effects no less than Americans will.
America and Europe
Deeply frustrated by the Bush administration’s policies, many people and governments in Europe hope for a fundamental change in American foreign policy after the upcoming presidential election.
But it would take a medium-sized political miracle for these hopes not to be disappointed, and such a miracle will not happen – whoever is elected.
The Bush administration made numerous foreign-policy blunders with far-reaching consequences.
But Bush neither invented American unilateralism nor triggered the transatlantic rift between the United States and Europe.
To be sure, Bush reinforced both trends, but their real causes lie in objective historical factors, namely America’s being the sole world power since 1989 and Europe’s self-inflicted weakness.