The first signs of this disruption are already visible.
Global unemployment has topped 212 million, according to the International Labor Organization, and another 42 million new jobs will need to be created each year if the world economy is to provide employment to the growing number of new entrants into the labor market.
Meanwhile, last year, 36% of employers worldwide reported facing difficulties in finding talent, the highest percentage in seven years.
Addressing this mismatch in supply and demand will require governments, business leaders, educational institutions, and individuals to overcome incentives to focus on the short term and begin to plan for a future in which change is the only constant.
All must rethink what it means to learn, the nature of work, and the roles and responsibilities of various stakeholders in ensuring that workers around the world are able to fulfill their potential.
Human-resource executives at some of the world’s largest companies anticipate profound disruptions from the increased adoption of mobile Internet and cloud technology, the use of big data, flexible work arrangements, 3-D printing, advanced materials, and new energy supplies, according to early results from a survey by the World Economic Forum.
Their view of the overall impact on employment levels in their industries was for the most part positive – provided that new workforce skills can be developed rapidly in their own sectors and in the labor market more broadly.
As technology increasingly takes over knowledge-based work, the cognitive skills that are central to today’s education systems will remain important; but behavioral and non-cognitive skills necessary for collaboration, innovation, and problem solving will become essential as well.
Today’s schools and universities, which are dominated by approaches to learning that are fundamentally individualistic and competitive in nature, must be redesigned to focus on learning to learn and acquiring the skills needed to collaborate with others.
Uniquely human skills, like being able to work in teams, manage relationships, and understand cultural sensitivities will become vital for businesses across all sectors and must become a core component of future generations’ education.
Moreover, with education increasingly becoming a lifelong pursuit, businesses must rethink their role in providing for a competitive workforce.
Some companies have already grasped this and are investing in their employees’ continuous learning, re-skilling, and up-skilling.
Yet most employers still expect to obtain pre-trained talent from schools, universities, and other companies.
Business will increasingly have to work with educators and governments to help education systems keep up with the needs of the labor market.
Given rapid change in the skill sets required for many occupations, business must redirect investment to on-the-job training and lifelong learning, particularly as millennials enter the workforce, seeking purpose and diversity of experience where their predecessors sought remuneration and stability.
Business cycles naturally entail peaks and troughs in employment, and socially responsible businesses should follow successful examples like Coca-Cola, Alcoa, Saudi Aramco, Africa Rainbow Minerals, and Google in working toward mitigating joblessness and enhancing people’s abilities to earn a livelihood.
Governments, too, have a role to play in creating an environment in which their citizens can reach their potential.
Policymakers must use stronger metrics to assess human capital and reexamine investment in education, curriculum design, hiring and firing practices, women’s integration into the workforce, retirement policies, immigration legislation, and welfare policies. Regulatory support for entrepreneurship and small and medium-size enterprises remains one of the most underused means of unleashing creativity, enhancing growth, and generating employment.
Protecting workers and consumers is critical, but shielding specific industries from the impact of new business models will not hold off the next wave of transformation.
Rather than seeking to rein in disruptive businesses such as Airbnb and Uber, governments should introduce regulations that enable their sustained growth, while looking for ways to leverage their technologies and entrepreneurial approaches to boost social welfare.
Such policies include online education courses for the unemployed, digital workers’ insurance, virtual unionization, and tax policies geared for the sharing economy.
Unlocking the world’s latent talent, and thus its full capacity for growth, requires us to look beyond business cycles and quarterly reports.
The future is full of potential, but only if we are smart enough – and courageous enough – to grasp it.
Pakistan After the Peshawar Massacre
LAHORE – On December 16, the Taliban attacked an army school in Peshawar and killed 132 children and nine adults.
Eight terrorists dressed in military uniform penetrated the school’s well-guarded perimeter and opened fire on the students and school personnel.
Pakistani army commandos fought the intruders for several hours before killing the last attacker.
The assault on the military school was the single deadliest attack in the Taliban’s history.
The question now is whether it will turn out to be a turning point for Pakistan in its relations with the group.
Pakistan’s military is the country’s most respected and powerful institution.
By attacking the children of military families, the Taliban has dramatically increased the likelihood that Pakistan will move resolutely against it.
This may, of course, take some time.
A Pakistani court’s decision to grant bail to Zaki-ur-Rehman Lakhvi, who is accused of masterminding the 2008 terror attack that killed 166 people in Mumbai, underscores the challenge of getting every Pakistani government institution on board.
Pakistan has had a complicated relationship with the Taliban.
The country’s intelligence services had a hand in the group’s formation and in its rise to power in neighboring Afghanistan.
Many in the international community suspect that some in the Pakistani military and its spy networks continued to support the Taliban even after the country joined what then-US President George W. Bush called “the war on terror” in 2001.
More recently, however, three crucial developments have altered the environment in which Islamic extremists operate in Pakistan.
For starters, in November 2013, Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif appointed General Raheel Sharif as Chief of Staff of the Pakistani army.
Sharif views Islamic extremism as an existential threat that needs to be faced and defeated.
In a conversation I had with the general when he visited Washington, DC last month, he placed Islamic extremism well ahead of Pakistan’s poorly performing economy and immature political system on the list of problems that the country must confront.
Pakistan, he said, has the strength – and now the political will – to move decisively against terrorism.
In June, the Pakistani army launched Operation Zarb-e-Azb, an effort to eliminate terrorist hideouts and safe areas in North Waziristan, one of the tribal areas along the border region with Afghanistan.
For Sharif, the offensive is just the beginning of an all-out effort that will take time to produce the desired result.
“There will be difficulties on the way, and three of them have already occurred,” he told me.
Following this summer’s attacks on Karachi’s international airport, a naval base, and a crowd gathered on the India-Pakistan border to witness a popular display of force by each side’s guards, the Peshawar massacre makes it four.
The second key development is the election in Afghanistan of President Ashraf Ghani.
A former senior World Bank official, Ghani is interested not only in finding a durable solution to the problem of Islamic extremism, but also in setting his country on a path of sustainable economic development.
Moreover, Ghani has been persuaded that he needs Pakistan’s help on both fronts.
One of Pakistan’s first actions after the Peshawar school attack was to approach Ghani’s government and ensure that Afghan authorities blocked the escape routes of those involved in planning and executing it.
Indeed, Sharif visited Ghani in Kabul just a few hours after the attack, and, even as the battle was still underway, Pakistan’s military launched airstrikes on terrorist hideouts along the countries’ border, after intelligence officials concluded that the attack had been planned by a group operating in that area.
The third development is the sudden rise of the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria.
The group’s brutality is not so much an expression of religious belief as of tribal traditions that have, over the centuries, shaped a narrow, fanatical interpretation of Islam.
This is the source of much of the trouble in Afghanistan and Pakistan as well.
Bringing the tribal system and its mores into the mainstream and under the rule of law will be an important component in the effort to end the reign of terror in both countries.
The border where Operation Zarb-e-Azb is taking place highlights the importance of all three developments.
To this day, Afghanistan has not recognized the Durand Line – drawn by a British diplomat in 1893 and imposed on Afghanistan by India’s colonial rulers – as the formal border with Pakistan.
Afghanistan was the only state that opposed Pakistan’s entry into the United Nations when it gained independence from British rule in 1947, contributing to nearly 70 years of bilateral tensions.
The Durand Line bisects the territory of several Pashtun tribes, including the Mehsuds and the Haqqanis.
The former have supplied the leadership and foot soldiers to the Pakistani Taliban and the latter has fought, often with devastating effect, against the government in Kabul and American and NATO troops.
Both groups aim to replace their countries’ governments with an Islamic caliphate, based on what they interpret as the tenets of Islam.
Over the decades, the governments in Islamabad and Kabul have done little to remove the sanctuaries established by the two groups, whose members freely cross the poorly patrolled frontier.
Today, the two countries have a chance to mend ties and join forces to rein in Islamic extremists on both sides of the border.
This week’s slaughter of schoolchildren in Peshawar could be the tipping point.
Talking Sense About Global Warming
LONDON – In February, 14 distinguished climate scientists, economists, and policy experts came together to discuss how to tackle global warming.
This week, the London School of Economics and Oxford University are publishing their conclusions. They are worth considering.
The group was brought together by Gwyn Prins, a well-regarded expert in security policy and international relations who heads LSE’s Mackinder Programme for the Study of Long Wave Events.
Participants included climate scientist Mike Hulme of the University of East Anglia, climate policy expert Roger Pielke Jr. of the University of Colorado, and climate economist Christopher Green of McGill University.
The group’s report, “The Hartwell Paper,” outlines a new direction for climate policy after the collapse of last year’s attempts to negotiate a global climate deal.
The authors note that 18 years of the “Kyoto Protocol approach” to international climate policy have failed to produce any discernable real-world reductions in emissions of greenhouse gases.
What defines the Kyoto approach, of course, is a single-minded focus on cutting carbon-dioxide emissions.
“The Hartwell Paper” argues that the Kyoto approach, based as it is on past experience with relatively simple environmental problems like acid rain, was always doomed to failure.
The group points out that it makes no sense to compare climate change to other environmental challenges that we have faced and solved.
Climate change is much more complicated, involving open, complex, and imperfectly understood systems.
The Kyoto approach, of course, does none of these things.
Instead of single-mindedly trying to force people to do without carbon-emitting fuels, the Hartwell group suggests that we pursue a number of other worthy goals – for example, adaptation, reforestation, encouraging biodiversity, and improving air quality – each of which is important, and all of which may also reduce carbon emissions.
As the report notes, “the all-inclusive ‘Kyoto’ type of climate policy…needs to be broken up into separate issues again, each addressed on its merits and each in its own ways.”
At the same time, the group adds, we must recognize that we won’t make any real progress in cutting CO2 emissions until we can provide developing economies with affordable alternatives to the fossil fuels on which they currently depend.
“In short,” the report notes, “we need to ignite…an energy technology revolution.”
The Hartwell group argues that mass improvements are needed across many technologies, requiring the determined participation of governments.
They suggest partially funding the required research and development with a “slowly rising but initially low carbon tax” that would avoid undermining economic growth.
If any – or all – of this sounds familiar, it may be because I have been arguing much the same points for some time.
If my experience is any guide, the members of the Hartwell group should expect to be attacked as heretics for questioning the Kyoto orthodoxy.
But that is a small price to pay. As the saying goes, “insanity is doing the same thing over and over again and expecting a different result.”
With respect to global warming, it’s time we came to our senses.
Talking to the Taliban
WASHINGTON, DC – The Obama administration has affirmed that, while it will not participate directly, it supports the idea of peace negotiations between the Afghan Taliban and the Afghan government.
This nod from the White House followed the publication of reports that representatives of Afghan President Hamid Karzai had begun preliminary high-level talks regarding a possible coalition government and an agreed timetable for a NATO military withdrawal from Afghanistan.
The issue of negotiating a rapprochement between Afghanistan’s government and the Taliban is undoubtedly controversial.
The hope is that the Taliban leadership is not cohesive – that, whereas some of its members are probably committed to al-Qaeda’s absolutist ideology, others might accept a compromise settlement.
Karzai and Western leaders have repeatedly insisted that their reconciliation offer does not extend to al-Qaeda members, who are seen as alien foreign elements whose extremist convictions and past terrorist activities make them unacceptable negotiating partners.
Although al-Qaeda and the Taliban are united in their desire to expel Western troops from Afghanistan and reestablish a strict Islamic government in which they enjoy a monopoly of political and religious power, some Taliban leaders might accept more moderate goals.
More importantly, the Taliban in government would not necessarily support Islamic insurgencies in other countries or engage in distant terrorist attacks in Western countries, whereas al-Qaeda almost certainly would.
In recent years, Taliban representatives, aware of widespread eagerness to end the country’s decades of fighting, have insisted that their political ambitions are confined to Afghanistan.
Al-Qaeda leaders, by contrast, remain wedded to the goal of establishing radical Islamist regimes throughout the Muslim world and waging war against a long list of governments that they see as hostile to this objective.
The key uncertainty is whether an Afghan government that includes the Taliban would and could prevent al-Qaeda from reestablishing bases in regions under Taliban control.
Some argue that the Taliban, eager to return to power, would want to reconcile with the international community or at least prevent further Western military strikes.
But it is hard to imagine the Taliban using force to prevent their al-Qaeda allies from reestablishing a military presence in Afghanistan and exploiting that presence to organize additional terrorist attacks in other countries.
The Taliban and al-Qaeda fighters in Afghanistan are closely integrated at the operational level, with al-Qaeda members embedded in most important Taliban field operations.
Thus far, the Taliban leadership has publicly rejected Karzai’s reconciliation overtures.
For example, they greeted the inauguration of the June 2010 Peace Jirga with rocket attacks and suicide bombers.
Until now, Taliban representatives have demanded that all Western troops leave Afghanistan before they even consider engaging in direct talks with the Afghan government.
Karzai has sought to finesse the issue by arguing that a peace agreement that ended the insurgency would bring about the withdrawal of all foreign military forces.
Another obstacle is many Taliban leaders’ opposition to Afghanistan’s current constitution, which was adopted after the Taliban lost power.
It includes a number of liberal-democratic principles that many Taliban consider objectionable, if not blasphemous.
For example, the constitutional provision guaranteeing women equal rights is a major source of dispute.
Fearing the loss of guaranteed schooling for girls and other rights, many women’s rights groups, in Afghanistan and elsewhere, oppose negotiating with the Taliban.
The 2001 Bonn Agreement, the 2006 London Compact, and NATO’s April 2008 Bucharest Declaration also list a range of political, economic, and social objectives for Afghanistan that in many cases conflict with Taliban values.
Human rights groups suspect that even if the Afghan government and Taliban representatives profess to respect the constitution in any future peace agreement, they will not enforce some of its provisions in practice.
Even if Taliban leaders affirmed their willingness to talk, it would be hard to trust their intentions.
They could easily imitate the North Vietnamese strategy of professing to accept a compromise peace settlement in order to secure a foreign military withdrawal.
They then could resume offensive operations against the still weak Afghan Security Forces, which have yet to demonstrate much military effectiveness.
The Pakistani Taliban has employed a variant of this strategy in the past, ostentatiously negotiating truces with the military in order to allow their forces to rest and regroup before resuming their attacks shortly thereafter.
Unlike in Pakistan, moreover, the Afghan insurgents could resume fighting with the expectation that their main adversary, the international forces, would be considerably hobbled in their response, because Western publics would prevent their governments from sending their troops back to battle.
One reason why progress in the reconciliation processes has been slower than anticipated is that Western governments have not pressed Karzai to engage in genuine peace negotiations with Taliban leaders until coalition forces have had the opportunity to reverse the deteriorating situation on the battlefield.
US policymakers in particular wanted to take advantage of the ongoing surge in NATO combat forces in Afghanistan – which reached 150,000 in August, of which some two-thirds were American – to shake Taliban commanders’ conviction that they were winning the war.
It would be a mistake to disconnect the situation on the battlefield from the reconciliation process.
If NATO’s forces work sufficiently well, they might weaken the insurgency enough that the Afghan military could prove adequate to overcoming the remaining hard-liners, even after foreign troops reverse their current surge and scale down their presence during the next few years.
Taming Bigotry
MELBOURNE –At a time when the horrific events in Norway remind us how much murderous bigotry there still is in the world, perhaps a story from the other side of it can restore a little optimism that some positive, historically significant, changes in attitude really are occurring.
Last month in Australia, a major-league football player was fined, suspended, and – as a result of intensive negative coverage in the press – experienced profound public humiliation. What was unusual about the case, and the scale of the response, was his offense.
It was not a thuggish tackle, abuse of the umpire, or match-fixing in collusion with gamblers.
It was just a taunting remark heard only by his opponent. But his opponent was Nigerian-born, and the remark was a racist insult.
Just a few days earlier, in an incident that also drew significant media attention and condemnation, a spectator hurling racial abuse at a Sudanese-born player was escorted from the ground and banned from attending future matches unless he undertook racism-awareness education.
Not many years ago, in Australia – as in most of the rest of the world – these kinds of incidents would have passed utterly unremarked and without redress.
They were not serious – just part of the game, uttered in the heat of the gladiatorial contest on the field and the passionate partisan cheering in the stands.
A famous player of the 1990’s said at the time, “I’d make a racist comment every week if I thought it would help win the game.”
And spectators were no different: “Of course, I sing out ‘black bastard,’ but I don’t mean it.
It’s just a way of letting out your feelings.”
It seemed not to occur to anyone that the black players who were the subject of this abuse could possibly have rather different feelings about it.
And all of this was happening in a country that seemed, institutionally at least, to have put its racist past behind it.
The notorious “White Australia” immigration policy was abandoned in the late 1960’s, robust anti-discrimination legislation was enacted in the 1970’s, and innumerable efforts were made to remedy through land rights and social-justice programs the injustices experienced over many decades by indigenous Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
Casual racism – disparaging remarks made about other ethnic and national groups around the workplace, or over the bar or the family dinner table (as I can well remember growing up in the 1950’s) – had become much less prevalent in Australian private life, and certainly wholly absent from public life, by the 1990’s.
But sport was somehow different.
There, it was just letting off steam, no different from cheering or booing; or it was a “legitimate” tactic, no different from needling an opponent by challenging his manhood.
That mood and behavior began to change with the action of a star Aboriginal Australian Rules footballer, Nicky Winmar, one of the very few then playing in the top professional league.
In 1993, he had had enough.
After a man-of-the-match performance, throughout which he had been racially taunted, he turned to the opposing team’s cheer squad, raised his top with one hand and pointed dramatically to his chest with the other.
The declaration was unequivocal: “I’m black, and I’m proud of it.”
The demand for action generated by this incident, and by the highly publicized on-field abuse of another star Aboriginal player, Michael Long, two years later, led the Australian Football League to introduce in 1995 a “Racial and Religious Vilification” code of conduct.
The code combines a robust conciliation process with appropriate punitive measures and a strong educational program.
The code has been overwhelmingly successful in ridding Australian football of the on-field racism that made life miserable for most indigenous players, with the number of indigenous players at the elite level more than doubling over the last decade.
It has since been embraced by every football competition in Australia, and has proved an influential model for other sports in Australia and worldwide.
For example, Australia’s reforms are reflected in the anti-racism policies adopted in the last decade by the international football governing bodies, FIFA and UEFA (though in many cases the translation of policy into effective, enforceable action at the national level has left much to be desired).
For a long time, however, there has been doubt in Australia about how much real across-the-board commitment there was to the underlying message that racial vilification anywhere, anytime, by anyone, in any context, is simply unacceptable.
There was considerable sentimental attachment toward Aboriginal sportsmen and women, and indeed toward Australia’s indigenous people generally – apparent in the outpouring of emotion, remarked worldwide, that accompanied Prime Minister Kevin Rudd’s moving “Apology to the Stolen Generation” in 2008.
But would this sentiment extend to those of African descent and to members of other ethnicities who were gradually becoming a more visible part of Australian life?
The evidence of the last few weeks is that history, at last, really has moved on.
The revelation of the abuse of players of Sudanese and Nigerian origin generated a surge of genuine, visible, and tangible public repugnance – a very real sense that the perpetrators had shamed not only themselves, but also their country.
For an Australian of my generation, that is a very new, and hugely welcome, experience.
And there is every reason to hope, and believe, that our experience is gradually becoming universal.
Taming “Speculative Capitalism”
Nicolas Sarkozy, the leading contender in the French presidential election, recently lashed out against what he called “speculative capitalism,” and says he wants to “moralize the financial zone” created by the euro.
What does Sarkozy mean by “speculative capitalism?”
Something immoral, apparently, but what?
The term has rarely been used before, and seems to be redundant.
After all, capitalism is practically a synonym for speculation, isn’t it?
Sarkozy is expressing a wave of sentiment that is neither unique to his party nor to France.
At stake with his comments are emerging ideas and attitudes that will inform the twenty-first century economy.
So we should think hard about what “speculative capitalism” means.
Sarkozy has called free trade “a policy of naiveté,” and wants to take a number of steps that would stand in the way of economic globalization.
Although he does want to make the French labor market less rigid, he would block foreign takeover bids of French companies and protect Airbus workers from possible job losses.
Protecting France from speculative capitalism seems to mean interfering with free trade to protect local jobs.
To be sure, Sarkozy is right to note the enormous risks that workers and their communities face in this rapidly globalizing world.
But putting this problem center stage should not mean protecting existing jobs come what may.
Capitalists put their money where they think it can get the highest return; that is what we call speculation.
They buy companies, break them up, recombine them, fire some employees, and hire others.
To do this profitably, they cannot afford to let patriotism or sentiment interfere.
They do business in whatever country is most advantageous.
Rewarding successful ventures is the basic idea of capitalism – a dynamic process that Joseph Schumpeter called “creative destruction.”
Under capitalism, one is immoral if one reneges on a contract or breaks the law, but not if one speculates.
Planned economies were never able to flourish because uncertainty about the future is just too high, something that is best left to the speculators, with the potential of reward if they are right and the disciplining whip of the market if they are wrong.
Concerns about free trade similar to Sarkozy’s are gaining strength around the world.
In an article last year in the US journal Foreign Affairs , Alan Blinder, a former advisor to President Bill Clinton and Vice-Chair of the US Federal Reserve Board, argued that the process of globalization has the potential to cause massive job loss in the future.
Given that electronic communications technology has a powerful potential to replace employees with others who are thousands of miles away, we may now be seeing only the beginning of this process.
Blinder is absolutely right that the problem could get worse.
Deniers of the problem – such as economist Jagdish Baghwati – cannot prove that the worst will not happen.
We ought to prepare for the possibility of massive turmoil in our economies in coming years, even if we cannot prove that it will happen, just as we should take steps against global warming, even if some scientists doubt that it is a problem.
According to Blinder, governments should encourage education for jobs that are harder to outsource overseas.
He wants the government to subsidize “personally-delivered service” jobs, which cannot be delivered over the Internet, to encourage the expansion of such jobs instead of “impersonally-delivered services.”
Subsidies, of course, interfere with free trade.
But Blinder’s solution appears to be a creative new idea, and one may think of legitimate justifications for the government to interfere with free markets this way.
His idea certainly is more focused and theoretically sound than Sarkozy’s plans to protect existing jobs.
In fact, Blinder’s proposal is only one of many possible government policies aimed at dealing with the Internet-age turmoil in the market for jobs and livelihoods.
Capitalist institutions include risk-management schemes that provide insurance, hedging, and diversification.
Government can promote the democratization of such institutions so that they protect people from the very risks that they are worrying most about.
Such possibilities include livelihood insurance, home equity insurance, income-linked loans, and GDP-linked and home-price-linked securities.
Moreover, government can make our social insurance (a government institution that complements private insurance) more incentive-compatible and better at managing risks – and not just the risks of the extreme losers – by, say, launching inequality-indexation of the tax system.
And governments should improve our information infrastructure, so that financial contracts can better capture the outcomes of economic risks.
So Sarkozy shouldn’t be lashing out against “speculative capitalism.”
On the contrary, he should be asking how capitalism can be developed even further, with new institutions in finance and insurance to deal with the very important problem that his campaign has highlighted.
Taming the Tigers
BRUSSELS – Three years ago, Sri Lanka elected Mahinda Rajapaksa as president because he pledged to take the offensive against the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, the guerillas who have been fighting for 25 years to carve out an independent homeland for the country’s Tamil minority.
Many well-meaning people saw Rajapaksa’s promise as warmongering, and, even as Sri Lanka’s army has been pressing toward victory, urged him to negotiate with perhaps the world’s most fanatical terror organization (the Tamil Tigers, it should be recalled, virtually invented the cult of the modern suicide bomber.)
Fortunately, Rajapaksa listened more to his war-ravaged citizens than to outsiders, and today what seemed impossible – military victory over the Tigers, the oldest, largest, and wealthiest guerrilla army in South Asia – appears at hand.
Over the past few months, the Tigers have suffered a series of devastating blows.
Instead of commanding much of northern Sri Lanka, they are now confined to a shrinking pocket, and are reduced to mindless military stunts such as the recent bombing by light aircraft of the tax administration building in the capital, Colombo.
Thousands of Tamil Tiger fighters have deserted.  A rebel army has dwindled to a fanatical few.
But fighting the Tigers and seeking a peace deal have never been alternatives.
President Rajapaksa’s predecessors spent years engaged in fruitless talks and ceasefires, during which the guerrillas remained committed to their aim of dividing the country, and making demands for political and socio-economic changes that no democracy could accept, even as they carried on killing and kidnapping.
Weakening the Tigers militarily has thus always been a necessary condition for achieving a political settlement with Sri Lanka’s Tamils.
Now that the guerrillas are boxed in, what can Rajapaksa reasonably offer to them and ordinary Tamils?
The Tigers’ leaders have committed crimes against humanity, and some of them engage in criminal activities.
So they have little incentive to demobilize.
Some Sri Lankans say the best place for the Tiger leaders is jail.
True, but in politics the best justice can be the enemy of the general good.
Though the Tigers can no longer destroy Sri Lanka’s democracy, fighting to the last guerrilla is in nobody's interest.
Ending this conflict will require political adroitness as well as continued military firmness.
Achieving a lasting peace, though difficult, is possible.
On the most basic level, it will almost certainly require security guarantees for the Tigers’ leaders.
But it should not, as some say, include any offer of power-sharing with the guerillas (ordinary Tamils are another matter).
Sri Lanka is a democracy.
In exchange for laying down their arms and ending a pointless and destructive war, Tiger soldiers should be encouraged to take part in politics, but on exactly the same terms as any other Sri Lankan.
Nobody should underestimate the difficulty of rebuilding Sri Lanka’s war-ravaged north and reconciling the Tamils at a time of global recession.
In countries with strong ethnic, tribal, and religious divisions, unless it is made clear from the start that everything possible will be done to foster reconciliation, communal enmity will most likely simmer.
Any “victory” that the Tamils perceive as leading to subjugation of their rights and aspirations for equality with the majority Sinhalese will be short-lived.
So Rajapaksa must offer the Tamil people a political compromise, perhaps including some cabinet positions, as well as the promise of a revived economy.
Indeed, the Rajapaksa government, and the majority Sinhalese, must understand that the political and economic reforms needed to achieve a lasting peace are inextricably intertwined.
One cannot succeed without the other.
On the political front, a power vacuum must be avoided.
Although one of the main goals of reconstruction must be the creation of a democratic system that the Tamils regard as their own, establishing effective governance, and fast, in Sri Lanka’s north matters just as much.
Order must be restored rapidly, with zero tolerance of looting and other crimes.
Nevertheless, victory over the Tigers need not rule out some form of decentralization that guarantees the Tamils some political say, so long as a degree of local autonomy does not destroy Sri Lanka’s unity.
The alternative to such a political compromise may be a return to the tragic and bloody secessionist course that the Tigers sought for so long.
Indeed, no effort should be spared to get skeptical Tamil groups to participate in the forthcoming peacemaking.
Of course, it may take some time for the Tamils and their leaders to learn the mutual tolerance and self-discipline of democratic government.
Handing over any local power before those leaders are ready to use it would be an error, with potentially disastrous consequences.
In the Eastern Province, a good start has been made, with former terrorists now winning through the ballot box and not the bullet.   
Economic reform also must begin without delay.
Sri Lanka’s economy must open up –�not an easy thing to achieve at a time when liberal economic reforms appear to be in disrepute.
But such an opening is essential if the country’s Tamils are to have real hopes for their future within the country.
Sri Lanka’s Buddhist traditions and historic links with Burma, Thailand, Cambodia and Laos makes it easy for it to be a future member of ASEAN, which Sri Lanka should try to join as a means of anchoring its economy in the wider region.
Some of what needs to be done, including the sequencing of reconstruction measures, is now better understood – not least due to the different recent experiences in rebuilding Bosnia, Colombia, and other war-torn states.
These efforts demonstrated the need to have an effective legal system and functioning state institutions before embarking on big structural reforms.
In this respect, Sri Lanka’s ability to maintain its democracy throughout decades of war gives reason for hope.
Taming Voodoo Economics
Americans have once again finished a presidential campaign season in which the quality of the debate over economic policy was abysmal.
On the Republican side, hacks, spin masters, and many people who ought to have known better suddenly developed an extraordinary appreciation for something called the "CPS Household Survey of Employment" as a supposed guide to month-to-month changes in the labor market.
The CPS survey was never designed to do this, but it offered the most favorable gloss on the Bush administration's dreadful record on employment.
On the Democratic side, the same sorts of hacks and PR men focused like a laser beam on the bad employment news of the George W. Bush years, ignoring the good news about output and productivity.
And, again, Republicans responded tendentiously, by focusing on the unemployment rate rather than on the job numbers - as if it were a good thing that the lousy labor market since 2001 has artificially depressed the number of people looking for work.
Similarly, Republicans glibly touted the Bush tax cuts - the equivalent of which President Bush's father, President George H. W. Bush, two decades ago called "voodoo economics" - as the acme of economic wisdom.
They paid no heed to the large drag that Bush's unbalancing of America's public finances will impose on the US economy over the next several decades.
Democrats, for their part, pretended that the tax cuts had already harmed the economy, when they ought to know that the greatest damage is still to come.
The Republicans magnified their economic quackery by frantically trying to minimize public perceptions of the long-run fiscal problems of America's social-insurance system, largely to deflect attention from the fact that Bush threw away the budget surpluses President Clinton had bequeathed him - and with them what may have been the country's last best chance to fix things in this regard short of some form of disaster.
These same Republicans also argued for government spending restraint while blocking the institutional changes to Congressional procedures needed to make spending restraint possible.
All of this economic legerdemain was magnified by television, print, and Internet journalists.
Aside from a small number of good stories in the business press, it is difficult to argue that anyone who read or listened to English-language media coverage of the campaign could have learned anything interesting or relevant to the question of whose economic policy was likely to be better for America.
The economics profession bears part of the blame for this.
Nobel Prize winners such as Edward Prescott have no business talking about the benefits of tax cuts without pointing out that a tax cut accompanied by spending increases is not a tax cut at all, but rather a tax shift onto the future - and a tax shift that raises risk and discourages accumulation.
But much of the problem stems from an under-briefed, undereducated, and uncurious press corps.
Indeed, the tendency towards superficiality in coverage of economic issues may have led campaign managers to believe that the press will so distort their message that they dare not even try to set out what they regard as the true rationales for their economic policies.
At this point, I as a pundit am supposed to come up with my magic plan, my clever scheme for fixing things and putting the world to rights.
I don't have one.
But there is one glimmer of hope.
The past two generations have witnessed the rise of independent central banks whose monetary policy, largely insulated from partisan politics, aims for the maximum possible employment and purchasing power consistent with price stability.
Monetary policy in the industrial core has been far from perfect in this age of independent central banks, but it has been much better than what came before, representing a victory for technocracy.
The American political system, at least, appears incapable of setting out the central fiscal policy issues in ways that give voters a chance to make informed judgments and distinguish between candidates-even between candidates whose programs are serious and those whose programs are mathematically impossible jokes.
It may well be time for another technocratic push: a Fiscal Stabilization Board that would take its place beside the Federal Reserve Board.
Just as the Federal Reserve exists to ensure that monetary policy is not inconsistent with price stability, the Fiscal Stabilization Board would guarantee that spending authority remains in line with the legislated level of taxes.
Let the debate begin.
The Saudi Spring?
LONDON – In the early 1970’s, Saudi Arabia’s King Faisal reportedly confided to senior members of the royal family his fear that, just as in a single generation the country had moved from “riding camels to riding Cadillacs….the next generation could be riding camels again.”
His warning seems more apt than ever.
Saudi Arabia, long one of the Arab world’s most rigid societies, now finds itself in a state of flux.
Its relations with the West – and with the United States in particular – have frayed in the turmoil unleashed in the Middle East and North Africa by the Arab Spring.
Meanwhile, a group of women provided the latest sign of domestic restiveness by defying the Kingdom’s prohibition against women drivers.
While Saudi Arabia remains the largest Arab economy, the world’s leading producer and exporter of oil, and the guardian of Sunni Islam, its political influence has diminished significantly in recent years.
From the early 1980’s to the mid-2000’s, Saudi Arabia was the coordinator of pan-Arab politics, with the palaces of Riyadh and Jeddah drawing political leaders from throughout the Arab world.
But the reception rooms have since been noticeably empty.
Qatar – with its seemingly inexhaustible wealth and a comprehensive foreign, investment, and media strategy – has replaced Saudi Arabia as the decisive arbiter in almost every Middle Eastern conflict.
The deterioration of Saudi Arabia’s political influence has contributed to a growing sense of national decline.
King Abdullah’s reform efforts – especially those aimed at curbing the power of the ultra-conservative Wahhabi-Salafi religious establishment – have lost steam, and the deaths of two crown princes have complicated the inter-generational transfer of power.
While Saudi leaders have managed to buy middle-class support by allocating a significant proportion of oil revenues to targeted welfare and credit-support programs, widespread poverty and massive income inequality persist.
Shia Muslims in the oil-rich Eastern Province have repeatedly defied the ban on anti-regime demonstrations.
And Saudi Arabia’s campaign against the Shia Houthis in Yemen has proved longer and costlier than expected.
Against this background, Saudi leaders remain conspicuously wary of popular empowerment and disruption of the Arab order that they have dominated for the last three decades.
For Saudi Wahhabism, in which absolute power is granted to the royal family by religious mandate, innovative forms of political Islam that anchor legitimacy in genuine representation are a strategic threat.
Over the last year, the Saudi family has been focusing on many of these challenges.
King Abdullah has made significant personnel changes within the defense, interior, foreign, and intelligence ministries, granting broad powers to two experienced princes – Bandar bin Sultan, who was Ambassador to the US for more than two decades, and Miteb bin Abdullah, the king’s son and long-time commander of the National Guard.
The government has also sought to attract foreign investment and promote economic diversification.
And some factions of the Saudi family are reaching out – albeit cautiously – to civil-society actors, attempting to engage them in a dialogue about the country’s future.
Moreover, in order to combat Iran’s influence in the eastern Mediterranean, Saudi Arabia has increased support for its allies in Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon, and has effectively taken responsibility for financing, arming, and directing the Syrian opposition and rebel forces.
It has helped to curb the rise of political Islam across North Africa, including by backing the overthrow of Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi.
And, through a combination of positive and negative incentives, it has checked the threat posed by the Houthis in Yemen.
But none of these policies addresses the fundamental challenge facing the Kingdom – namely, the gradual erosion of its wealth (indeed, Saudi Arabia is expected to become a net energy importer by 2030).
Given many economic sectors’ lack of competitiveness and the inadequacy of the educational system, the Saudi population – 70% of which is under 35 years old – will experience skyrocketing unemployment in the coming years.
Many Saudis sense a wasted opportunity; despite sitting atop one of history’s most liquid fortunes, the country has failed to become an advanced economy.
And Saudi Arabia’s large middle class is likely to respond to diminishing prosperity by calling for a more representative political system.
The problem is that the obvious challenges facing Saudi Arabia require a level of cohesion in the upper echelons of government that remains elusive.
As the journalist Christian Caryl put it, “to say that historical or economic conditions predispose a country to embark on a particular path does not mean that its politicians will necessarily decide to take it.”
The continued absence of resolute action could easily drive Saudi Arabia toward irreversible decay.
In such a scenario, the economy would gradually weaken, hampering the royal family’s ability to continue buying middle-class support, while enabling rebel groups in the east and the south to erode the government’s authority.
This could cause Wahhabi religious and political doctrine to lose ground among young people and fuel regime infighting.
Ultimately, Abdulaziz bin Saud’s unification of the Kingdom in the late 1920’s could even be reversed, making the last eight decades an anomaly in the Arabian Peninsula’s long history of fragmentation.
Such an outcome would effectively make Yemen and the rest of the Gulf states ungovernable, allowing the Sunni-Shia confrontation that is currently unfolding in the Levant to overwhelm the region.
But there is another possibility.
The new generation of Saudi leaders could spearhead a transition to a genuine constitutional monarchy, based on a transparent system of checks and balances.
A more representative governance model, together with strong economic incentives, could unleash the young population’s creativity and dynamism – and secure Saudi Arabia’s future in the process.
That promise was captured in the recent film “Wadjda” – written, produced, and directed by Saudi women – which tells the story of a young girl from a middle-class family who challenges social conventions and pushes boundaries, as she attempts to fulfill her potential.
If she is not Saudi Arabia’s future, the country may not have a future at all.
Targeting Non-Communicable Diseases
INDIANAPOLIS – Around the world, one of the major factors destroying lives and hampering economic growth is also one of the hardest to address.
Non-communicable diseases (NCDs) – such as heart disease, diabetes, and cancer – now account for two-thirds of all deaths worldwide.
In addition to cutting lives short, NCDs exact a massive economic toll on their victims, their families, and their communities, sapping economic productivity and driving up medical costs.
Over the next two decades, the total economic losses from NCDs could top $30 trillion.
Addressing the complex challenge posed by NCDs will require a coordinated international effort.
Fortunately, there have been some important recent steps in that direction.
In September, the United Nations adopted the Sustainable Development Goals, a set of 17 objectives that will guide the global development agenda for the next 15 years.
Alongside targets like eliminating poverty and measures to protect the environment is a commitment to reducing mortality caused by NCDs – the first time the UN’s official development agenda has taken direct aim at the problem.
This is a welcome milestone, but it is only the first of many on a long road.
The physical and economic burdens associated with NCDs fall the hardest where they are least easily borne: low- and middle-income countries, where 80% of NCD-related deaths occur.
Millions of people who have recently escaped poverty could be pushed back into it as a result.
The attention and peer pressure generated by the SDGs can help drive progress.
But achieving the targets will require sustained focus, drawing on the resources and expertise of governments, international non-profit organizations, and, crucially, the private sector.
My experience in the health sector has led me to conclude that two important factors will prove crucial in addressing the challenges posed by NCDs.
Progress will depend, first and foremost, on crafting effective local approaches that can be adapted, replicated, and scaled up.
There are no one-size-fits-all solutions to problems like diabetes or heart disease.
But, given that NCDs afflict communities in all parts of the world, there is much common ground that need not be continually rediscovered.
In 2013, for example, the Carlos Slim Foundation conducted a rigorous baseline assessment at eight primary-care clinics to understand the state of diabetes prevention and treatment.
Based on the data gathered during the study, the Foundation piloted what is known as the CASALUD model to improve screening, treatment, and prevention using low-cost, user-friendly devices that can measure a range of relevant vital signs, including blood glucose levels.
Participating clinics have been equipped with an online system to track drug inventories and avoid shortages.
The approach was so effective that Mexico’s health office is using the CASALUD model as the basis for its national campaign to fight obesity, which can fuel diabetes and other NCDs – a great example of scaling up based on local experience.
The second key to success in the fight against NCDs is a commitment to tapping the resources of the private sector.
This includes not only the mobilization of private investment, but also the deployment of the vast amounts of technical, operational, and locally tailored expertise that private companies have gained in the course of doing business around the world.
By forming partnerships with governments and international and local organizations, companies can help reduce the impact of devastating and costly diseases.
I know this because my company is involved in just such an effort: the Lilly NCD Partnership, in which we are cooperating with partners and the governments of India, Mexico, South Africa, and Brazil to tackle NCDs.
In Brazil, for example, we are working closely with key local organizations, including the Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, to improve disease prevention – with a focus on helping mothers who were diagnosed with gestational diabetes while pregnant and are now at risk of developing type 2 diabetes.
Programs like ours demonstrate what can be achieved through substantive, locally driven public-private partnerships around the world.
Ensuring the success of the SDGs – including the reduction of mortality from NCDs – will require companies to move beyond traditional philanthropy and forge creative solutions to socioeconomic problems.
If we recognize that innovation stems from understanding local conditions and optimizing the vast resources of the private sector, we can ensure better health – and more rapid economic growth – far into the future.
Targeting the Targeters
LONDON – Speaking in the happier economic times of 2005, Mervyn King – then, as now, Governor of the Bank of England – stressed the importance of entrenching public expectations of stable, low inflation.
He warned that, “if you let inflation expectations drift too far away from the target, you can end up in quite serious difficulty with a costly process to bring them back again.”
King must now be a worried man.
The Bank of England’s own commissioned quarterly surveys of public attitudes reveal that the credibility of its Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has now been impaired.
For the last 15 months, the 2% inflation target, which is set by the government and is supposed to be enforced by the Bank of England, has been exceeded by more than a full percentage point.
For most of this period, the British public expected inflation in the coming year to be lower than in the previous year, thanks to the MPC’s strong track record on price stability.
That confidence has now dissipated: inflation expectations have caught up with the actual inflation rate of 4%.
There is no mystery about what is going on. The price-stability mandate has been trumped by concerns about growth.
The fear is that tightening monetary policy to bear down on inflation could snuff out the faltering economic recovery.
So not only has the MPC kept interest rates at a rock-bottom 0.5% since 2009, but policy has been loosened further by the Bank of England’s so-called “quantitative easing” – that is, expanding the monetary base by the stroke of a pen in the hope of reinvigorating domestic credit markets.
But the United Kingdom is now faced with the worst outcome: stagflation.
The economy is incurring the inflationary costs of the Bank’s policy while missing out on the intended benefit of growth.
In the US, where the Federal Reserve is running a similarly loose monetary policy, the situation looks rosier – at least at first sight.
The US economy is staging a more convincing recovery than the UK, and, in contrast to the Bank of England and the European Central Bank, the Fed is not explicitly mandated by Congress to achieve a specific inflation target.
Thus, compared to the Bank of England, the all-important credibility of the monetary authority seems less vulnerable in the case of the Fed.
But, even in the US, policy-setting officials, such as Thomas Hoenig, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, express concern that inflation expectations may become unanchored, owing to the massive expansion of government debt and the Fed’s balance sheet since the financial crash in 2008.
All the major Western central banks – including even the traditionally “hawkish” ECB – appear to be sticking their heads in the sand.
But there is something they can do to ensure the benefits of inflation-targeting rules (credibility and well-anchored inflation expectations) while also supporting recovery: raise the stated target.
The case for doing so can best be shown by Britain, where the situation is particularly delicate.
The UK authorities have decided to prioritize fiscal consolidation while running a loose monetary policy to contain risks to the recovery from higher taxes and lower government spending.
The thinking is clear (if rarely spelled out clearly by politicians): whereas a loss of market confidence in the British state’s solvency would most likely trigger a depression, above-target inflation can be rectified at a relatively tolerable cost to living standards (though higher than it should have been).
Granting, for the sake of argument, the force of this logic (and even its critics could hardly deny its coherence), it would be foolish to underestimate the risk of runaway inflation and underplay the economic and social harm it would cause.
To the extent that tolerance of above-target inflation also reflects a desire to erode the real value of public and private debts, market interest rates could soar, leaving indebted governments and households in even greater trouble.
Many commentators believe that governments’ huge budget constraints will force them to rely on inflation.
If so, it is better to do it transparently, unlike the Bank of England.
Simply put, in order to anchor inflation expectations effectively, inflation targets must be realistic.
The current high-stakes conundrum faced by policymakers suggests that they should apply inflation-targeting principles more flexibly in the context of a major economic shock.
This would involve raising the target to a level in line with the actual inflation rate observed in the post-crisis period – a level that the public would perceive as realistic, honest, and credible.
Doing so would reduce the debt and tax burdens on future generations, while crucially limiting the risks of much higher inflation in the nearer term.
Moreover, a higher inflation target – and the restoration of credibility that it would imply – would enable central banks to return to a lower inflation target without creating a recession once debt levels had been reduced and aggregate demand had recovered.
Why Taxation Must Go Global
BERLIN – We are witnessing profound changes in the way that the world economy works.
As a result of the growing pace and intensity of globalization and digitization, more and more economic processes have an international dimension.
As a consequence, an increasing number of businesses are adapting their structures to domestic and foreign legal systems and taxation laws.
Thanks to technical advances in the digital economy, companies can serve markets without having to be physically present in them.
At the same time, sources of income have become more mobile: There is an increasing focus on intangible assets and mobile investment income that can easily be “optimized” from a tax point of view and transferred abroad.
Tax legislation has not kept pace with these developments.
Most of the tax-allocation principles that apply today date back to a time when doing business internationally primarily meant transporting goods across a border to a neighboring country.
But rules that were devised for this in the 1920s and 1930s are no longer suitable for today’s international integration of economic processes and corporate structures.
They need to be adapted to the economic reality of digital services.
In the absence of workable rules, states are losing revenue that they urgently need in order to fulfill their responsibilities.
At the same time, the issue of fair taxation is becoming more and more pressing, because the number of taxpayers who make an adequate contribution to financing public goods and services is decreasing.
The resulting tensions between national fiscal sovereignty and the borderless scope of today’s business activities can be resolved only through international dialogue and uniform global standards.
Within the European Union, permitting groups of states to forge ahead with joint solutions to issues that can be addressed only multilaterally has worked well in the past.
If such measures prove successful, other states follow.
This approach can also serve as a global governance model for resolving international problems.
In today’s world, even large states cannot establish and enforce international frameworks on their own.
Groups of countries still can.
This has been demonstrated in the context of financial-market regulation; it is starting to become clear with regard to the regulatory framework for the digital economy; and it is now being confirmed in the area of taxation.
The Seventh Meeting of the Global Forum on Transparency and Exchange of Information for Tax Purposes took place in Berlin this week, bringing together representatives from 122 countries and jurisdictions, as well as the EU.
A joint agreement on the automatic exchange of information on financial accounts was signed on Wednesday.
The joint agreement was originally an initiative by Germany, France, Italy, the United Kingdom, and Spain.
Roughly 50 early-adopter countries and territories decided to take part, while other countries have indicated their willingness to join.
The agreement is based on the Common Reporting Standard, which was developed by the OECD.
Under the CRS, tax authorities receive information from banks and other financial service providers and automatically share it with tax authorities in other countries.
In the future, virtually all of the information connected to a bank account will be reported to the tax authorities of the account holder’s country, including the account holder’s name, balance, interest and dividend income, and capital gains.
Various measures are in place to ensure that banks can identify the beneficial owner and notify the relevant tax authorities accordingly.
The CRS thus expands the scope of global, cross-border cooperation among national tax authorities.
In this way, we can establish a regulatory framework for the age of globalization.
The automatic exchange of information is a pragmatic and effective response to the perceived lack of global governance regarding international tax issues.
By making taxation fairer, governments will have a positive impact on people’s acceptance of their tax regimes.
This great success in the fight against international tax evasion would have been unthinkable only a few years ago.
Now it is important to continue the efforts of the OECD and the G-20 in the area of corporate taxation.
We need to make sure that creative tax planning in the form of profit-shifting and artificial profit reduction is no longer a lucrative business model.
A “beggar-thy-neighbor” taxation policy, by which one country pursues tax policies at the expense of others, is just as dangerous as beggar-thy-neighbor monetary policies based on competitive currency devaluation.
It leads to misallocations – and will ultimately reduce prosperity around the world.
That is why we need to agree on uniform international standards in order to achieve fair international tax competition.
The progress achieved in Berlin on the automatic exchange of tax information shows that, by working together, we can realize this goal.
Penghasil Polusi, Saatnya Membayar
JAKARTA – Pada awal tahun ini di Myanmar, hujan deras menyebabkan tanah longsor yang menghabiskan ratusan rumah dan menyebabkan kerusakan hasil panen berskala besar.
Lebih dari 1,3 juta orang terkena dampaknya, dan lebih dari 100 orang meninggal dunia.
Di Vietnam, banjir besar juga menghasilkan lubang-lubang dengan lumpur beracun dari tambang batubara meluap dan membanjiri desa-desa mencapai Ha Long Bay yang tercatat sebagai salah satu Kekayaan Dunia; jumlah korban jiwa sampai 17 orang.
Melihat semakin banyak dan membahayakannya kejadian-kejadian alam seperti ini, kebutuhan untuk memitigasi dan beradaptasi kepada perubahan iklim menjadi semakin penting.
Dan jangan ragu: Kejadian-kejadian ini, paling tidak sebagian, diakibatkan oleh perubahan iklim.
Sebagaimana diutarakan oleh ilmuwan iklim Kevin Trenberth dari Pusat Penelitian Atmosfer Nasional AS, belakangan ini, “semua kejadian cuaca terkena dampak perubahan iklim, karena lingkungan di mana kejadian-kejadian ini terjadi lebih panas dan lembab dari sebelumnya.”
Para negosiator iklim internasional sedikit banyak memahami hal ini.
Konsekuensi yang dihadapi oleh penduduk Myanmar dan Vietnam dianggap sebagai kerugian yang tidak dapat dihindari akibat kegagalan untuk beradaptasi kepada perubahan iklim, yang dikelompokkan oleh para pejabat sebgai “kerugian dan kerusakan.”
Akan tetapi, istilah-istilah tersebut tidak berhasil menangkap keseluruhan konsekuensi – khusunya dampaknya terhadap jiwa manusia.
Orang-orang yang meninggal di Myanmar dan Vietnam bukan hanya “kerugian yang tidak dapat dihindari”, dan orang-orang tercinta mereka tidak dapat “beradaptasi” begitu saja dengan kehilangan mereka.
Retorika berdarah dingin seperti ini mencerminkan kurangnya respon kepada perubahan iklim yang telah dihasilkan perundingan internasional selama ini.
Bahkan, jika negara-negara industri telah melakukan apa yang diperlukan untuk menghentikan perubahan iklim, sebagaimana dijanjikan pada generasi sebelumnya, kemungkinan besar Myanmar dan Vietnam dapat menghindari “kerugian dan kerusakan” yang terjadi baru-baru ini.
Kegagalan negara-negara ekonomi besar dunia untuk memenuhi komitmen mereka tersebut memiliki implikasi bahwa Myanmar dan Vietnam bukanlah negara-negara berkembang yang paling rapuh saat ini.
Negara-negara pulau kecil Pasifik, contohnya, tidak dapat mendirikan pertahanan yang cukup dari “arus pasang” yang memasuki pulau mereka dan menyebabkan air tawar yang berada di bawah pulau-pulau karang mereka menjadi payau.
Populasi mereka – yang merupakan salah satu orang-orang termiskin di dunia – membayar harga perubahan iklim dengan jiwa dan penghidupan mereka.
Dan tanpa sumber daya untuk beradaptasi, mereka akan terus menderita.
Keadaannya bahkan lebih buruk lagi.
Mereka yang menjadi penyebab masalah ini – para penghasil polusi terbesar di dunia – terus menghasilkan keuntungan miliaran, dan juga menerima subsidi energi yang besar dari pemerintah (diperkirakan mencapai $5,3 triliun di tahun 2015, atau sekitar $10 juta per menit).
Siapa para penghasil polusi ini?
Menurut penelitian pada tahun 2013 oleh ilmuwan Rick Heede, hampir dua per tiga karbon dioksida yang dihasilkan sejak tahun 1750 dapat ditelusuri kepada 90 entitas penghasil bahan bakar fosil- dan semen- terbesar, yang sebagian besar masih beroperasi.
Lima puluh di antaranya merupakan perusahaan yang dimiliki investor, termasuk ChevronTexaco, ExxonMobil, Shell, BP, dan Peabody Energy; 31 diantaranya merupakan BUMN, seperti Saudi Aramco dan Statoil dari Norwegia; dan sembilan merupakan negara seperti Arab Saudi dan Cina.
Memahami ketidakadilan yang mencolok ini – juga kerusakan yang dibuatnya – keadaan ini, suatu inisiatif baru, diluncurkan oleh Carbon Levy Project dan didukung oleh berbagai individu dan organisasi yang jumlahnya semakin besar, telah muncul untuk meminta kompensasi untuk negara-negara berkembang yang rentan terhadap para penghasil polusi besar.
Secara khusus, Carbon Levy Project mengajukan pajak di titik-titik ekstraksi bahan bakar fosil.
Pajak tersebut konsisten dengan hukum internasional, termasuk prinsip “pencemar membayar” (polluters pay principle), dan akan memberikan sumber pembiayaan yang baru dan dapat diprediksi – yang berjumlah miliaran dolar – untuk masyarakat yang paling membutuhkannya, tanpa melepaskan pemerintah dari tanggung jawab untuk memberikan sumber dana umum.
Dan, peningkatan biaya pengambilan bahan bakar fosil akan berkontribusi pada pengikisan suatu sektor yang tidak seharusnya ada di dunia yang aman secara iklim.
Untungnya, dunia tidak perlu menunggu kesadaran moral untuk bertahan.
Perusahaan bahan bakar fosil dan pemerintah saat ini menghadapi tekanan hukum yang semakin berat.
Para korban angin topan di Filipina yang selamat mengirimkan keluhan kepada Komisi Hak Asasi Manusia nasionalnya, meminta dilakukannya investigasi atas tanggung jawab perusahaan-perusahaan bahan bakar fosil dalam menyebabkan perubahan iklim.
Grup Belanda Urgenda dan hampir 900 penggugat berhasil menggugat pemerintah Belanda, memaksanya untuk memberlakukan kebijakan iklim yang lebih ketat.
Seorang petani Peru saat ini bermaksud untuk menggugat perusahaan batubara Jerman RWE untuk menutup biaya yang dikeluarkan untuk melindungi rumahnya, yang berlokasi di jalur banjir sebuah danau glasial.
Di samping itu, para penandatangan Deklarasi Masyarakat Sipil untuk Keadilan Iklim dari negara-negara Kepulauan Pasifik berkomitmen untuk mengajukan perkara terhadap para penghasil polusi besar untuk kegiatan-kegiatan yang menyebabkan kerusakan rumah mereka.
Jika tidak ada tindakan yang dilakukan, gugatan-gugatan seperti itu akan semakin banyak dan semakin sulit untuk dikalahkan.
Big Oil, Big Gas, dan Big Coal perlu mengambil tanggung jawab untuk perubahan iklim dan mulai memberikan kontribusi nyata kepada adaptasi, atau bersiap diri untuk pertarungan bagi kelangsungan mereka sendiri – pertarungan yang, dalam jangka panjang, tidak mungkin bisa mereka menangkan.
Sunlight on Tax Havens
BERKELEY – Tax havens are by design secretive and opaque.
The entire point of their existence is to conceal the wealth hidden within them.
And a new book by Gabriel Zucman, The Hidden Wealth of Nations: The Scourge of Tax Havens, reveals, as never before, the extent of their role in the global economy.
Zucman examines discrepancies in international accounts to provide the most precise and reliable figures we are likely to obtain about the amount of money stored in tax havens.
He estimates that 8% of the world’s financial wealth – some $7.6 trillion – is hidden in places like Switzerland, Bermuda, the Cayman Islands, Singapore, and Luxembourg.
That is more wealth than is owned by the poorer half of the world’s 7.4 billion people.
This figure has important consequences, as it represents money that should be in the tax base.
If rich countries in Europe and North American cannot effectively tax the rich, they have little chance of preserving social democracy and offsetting the surge in inequality that has recently afflicted their economies.
Similarly, emerging economies have little hope of putting in place progressive tax systems if they cannot find their plutocrats’ wealth.
To be sure, Zucman’s relies on the unproven assumption that there are important data to be found in what is usually classified as “errors and omissions.”
But there is good reason to believe his figures are in the ballpark.
Switzerland’s central bank reports that foreigners hold $2.4 trillion in Swiss banks alone.
And while Switzerland may be the world’s oldest tax haven, it is not the most advantageous place to park one’s money.
One reason why tax havens are difficult to eliminate is that not everyone in government necessarily views them in the same way.
Wherever corruption is endemic – say, Russia, China, and much of the Middle East – many officials may view tax havens not as a revenue problem, but as an attractive part of the job.
Even in the United States, policies have all too often been deliberately designed to enable – rather than to discourage – tax avoidance via tax havens.
One former senior official in US President George W. Bush’s administration put it this way, “it is, ultimately, about freedom.”
The resulting lax enforcement accounts for a large portion of the one-third decline in the effective reach of the US corporate income tax since the late 1990s.
When it comes to tax havens, it is fashionable to say that nothing can be done.
National sovereignty is deemed too important to be subordinated to international tax laws.
And the day’s plutocrats are seen as having sway over elected politicians and civil servants.
More than a century ago, then-Governor Woodrow Wilson of New Jersey convinced the state legislature to get out of the corporate-tax-haven business.
As soon as it did, America’s corporations picked up their legal headquarters and moved next door to Delaware.
But what those who say that coordinated international policy is impossible don’t say is that coordinating international policy always looks impossible, until suddenly the conditions change and everything falls into place.
Tax havens can be eliminated; all that is required is to close the loopholes that allow legal tax avoidance and establish enforcement mechanisms that make illegal tax evasion no longer worth the risk.
The first step should be increased transparency.
As the saying goes, “sunlight is the best disinfectant.”
Zucman, for his part, favors a single global registry – a publicly accessible database detailing the ownership of financial instruments.
The second step would be to shift the corporate tax base from profits reported to have been earned in a country to sales made and wages paid in that country.
As Zucman points out, a corporation can move its legal headquarters and use mechanisms like transfer pricing to shift its tax burden, but moving its employees across national borders is more difficult, and it cannot move its customers.
If we are ever to combat inequality effectively, truly progressive taxation will have to be a part of the policy mix.
But unless we eliminate tax havens now, we are likely to find that we lack the ability to implement it.
Taxing the Israeli Occupation
CAIRO – Arab intellectuals and policymakers have often accused Europe of using financial generosity to cover up its political impotence over the Arab-Israeli conflict.
If Europe is to be taken seriously as a global player, they argue, it must also flex some muscle when it delivers the money.
In Arab eyes, European officials implicitly plead guilty to these charges by pointing to Europe’s complex multilateral politics and the European Union’s bureaucratic nature.
Europe’s Arab interlocutors are unimpressed: they want Europe to stop talking like a Great Power and start acting like one.
But it is precisely the EU’s desire to look more and more like a nation-state that has pushed its position on the Arab-Israeli conflict in the wrong direction.
Europe’s inability to play a political role in the Middle East peace process was wrongly diagnosed as resulting from a European bias against Israel.
Policy advisers argued that gaining Israel’s trust was necessary to win support for a European role in the peace process.
Almost nothing became too dear in this quest: technology transfers, upgraded relations, association agreements, and even, reportedly, the prospect of joining the EU.
European policy thus revolved around simultaneously seducing Israel and bribing the Palestinian Authority.
Financing Israel’s occupation of Gaza and the West Bank served both objectives at the same time, at a cost to European taxpayers of several billion euros.
Yet this policy earned Europe neither recognition nor relevance.
Palestinians continued to trivialize Europe’s contribution, and Israelis to loathe it for “financing Palestinian terror.”
In the end, Europe paid a lot of money only to expose its own weakness.
How much worse can things get before the EU abandons its counter-productive policy?
The idea that Europe can seduce the occupier into giving it a role in ending the occupation seems wrong-headed.
Israel does not want an even-handed mediator but an unconditional supporter.
This is partly why Israel prefers the United States as sole mediator, and it is also why Israel’s acceptance of a monopoly role for the US evaporates as soon as any American president starts developing views different from its own.
When this happens, America’s ability to project power makes all the difference.
In other words, no matter what blandishments are showered on Israel, when push comes to shove it is the ability to use power – not charm – that determines whether or not an outside power has a say in Arab-Israeli peacemaking.
Europe ’s failure to play a role in resolving this conflict does not result from its supposed anti-Israeli views, but from the fact that the EU is not a state.
States are not given roles; they acquire them by the power assets they can deploy.
And Europe cannot deploy the type of power needed to tilt the balance in Arab-Israeli peacemaking.
But Europe can do other things.
To change the Israeli-Palestinian dynamic, external actors now need to influence the political calculus inside Israel and Palestine by lowering the political cost of peace and raising the cost of occupation .
Any meaningful Arab-Israeli peace depends on Israel’s return of Palestinian territories, with certain conditions, but no Israeli government will be willing or even able to do so unless the political calculus inside Israel changes.
Making withdrawal a tolerable political option (or making occupation a more costly one) is needed to trigger a meaningful peace process.
Europe has already tried incentives for withdrawal, but that alone will not suffice; the cost of occupation must also be raised.
In plain English, an “occupation tax” is needed.
This would be different from applying sanctions, which would risk triggering a “ Masada Complex” that might push Israel to further extremes.
Instead, an occupation tax would target the settlers’ economy and the violation of Palestinians’ human rights.
Such a tax should start with turning the EU current exclusion of settlements’ products from preferential customs treatment into a full-scale ban on imports from settlements – and any transactions with them.
Companies and banks should be barred from doing business in or with settlements, especially with construction companies and their suppliers.