·A Washington-based consulting firm estimates that the U.S. environmental industry generated more than $340 billion in sales and almost $50 billion in tax revenues in 2005.
The 5.3 million workers in the environmental industry outnumber pharmaceutical workers ten to one.
·A British company specializing in improving the energy efficiency of homes was floated on the London Stock Exchange last June and now employs 4,000 people who once worked in nearby, now closed, coal mines.
·A study prepared for the German Ministry of Environment estimates that employment in the German environmental technology industries will surpass employment in the automobile industry by 2020.
·China has some 1,000 solar thermal energy firms, generating sales of $2.5 billion and employing 600,000 workers in manufacturing and installation.
·The Indian city of Delhi is introducing new eco-friendly compressed natural gas buses, which will create an additional 18,000 new jobs.
These trends look set to continue.
The United Nations Environment Programme’s Sustainable Energy Finance Initiative estimates that investment in renewable energy has reached $100 billion worldwide, or 18% of new investment in the power sector.
The Initiative, which involves some 170 financial institutions, also estimates that market financing for clean and renewable energies could reach $1.9 trillion by 2020.
International efforts are now beginning to bear fruit.
The Clean Development Mechanism of the Kyoto Protocol could channel $100 billion in funds from North to South for investment in carbon offsetting projects such as renewable energy schemes and tree planting.
The Bali conference last year agreed to include avoided deforestation in tropical countries into a new climate regime, which could generate new employment opportunities in sustainable management, conservation, and tourism.
Several countries, including Costa Rica, Norway, and New Zealand, have pledged carbon neutrality, which in turn will require investment and employment in carbon-friendly sectors.
Significantly, labor is adding to the effort.
At Bali, the global trade union movement signaled its commitment to an 85% reduction in global greenhouse gas emissions by 2050, underlining the perceived value of environmentally sustainable development and a future in “green jobs.”
These jobs will play a vital role in reducing the environmental footprint of economies and promoting sustainable production and consumption patterns.
In a rapidly greening labor market, those jobs lost to environmental unsustainability will have to be replaced by just transitions involving the promotion of social security, economic diversification and retraining.
Yet green jobs are not enough.
Meeting the challenge of climate change will require a new development model that combines reduced emissions with a better future for the vast majority of people and the opportunity to earn a living in a decent job.
Last month, President Hu Jintao of China called for the realization of sustainable development and decent work by advancing “economic globalization in the direction of balanced development, shared benefit and win-win progress and to make sure that international economic, trade and financial institutions provide favorable conditions … so that the 21st century is genuinely a century of development for all … to realize sustainable development and for the vast majority of workers to enjoy decent work”.
Clearly, change is in the air.
Our responses to climate change must have a social dimension.
Workers, employers and governments must engage in dialogue to put in place the social policies which ensure that green jobs are decent jobs.
Only in this way can the poor and the jobless from Marseille to Mumbai and Sao Paulo to Shanghai be optimistic that creating an environmentally-sustainable world will also deliver decent, environmentally-sustainable work.
The Green Inquisition
COPENHAGEN – When it comes to global warming, extreme scare stories abound.
Al Gore, for example, famously claimed that a whopping six meters (20 feet) of sea-level rise would flood major cities around the world.
Gore’s scientific advisor, Jim Hansen from NASA, has even topped his protégé.
Hansen suggests that there will eventually be sea-level rises of 24 meters (80 feet), with a six-meter rise happening just this century.
Little wonder that fellow environmentalist Bill McKibben states that “we are engaging in a reckless drive-by drowning of much of the rest of the planet and much of the rest of creation.”
Given all the warnings, here is a slightly inconvenient truth: over the past two years, the global sea level hasn’t increased.
It has slightly decreased .
Since 1992, satellites orbiting the planet have measured the global sea level every 10 days with an amazing degree of accuracy – 3-4 millimeters (0.2 inches).
For two years, sea levels have declined.
(All of the data are available at sealevel.colorado.edu.)
This doesn’t mean that global warming is not true.
As we emit more CO2, over time the temperature will moderately increase, causing the sea to warm and expand somewhat.
Thus, the sea-level rise is expected to pick up again.
This is what the United Nations climate panel is telling us; the best models indicate a sea-level rise over this century of 18 to 59 centimeters (7-24 inches), with the typical estimate at 30 centimeters (one foot).
This is not terrifying or even particularly scary – 30 centimeters is how much the sea rose over the last 150 years.
Simply put, we’re being force-fed vastly over-hyped scare stories.
Proclaiming six meters of sea-level rise over this century contradicts thousands of UN scientists, and requires the sea-level rise to accelerate roughly 40-fold from today. Imagine how climate alarmists would play up the story if we actually saw an increase in the sea-level rise.
Increasingly, alarmists claim that we should not be allowed to hear such facts.
In June, Hansen proclaimed that people who spread “disinformation” about global warming – CEOs, politicians, in fact anyone who doesn’t follow Hansen’s narrow definition of the “truth” – should literally be tried for crimes against humanity.
It is depressing to see a scientist – even a highly politicized one – calling for a latter-day Inquisition.
Such a blatant attempt to curtail scientific inquiry and stifle free speech seems inexcusable.
Hansen is not alone in trying to blame others for his message’s becoming harder to sell.
Canada’s top environmentalist, David Suzuki, stated earlier this year that politicians “complicit in climate change” should be thrown in jail.
Campaigner Mark Lynas envisions Nuremberg-style “international criminal tribunals” against those who dare to challenge the climate dogma.
Clearly, this column places me at risk of incarceration by Hansen &amp; Co.
But the globe’s real problem is not a series of inconvenient facts.
It is that we have blocked out sensible solutions through an alarmist panic, leading to bad policies.
Consider one of the most significant steps taken to respond to climate change.
Adopted because of the climate panic, bio-fuels were supposed to reduce CO2 emissions.
Hansen described them as part of a “brighter future for the planet.”
But using bio-fuels to combat climate change must rate as one of the poorest global “solutions” to any great challenge in recent times.
Bio-fuels essentially take food from mouths and puts it into cars.
The grain required to fill the tank of an SUV with ethanol is enough to feed one African for a year.
Thirty percent of this year’s corn production in the United States will be burned up on America’s highways.
This has been possible only through subsidies that globally will total $15 billion this year alone.
Because increased demand for bio-fuels leads to cutting down carbon-rich forests, a 2008 Science study showed that the net effect of using them is not to cut CO2 emissions, but to double them.
The rush towards bio-fuels has also strongly contributed to rising food prices, which have tipped another roughly 30 million people into starvation.
Because of climate panic, our attempts to mitigate climate change have provoked an unmitigated disaster.
We will waste hundreds of billions of dollars, worsen global warming, and dramatically increase starvation.
We have to stop being scared silly, stop pursuing stupid policies, and start investing in smart long-term R&amp;D. Accusations of “crimes against humanity” must cease.
Indeed, the real offense is the alarmism that closes minds to the best ways to respond to climate change.
The Green Paradox
The protesters have returned to their home countries, the injured are licking their wounds, the heads of state are back to business as usual, and Heiligendamm, the old spa on Germany’s Baltic coast, is resuming its dream of imperial beauty.
And German Chancellor Angela Merkel achieved a substantial diplomatic success.
With charm and unassuming clear-headedness, she wrought a compromise from the G8 countries that may help save the world from the most severe devastations caused by global warming.
The world’s eight richest countries promised to “seriously consider” halving their CO2 emissions by 2050.
The wording may sound vague, but, given the positions the countries held at the outset, the outcome was an important achievement.
The United States, in particular, shifted its stance significantly since its rejection of the Kyoto Protocol, even accepting that the United Nations will have to organize the future negotiations.
But, while the compromise is more than could have been hoped for at the outset, several important countries did not partake of it.
To be sure, China, India, Brazil, South Africa, and Mexico signed on; but many countries, including the Asian tigers and most European countries, did not, despite their large contributions to polluting the world’s atmosphere.
Moreover, the oil sheiks and other producers of fossil fuels who ultimately control the amount of carbon released to the atmosphere were not part of the deal.
If major consumer countries and most producer countries do not join the agreement to reduce CO2 emissions, it could be useless.
Many believe that aggregate CO2 emissions are the result of independent decisions in individual countries.
Thus, if a group of countries decides to have lower emissions, worldwide emissions will decline by the sum of these countries’ reductions.
Sure, it would be better if all countries curtailed their emissions, but it is already a great help if at least some countries do so.
Unfortunately, this view is too good to be true, because one country’s emissions are not independent from those of another.
If countries decide to cut their emissions, they will have to reduce their consumption of fossil fuels, in particular oil.
This will reduce the world price of these fuels, inducing other countries to consume even more than they otherwise would.
Countries that cut their emissions would, in effect, be subsidizing their competitors’ growth, not necessarily reducing the speed of global warming.
The sacrifices of the participating countries would alleviate the CO2 problem only if their restraint meant that some of the fossil resources they do not consume remain underground.
They must succeed in inducing the oil sheikhs and other producers of fossil fuels to throttle their pumps.
If the sheikhs are stubborn and continue to extract as much as they had planned to extract without the G8’s restraint, the price of fuels will fall sufficiently to induce so much extra consumption among the non-participating countries that the net effect on aggregate CO2 emissions will be nil.
Will the oil sheikhs reduce output of fossil fuels?
At first glance, it seems natural to assume this, as most suppliers reduce production when the price falls.
But the sheikhs are sitting on fixed stocks of oil.
If they do not extract it today, they will have to do it in the future if they want to make a profit.
At best, it seems that the time path of extractions can be tilted toward the future.
This would not solve the CO2 problem in the long run, but at least it would postpone the catastrophe.
The oil sheikhs would likely be inclined to postpone extraction only if they could reasonably assume that the demand reductions of the signing countries and the comparative price reduction that this implies are stronger today than they will be in the future.
This is not plausible.
Indeed, the sheikhs will know that, in all likelihood, concerns about global warming will increase over time.
They will therefore speed up rather than reduce production, in order to avoid selling their oil when anxiety about CO2 peaks and the artificial measures of the signing countries to reduce their consumption have dampened the oil price most.
Thus, green policies will paradoxically accelerate rather than mitigate global warming.
Two lessons arise from these considerations.
First, all polluters must sit at the negotiating table and be forced or induced to participate in reducing pollution.
The commitments of single countries like Germany to over-fulfill their duties are useless.
Germany has already contributed three-quarters of the aggregate EU-wide reductions of CO2 emission from 1990 to 2008-2012 to which the EU committed in the Kyoto protocol.
Such a policy simply subsidizes other polluters’ CO2 emissions, but does not alleviate the problem of global warming.
Second, and more difficult, the oil sheikhs and other producers of fossil fuels must be talked into postponing their extraction plans or, better yet, not to extract some of their resources at all.
The best policy against global warming is to keep the CO2 imbedded in fossil resources deep underground.
The good news from Heiligendamm is that the UN will now have to organize a common solution.
The bad news is that this is unlikely to happen in the foreseeable future, and that the owners of natural resources will therefore make every attempt to extract their resources and thus pump the fossil carbon into the atmosphere before the UN finds a way out of this impasse.
The Green Pseudo-Revolution
COPENHAGEN – With a worldwide recession advancing, strong action on global warming has been thrown into jeopardy.
This matters, because in little more than a year, the world will sit down in Copenhagen to negotiate the follow-on treaty to the failed Kyoto Protocol.
Yet, with people losing jobs and income, immediate economic help seems to matter more than temperature differentials 100 years from now.
Many green pundits have, however, started saying that the financial crisis only makes the need for action on climate change greater.
They urge America’s president-elect Barack Obama to pursue a “green revolution” with big investments in renewable energy, arguing that this could create millions of new “green collar” jobs and open huge new markets.
Such sentiments, no surprise, are strongly voiced by business leaders who live off such subsidies.
But are such pleas smart investments for society?
The problem with the green revolution argument is that it doesn’t trouble itself about efficiency.
It is most often lauded for supplying new jobs.
But billions of dollars in tax subsidies would create plenty of new jobs in almost any sector: the point is that many less capital-intensive sectors would create many more jobs for a given investment of taxpayers’ money.
Similarly, green initiatives will open new markets only if other nations subsidize inefficient technologies bought abroad.
Thus, the real game becomes which nations get to suck up other nations’ tax-financed subsidies.
Apart from the resulting global inefficiency, this also creates a whole new raft of industry players that will keep pushing inefficient legislation, simply because it fills their coffers.
A good illustration is Denmark, which early on provided huge subsidies for wind power, building thousands of inefficient turbines around the country from the 1980’s onwards.
Today, it is often remarked that Denmark is providing every third terrestrial wind turbine in the world, creating billions in income and jobs.
A few years ago, however, the Danish Economic Council conducted a full evaluation of the wind turbine industry, taking into account not only its beneficial effects on jobs and production, but also the subsidies that it receives.
The net effect for Denmark was found to be a small cost , not benefit.
Not surprisingly, the leading Danish wind producer is today urging strong action on climate change that would imply even more sales of wind turbines.
The company sponsors the “Planet in Peril” show on CNN, which helps galvanize public pressure for action.
The crucial point is that many green technologies are not cost-effective, at least not yet.
If they were, we wouldn’t need to subsidize them.
The standard reply is that green technologies seem more expensive only because the price of fossil fuels does not reflect their climate costs.
That makes some sense.
Given that fossil fuels contribute to global warming, standard economic theory suggests we should tax them according to their cumulative negative effects.
But this would make little difference to the inefficiency of most green technologies.
The most comprehensive economic meta-study shows that total future climate impacts justify a tax of €0.012 per liter of petrol ($0.06 per gallon in the US.)
This is dwarfed by the tax that many European countries already impose, and it is much less than in the European trading system.
Yet it is argued that much higher taxes and subsidies are the best way to increase research and development in new, cheaper renewable energy sources.
This is untrue.
During the massive investment associated with the Kyoto treaty, the participating countries’ investment in R&amp;D as a percentage of GDP has declined , not increased.
It is rather obvious that if you invest massively in inefficient solar panels, most of your money will go to buy the physical panels, whereas only a very small part will go to R&amp;D. If you want more R&amp;D, you should spend your money directly on R&amp;D. This could tackle global warming in the longer run.
Finally, it is often claimed that high CO2 taxes and subsidies for green technology will actually do good, and again Denmark is often taken as an example.
After all, it is argued, Denmark has kept its CO2 emissions flat while enjoying 70% economic growth since 1981.
But could it have grown more if it had not restricted CO2 emissions?
During the same period, US emissions grew 29%, but its GDP grew 39% more than Denmark’s, indicating a simple truth: CO2 cuts and subsidies don’t necessarily mean no growth, but they probably do mean slower growth.
President-elect Obama is now facing countless people who claim that subsidies for renewable energy and CO2 taxes are great ways to tackle global warming and forge a new green economy.
Unfortunately, this is almost entirely incorrect.
Taxes and subsidies are always expensive, and will likely impede growth.
Moreover, if we really want to tackle global warming, we shouldn’t spend vast sums of money buying inefficient green technology – we should invest directly in R&amp;D to make future green technology competitive.
Obama should seize the initiative and make the meeting in Copenhagen next year not about bloated subsidies for inefficient technologies, but about lean investments in future breakthroughs.
That is the way to tackle global warming and support a genuinely vibrant economy.
Missing America
BERLIN – Madeleine Albright, the former US secretary of state, once described the United States as the “indispensable nation.”
Current developments around the world are proving her right.
But the proof has been almost entirely negative: Today, America’s importance has become apparent from the absence of US leadership in one crisis after another –&#160;an absence that is most immediately obvious in Syria.
In fact, a post-American world is taking shape before our eyes, characterized not by a new international order, but by political ambiguity, instability, and even chaos.
This is unfortunate, and could turn out to be so dangerous that even die-hard anti-Americans end up longing for the passé American century and the US role as a global force for order.
I am relatively certain that the US will successfully manage its reorientation and realignment, but the relative weight and reach of its power will nonetheless decline in the new world of the twenty-first century, as others grow in strength and catch up.
Certainly, America’s global role will not be called into question.
China will be busy addressing its own internal contradictions for a long time yet.
Nor is India or Russia likely to pose a serious challenge.
And Europe’s din of conflicting voices appears to preclude it from claiming America’s mantle.
But, while none of these powers represents a serious alternative to America’s global role, the US will no longer be able to act unilaterally, as it did after the Cold War’s end, and it will be weakened substantially.
This change has become particularly obvious in the Middle East and the Asia-Pacific region.
In the Middle East, the regional order created by the colonial powers, France and Britain, following World War I, was maintained throughout the Cold War and the brief era of unilateral US domination that followed; the convulsions of recent years, however, could well bring about its end.
The colonial borders are being called into question, and what will become of Syria, Lebanon, Iraq, and Jordan is difficult to forecast.
The potential for regional disintegration and reconstitution – a process that can unleash untold violence, as in Syria – is greater than ever.
Moreover, while there is no new regional hegemon to follow America, there are numerous contenders for the role.
But none – Iran, Turkey, and Saudi Arabia being the most prominent – is strong enough to decide matters in its own favor.
Given the lack of a new force for order in the region in the foreseeable future, and the old one’s unwillingness to act, the danger of long-lasting violent confrontation is growing.
Even if America once again pursued military intervention in the region, its power would no longer be sufficient to enforce its will.
Indeed, it is precisely because the US, after more than a decade of war, understands this only too well that any American administration will think twice before intervening militarily in the region again.
Things look different in Asia, where the US not only remains present, but has increased its commitments.
In East and South Asia, nuclear powers (China, Russia, India, Pakistan, and North Korea) or near-nuclear powers (Japan and South Korea) are all entangled in dangerous strategic rivalries.
Add to this a regular dose of North Korean irrationality.
While the US presence in the region has so far prevented its numerous conflicts and rivalries from intensifying, sources of uncertainty are multiplying.
Will China be wise enough to seek reconciliation and partnerships with its neighbors, large and small, rather than aiming for regional domination?
What will become of the Korean Peninsula?
And what implications does Japan’s nationalist turn – and its risky economic policy – hold for the region?
Can India and China stem the deterioration in bilateral relations?
Is state failure looming in Pakistan?
Imagine this situation without America’s military and political strength.
The region would be dramatically more dangerous.
At the same time, America’s straitened resources mean that its new global role will require more careful consideration of national interests in setting priorities.
Clearly, the Asia-Pacific region takes precedence in US calculations.
This new, more focused and limited American role thus raises the following question for America’s European partners: Can they afford the luxury of being unable to defend themselves without US help?
Certainly, America’s guarantee of its NATO allies’ security will not become worthless; but it will become far more difficult to redeem it in full.
And, if a post-American world entails greater risk of chaos and its consequences than hope for a new, stable order – a risk that affects Europe in particular – then perhaps Europe should reverse course on its apparent determination to dismantle itself.
Too Big To Handle
WASHINGTON, DC – In the discussion of whether America’s largest financial institutions have become too big, a sea change in opinion is underway.
Two years ago, during the debate about the Dodd-Frank financial-reform legislation, few people thought that global megabanks represented a pressing problem.
Some prominent senators even suggested that very large European banks represented something of a role model for the United States.
In any case, the government, according to the largest banks’ CEOs, could not possibly impose a cap on their assets’ size, because to do so would undermine the productivity and competitiveness of the US economy.
Such arguments are still heard – but, increasingly, only from those employed by global megabanks, including their lawyers, consultants, and docile economists.
Everyone else has shifted to the view that these financial behemoths have become too large and too complex to manage – with massive adverse consequences for the wider economy.
And every time the CEO of such a bank is forced to resign, the evidence mounts that these organizations have become impossible to manage in a responsible way that generates sustainable value for shareholders and keeps taxpayers out of harm’s way.
Wilbur Ross, a legendary investor with great experience in the financial services sector, nicely articulated the informed private-sector view on this issue.
He recently told CNBC,
“I think it was a fundamental error for banks to get as sophisticated as they have, and I think that the bigger problem than just size is the question of complexity.
I think maybe banks have gotten too complex to manage as opposed to just too big to manage.”
In the wake of Vikram Pandit’s resignation as CEO of Citigroup, John Gapper pointed out in the Financial Times that “Citi’s shares trade at less than a third of the multiple to book value of Wells Fargo,” because the latter is a “steady, predictable bank,” whereas Citigroup has become too complex.
Gapper also quotes Mike Mayo, a leading analyst of the banking sector: “Citi is too big to fail, too big to regulate, too big to manage, and it has operated as if it’s too big to care.”Even Sandy Weill, who built Citi into a megabank, has turned against his own creation.
At the same time, top regulators have begun to articulate – with some precision – what needs to be done.
Our biggest banks must become simpler.
Tom Hoenig, a former president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City and now a top official at the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, advocates separating big banks’ commercial and securities-trading activities.
The cultures never mesh well, and big securities businesses are notoriously difficult to manage.
Hoenig and Richard Fisher, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, have been leading the charge on this issue within the Federal Reserve System.
Both of them emphasize that “too complex to manage” is almost synonymous with “too big to manage,” at least within the US banking system today.
George Will, a widely read conservative columnist, recently endorsed Fisher’s view .
Big banks get a big taxpayer subsidy – in the form of downside protection for their creditors.
This confers on them a funding advantage and completely distorts markets.
These subsidies are dangerous; they encourage excessive risk-taking and very high leverage – meaning a lot of debt relative to equity for each bank and far too much debt relative to the economy as a whole.
Now these themes have been picked up by Dan Tarullo, an influential member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
In an important recent speech, Tarullo called for a cap on the size of America’s largest banks, to limit their non-deposit liabilities as a percentage of GDP – an entirely sensible approach, and one that fits with legislation that has been proposed by two congressmen, Senator Sherrod Brown and Representative Brad Miller.
Tarullo rightly does not regard limiting bank size as a panacea – his speech made it clear that there are many potential risks to any financial system.
But, in the often-nuanced language of central bankers, Tarullo conveyed a clear message: the cult of size has failed.
More broadly, we have lost sight of what banking is supposed to do.
Banks play an essential role in all modern economies, but that role is not to assume a huge amount of risk, with the downside losses covered by society.
Ross got it right again this week, when he said:
“I think that the real purpose and the real need that we have in this country for banks is to make loans particularly to small business and to individuals.
I think that’s the hard part to fill.”
He continued,
“Our capital markets are sufficiently sophisticated and sufficiently deep that most large corporations have plenty of alternative ways to find capital.
Smaller companies and private individuals don’t have really the option of public markets.
They’re the ones that most severely need the banks.
I think they’ve kind of lost track of that purpose.”
Hoenig and Fisher have the right vision.
Tarullo is heading down the right path.
Ross and many others in the private sector fully understand what needs to be done.
Those who oppose their proposed reforms are most likely insiders – people who have received payments from big banks over the past year or two.
Two Dollar Fallacies
CAMBRIDGE – The United States’ current fiscal and monetary policies are unsustainable.
The US government’s net debt as a share of GDP has doubled in the past five years, and the ratio is projected to be higher a decade from now, even if the economy has fully recovered and interest rates are in a normal range.
An aging US population will cause social benefits to rise rapidly, pushing the debt to more than 100% of GDP and accelerating its rate of increase.
Although the Federal Reserve and foreign creditors like China are now financing the increase, their willingness to do so is not unlimited.
Likewise, the Fed’s policy of large-scale asset purchases has increased commercial banks’ excess reserves to unprecedented levels (approaching $2 trillion), and has driven the real interest rate on ten-year Treasury bonds to an unprecedented negative level.
As the Fed acknowledges, this will have to stop and be reversed.
While the future evolution of these imbalances remains unclear, the result could eventually be a sharp rise in long-term interest rates and a substantial fall in the dollar’s value, driven mainly by foreign investors’ reluctance to continue expanding their holdings of US debt.
American investors, fearing an unwinding of the fiscal and monetary positions, might contribute to these changes by seeking to shift their portfolios to assets of other countries.
While I share these concerns, others frequently rely on two key arguments to dismiss the fear of a run on the dollar: the dollar is a reserve currency, and it carries fewer risks than other currencies.
Neither argument is persuasive.
Consider first the claim that the dollar’s status as a reserve currency protects it, because governments around the world need to hold dollars as foreign exchange reserves.
The problem is that foreign holdings of dollar securities are no longer primarily “foreign exchange reserves” in the traditional sense.
In earlier decades, countries held dollars because they needed to have a highly liquid and widely accepted currency to bridge the financing gap if their imports exceeded their exports.
The obvious candidate for this reserve fund was US Treasury bills.
But, since the late 1990’s, countries like South Korea, Taiwan, and Singapore have accumulated very large volumes of foreign reserves, reflecting both export-driven growth strategies and a desire to avoid a repeat of the speculative currency attacks that triggered the 1997-1998 Asian financial crisis.
With each of these countries holding more than $200 billion in foreign-exchange holdings –&#160;and China holding more than $3 trillion – these are no longer funds intended to bridge trade-balance shortfalls.
They are major national assets that must be invested with attention to yield and risk.
So, although dollar bonds and, increasingly, dollar equities are a large part of these countries’ sovereign wealth accounts, most of the dollar securities that they hold are not needed to finance trade imbalances.
Even if these countries want to continue to hold a minimum core of their portfolios in a form that can be used in the traditional foreign-exchange role, most of their portfolios will respond to their perception of different currencies’ risks.
In short, the US no longer has what Valéry Giscard d’Estaing, as France’s finance minister in the 1960’s, accurately called the “exorbitant privilege” that stemmed from having a reserve currency as its legal tender.
But some argue that, even if the dollar is not protected by being a reserve currency, it is still safer than other currencies.
If investors don’t want to hold euros, pounds, or yen, where else can they go?
That argument is also false.
Large portfolio investors don’t put all of their funds in a single currency.
They diversify their funds among different currencies and different types of financial assets.
If they perceive that the dollar and dollar bonds have become riskier, they will want to change the distribution of assets in their portfolios.
So, even if the dollar is still regarded as the safest of assets, the demand for dollars will decline if its relative safety is seen to have declined.
When that happens, exchange rates and interest rates can change without assets being sold and new assets bought.
If foreign holders of dollar bonds become concerned that the unsustainability of America’s situation will lead to higher interest rates and a weaker dollar, they will want to sell dollar bonds.
If that feeling is widespread, the value of the dollar and the price of dollar bonds can both decline without any net change in the holding of these assets.
The dollar’s real trade-weighted value already is more than 25% lower than it was a decade ago, notwithstanding the problems in Europe and in other countries.
And, despite a more competitive exchange rate, the US continues to run a large current-account deficit.
If progress is not made in reducing the projected fiscal imbalances and limiting the growth of bank reserves, reduced demand for dollar assets could cause the dollar to fall more rapidly and the interest rate on dollar securities to rise.
Democracy in Arabia?
PARIS – In Democracy in America, Alexis de Tocqueville argued that the public’s trust alleviates pressure on the state, allowing it to function more effectively.
This should give some comfort to governments in the Arab world, where a 2012 survey of young people showed 72% of the respondents expressing greater trust in their governments.
But what, then, accounts for the continuing civil turmoil and government paralysis in the Arab-Spring countries?
A more recent version of the survey provides some clues.
A large majority of Arab youths, around 70%, say that they are most influenced by parents, family, and religion, whereas only about a third report that elite groups – writers, business leaders, community leaders, and media outlets – have any influence on their outlook on life.
Indeed, just 16% reported that pop stars influenced their outlook.
These figures provide some useful insights into the evolving social fabric of Arab societies.
Normally, people are open to influence from those whom they trust and wish to emulate.
The fact that a large majority of Arabs turns to family and religion is highly revealing.
Arab societies, particularly those in turmoil, are regressing to what another French social theorist, Émile Durkheim, called “mechanistic solidarity.”
This is social solidarity that evolves along lines of kinship and religion, underpinned by a sense of belonging to the same “homogenous” group.
Durkheim contrasts this phenomenon with the more progressive “organic solidarity” that evolves in modern societies according to people’s professional and functional relationships.
In times of elevated risk, real or perceived, people begin to organize increasingly on the basis of homogenous identities.
As a result, “mechanistic solidarity” grows stronger at the expense of “organic solidarity.”
The trend is often accelerated by the loss of jobs, which often leads people to abandon their professional and functional identities in favor of identities based on ethnicity, kinship, or religion.
In culturally diverse societies, such as Iraq and Lebanon, networks of social solidarity are based almost entirely on religious and ethnic affinity.
In more homogenous societies, such as Libya, social solidarity tends to follow tribal and partisan lines.
In Tunisia, too, there has been a similar regression to mechanistic types of solidarity organized around tribal, regional, and religious identities.
A dramatic manifestation of the mechanistic pattern of solidarity is now emerging in Syria, as well.
While Syrians have been facing death, violence, and displacement for more than two years, the international community has been busy debating the nature of the Syrian rebels.
Left to its fate, Syrian society began to disintegrate and reorganize on a sectarian basis.
As the conflict intensified, established profession-based identities began to disappear, giving way to family, regional, and religious solidarities.
Civil-society and professional groups have been unable to respond in a way that maintains organic social cohesion, owing to a lack of resources, weak capacity, or both.
Mechanistic solidarity has emerged as a more effective means to mobilize people and resources.
At the heart of the crisis is a strong element of indifference.
For example, the role of the Arab middle class has been notably muted in efforts to support Syrian refugees.
The American actress Angelina Jolie’s highly publicized visits to Syrian refugee camps in Jordan and Turkey underscored the near-absence of similar awareness campaigns by Arab celebrities.
Indeed, while millions of Arabs tune in weekly to watch and vote for their favorite singers on the Arabic version of The Voice and Arab Idol, a fund-raising campaign for the benefit of Syrian refugees has yet to be organized.
By contrast, TV channels with specific religious and sectarian affiliations have been very active, including on social media, in fundraising efforts.
It is perhaps not surprising, then, that most Arab youth do not see role models beyond their close social circles.
In short, Arab countries are hemorrhaging social capital, which can significantly derail economic recovery and state-building.
As the Nobel laureate economist Kenneth Arrow argued in 1972, “much of the economic backwardness in the world can be explained by the lack of mutual confidence.”
Against this background, the recently announced Arab Stabilization Plan, an Arab-led private-sector initiative aimed at creating tens of thousands of jobs through large-scale infrastructure investment, is exactly the type of action needed to preserve social cohesion.
International efforts, led by the World Bank and other international donors, have tended to focus on strengthening relations between the state and its citizens in order to achieve “Tocquevillian” gains – that is, operational democracy and effective government.
But what is urgently needed is a strong complementary focus on job creation to preserve and foster Durkheim’s organic solidarity.
The Gulag of the Russian Mind
It is now 15 years since the failed coup of August 1991 against Mikhail Gorbachev.
At the time, Gorbachev’s policies of perestroika and glasnost were seen by Soviet hardliners as a sell-out of communist Russia to the capitalist West.
But it is now clear that the KGB and the military who launched the coup were not defending the idea of communism.
Instead, they were protecting their idea of Russia’s imperial mission, a notion that had given the Kremlin commissars greater control of the vast Russian empire, and of Russia’s neighbors, than any of the Tsars had ever enjoyed.
Gorbachev’s reforms not only liberated ordinary Russians from the straitjacket of Marxism-Leninism, but also released the national aspirations of people who had been locked in the empire for centuries.
Having seen the peoples of Central Europe free themselves from Soviet domination just two years before, the constituent nations of the USSR were beginning to seek the same freedom for themselves.
The Baltic republics of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania were the first to insist on traveling their own national path, and have since linked their fate to Europe as members of the European Union and NATO.
Others soon followed. By December 1991, the Soviet empire was no more.
But only the Baltics have secured the sort of independence dreamed of in 1991.
Georgia, which is both European and Asiatic, teeters on the edge of instability.
Traditionally Asian Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan have resumed the tribal forms of autocracy they practiced throughout the centuries.
Azerbaijan and Kazakhstan have in essence become their presidents’ wholly owned family fiefs.
Ukraine’s break with Russia was perhaps the most wrenching, both for those in the Kremlin nostalgic for imperial control and for ordinary Russians who see Ukraine as the wellspring of Russian civilization.
The Orange Revolution of 2004, which overturned a rigged presidential election, proved that Ukraine was no longer a Malorossiya (a small Russia), an inferior and subordinate Slavic brother.
Indeed, that peaceful revolution, led by Viktor Yushchenko and Yuliya Tymoshenko, was a reminder of how enlightened Kievan Rus had been before it was forced to give way to the despotic princes of Moscow.
Two years after the Orange revolt, Yushchenko (a politician who seems out of his depth) has now accepted the Kremlin placeman Viktor Yanukovych, the foe he had vanquished in 2004, as his new prime minister.
Nonetheless, the Orange movement – now led by Yushchenko’s former partner and prime minister, Tymoshenko – has not fully lost its way, and still aims to preserve Ukraine as a truly independent and free country. Malorossiya , for the majority of Ukrainians, remains a thing of the past.
Despite all these epochal changes, Russians cannot accept the loss of their imperial role.
The dream of empire is, indeed, the gulag that imprisons the Russian mind.
Most Russians do not regard Europe’s approach to their country’s borders as a sign that they have, at long last, fully united with the civilization of which they are a part, but as a source of insecurity.
Something more is at work here than mere nostalgia.
During the chaotic years of Boris Yeltsin’s presidency, it was perhaps understandable that Russians regretted their loss of great power status.
Something had to be blamed for their dire economic conditions.
Yet under President Vladimir Putin, with the economy growing robustly, these feelings have hardened, not diminished.
Russians are reverting to the past – to the grand pronouncements of Russia as a unique great nation, destined to rule the world.
As before the advent of Gorbachev – indeed, restoring a centuries-old tendency – Russians yet again believe that the people should be willing to forfeit their freedoms for the sake of the greatness of the state, which wins wars and launches Sputniks.
A free press, free speech, and free elections, it is feared, may diminish the brute power that is needed for Russia to assert itself.
Russians have long boasted of their various unique forms of greatness: first it was the holy Russian soul, so superior to Western practicality.
In the fifteenth century, Moscow was declared a “Third Rome,” the savior of spiritual Christianity.
The seventeenth century united this spiritual mission with imperial expansion, which eventually encompassed a landmass spanning 11 times zones.
In the early twentieth century, the imperial and spiritual mission became one, as Russia became the bastion of world communism.
All these forms of greatness, however, demanded that ordinary Russians accept their debasement and enslavement.
Development is not seen as a means of improving people’s lives, but as helping Russia prove itself to be superior to everybody else.
So, ultimately, the material achievements of Russian development always come with a body count.
Joseph Stalin’s industrialization killed millions – and became obsolete in only 30 years.
Putin’s Russia doesn’t go in for mass killing, yet it has not lost the country’s “superiority” complex.
For Russia’s elite, a restaurant bill cannot be too expensive, and one can never have enough bodyguards waiting out front for you.
On a grander scale, Putin’s Russia has become a great power in terms of energy production, but that looks to be temporary, as scant investment is being made to maintain and improve the oil and gas fields.
What matters is selling the reserves and being rich now, not finding more for later.
So, as always, the trouble with Russia is that the state develops, but society doesn’t.
The good of the people is sacrificed for the good of the nation.
The dream of great Russia remains the gulag of the Russian mind.
Erdoğan Is Not Turkey’s Only Problem
PRINCETON – Türkan Saylan was a trailblazing physician, one of Turkey’s first female dermatologists and a leading campaigner against leprosy.
She was also a staunch secularist who established a foundation to provide scholarships to young girls so they could attend school.
In 2009, police raided her house and confiscated documents in an investigation that linked her to an alleged terrorist group, called “Ergenekon,” supposedly bent on destabilizing Turkey in order to precipitate a military coup.
Saylan was terminally ill with cancer at the time and died shortly thereafter.
But the case against her associates continued and became part of a vast wave of trials directed against opponents of Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan and his allies in the powerful Gülen movement, made up of the followers of the Islamic preacher Fethullah Gülen.
The evidence in this case, as in so many others, consists of Microsoft Word documents found on a computer that belonged to Saylan’s foundation.
When American experts recently examined the forensic image of the hard drive, they made a startling – but for Turkey all too familiar – discovery.
The incriminating files had been placed on the hard drive sometime after the computer’s last use at the foundation.
Because the computer had been seized by the police, the finding pointed rather directly to official malfeasance.
Fabricated evidence, secret witnesses, and flights of investigative fancy are the foundation of the show trials that Turkish police and prosecutors have mounted since 2007.
In the infamous Sledgehammer case, a military-coup plot was found to contain glaring anachronisms, including the use of Microsoft Office 2007 in documents supposedly last saved in 2003.
(My father-in-law is among the more than 300 officers who were locked up, and my wife and I have been active in documenting the case’s fabrications.)
The list of revelations and absurdities goes on and on.
In one case, a document describing a plot directed against Christian minorities turned out to have been in police possession before the authorities claimed to have recovered it from a suspect.
In another, police “discovered” the evidence that they were seeking, despite going to the wrong address and raiding the home of a naval officer whose name sounded similar to that of the target.
Yet none of the trials has yet been derailed.
Most have had the support and blessing of Erdoğan, who has exploited them to discredit the old secular guard and cement his rule.
Even more important, the trials have had the strong backing of the Gülen movement.
Gülen lives in self-imposed exile in Pennsylvania, where he presides over a huge informal network of schools, think tanks, businesses, and media across five continents.
His devotees have established roughly 100 charter schools in the United States alone, and the movement has gained traction in Europe since the first Gülen school was founded in Stuttgart, Germany, in 1995.
Back home, Gülen’s followers have created what is effectively a state within the Turkish state, gaining a strong foothold in the police force, the judiciary, and the bureaucracy.
Gülenists deny that they control the Turkish police, but, as a US ambassador to Turkey put it in 2009, “we have found no one who disputes it.”
The movement’s influence within the judiciary ensures that its members’ transgressions remain unchallenged.
In one well-documented case, a non-commissioned officer at a military base, acting on behalf of the Gülen movement, was caught planting documents in order to embarrass military officials.
The military prosecutor investigating the case soon found himself in jail on trumped-up charges, while the perpetrator was reinstated.
A senior police commissioner who had been close to the movement and wrote an exposé about its activities was accused of collaborating with the far-left groups that he had spent much of his career pursuing; he, too, ended up in jail.
The Gülen movement uses these trials to lock up critics and replace opponents in important state posts.
The ultimate goal seems to be to reshape Turkish society in the movement’s own conservative-religious image.
Gülenist media have been particularly active in this cause, spewing a continuous stream of disinformation about defendants in Gülen-mounted trials while covering up police misdeeds.
But relations between Erdoğan and the Gülenists have soured.
Once their common enemy, the secularists, were out of the way, Erdoğan had less need for the movement.
The breaking point came in February 2012, when Gülenists tried to bring down his intelligence chief, a close confidant, reaching perilously close to Erdoğan himself.
Erdoğan responded by removing many Gülenists from their positions in the police and judiciary.
But Erdoğan’s ability to take on the Gülen movement is limited.
Bugging devices were recently found in Erdoğan’s office, planted, his close associates said, by the police.
Yet Erdoğan, known for his brash style, responded with remarkable equanimity.
If he harbored any doubt that the movement sits on troves of embarrassing – and possibly far worse – intelligence, the bugging revelation must surely have removed it.
The foreign media have focused mainly on Erdoğan’s behavior in recent months.
But if Turkey has turned into a Kafkaesque quagmire, a republic of dirty tricks and surreal conspiracies, it is Gülenists who must shoulder much of the blame.
This is worth remembering in view of the movement’s efforts to dress up its current opposition to Erdoğan in the garb of democracy and pluralism.
Gülenist commentators preach about the rule of law and human rights, even as Gülenist media champion flagrant show trials.
The movement showcases Fethullah Gülen as a beacon of moderation and tolerance, while his Turkish-language Web site peddles his anti-Semitic, anti-Western sermons.
Such double talk seems to have become second nature to Gülenist leaders.
The good news is that the rest of the world has started to see Erdoğan’s republic for what it is: an increasingly authoritarian regime built around a popular but deeply flawed leader.
Indeed, his government’s crackdown on dissent may well have cost Istanbul the 2020 Olympics.
What has yet to be recognized is the separate, and quite disturbing, role that the Gülen movement has played in bringing Turkey to its current impasse.
As Americans and Europeans debate the Gülen movement’s role in their own societies, they should examine Turkey’s experience more closely.
The Haitian Miracle?
This spring’s presidential election in Haiti sadly re-enforced the country’s blighted reputation.
The paradox is that today Haiti has a chance, perhaps the best in its modern history, to escape from its long history of extreme poverty and turmoil.
A mere one-hour flight from Miami, the country struggles with poverty levels akin to the poorest parts of sub-Saharan Africa.
But, whereas many parts of the world are extremely poor because of their isolation, Haiti is extremely poor despite its proximity to the world’s largest market.
Now, Haiti can turn its geography into a competitive advantage, but only if the United States helps.
Haiti recalls a famous lament once heard about another US neighbor, Mexico: “So far from God and so close to the United States.”
As with Mexico, Haiti’s proximity to the US has cut both ways in its history.
Proximity to the US should, of course, be an advantage for exports and attracting investment.
However, proximity has also meant US meddling.
Haiti was the second country, after the US, to win its independence from Europe, following a slave rebellion in 1804.
But America regarded Haiti as a threat rather than as a colleague in freedom, refusing to extend diplomatic recognition until after the outbreak of the Civil War, which finally brought an end to slavery in the US.
Even after recognition by President Abraham Lincoln in 1862, relations remained sour.
Haiti was exploited and occasionally occupied by US troops, rather than being regarded as a legitimate partner in trade and diplomacy.
Meanwhile, Haiti’s ecological and demographic conditions posed huge development challenges that have never been overcome.
The island is hit regularly by devastating hurricanes.
It has been massively deforested, and its soils have been depleted of nutrients.
Tropical diseases remain killers to this day.
A devastating economic blow occurred in the mid-nineteenth century, when Europe learned to produce sugar from a temperate-zone crop, beets, rather than from tropical sugar cane.
World sugar prices collapsed, and Haiti fell into deeper disarray.
Extreme poverty bred illiteracy and miserable governance, which in turn intensified hunger, disease, and instability.
Aristide’s government was ousted under highly contested circumstances in 2004.
The newly elected president, Rene Preval, is a highly talented and experienced agronomist, and thus has the perfect background to revive Haiti’s degraded rural economy.
With the US market close by, Haiti could achieve a remarkable recovery of exports of horticulture, fruits, and other agricultural products, as well as tourism and light manufactured goods.
The key will be for the new government to provide a sound framework which combines key public investments – roads, power, soil nutrients, improved seed varieties, public health, safe water – with confidence-building outreach to the business community and fruitful relations with the US and other donor countries.
This time, the US has a strong interest in cooperating fully to promote economic progress: another round of failure would only provoke chaos, including massive numbers of new refugees to the US.
The gap between Haiti’s performance and its potential is now so large that great gains can be achieved in income levels, farming, health, education, and more.
Crop yields are below one ton of cereal per hectare of farmland – far less than half of what is readily achievable if farmers are helped to gain access to fertilizers, improved seeds, and basic infrastructure.
Similarly, health conditions are horrendous, but could be improved dramatically just with immunization, de-worming, safe water, antibiotics, and anti-malaria bed nets.
Community health workers could be trained in a matter of months to extend basic health care throughout rural areas, which could then be better mobilized to fend off the debilitating results of future hurricanes.
On the economic front, Haiti can become a profitable exporter of tropical crops such as groundnuts, mangos, cut flowers, string beans, and bamboo – a source of progress among Haiti’s Caribbean-basin neighbors.
Preval’s own hometown has successfully used a modest level of external donor support to create new rural cooperatives to market improved crops.
And, with its beautiful beaches and remarkable arts and music, Haiti could once again become a major tourist destination.
Indeed, Haiti can become an inspiration for many other fragile and impoverished new democracies.
The US, France, Canada, and other major donor countries must not miss this historic opportunity to give vital help to Preval’s democratically elected new government.
The Hamas Earthquake
Hamas’s crushing defeat of Fatah in this week’s elections brings the Palestinian people to a crossroads.
An Islamist political party that previously abstained from national politics and rejects Fatah’s policy of negotiations with Israel, is now in charge in Palestine.
Hamas won 76 of 132 seats in the Palestinian Legislative Council, and can count on support from four independent deputies.
Overall, that’s 60% of the seats in Parliament, won in nearly every district in the West Bank and Gaza.
Hamas entered electoral politics only recently, but its massive victory was preceded by wide success in municipal elections.
Hamas’s political moment has come.
Under Palestinian law, Mahmoud Abbas, the Palestinian president, must now ask Hamas to form a new government.
For their part, Fatah officials seem unwilling to join a Hamas-led government.
Although Hamas has said that it would seek such a coalition, Fatah’s humiliating defeat has left it with little credibility as a governing partner.
So far, Fatah’s senior leaders have declared that they will be a loyal opposition in Parliament, leaving governmental responsibility to Hamas.
Instead, they will have to focus on rebuilding and reenergizing Fatah.
Hamas is well aware of the shock that its victory has produced.
If Fatah refuses to join a coalition, Hamas may opt for a government of independents and technocrats.
It is unlikely that Hamas will form a government composed of hardliners.
The political, security, and economic circumstances of the Palestinians require a government focused on solving problems, not ideological purity.
The most urgent challenge facing the new government is rampant lawlessness and anarchy throughout Palestinian society.
Murder, kidnapping, and extortion have reached record heights.
Armed individuals resort to kidnapping to get jobs, free family members from prison, and exact revenge.
Often, the people involved in these crimes belong to local gangs or even to the militias of large clans.
In opposition, Hamas adamantly refused to collect illegal weapons.
Now, it will have to deal with a Palestinian society that is armed to the teeth, with poverty rates reaching 70% and unemployment at 35% .
Having benefited from overwhelming political rejection of Fatah, Hamas will now be judged by how it uses its new authority.
For the first time, a political clock is ticking for Hamas.
Senior Hamas officials are well aware of the challenge, and have promised a complete overhaul of Palestinian public services and administration.
More than anything else, Hamas’s success in the coming months will be measured by its response to these issues.
Will Hamas be able to root out corruption and incompetence, and deliver services fairly and efficiently?
How will its election affect Palestine’s foreign aid inflows, which form major component of the national budget?
Initial international reaction to the Hamas victory has been severe.
The Bush administration has declared that it will not deal with a Hamas government, because Hamas remains committed to Israel’s destruction.
This, indeed, is the language of Hamas’s 1988 covenant.
Interestingly, however, Hamas’s election platform combined different approaches to the issue of a Palestinian state.
On the one hand, Hamas agreed for the first time to the establishment of a Palestinian state in the West Bank and Gaza, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
On the other hand, the platform repeats Hamas’s refusal to relinquish even an inch of historic Palestine.
Whether Hamas can actually be transformed into a more moderate organization is impossible to say right now.
But it is clear that Hamas is now vulnerable to public opinion and, as a governing authority, will have to deal with the international response to its victory.
Immediately after the election, a senior Hamas official, Mahmoud al-Zahar, said that Hamas would maintain the cease-fire with Israel begun last February, if Israel did the same.
Hamas may be signaling that it will not provoke Israel.
Perhaps its governing responsibilities will push Hamas toward ongoing discussions with the United States and the international community.
In any case, despite the election results, and even without Fatah in government, Abbas remains in charge of negotiations with Israel.
He has quickly called for a revival of peace talks, although Israel, like the US, has refused to deal with Hamas.
Palestinians have entered uncharted waters.
They turned out in droves to vote in an election that former US President Jimmy Carter described as honest, fair and unmarked by violence.
They elected a party which called for “reform and change” in response to a decade of violence and lawlessness.
And Palestinians accepted Hamas’s view that negotiations based on the Oslo Accords could not achieve Palestinian rights and political ambitions.
Victory achieved, Hamas will take on the responsibility for the Palestinian side in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
With the Palestinians’ future at stake – not to mention the future of Israel and the Middle East – no one can say if Hamas is up to the task.
The Hamas Veto
GAZA CITY – The resumption of direct peace talks between the Palestinians and Israelis has broken 20 months of stalemate, and marked the entry of Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu into this round of diplomacy.
But these difficult talks face significant challenges from outside the negotiating room, particularly from Hamas, which is intent on ensuring that nothing happens without its approval.
Hamas refuses all direct peace negotiations with Israel, and has vowed to derail the current talks through violence.
Their first blow came on the eve of the talks, when the al-Qassam Brigades, Hamas’ military wing, carried out an ambush on Israeli settlers in Hebron, killing four people.
Hamas has vowed to continue launching its attacks from inside the West Bank, but not from Gaza.
This follows from Hamas leaders’ frequent statements since the 2008 Gaza war that they do not want to provoke another Israeli attack, which could cost them their governing position.
Israel does not recognize a distinction between Hamas-planned attacks from the West Bank and from Gaza.
However, a large-scale Israeli assault on Hamas’s Gaza redoubt in response to the West Bank killings could bring the negotiations to a halt.
Hamas’s strategy is to expose the Palestinian Authority’s weakness by demonstrating that it cannot control the West Bank, as it promises in negotiations.
Moreover, Hamas is well aware that their attacks cause Israel to insist even more strongly on security as the centerpiece of any agreement.
This, in turn, puts the spotlight on ongoing security cooperation between Israel, the PA, and the United States, again undermining the PA’s claims to represent the Palestinian people.
Rhetoric aside, Hamas’s opposition to direct talks with Israel is intended to make clear to the US that Hamas is central to the political reality of the region and cannot be ignored.
If Hamas is not part of the process, there will be no process.
Hamas insists that Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas does not have the legitimacy to negotiate on behalf of the Palestinians, and that any deal he reaches with Israel is not binding.
Hamas claims to be the Palestinians’ true representative, having won the majority of seats in the Palestinian Legislative Council (PLC) in January 2006 (the PLC’s term expired in January 2010, but fresh elections have yet to be held).
As Hamas knows, the US holds the key to ending the political isolation imposed on it after its victory in 2006.
Indeed, Hamas leaders recently acknowledged sending messages to the Obama administration calling for dialogue.
The most recent note, sent through a group of visiting American academics, asked the US government to take a more balanced position in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Hamas, for its part, has expressed its willingness to accept a Palestinian state on the West Bank and Gaza, subject to a return of all refugees and Israel’s release of all Palestinian prisoners.
But Hamas has not taken what the US considers the critical step of recognizing Israel – and thus accepting a two-state solution.
For now, Hamas and the Palestinians of Gaza are excluded from the peace talks, which means that the negotiations will most likely not lead to an end to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
But every day that Gazans are left to stew in an unhealthy mix of siege, poverty, and unemployment is a day that strengthens the Hamas hardliners.
The US has invested much in shuttle diplomacy to bring Netanyahu and Abbas to the negotiating table and is not ready to see these talks collapse.
But the continuing US boycott of Hamas reinforces the logic of those who are trying to sabotage the negotiations.
What do they have to lose?
The future of these direct peace talks thus depends not only on Netanyahu and Abbas, but also on how they relate to the extremists within their camps.
Will Netanyahu abandon his ideological rhetoric, negotiate seriously with the Palestinians, and make the needed concessions?
Can the Palestinians rise to the political moment and take advantage of the pressure coming from US President Barack Obama?