Although the rise 25 years ago of Solidarity, the first independent civic movement in the former Soviet empire, had huge political consequences, Solidarity was, primarily, neither a political movement nor a labor union.
First and foremost, Solidarity was a cry of dignity.
We simply had reached the end of our endurance with the omnipresent and all-powerful communist apparatchiks who ruled in our workplaces, neighborhoods, even places of rest.
Writers, journalists, and artists could no longer stand the heavy-handed censorship and supervision.
In factories as well, Party bureaucrats wanted to know everything and decide everything.
Every civic initiative, every activity of any kind was subject to ideological evaluation and control.
All who were tempted to disobey were certain to be “taken care of” by the secret police.
Last winter, I saw a similar cry for dignity in Ukraine.
Those hundreds of thousands of people who camped for weeks on the freezing streets of Kiev did so because they were demanding their dignity.
Both the Polish and the Ukrainian experiences have convinced me that the will to live in dignity is the most powerful engine of human action, an engine that is capable of overcoming even the greatest fear.
But the desire for dignity is not enough to secure it. Something else is needed as well.
Second, Solidarity was a social movement.
This meant that Solidarity – ostensibly a labor union – became a home for people from all social groups and classes in Poland: workers and intellectuals, engineers and artists, doctors and patients.
Some passionately discussed economic reform, others talked about developing culture, while still others planned to reform education and the scientific establishment or assure the defense of the environment.
Solidarity created a public space for all of these discussions, while protecting us all against the party apparatus.
But Solidarity was still something more.
It was a Polish version of the ancient Greek agora, a meeting place of all citizens, a locus of a free conversation about our communal and individual future, about all kinds of problems and their solutions.
We did not yet have a free state, but we already had something more important than that: a free civil society engaged in discussing the common condition of its members.
The society embraced by Solidarity counted 10 million members; indeed, 10 million real citizens.
But even that was not enough to achieve the final victory over the party and police apparatus of the state.
Third, Solidarity was an institution; indeed, a unique one given the conditions under which we lived, and it is to its special institutional form that we owe our ultimate victory.
Between the organizational structure of Solidarity and the official state and party organizations there was what might be called a “gap between civilizations.”
Against the authoritarian and hierarchical structures of the regime, we raised a decentralized institution, a huge organism striving to achieve consensus about its aims and the methods of action.
It was an institution committed to respecting the integrity of all individuals and all other institutions.
This may not be extraordinary in old democratic communities; but in our authoritarian environment, it was strikingly new.
And only such a new institutional structure could respond to that deep cry for dignity.
So what is left of all this today?
To be sure, Solidarity achieved a stunning political success.
Poland is a free country, a member of NATO and of the EU, while the Soviet Union is no more.
But recent history has not been kind to the victors.
The leaders of the democratic revolutions in Eastern Europe quickly faded in the new environment.
Democratic elections brought out new and savvier politicians, often from among those who were part of the old regime.
More strikingly, some of our hopes for a new social order also crashed against the rocks of the new rules of the game.
True, Poland’s democratic institutions, despite their flaws, function rather well.
Economic growth has been impressive, and life is definitely getting better.
But the vibrancy of civil society, the sense of common purpose, the universal manifestations of social solidarity that our union stood for in its time – all these things are largely gone.
The union itself is a shell of its own former self, a partisan and mostly right-wing movement of workers buffeted by the new economic reality.
Most notably, the unifying character of Solidarity gave way to social divisions and, among many of Poland’s people, a large dose of alienation from both politics and civic engagements.
Is this what normalcy always means?
Do heady times of struggle always give way to a somewhat deflating taste of victory?
Am I merely a veteran wistfully reminiscing about the old days of struggle?
Perhaps.
But I am not a nostalgic type.
I know that we have come a long way, and I do not want to go back.
But was it really inevitable that so much solidarity had to escape our Solidarity?
Global Capital Heads for the Frontier
PRINCETON – So-called “frontier market economies" are the latest fad in investment circles.
Though these low-income countries – including Bangladesh and Vietnam in Asia, Honduras and Bolivia in Latin America, and Kenya and Ghana in Africa – have small, undeveloped financial markets, they are growing rapidly and are expected to become the emerging economies of the future.
In the last four years, inflows of private capital into frontier economies have been nearly 50% higher (relative to GDP) than flows into emerging market economies.
Whether that should be cheered or lamented is a question that has become a kind of Rorschach test for economic analysts and policymakers.
We now know that the promise of free capital mobility has not been redeemed.
By and large, the surge in capital inflows has boosted consumption rather than investment in recipient countries, exacerbating economic volatility and making painful financial crises more frequent.
Rather than exerting discipline, global financial markets have increased the availability of debt, thereby weakening profligate governments' budget constraints and over-extended banks' balance sheets.
The best argument for free capital mobility remains the one made nearly two decades ago by Stanley Fischer, then the International Monetary Fund's number two official and now Vice Chair of the US Federal Reserve.
Though Fischer recognized the perils of free-flowing capital, he argued that the solution was not to maintain capital controls, but to undertake the reforms required to mitigate the dangers.
Fischer made this argument at a time when the IMF was actively seeking to enshrine capital-account liberalization in its charter.
But then the world witnessed financial crises in Asia, Brazil, Argentina, Russia, Turkey, and eventually Europe and America.
To its credit, the Fund has since softened its line on capital controls.
In 2010, it issued a note that recognized capital controls as part of the arsenal of policy tools used to combat financial instability.
Nonetheless, at the IMF and in advanced countries, the prevailing view remains that capital controls are a last resort – to be used only after conventional macroeconomic and financial policies have been exhausted.
Free capital mobility continues to be the ultimate goal, even if some countries may have to take their time getting there.
There are two problems with this view.
First, as advocates of capital mobility tirelessly point out, countries must fulfill a long list of prerequisites before they can benefit from financial globalization.
These include the protection of property rights, effective contract enforcement, eradication of corruption, enhanced transparency and financial information, sound corporate governance, monetary and fiscal stability, debt sustainability, market-determined exchange rates, high-quality financial regulation, and prudential supervision.
In other words, a policy aimed at enabling growth in developing countries requires first-world institutions before it can work.
Worse, the list is not only long; it is also open ended.
As the advanced countries' experience with the global financial crisis has demonstrated, even the most sophisticated regulatory and supervisory systems are far from being failsafe.
Thus, demanding that developing countries build the kind of institutions that will render capital flows safe not only puts the cart before the horse; it is also a fool's errand.
Caution dictates a more pragmatic approach, one that recognizes a permanent role for capital controls alongside other regulatory and prudential tools.
The second problem concerns the possibility that capital inflows may be harmful to growth, even if we leave aside concerns about financial fragility.
Advocates of capital mobility assume that poor economies have lots of profitable investment opportunities that are not being exploited because of a shortage of investible funds.
Let capital come in, they argue, and investment and growth will take off.
But many developing countries are constrained by a lack of investment demand, not a shortage of domestic saving.
The social return on investment may be high, but private returns are low, owing to externalities, high taxes, poor institutions, or any of a wide array of other factors.
Capital inflows in economies that suffer from low investment demand fuel consumption, not capital accumulation.
They also fuel exchange-rate appreciation, which aggravates the investment shortage.
The profitability of tradable industries – those most likely to suffer from appropriability problems – takes a hit, and investment demand falls further.
In these economies, capital inflows may well retard growth rather than stimulate it.
Such concerns have led emerging economies to experiment with a variety of capital controls.
In principle, frontier market economies can learn much from this experience.
As the Johns Hopkins University economist Olivier Jeanne pointed out at a recent IMF conference organized to spur such learning, the capital-flow measures that have become fashionable of late do not work very well.
That is not because they fail to affect the quantity or composition of flows, but because such effects are quite small.
As Brazil, Colombia, South Korea, and others have learned, limited controls that target specific markets such as bonds or short-term bank lending do not have a significant impact on key outcomes – the exchange rate, monetary independence, or domestic financial stability.
The implication is that capital controls may need to be blunt and comprehensive, rather than surgical and targeted, to be truly effective.
Capital controls by themselves are no panacea, and they often create worse problems, such as corruption or a delay in needed reforms, than they solve.
But this is no different from any other area of government action.
We live in a second-best world where policy action is almost always partial (and partially effective), and well-intentioned reforms in one area may backfire in the presence of distortions elsewhere in the system.
In such a world, treating capital controls as the last resort, always and everywhere, has little rationale; indeed, it merely fetishizes financial globalization.
The world needs case-by-case, hardheaded pragmatism, recognizing that capital controls sometimes deserve a prominent place.
Fukushima and Derivatives Meltdowns
CAMBRIDGE – Financial commentators have likened Japan’s earthquake, tsunami, and nuclear catastrophe to derivatives’ role in the 2008 financial meltdown. The resemblance is clear enough: each activity yields big benefits and carries a tiny but explosive risk.
But the similarity between the two types of crisis ends where preventing their recurrence begins.
For the Fukushima nuclear-power plant, a 1,000-year flood and ordinarily innocuous design defects combined to deprive the reactors of circulating water coolant and cause serious radiation leaks.
In financial markets, an unexpected collapse in real-estate securities and design defects in the derivatives and repo markets combined to damage core financial institutions’ ability make good on their payment obligations.
While the basic risks originated outside the systems – a tsunami for Fukushima, over-investment in real-estate mortgages for financial institutions – design defects and bad luck meant that the system couldn’t contain the damage.
In the United States, AIG, Bear Stearns, and Lehman Brothers – all with large derivatives and/or repo investments – failed, freezing up credit markets for a scary few weeks.
We now understand the Fukushima risks and design defects well.
Not so for the derivatives risks that jeopardized the global economy.
For Fukushima, crews are valiantly trying to stop the radiation leakage.
But for derivatives, the analogous efforts are misdirected and won’t save us from the financial fire next time.
We are rebuilding derivatives and related financial structures atop the same, still-active faults.
Financial players use derivatives to transfer risk: one player assumes the risk of, say, euro fluctuation, but doesn’t want yen risk, while for another, it’s the opposite.
So the former promises to deliver euros next June 1, while the latter promises to deliver yen.
If one currency declines relative to the other, the loser pays the difference.
Repos are financing transactions.
Financial firms sell assets, like Treasury bonds or real-estate securities, for cash, and promise to buy those assets back (i.e., to repurchase them or, for short, to do a “repo”), typically the following day.
But, with the cash coming from short-term repos making up much of core financial firms’ balance sheets, tremors in financial markets could hit them hard, drying up repo financing for a few, as occurred in 2008. Some, like Bear Stearns, then failed.
Individual derivatives and repo transactions are hardly nefarious.
Each alone legitimately transfers risk to those better able to bear it, or backs financial holdings.
But, when over-used by systemically vital firms, they can blow up the financial system, owing to its design defects.
Even today, about 70% of the core US financial firms’ liabilities are very short-term loans, like overnight repos.
In the US, the main design defects are in bankruptcy law, which exempts derivatives and repos from most regular bankruptcy constraints.
For example, investors holding derivatives and repo contracts with a weakened financial institution can grab the firm’s assets ahead of – and at the expense of – its regular creditors, possibly sealing its fate, when, with a little extra time, the firm might have survived.
Such runs were the ruin of AIG, Bear Stearns, and others during the financial crisis.
Worse still, because derivatives and repo investors jump to the head of the repayment line in so many ways, they have less incentive to foster market discipline by closely monitoring their counterparties’ solvency and carefully rationing their exposure to any single counterparty.
They typically get repaid, regardless.
True, someone has to come first.
Other financial players take on more risk because derivatives and repo players’ bankruptcy exemptions put them first.
Usually, we would expect the others to have an interest in more market discipline.
But the next player in line is too often the US government, as guarantor of too-big-to-fail financial institutions, and it is poorly positioned to regulate these markets on a day-to-day basis.
It is not financially nimble; it is often captured by the regulated; and when economic times are good, no official wants to spoil the party.
The US Congress had a chance to fix this design defect in the major financial overhaul that it enacted last summer via the Dodd-Frank bill. But it didn’t.
If investors in derivatives, repos, and credit-default swaps lacked favored treatment, they would behave differently.
Above all, they would insist more often that their counterparties be well capitalized.
They accepted the risk implied by ultra-thin capitalizations when it was mainly US government money on the line; they would be more reluctant to do so if it was mostly their own money that they were wagering.
The public perceives Fukushima-type risks and derivatives risks differently.
Many fear nuclear risks, which are vivid, slowing the industry’s development amid safety concerns.
But the derivatives and repo markets present risks that are poorly understood, difficult to communicate in the media, and hard for politicians to debate and resolve.
During a crisis, these markets attract public attention and scorn, but, as the economy steadies, ordinary people lose interest, leaving the financial industry to control its own destiny with legislatures.
For Fukushima-type risks, analysts are already discussing how nuclear plants can be designed and built to contain earthquake and tsunami risks via passive cooling.
It is possible, the thinking now runs, to design and build nuclear plants that can keep the fuel rods cool even if all power is lost.
But little of importance has yet been done to prevent the damage that derivatives and repo bankruptcy priorities could cause in another financial-system meltdown.
New rules to require end-users (such as oil companies using derivatives to guard against unexpected oil-price changes) and others to put up good collateral are being developed.
But these rules don’t address the main problem: the weakened incentives for market discipline for core financial institutions.
It’s as if we reacted to Fukushima by better handling gas emissions in oil-shale projects.
We should be examining how to make derivatives and repo investors assume the full risk of their decisions when dealing with systemically vital financial institutions.
Instead, we survived the financial tsunami of 2008, only to rebuild in the same place, on the main financial fault-lines, using the same flawed design.
Fukushima, Europe\u0027s Nuclear Test
MADRID – Seen from Europe, the irrationality of the political and media discourse over nuclear energy has, if anything, increased and intensified in the year since the meltdown at Japan’s Fukushima Daiichi power plant.
Yet a dispassionate assessment of nuclear energy’s place in the world remains as necessary as it is challenging.
Europeans should not pontificate on nuclear-energy policy as if our opinion mattered worldwide, but we do.
On the other hand, Europe does have a qualified responsibility in the area of security, where we still can promote an international regulatory and institutional framework that would discipline states and bring about greater transparency where global risks like nuclear power are concerned.
Europe is equally responsible for advancing research on more secure technologies, particularly a fourth generation of nuclear-reactor technology.
We Europeans cannot afford the luxury of dismantling a high-value-added industrial sector in which we still have a real comparative advantage.
In Europe, Fukushima prompted a media blitz of gloom and doom over nuclear energy.
The German magazine Der Spiegel heralded the “9/11 of the nuclear industry” and “the end of the nuclear era,” while Spain’s leading newspaper El Pais preached that supporting “this energy [was] irrational,” and that “China has put a brake on its nuclear ambitions.”
But reality has proven such assessments to be both biased and hopelessly wrong.
True, a few countries – Belgium, Italy, Germany, and Switzerland, with Peru the only non- European country to join the trend – formally declared their intention to phase out or avoid nuclear energy.
These decisions affect a total of 26 reactors, while 61 reactors are under construction around the world, with another 156 projected and 343 under official consideration.
If these plans are realized, the number of functioning reactors, currently 437, will double.
But, more interestingly, the nuclear boom is not global: Brazil is at the forefront in Latin America, while the fastest development is occurring in Asia, mostly in China and India.
In this respect, nuclear energy’s advantages, particularly its reliability and predictable costs, stand out.
The International Energy Agency’s 2010 World Energy Outlook foresees a rise in global energy demand of 40% by 2030 – an unforgiving reality that is most tangibly felt in developing countries, particularly in Asia.
So expansion of nuclear energy is, and will continue to be, a fact.
To act responsibly, Europeans should be working to enhance international security standards for nuclear power, not opting out of the game.
The real lesson of Fukushima is that state controls are necessary but not sufficient to ensure nuclear safety.
Unfortunately, a proposal last year at the International Atomic Energy Agency aimed at launching an effective international control system on safety and security of nuclear power worldwide blatantly failed with the acquiescence of the European Union.
Worse still, with European backing, the IAEA’s budget, already a paltry €300 million, has been cut by almost 10%.
In this context, an initiative to mandate random IAEA inspections of 10% of the world’s operating reactors within three years was watered down, again with the EU’s active support, on the grounds that responsibility for security and inspections should rest primarily with member states.
Only a slim provision that made joint inspections with the IAEA voluntary made it into the final agreement.
The rise of nuclear power in Europe paralleled its post-war economic prowess.
It coincided with the peak of the West’s belief in its soaring economic strength and perpetual global ascendancy.
Today, with Europe increasingly seen as the sick man of the world’s economy, even the whole continent’s renunciation of nuclear energy would have little to no reverberation on the world stage.
Dictating the direction of the policy discourse is no longer Europe’s role.
Behaving responsibly is.
Private Wealth and European Solidarity
COLOGNE – A little-discussed but crucial factor in the debate over wealth transfers from Europe’s more economically sound north to its troubled south is the relationship between public debt, GDP, and private wealth (households’ financial and non-financial assets, minus their financial liabilities) – in particular, the ratio of private wealth to GDP in the eurozone countries.
While the European Central Bank’s bond-purchasing scheme has calmed financial markets to a considerable extent, some European economies – including Italy, Spain, Greece, and Portugal – are still at risk, because they are not growing fast enough to narrow their deficits and stem the growth of their national debts.
The grim irony here is that the ratio of private wealth to GDP in some of the countries that are in need of support from the ECB and northern eurozone members is equal to or higher than that in more solvent countries.
Consider Italy, which has the highest ratio of private wealth to public debt of any G-7 country, and is some 30% to 40% higher than in Germany.
Likewise, Italy and France share a private wealth/GDP ratio of five to one, while Spain’s – at least before the crisis hit the country in full – was six to one.
By contrast, the ratio in Germany, Europe’s largest creditor, is only 3.5 to one.
This discrepancy is at the heart of the question with which European policymakers are now grappling: Should taxpayers in debtor countries expect “solidarity” – or, more bluntly, money – from taxpayers in creditor countries?
Why should taxpayers in creditor countries have to take responsibility for financing the euro crisis, especially given that high private wealth/GDP ratios may result from low tax revenues over time, while lower ratios may reflect higher tax revenues?
Before seeking or accepting help from the rest of Europe, countries should employ all available domestic resources.
Debtor governments should call upon their own taxpayers to fund some of the national debt in order to avoid higher interest rates in credit markets.
They could, for example, offer an incentive in the form of a 3-4% interest rate on bonds, and even make them tax-free eventually.
This would allow Italy, Spain, and even Greece to finance their national debts at a more reasonable, sustainable cost.
Citizens’ voluntary financing of their countries’ national debt would be the most effective means of reducing strain on Europe’s financial resources, while simultaneously serving as a powerful symbol of solidarity.
By contrast, turning creditor-country citizens’ tax payments into forced subsidies of other countries’ debts would undermine European cohesion.
Nordic countries, for example, cannot be expected to fund other countries’ debts in the long term – especially if those countries have not made full use of their own resources.
In fact, while concerns over the eurozone’s survival tend to focus on its indebted members, Europe’s monetary union is at risk of losing one of the few members that still enjoys a triple-A credit rating: Finland.
Given Finland’s difficult domestic political situation, its citizens may look to Denmark and Sweden – which boast rapid growth and low national debt, and do not pay into the European Financial Stability Facility or the European Stability Mechanism – and decide that eurozone membership costs too much and is no longer worthwhile.
Italy and Spain have enough resources to rescue themselves, and to secure the time needed to restructure their economies.
Indeed, even after taking on the entire national debt, their private wealth/GDP ratios would still be higher than they are in some northern European countries.
Escaping the euro crisis is less a matter of economics than of political will.
By calling upon citizens to finance their own countries’ national debts, southern Europe’s leaders can fix their own economies and strengthen the European principles of solidarity and subsidiarity.
Furnace Cities
COPENHAGEN &#45;&#45; It’s possible to see, right now, what global warming will eventually do to the planet.
To peek into the future, all we have to do is go to Beijing, Athens, Tokyo, or, in fact, just about any city on Earth.
Most of the world’s urban areas have already experienced far more dramatic temperature hikes over the past few decades than the 2.6°C increase expected from global warming over the next hundred years.
It’s simple enough to understand.
On a hot day in New York, locals sprawl out on the grass fields of Central Park, not on asphalt parking lots or concrete sidewalks.
Bricks, concrete, and asphalt – the building blocks from which cities are made – absorb much more heat from the sun than vegetation does in the countryside.
Across an entire city, there’s much more tarmac than there is grass.
So the air above the city heats up.
This effect, called an “urban heat island,” was discovered in London in the early 1800’s.
Today, the fastest-growing cities are in Asia.
Beijing is roughly 10°C hotter than the nearby countryside in the daytime and 5.5°C warmer at night.
There are even more dramatic increases in Tokyo.
In August, temperatures there climbed 12.5oC above the surrounding countryside, reaching 40oC – a scorching heat that affected not only the downtown area, but also covered some 8,000 square kilometers.
Looking at a fast-growing city like Houston, Texas, we can see the real effect of the urban heat island.
Over the last 12 years, Houston grew by 20%, or 300,000 inhabitants.
During that time, the night time temperature increased about 0.8°C. Over a hundred-year period, that would translate to a whopping 7°C increase.
But, while celebrity activists warn about the impending doom posed by climate change, a more realistic view is offered by these cities’ ability to cope.
Despite dramatic increases over the past 50 or 100 years, these cities have not come tumbling down.
Even as temperatures have risen, heat-related deaths have decreased, owing to improved health care, access to medical facilities, and air-conditioning.
We have far more money and much greater technological ability to adapt than our forebears ever did.
Of course, cities also will be hit by temperature increases from CO2, in addition to further warming from urban heat islands.
But we have an opportunity to act.
Unlike our forebears, who did very little or nothing about urban heat islands, we are in a good position to tackle many of their effects.
While celebrity activists focus entirely on cutting CO2, we could do much more – and at much lower cost – if we addressed urban heat islands.
Simple solutions can make a vast difference to temperatures.
Cities are hotter than the land around them because they are drier.
They lack moist green spaces and have drainage systems that efficiently remove water.
In London, the air around the River Thames is cooler than it is a few blocks away in built-up areas.
If we plant trees and build water features, we won’t just beautify our surroundings, but we’ll also cool things down – by upwards of 8°C, according to climate models.
Moreover, although it may seem almost comically straightforward, one of the best temperature-reducing approaches is very simple: paint things white.
Cities have a lot of black asphalt and dark, heat-absorbing structures.
By increasing reflection and shade, a great deal of heat build-up can be avoided.
Paint most of a city and you could lower the temperature by 10°C.
These options are simple, obvious, and cost-effective.
Consider Los Angeles.
Re-roofing most of the city’s five million homes in lighter colors, painting a quarter of the roads and planting 11 million trees would have a one-time cost of about $1 billion.
Each year after that, this would lower air conditioning costs by about $170 million and provide $360 million in smog-reduction benefits.
And it would lower LA temperatures by about 3°C – or about the temperature increase envisioned for the rest of this century.
Compare that to the $180 billion cost of implementing the Kyoto Protocol, which will have virtually no effect.
At the moment, we don’t hear much about the smartest choices when it comes to addressing global warming.
That needs to change.
We do get to choose which future we want.
The Negative Rates Club
BRUSSELS – For the better part of a decade, central banks have been making only limited headway in curbing powerful global deflationary forces.
Since 2008, the US Federal Reserve has maintained zero interest rates, while pursuing multiple waves of unprecedented balance-sheet expansion through large-scale bond purchases.
The Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, and the European Central Bank have followed suit, each with its own version of so-called “quantitative easing” (QE).
Yet inflation has not picked up appreciably anywhere.
Despite their shared struggles with deflationary pressures, these countries’ monetary policies – and economic performance – are now diverging.
Whereas the United States and the United Kingdom are now growing strongly enough to exit their expansionary policies and raise interest rates, the eurozone and Japan are doubling down on QE, pushing policy long-term interest rates further into negative territory.
What explains this difference?
The short answer is debt.
The US and the UK have been running current-account deficits for decades, and are thus debtors, while the eurozone and Japan have been running external surpluses, making them creditors.
Because negative rates benefit debtors and harm creditors, introducing them after the global economic crisis spurred a recovery in the US and the UK, but had little effect in the eurozone and Japan.
This is not an isolated phenomenon.
By now, most of the world’s creditor countries – those with large and persistent current-account surpluses, such as Denmark and Switzerland – have negative interest rates, not only for long-term governments bonds and other “riskless” debt, but also for medium-term maturities.
And it is doing little good.
Despite the weak impact of low interest rates, central banks in these economies remain committed to them.
If it is suggested that QE or lower interest rates are unlikely to benefit their economies much, they shift the focus of the discussion, railing against the notion that raising interest rates would stimulate the economy – an ostensibly airtight argument.
Only it is actually far from airtight.
Basic economics courses cover the curious case of the “backward-bending supply curve of savings”: In some circumstances, lower interest rates can lead to higher savings.
Because lower rates reduce savers’ income, they spend less, especially if they have a savings target for their retirement.
None of this discredits the general rule – which forms the basis of modern monetary policymaking – that a lower interest rate tends to stimulate consumption and other expenditure.
The impact simply varies according to the economy’s debt position.
In a closed economy, there is a debtor for every creditor, so whatever creditors lose from ultra-low interest rates, debtors should gain.
But in an economy with a large net-foreign-asset position, there are naturally more creditors than debtors.
For a country with large foreign debts, the opposite is true.
The effectiveness of monetary policy at the lower bound should thus be different in creditor and debtor economies.
Until recently, this condition did not matter, because foreign-asset positions were usually small (as a percentage of GDP).
Today, however, these positions in the major industrial economies are large and increasingly divergent, partly owing to the buildup of leverage that led to the global financial crisis of 2007-2008.
And, in fact, at the international level, leverage is continuing to grow.
Though current-account imbalances have generally fallen since the financial crisis began, they have not reversed.
This implies that the surplus countries continue to strengthen their creditor positions, diverging from the deficit economies.
Commodity exporters like Russia and Saudi Arabia, which ran large current-account surpluses when oil prices were high, are the main exception to this pattern of diverging foreign-asset positions.
With the precipitous decline in world oil prices since June 2014, their fortunes have reversed.
Their export earnings have plummeted – falling by half in many cases – forcing them to run deficits and draw on the large sovereign-wealth funds they accumulated during the global commodity boom.
A radical reduction in expenditure has now become unavoidable.
The industrialized economies face very different challenges.
Their problem – in a sense, a luxury problem – is to ensure that their consumers spend the windfall from lower import prices.
But in the creditor countries, negative rates do not seem to advance this goal; indeed, some external surpluses are even increasing.
This divergence is also playing out within the eurozone.
Though it is a creditor economy overall, it comprises debtor countries as well.
The debtor economies, such as Spain and Portugal, now run small current-account surpluses, and are gradually reducing their debt.
But the traditional creditors have seen their current-account surpluses grow so much that the debtor/creditor asymmetry continues to increase.
Most notably, since the start of the financial crisis, Germany's current-account surplus has increased to nearly 8% of GDP, meaning that the country has accumulated more surpluses in that period than in its entire previous history.
On current trends, the German creditor position might rise from 60% of GDP to 100% of GDP.
Central bankers are supposed to be patient.
Indeed, economists supported the global movement toward central-bank independence precisely because it seemed that central bankers would be less inclined to try to stimulate the economy for short-term gain.
But central bankers seem to have become impatient, fretting about low inflation, even though the output gap is slowly closing and full employment has been reached in the US and Japan.
Creditor countries’ central bankers must stop trying to manipulate their economies with more potentially counterproductive monetary easing.
Instead, they should allow the recovery to run its course, even if that happens slowly, and wait for the base effect of lower oil prices to disappear.
ECB President Mario Draghi recently admitted that, in today’s global context, the current monetary-policy approach might not be effective.
But promising more of the same is not the answer.
Preventing the Next Eurozone Crisis Starts Now
PARIS – European leaders have devoted scant attention to the future of the eurozone since July 2012, when Mario Draghi, the European Central Bank’s president, famously committed to do “whatever it takes” to save the common currency.
For more than four years, they have essentially subcontracted the eurozone’s stability and integrity to the central bankers.
But, while the ECB has performed the job skillfully, this quiet, convenient arrangement is coming to an end, because no central bank can solve political or constitutional conundrums.
Europe’s heads of state and government would be wise to start over and consider options for the eurozone’s future, rather than letting circumstances decide for them.
So far, Europe’s leaders have had little appetite for such a discussion.
In June 2015, they only paid lip service to a report on the euro’s future by the presidents of the various European institutions.
A few weeks later, the issue briefly returned to the agenda when eurozone leaders spent a long late-July night arguing about whether to kick out Greece; but their stated intention to follow up and address underlying problems was short-lived.
Finally, plans to respond to the Brexit shock by strengthening the eurozone were quickly ditched, owing to fear that reform would prove too divisive.
The issue, however, has not gone away.
Although the monetary anesthetics administered by the ECB have reduced market tensions, nervousness has reemerged in the run-up to the Italian constitutional referendum on December 4.
By end-November spreads between Italian and German ten-year bunds reached 200 basis points, a level not seen since 2014.
The worrying state of several Italian banks is one reason for the mounting concern.
Brexit, and the election of a US president who advocates Americanism instead of globalism and dismisses the EU, adds the risk that voters, rather than markets, will call into question European monetary integration.
Anti-euro political parties are on the rise in all major eurozone countries except Spain.
In Italy, they may well command a majority.
On the economic front, the eurozone has much unfinished business.
The banking union, launched in June 2012 to sever the interdependence of banks and states, has made good progress but is not yet complete.
Competitiveness gaps between eurozone members have diminished, and external imbalances within it have abated, but largely thanks to the compression of domestic demand in Southern Europe; saving flows from North to South have not resumed.
Unemployment gaps remain wide.
The eurozone still lacks a common fiscal mechanism as well, and Germany has flatly rejected the European Commission’s recent attempt to promote a “positive stance” in countries with room to boost spending.
Of course, when the next recession hits, fiscal stability is likely to be in dangerously short supply.
Finally, the governance of the eurozone remains excessively cumbersome and technocratic.
Most ministers, not to mention legislators, appear to have become lost in a procedural morass.
This unsatisfactory equilibrium may or may not last, depending on political or financial risks – or, most likely, the interaction between them.
So the question now is how to hold a fruitful discussion to map out possible responses.
The obstacles are twofold: First, there is no longer any momentum toward “more Europe”; on the contrary, a combination of skepticism about Europe and reluctance concerning potential transfers constitutes a major stumbling block.
And, second, views about the nature and root causes of the euro crisis differ across countries.
Given the dearth of political capital to spend on European responses, and disagreement on what the problem is and how to solve it, governments’ excess of caution is hardly surprising.
Both obstacles can be overcome.
For starters, discussion of the eurozone’s future should not be framed as necessarily leading to further integration.
The goal should be to make the eurozone work, which may imply giving more powers to the center in some fields, but also less in others.
Fiscal responsibility, for example, should not be reduced to centralized enforcement of a common regime.
It is possible to design a policy framework that embodies a more decentralized approach, empowering national institutions to monitor budgetary behavior and overall fiscal sustainability.
In fact, some steps in this direction have already been taken.
Going further would imply making governments individually responsible for their misconduct – in other words, making partial debt restructuring possible within the eurozone.
Such an approach would raise significant difficulties, if only because transiting to such a regime would be a hazardous journey; but options of this sort should be part of the discussion.
To overcome the second obstacle, the discussion should not start by addressing the legacy problems.
Distributing a burden between creditors and debtors is inevitably acrimonious, because it is a purely zero-sum game.
The history of international financial relations demonstrates that such discussions are inevitably delayed and necessarily adversarial when they take place.
So the issue should not be addressed first.
The seemingly realistic option of starting with immediate problems before addressing longer-term issues is only superficially attractive.
In reality, discussions should start with the features of the permanent regime to be established in the longer run.
Participants should explore logically coherent options until they determine if they can agree on a blueprint.
It is only when agreement on a blueprint for the future has been reached that the path toward realizing it should be discussed.
There are no quick fixes to the eurozone’s problems.
But one thing is clear: the lack of genuine discussion on possible futures is a serious cause for concern.
Silence is not always golden; for the sake of Europe’s future, the hush surrounding the common currency should be broken as soon as possible.
The G20 Embraces Green Finance
BEIJING – The G20’s finance ministers and central-bank governors have begun to undertake a stunning shift in mindset.
They have become increasingly convinced that “green finance” – financing environmentally sustainable growth – should be at the center of economic-development strategies.
Such an idea, until recently confined to a fringe of academics and policymakers, is potentially one of the most important new “truths” of the twenty-first century.
The conventional economic-development model viewed environmental protection as a “luxury good” that societies could afford only after they became rich.
Such thinking explains why the dramatic growth in global income, 80-fold in real terms during the last century, has been accompanied by a decline, according to the United Nations Environment Programme, in natural capital in 127 of 140 countries.
But natural capital is not just an abstract concept; it supports lives, livelihoods, and societal wellbeing.
The environmental destruction that our activities are wreaking – greenhouse-gas emissions add energy to the Earth system at a rate equivalent to the detonation of four nuclear bombs every second – has concrete consequences, which are already being borne by millions of people.
Since 2008, an average of 26.4 million people have been displaced from their homes by natural disasters each year – equivalent to almost one person every second.
One-third of the world’s arable land is now jeopardized by land degradation, which causes economic losses of $6.3-10.6 trillion per year.
And 21 of the world’s 37 largest aquifers have passed their sustainability tipping point.
The downsides of the conventional approach to economic development, which favors income and employment over environmental protection, are particularly apparent in China.
By some measures – in particular, per capita income and GDP growth – China’s development process has been an extraordinary success.
But it has also brought lethal levels of air pollution and extensive contamination and depletion of land and water.
The good news is that Chinese leaders now seem to recognize that they must safeguard the environment before China achieves high-income status.
Indeed, they have moved to the forefront of the green-finance movement.
To be sure, the challenge facing China is monumental.
Success will require an estimated $600 billion in investment each year, in areas including environmental remediation and protection, renewable energies and energy efficiency, and sustainable transportation systems.
Given that less than 15% of that finance will come from public sources, China will also have to retool its financial system to support private investment.
But China is already taking concrete steps in the right direction.
On August 30, President Xi Jinping presided over a decision by the Central Leading Group for Comprehensively Deepening Reforms to transform China’s financial system to facilitate green investment.
The so-called “guidelines for establishing a green finance system” adopted at the meeting represent the world’s first attempt at an integrated policy package to promote an ambitious shift toward a green economy.
According to the guidelines, China will have to develop a wide range of new financial instruments, including green credit, green development funds, green bonds, green equity index products, green insurance, and carbon finance.
It must also introduce a host of specific policies, regulations, and incentives, including innovative use of the central bank’s relending operations, interest subsidies, and guarantees.
And it must establish a national-level Green Development Fund, much like the United Kingdom’s Green Investment Bank.
How this process unfolds in China will hold important lessons for others seeking to build more sustainable economies.
But some governments are not hesitating to make their own way.
From the City of London’s Green Finance Initiative to Indonesia’s Sustainable Finance Roadmap, innovative policy packages are emerging at an accelerating pace.
Moreover, many of the world’s stock exchanges have committed to requiring listed companies to report on their sustainable development risks.
And a coalition of banking regulators has emerged to explore how to advance green credit.
Details vary by country, but the goal is a common one: to align capital markets with the financing needs of an inclusive, sustainable economy.
The G20’s agenda, which aims to promote strong, sustainable, and balanced economic growth, should now be updated to reflect this shared goal, with green finance becoming a key component of the G20’s business.
This week’s summit in China is the ideal place to start.
Era Pembangunan Mega Proyek
WASHINGTON, DC – Nampaknya kita tengah memasuki era pembangunan mega proyek, ketika negara, khususnya negara-negara anggota G-20, memobilisasi sektor swasta untuk berinvestasi besar-besaran pada inisiatif infrastruktur bernilai jutaan dolar (bahkan miliaran atau triliunan), seperti jaringan pipa, bendungan, sistem pengairan dan listrik, serta jaringan jalan raya.
Kini, anggaran mega proyek bernilai antara $6-9 triliun per tahun, sekitar 8% dari PDB dunia, menjadikannya sebagai “investment boom terbesar sepanjang sejarah manusia”.
Kemudian geopolitik, tuntutan pertumbuhan ekonomi, pencarian pasar-pasar baru dan sumber daya alam memicu pengeluaran lebih besar untuk mendanai proyek-proyek infrastruktur berskala besar.
Di titik puncak yang berpotensi mengarah pada ledakan yang tidak pernah terjadi sebelumnya, pemimpin dunia dan kreditor terkesan lupa atau tidak menyadari betapa mahalnya pembelajaran dari masa lalu.
Memang benar investasi di bidang infrastruktur dapat memenuhi kebutuhan-kebutuhan nyata, menyokong pemenuhan akan tingginya gelombang permintaan yang diperkirakan atas pangan, air, dan energi.
Tetapi, kecuali jika lonjakan mega proyek ini berhasil dialihkan dan dikelola dengan hati-hati, upaya tersebut cenderung bersifat counterproductive dan tidak berkelanjutan.
Tanpa kendali demokratis, investor akan menjalankan praktik privatizing profits and socializing losses, sembari menetapkan pendekatan intensif karbon serta pendekatan lain yang berbahaya bagi lingkungan hidup dan sosial.
Pertama-tama, terdapat isu mengenai efektivitas biaya.
Daripada menerapkan filosofi “kecil itu indah” atau “lebih besar lebih baik”, negara harusnya membangun infrastruktur dengan “skala yang tepat (appropriate scale)” disesuaikan dengan tujuannya.
Bent Flyvbjerg, seorang profesor di University of Oxford dengan spesialisasi di bidang perencanaan dan pengelolaan program, mempelajari data yang berusia 70 tahun untuk menyimpulkan adanya “hukum besi mega proyek (iron law of megaprojects)”: mega proyek ini hampir selalu “over budget, over time, over and over again.”
Mega proyek ini juga, beliau menambahkan, tunduk pada prinsip “survival of the unfittest”, yakni justru proyek-proyek terburuk yang dibangun, bukan yang terbaik.
Risiko ini diperparah dengan fakta bahwa mega proyek ini dikendalikan utamanya oleh geopolitik – bukan ekonomi kehati-hatian.
Semenjak tahun 2000 hingga 2014, ketika PDB dunia menjadi dua kali lebih besar mencapai $75 triliun, penguasaan negara-negara G-7 di dalam ekonomi dunia merosot dari 65% menjadi 45%.
Saat dunia internasional menyesuaikan diri terhadap bentuk keseimbangan baru ini, Amerika Serikat mulai khawatir bahwa hegemoninya akan dilawan oleh pemain-pemain baru, seperti Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, yang berada di bawah kepemimpinan Tiongkok.
Sebagai reaksinya, lembaga-lembaga keuangan yang dipimpin negara-negara Barat seperti World Bank and Asian Development Bank, secara agresif memperluas operasi investasi infrastrukturnya, dan secara terbuka menyerukan perubahan paradigma.
G-20 pun juga mempercepat peluncuran mega proyeknya, berharap akan mampu menaikkan laju pertumbuhan global setidaknya 2% pada tahun 2018.
OECD memperkirakan kebutuhan akan tambahan anggaran sebesar $70 triliun diperlukan pada tahun 2030 – rata-rata pengeluaran hampir lebih dari $4,5 triliun per tahun.
Sebagai perbandingan, diperlukan dana sekitar $2-3 triliun per tahun guna mencapai Tujuan Pembangunan Berkelanjutan (Sustainable Development Goals).
Tentunya dengan adanya mega proyek ini potensi terjadinya pemborosan, korupsi, dan menumpuknya utang publik yang tidak berkesinambungan akan tinggi.
Persoalan kedua yang perlu dipertimbangkan adalah batasan bumi (planetary boundaries).
Dalam sebuah surat yang dikirimkan kepada G-20 di bulan Maret 2015, sekelompok ilmuwan, kaum penyelamat lingkungan hidup, dan pemuka pendapat telah memperingatkan bahwa kenaikan investasi mega proyek menimbulkan risiko kerusakan yang bersifat irreversible (tidak dapat dipulihkan) dan bencana besar.
“Setiap tahun, kita sudah menghabiskan sumber daya yang senilai dengan satu-setengah kali sumber daya di bumi,” jelas penulisnya.
“Pilihan infrastruktur perlu ditetapkan untuk meringankan kondisi ini, bukan justru memperburuknya.
Sejalan dengan itu, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change memperingatkan bahwa “pembangunan infrastruktur dan produk umur panjang yang membawa masyarakat menuju jalur tinggi emisi gas rumah kaca menjadikannya sulit diubah atau terlampau mahal.”
G-20 sebetulnya telah memasukkan beberapa kriteria terkait dengan lingkungan hidup, iklim, atau sosial ke dalam “wish list” mega proyek yang harus diserahkan oleh negara-negara anggota pada pertemuan di Turki bulan November nanti.
Potensi masalah ketiga sehubungan dengan mega proyek ialah ketergantungannya pada kerjasama publik-swasta.
Sebagai bagian dari fokus terbaru mengenai investasi skala besar, maka World Bank, International Monetary Fund, dan beberapa kreditor multilateral lainnya telah mengumumkan upaya untuk merekayasa pembiayaan pembangunan, diantaranya dengan penetapan sejumlah asset class baru bagi infrastruktur sosial dan ekonomi untuk menarik investasi swasta.
“Kita perlu memanfaatkan aset triliunan dolar yang dimiliki investor institusional…dan mengalihkan aset-aset tersebut ke dalam proyek-proyek,” menurut Presiden World Bank Group, Jim Yong Kim.
Melalui penggunaan dana publik untuk menekan risiko, mereka berharap bisa menarik investor institusional jangka panjang – termasuk reksadana, perusahaan asuransi, dana pensiun, dan lembaga sovereign-wealth fund – yang secara keseluruhan mengendalikan aset sebesar $93 triliun.
Harapan kreditor multilateral ialah pemanfaatan modal besar ini akan memungkinkan mereka meningkatkan pembangunan infrastruktur dan mengubah pembiayaan pembangunan melalui cara-cara yang sebelumnya tidak terpikirkan.
Persoalannya adalah kerjasama publik-swasta wajib memberikan tingkat laba/ROI yang kompetitif.
Akibatnya, menurut tim peneliti di London School of Economics, bentuk kerjasama ini “tidak dipandang sebagai perangkat yang tepat bagi proyek-proyek [teknologi informasi] atau jika kekhawatiran sosial membatasi retribusi sehingga proyek terlihat menarik bagi sektor swasta.”
Investor swasta ingin mempertahankan tingkat laba/ROI mereka melalui sumber pendapatan terjamin dan memastikan bahwa hukum dan peraturan perundang-undangan (termasuk persyaratan lingkungan hidup dan sosial) tidak mengganggu perolehan keuntungan.
Risikonya adalah pencarian keuntungan akan menghabiskan barang publik.
Akhirnya, aturan-aturan mengenai investasi jangka panjang tidak secara efektif mempertimbangkan risiko-risiko jangka panjang terkait sosial dan lingkungan hidup, sebagaimana ditekankan oleh serikat pekerja dan United Nations Environment Program.
Penggabungan investasi infrastruktur dalam portofolio atau pengalihan sektor pembangunan ke dalam asset class dapat mengarah pada praktik privatizing profits and socializing losses dalam skala besar.
Dinamika ini dapat memperbesar tingkat ketidaksetaraan dan melemahkan demokrasi, berkat rendahnya pengaruh pemerintah – apalagi masyarakat – terhadap investor institusional.
Secara umum, aturan-aturan dan perjanjian perdagangan memperburuk masalah-masalah ini dengan menempatkan kepentingan investor di atas masyarakat biasa.
Satu hal yang belum diuji, dorongan menuju risiko mega proyek – menurut istilah yang digunakan perumus surat kepada G-20 – “doubling down on a dangerous vision”. Sangat penting bagi kita untuk memastikan bahwa perubahan apapun terhadap pembiayaan pembangunan dapat dirancang sedemikian rupa agar menegakkan hak asasi manusia dan melindungi bumi.
The Global Economy’s Stealth Resilience
OXFORD – Last week, Christine Lagarde, the International Monetary Fund’s managing director, warned that if countries do not act together, the global economy could be derailed.
Likewise, the OECD has warned that countries must move “urgently” and “collectively” to boost global growth prospects.
Yet the G-20 finance ministers and central-bank governors to whom these entreaties were directed failed to agree any such action at their recent meeting in Shanghai.
To be sure, the communiqué released after the meeting includes a pledge to use “all policy tools – monetary, fiscal, and structural – individually and collectively” to “foster confidence and preserve and strengthen the recovery.”
But the communiqué also reflects distinct divisions – particularly with regard to the role of monetary and fiscal policy in stimulating growth – among the finance ministers and central bankers who agreed on its text.
On monetary policy, the communiqué offers the empty statement that the G-20 would “continue to support economic activity and ensure price stability, consistent with central banks’ mandates.”
That avoided the central question: Should central banks be attempting to stimulate growth through “unconventional” monetary policies?
The Bank for International Settlements thinks not, arguing in its 2015 annual report that “monetary policy has been overburdened” in an attempt to reinvigorate growth, a reality that is reflected in “the persistence of ultra-low interest rates.”
The result is a vicious cycle of too much debt, too little growth, and too-low interest rates that, to quote the BIS’s Claudio Borio, “beget lower rates.”
This sobering analysis has not stopped the Bank of Japan or the European Central Bank from further monetary easing.
Nor did it deter People’s Bank of China Governor Zhou Xiaochuan from expressing a willingness to shoulder more of the growth-stimulating burden in Shanghai.
But not everyone is ignoring the writing on the wall.
Reserve Bank of India Governor Raghuram Rajan has called on the IMF to examine the effects of unconventional monetary policy not just on the countries that implement them, but also on the rest of the world.
Likewise, Bank of England Governor Mark Carney has pointed out that countries using negative interest rates (including, most recently, Japan) are, by forcing currency devaluation, exporting weak demand – ultimately a zero-sum game.
When it comes to fiscal policy, agreement is similarly lacking.
The IMF is urging surplus countries like Germany to pursue more stimulus.
The OECD, too, has called upon its wealthier members to take advantage of their current ability to borrow for long periods at very low interest rates to increase growth-enhancing investment in infrastructure.
These calls provoked a sharp rebuttal from German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble, who condemned the “debt-financed growth model.”
The result of this conflict was a vague declaration by the G-20 that it would use “fiscal-policy flexibly to strengthen growth, job creation, and confidence, while enhancing resilience and ensuring debt as a share of GDP is on a sustainable path.”
In light of the statements by the IMF and the OECD, this distinct failure to agree on monetary and fiscal policy seems highly dangerous.
But both institutions may be overstating the problem.
In fact, despite widespread uncertainty – volatile capital flows, plummeting commodity prices, escalating geopolitical tensions, the shock of a potential British exit from the European Union, and a massive refugee crisis – the stalling of global cooperation may be less risky today than it was even a decade ago.
The key factor in this context has been widespread recognition of the risks inherent in economic globalization, and concerted efforts to build up the needed resilience on a national, bilateral, or regional basis.
Consider finance.
Twenty years ago, a catastrophic financial crisis began in Thailand and quickly spread across East Asia.
Since then, those economies, and others in the emerging world, have self-insured against crisis by building up huge stockpiles of foreign-exchange reserves.
Partly as a result of this, the volume of reserves has risen from some 5% of world GDP in 1995 to around 15% today.
Emerging economies are also holding less sovereign debt, and they have created bilateral and regional currency-swap arrangements.
In addition, more than 40 countries have deployed macroprudential measures since the 2008 global financial crisis.
Countries also benefit from greater access to more diversified sources of finance.
Some emerging and developing countries now access global bond markets individually.
And the role of regional development banks – including the African, Asian, and Inter-American Development Banks, as well as the newly created Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and the New Development Bank – has grown.
The final manifestation of this new pattern of cooperation – which might be called “distributed governance” – appears in trade.
While the Doha Round of negotiations has staggered and fallen, liberalization is proceeding apace, owing to the proliferation of bilateral, regional, and super-regional deals.
These new governance arrangements have important resilience-enhancing effects; but they may not offer a more efficient alternative to multilateralism, and they do not eliminate the need for traditional multilateral institutions.
On the contrary, bodies like the IMF, the World Bank, and the World Trade Organization should be responsible for analyzing and transmitting vital information to the array of institutions that are filling their traditional role.
For example, the IMF should respond to Rajan’s request to track and analyze the effects of unconventional monetary policies.
Likewise, it could strengthen its analysis of the impact of capital controls on the countries implementing them, and on other countries.
It could also resume preparing models of how sovereign-debt restructuring could be better supported – whether at the national level, through GDP-linked or contingent convertible bonds, or at the regional or global level.
At their Shanghai meeting, G-20 policymakers vowed to adopt a range of policy tools to boost global growth and avoid currency wars.
They did not deliver on that promise.
But their failure may have reinforced the shift to a new phase of distributed global economic governance.
A Plutocrats Summit?
BRISBANE – At an official dinner in Washington, DC, ahead of November’s G-20 Summit in Brisbane, Australia-born media mogul Rupert Murdoch lectured ministers on the dangers of socialism and big government.
A fervent opponent of Australia’s carbon price, and a battle-hardened opponent of US President Barack Obama, Murdoch lauded the virtues of austerity and minimal regulation, and railed against the corrosive effects of social safety nets.
The ministers were in Washington to attend the Annual Meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, where they attempted to thrash out differences and establish common ground before the upcoming summit.
The tone set by Murdoch, however, suggests that a consensus on sustainable, inclusive growth will be hard to achieve.
Murdoch’s comments are in keeping with views expressed by his friend, Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott, and Abbott’s current administration.
In January, for example, Abbott informed a startled Davos conference that the global financial crisis was caused not by unregulated global markets, but rather by too much governance.
This was certainly news to the finance ministers who had spent the past few years struggling with the toxic fallout from financial-sector excess.
Viewed in the context of such comments, one can better understand Australia’s refusal to put issues of climate change and inclusive prosperity on the Brisbane agenda.
Of course, stimulating global growth is a big enough challenge in itself, even without considering inclusiveness or environmental sustainability.
The IMF’s gloomy growth forecasts attest to that.
And many policymakers view Australia’s G-20 chairmanship as an opportunity to re-energize and refine the group’s mission to boost global growth, create jobs, and raise living standards.
G-20 finance ministers have already decided on a 2% target for annual growth through 2018, and are sifting through more than 900 proposals for structural reforms in order to achieve this.
What reforms G-20 members propose in Brisbane, and how serious they will be about implementing them, remains to be seen.
The bigger challenge, though, is hitting those growth targets in a sustainable and inclusive way.
If structural reforms are not done right, the Brisbane Summit will come to be regarded as a failure.
Structural reforms, in which certain interests are sacrificed for the greater good, will always be controversial and difficult to execute.
But when such reforms involve sacrifices by ordinary citizens and benefit society’s most privileged groups, political gridlock and instability invariably follow.
Over the past two years, academics, regulators, economists, and financial institutions have all linked the secular stagnation in demand with greater income inequality.
It is ironic that, at a time when many in the developing world are entering, or aspire to enter, the emerging middle class, wealth in much of the developed world is becoming more concentrated at the top.
Indeed, inequality of outcomes both in emerging and advanced economies has increased within and across generations.
Australia’s refusal to discuss inclusive growth in Brisbane may please plutocrats like Murdoch, but talk of unregulated markets, lower taxes, and the removal of social safety nets strongly indicates that the summit will offer no substantive policies aimed at reducing inequality.
With just days to go until the Brisbane meeting, the G-20 is ignoring the main long-term threats to the global economy.
As the Bank of England’s Governor Mark Carney (who I assume also heard Murdoch’s lecture) remarked earlier this year, “[U]nchecked market fundamentalism can devour the social capital essential for the long-term dynamism of capitalism itself.”
IMF Managing Director Christine Lagarde recently put it more starkly, noting that the world’s 85 richest people control more wealth than the world’s 3.5 billion poorest people, and that this degree of inequality is casting a dark shadow over the global economy.
Inequality is not a fringe issue.
Combating its rise is essential to achieving sustainable economic growth and political stability.
The G-20’s real&nbsp;power is to highlight such challenges and generate informed debate on the issues as a prelude to action.
The question now is which leader in Brisbane, if any, will grab the global megaphone and speak out.
Realizing the Potential of China’s G20 Presidency
NEW YORK – In the run-up to this September’s G20 summit in Hangzhou, China, there has been much talk about strengthening global macroeconomic cooperation and reforming the international monetary system.
While this is far from the first time these topics have come up – in 2011, for example, France pushed for monetary reform, but was waylaid by the eurozone crisis – the time may be ripe for genuine progress.
Today’s global economy is plagued by uncertainty.
Inconsistent data have lately raised questions about the strength of the United States’ economy.
When it comes to Japan, the data are even more erratic. The European Union faces not only a still-weak recovery, but also the possibility of losing the United Kingdom as a member.
The emerging world, meanwhile, is experiencing a sharp economic slowdown.
China, in particular, poses a significant risk, with many fearing that its downturn will be more severe than initially anticipated.
This has spurred many to move their capital out of the country, generating strong downward pressure on the renminbi.
This highlights another source of uncertainty today: exchange rates.
From the euro’s decline in 2014-2015 to the US dollar’s decline after the Federal Reserve signaled a postponement of its rate increases to the British pound’s recent drop, spurred by uncertainty surrounding the recent referendum on EU membership, major currencies have been all over the map in recent years.
Some have even mooted suspicions of competitive devaluation.
At a time when a policy change in one country reverberates throughout the global economy, stronger cooperation could be vital to enhancing overall stability.
And, indeed, to some extent, world leaders have already recognized this imperative.
Since the global financial crisis erupted in 2008, many initiatives aimed at boosting macroeconomic cooperation have been undertaken.
For example, the G20 launched the Mutual Assessment Process, whereby member countries are evaluated on the basis of agreed indicators.
The International Monetary Fund’s surveillance of macroeconomic policies has also been enhanced, with the implementation of a new set of multilateral surveillance tools that focus on major economies.
These reforms, it has been said, make for the most elaborate system of multilateral macroeconomic cooperation in history.
And yet the G20 still finds it extremely difficult to fulfill its objective, agreed in 2009, to “act together to generate strong, sustainable, and balanced global growth.”
Among the most notable obstacles has been the inability to compel some surplus economies to pursue growth-stimulating policies, which would compensate for the recessionary effects of adjustment in the deficit countries.
This failure is perhaps most pronounced within the eurozone, where Germany and the Netherlands have failed to reduce their surpluses, even as the deficit economies have undergone massive adjustments.
As a result, the eurozone has gone from having an overall deficit in 2008 to being a major surplus region – a shock that has subtracted about 1% from global demand.
Macroeconomic cooperation clearly must be made more effective.
But, as recent exchange-rate volatility has shown, even that will not be enough to stabilize the global economy. Monetary reform is also needed.
Such reform must include a reconsideration of the US dollar’s outsize role in shaping the international monetary system.
In an increasingly multipolar world, would it not be more appropriate to build a multicurrency system and make greater use of the only global currency that has ever been created: the IMF’s Special Drawing Rights (SDRs)?
Establishing the SDR as the leading global reserve currency would have far-reaching benefits.