The idea of increasing the low (12.5%) withholding tax on capital gains met with accusations that Prodi intends to expropriate wealth.
But the right’s slim manifesto includes its own unaffordable promises, such as cuts in property taxes and increases in low-level pensions.
Italian voters are perplexed.
In 2001, Berlusconi signed a “contract with the Italians” containing promises that have gone unfulfilled.
He has always fancied himself as a savior, convinced that he alone can fix the country.
So he finds it unconceivable that anybody can feel otherwise or even that rules should stand in his way.
Hence his government’s efforts to pass laws changing judicial procedures, or to consolidate the duopoly of public (government-controlled) television stations and his own, or to concoct a bizarre new electoral law favorable to his coalition.
But voters’ frustration with Berlusconi is not necessarily good news for Prodi and the left.
Opinion polls reveal that trust in all politicians and political parties has reached the lowest level ever.
Italy has endured a sad and degrading electoral campaign, one that has generated a lot of heat, but little light.
One hopes that whoever wins buckles down to the serious work that Italy so desperately needs.
Exiting from Democracy?
Both President George W. Bush and Prime Minister Tony Blair urgently need a plausible exit strategy from Iraq.
That they want to get out, now that their reasons for the war have so dramatically collapsed and domestic support is fading, is beyond doubt.
But neither wants to leave in ignominy, with their last man dramatically lifted of an embassy rooftop by helicopter.
Both Bush and Blair want to leave Iraq, if not with a victory, then at least with some sense of "mission accomplished."
Judging from their recent statements, the scenario that they are concocting is simple. In January, there will be elections in Iraq.
The resulting government will then ask the occupation troops to leave, say, within a year. Withdrawal will begin next spring.
While that scenario is simple, reality is not.
The first nagging question is this: will there actually be elections next January?
Prime Minister Iyad Allawi assures the world that there will be, and President Bush echoes his words.
More neutral observers - and indeed, the daily news bulletins about bombings and hostage taking and "insurgents" - cast doubt on that prospect.
The probability of Iraqi elections being held this coming January must be lower than 50%, and we can be certain that these will not be free and fair elections throughout the entire country.
Indeed, Iraq no longer deserves to be described as a united country.
It has now joined the growing list of the world's failed states and can at best be described as a potential federation of three states plus the unruly city of Baghdad.
Without elections, the Coalition is in trouble. What other exit strategy can it devise?
Above all, however, Iraq is in trouble. What other way forward is there for that unhappy former country?
The answer need not be all despair. It may be that rethinking strategy in the light of new facts will open a way forward.
After all, it might be the case that national elections in a place groping for a democratic future are not the best first step on the road to a liberal order. This is notably the case where entrenched groups - Kurds, Shiites, Sunnis - compete for central power.
Elections, in such a case, may not even be wise at all - indeed, they may prove to be counterproductive.
History suggests that elections do not create democracies. They confirm that the conditions for a democratic order are present.
Thus, they are not the first step in the process of democratisation, but the last step in a preparatory phase in which at least two conditions have been created.
The first condition is a settled territorial arrangement. In "tribal" societies, this is not easy to bring about.
Bosnia's experience reveals why this is so.
However much one may favor multiethnic nation-states, once such a construction has failed, it is imperative to listen to popular sentiment.
Viable units will emerge that are less than ideal but at least capable of creating legitimate government - meaning a government that is both effective and acceptable.
It would be disastrous to destroy the emergent Iraqi-Kurdish entity in the name of an abstract and no-longer existent greater Iraq.
Anyone who experienced occupied Germany after World War II, as I did, remembers that the first postwar elections held there were local and regional.
In fact, they established what are now the Länder of the Federal Republic of Germany.
The second condition that must be satisfied before elections can be credible is security.
Initially, this may be an issue for the military. But peace and quiet based on tanks and the threat of air strikes cannot be enough.
Security requires not just troops, but laws and their enforcement.
What one might call "the liberal order" requires at least two institutional ingredients.
One is democracy, including elections and governments held to account by parliaments and ultimately the people. The other is the rule of law.
Lord Ashdown, the High Representative of a coalition of countries in Bosnia-Herzegovina, has set a good example of how the rule of law can be established.
It requires persons of great courage to become judges, and strong authorities to enforce their judgments.
But it can be done.
In a Muslim country, such a strategy would, moreover, provide protection against hijacking of the law by religious fanatics.
It would establish what might be called the "Turkish solution."
Turkey's Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan has taken up this very challenge, first set by his great predecessor Kemal Atatürk nearly a century ago.
Perhaps what Iraq needs most is not a ballot box, but an Atatürk.
Such a strategy would be less simple than merely holding highly imperfect elections. It would make the exit of occupation forces more complex and perhaps more drawn-out.
It would, however, have a more lasting impact on democratic development than a dubious process by which a limited number of people go to the polls to elect an ineffectual central government.
Such a strategy might even lead to an outcome about which those who want Iraq to join a free world can genuinely say: mission accomplished.
Exiting International Justice
I recently took part in a conference in Belgrade entitled “Dealing with the Past in ex-Yugoslavia.”
Although the rest of postcommunist Europe confronted such questions a decade ago, the Balkan wars of the 1990’s left both perpetrators and victims stuck in a time warp of justice delayed.
As the conference’s participants made their way into Belgrade’s Hyatt Hotel, an angry band of mostly older protesters bearing posters that read, “Free Milosevic” greeted them.
In a flurry of media and security, they confronted Carla Del Ponte, chief prosecutor at the International Criminal Tribunal for former Yugoslavia (ICTY) in The Hague.
Del Ponte is pressing Serbia’s government to cooperate in the still unresolved cases of Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic, who ordered, implemented, and oversaw the massacre of 7,000 Muslim men and boys at Srebrenica in 1995.
The protesters are not unrepresentative of Serb opinion.
Almost a decade after the start of the ICTY’s work, debate still rages over responsibility for war crimes, with little agreement on even the most basic facts of the conflicts in Bosnia, Croatia, and Kosovo.
Serbian Prime Minister (then President) Vojislav Kostunica’s attempt in 2001 to set up a truth commission was doomed from the outset by allegations of bias, and was disbanded within a year.
The ICTY is also in trouble.
To be sure, Milosevic is on trial in The Hague for war crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide.
But comparisons to the post-WWII Nuremberg tribunal have worn thin: as the proceedings drag on, observers wonder why it has taken so long to establish criminal liability.
After all, at Nuremberg, the top rung of the Third Reich was tried and convicted within months.
By contrast, Milosevic has taken advantage of the ICTY’s procedures to delay his trial, while challenging its jurisdiction and legitimacy.
This plays well back home, where indicted war criminals are still touted as war heroes.
Indeed, Serbia’s last presidential election became something of a referendum on Milosevic – and hence on Serbia’s relations with the West and the wider world.
The pro-Milosevic candidate, Tomislav Nikolic, lost, but he received 46% of the vote.
Despite his campaign promises, Serbia’s President Boris Tadic has so far failed to cooperate with the ICTY by assisting in turning over Mladic (Karadzic is probably not in Serbia), who would surely testify against Milosevic.
One understands his trepidation: the first post-Milosevic prime minister, Zoran Djindjic, cooperated with the tribunal, and paid for it with his life.
Such foot-dragging exposes the ICTY’s fundamental weakness: unlike the Nuremberg tribunal, the international community convened it
This continues to impede the case against Milosevic, raising questions about whether there is sufficient proof directly linking him to the policy of genocidal ethnic cleansing, although this is likely to be less problematic since the charges against him turn not on “command responsibility,” but instead on the ICTY’s charter principles of individual responsibility.
These implicitly authorize prosecution of those responsible for a “joint criminal enterprise,” thus linking liability for criminal behavior such as deportations and removals to other foreseeable atrocities.
But time is running out.
The ICTY must wrap up new indictments this year, and disband by 2008.
It enters this end game facing diminished resources and waning political will within the international community.
What will be the Tribunal’s legacy?
From the start, the ICTY’s aims were ambitious, having been launched under the UN Security Council’s peacemaking powers.
If this meant that the Tribunal was intended to deter further violence, then it failed, at least in the short run.
After all, atrocities – including the Srebrenica massacre – continued after the ICTY began operating.
What about ethnic reconciliation?
The ICTY’s first chief prosecutor, Richard Goldstone, called for condemnation of ethnic persecution in order to enable all sides to transcend identity politics and move towards a more liberal political order.
Individual accountability would somehow break the chain of ethnic identity and communal vengeance.
But fostering ethnic reconciliation is a tall order for any court, and the ICTY hasn’t yet delivered.
A liberal political order implies a rule of law that recognizes precedents and analogical thinking. But many Serbs hold on to their sense of historical exceptionalism and unique suffering.
Indeed, the coincidence of the NATO bombing in 1999 with the indictment of Milosevic helped convert both events into “attacks on the Serbian people.”
Historical denial is no less evident in Croatia, where the polarities of blame and suffering have simply been reversed.
There, too, the ICTY will not be missed.
So the talk nowadays is of the right “exit strategy” from international justice.
When the ICTY closes its doors, where should its unfinished cases go?
Del Ponte has called for “new partnerships for justice.”
That sounds fine, but what, realistically, are the choices?
Can the ICTY’s investigations and indictments really be turned over to national courts?
So far, the picture is not promising: the few domestic trials in the region continue to reflect the fractious politics and pervasive ethnic bias that surround them.
As in many parts of the world, it may be several generations before the region’s crimes can be worked through.
The ICTY’s responsibility should be to forge and disseminate a record that limits the possibility of historical denial.
Exiting the Middle East Labyrinth
BERLIN – Two years have passed since Barack Obama was elected President of the United States.
Much to his credit – and in contrast to his immediate predecessor – Obama tried, from his first day in office, to work towards a resolution of the conflict between Israelis and Palestinians.
Two years on, are good intentions the best that Obama’s new policy has to offer?
After all, nothing of value has in fact resulted from them.
Even worse, given that Obama’s effort to enforce a permanent moratorium on new settlement construction in the West Bank has failed, is that direct negotiations between the conflicting parties have run aground.
Good intentions count for little in life – and for less in politics.
What matters, first and foremost, are results.
President George W. Bush believed that he needed to take account of only one half of America’s dual role in the Middle East, namely the alliance with Israel.
He had no time for the second US role, that of pivotal peace mediator between Israelis and Palestinians, during his entire eight-year presidency.
All his initiatives were intended only to pacify the international public.
We all know where that led.
From the start, Obama wanted to do things differently, pursuing an active Middle East policy.
But the results so far are not very different from those under Bush.
In both cases, standstill triumphed over progress.
Given this, and both sides’ intransigence, many would withdraw and try to forget the conflict altogether.
But it isn’t as simple as that, because a continuation of the conflict (which is what “forgetting about it” would boil down to) would not only prolong what is a tragedy for both Palestinians and Israelis, but would also be too dangerous for the region.
Most ominously, the window of opportunity for a two-state solution could close for good, because realities on the ground will no longer allow it.
For Israelis, this would mean permanent occupation of East Jerusalem and the West Bank, and thus reckoning with an Arab majority, which would erode the foundations of their state – democracy and the rule of law – and thus its legitimacy.
Such a development is the greatest threat that Israel faces in the medium term, which makes a two-state solution vital to its own interests.
Of course, from Israeli leaders’ perspective, the status quo, with its absence of terror and missile strikes, is anything but negative.
But it won’t last.
Moreover, the country’s strategic situation is deteriorating with each passing year, because the global redistribution of power and influence from the West to the East can only weaken Israel’s position.
For the Palestinians, the situation is oppressive, and for Gaza it is an outright humanitarian disaster.
They are internally divided between Fatah and Hamas, under Israeli occupation in East Jerusalem and the West Bank, isolated from the outside world in Gaza, hopeless in the region’s refugee camps, and rebuffed by their Arab neighbors.
In these circumstances, the loss of a two-state perspective would be a recipe for further indignities and deepening misery.
But, if Israelis and Palestinians share a vital interest in a two-state solution, they have very different interests, and therefore mean very different things when referring to the same issues.
For Israel, security is the top priority; for Palestinians, what matters most is an end to Israeli occupation.
Israel cannot afford a second Gaza in the West Bank and East Jerusalem; for the Palestinians, a state with an ongoing Israeli military presence would be worthless.
Perhaps Obama’s central error was that an important but minor matter – stopping new settlements – was given central significance.
An indefinite building freeze would lead to the immediate end of Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu’s coalition government in Jerusalem, without giving Israel or Netanyahu anything tangible in return.
It should have been clear that Netanyahu would not extend the freeze.
The crucial question that the US must ask both Netanyahu and Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas is whether they would be willing – here and now – to negotiate in earnest about the final status.
On this new and permanent basis, they may find a solution for the Palestinian refugees and advance the cause of reconciliation between Fatah and Hamas.
Israel would have a guarantee that its security would not be endangered by a final-status agreement and the establishment of a Palestinian state, and that its withdrawal from the Palestinian territories would be gradual, over several years, and monitored on the ground by a third party.
The country would then have clear, internationally recognized borders, enabling it to end permanently the conflict with its Arab neighbors.
While the situation in the Middle East currently looks hopeless, a new attempt that focuses on the essential points, not on minor ones, deserves support.
The alternative is the loss of the two-state solution and the perpetuation of a terrible – and terribly perilous – conflict.
Exorcising Musharraf\u0027s Ghost
CAMBRIDGE – Following its recent free elections, Pakistan is rebounding politically.
But the euphoria that came with the end of the Musharraf era is wearing off, as the new government faces stark choices.
Unlike Iraq and Afghanistan, democracy is not new to this 60-year-old state, but ethnic cleavages, weak institutions, and religious extremism in the North are perennially destabilizing.
And, while the new government settles in and establishes its priorities, the West, especially the United States, must reassess the impact of its past dealings with Pakistan.
Pakistan’s new prime minister, Yousaf Gilani, is a seasoned politician and, more importantly, has Sufi family roots, which is a good omen because of the Sufi tradition of tolerance.
Gilani unequivocally declared in his inaugural address that fighting terrorism is a top priority, and his first decision was to release from house arrest judges deposed by Musharraf.
The respite from the horrendous spate of suicide bombings since the new government assumed power is similarly heartening.
But the honeymoon period is coming to an end.
Already, in Gilani’s hometown of Multan, rioters attacked government offices and banks to protest electricity disruptions.
A couple of well-known opposition politicians, a chief minister and a federal cabinet minister of the previous pro-Musharraf government, were publicly thrashed, raising doubts about government control over law and order in the country.
So far, Musharraf has accepted his diminishing stature quietly – though he has few other options.
The new political leadership, both inside and outside the parliament, has been carefully avoiding a head-on collision with the president.
Interestingly, in the midst of the political transition, Musharraf embarked on a week-long visit to China to lobby for construction of an oil and gas pipeline between China and the Persian Gulf that would be routed through Pakistan.
The deeper question raised by this proposal is whether Musharraf meant to convey a message to the US that Pakistan’s priorities were shifting.
The revival of democratic politics in Pakistan will undoubtedly effect Pakistan-US relations.
Pakistan’s military links with America appear to remain on a sound footing, so the strategic alliance with the US is likely to continue, perhaps with some nuanced differences over how to fight the “war on terror.”
But Pakistani politicians are bound to be influenced by domestic public opinion, which is generally critical of US policies.
Nevertheless, long-term US interests in the region will be better served if Pakistan’s democratic forces successfully establish themselves.
A proposal in the US Senate to increase development and education aid to Pakistan could help in winning the hearts and minds.
Meanwhile, President George W. Bush has said that “if another September 11-style attack is being planned, it probably is being plotted in Pakistan and not Afghanistan.”
Whether this American intelligence assessment is based on credible information is unknown.
American election-year politics may also be behind this assertion.
But it is significant that Bush decided to voice this view during Pakistan’s political transition.
Pakistan must take this view seriously, regardless of Bush’s motivations.
The new government should quickly devise a policy to deal with terrorism.
Recent months have seen dozens of suicide bombings and other terrorist activities – the price of Pakistan’s own past blunders, as well as those of the West.
Afghanistan is a prime example, as is the failure to settle the Kashmir imbroglio with India. Both failures have strengthened domestic terrorist groups.
Pakistan’s government appears to be preparing to talk to some of the extremists in the tribal areas, introduce political reforms, and redouble development efforts.
But reference to “talks” makes the West uncomfortable.
American officials have likened this strategy to negotiating with terrorists, and point to a previous round of negotiations that did nothing to stop violence in the tribal areas.
But the new leadership wants to distinguish between al-Qaeda terrorists and religious conservatives and disillusioned Pashtun youth within Pakistan.
After all, the victory of the secular Awami National Party (ANP) in Pakistan’s North-West Frontier Province is a strong indication that people there have rejected religious political forces and violence.
This window of opportunity can be expanded through dialogue and reconciliation with those who are ready to disavow extremism and militancy. The new Pakistani government needs to explain this to the West in order to keep its support.
The US, meanwhile, should end direct military strikes in the area, even if these are conducted with the knowledge and cooperation of Pakistan’s military.
Force has never worked with the Pashtun tribes, and there is no evidence that this has changed.
There are real signs that the new government is considered a credible partner in the tribal areas.
It needs to be given time to find a way out of the endless cycle of violence. 
Exorcising the Last Balkan Ghosts
The next few weeks will see the resolution, one way or another, of the last territorial issues remaining in the Balkans, where the wars of the 1990’s ended with NATO interventions in Bosnia (1995) and Kosovo (1999).
Even with peace, major problems were left unresolved.
Bosnia was divided between a Muslim-Croat federation and a Serb republic, with little authority vested in the central government and a large international military – and eventually civilian – presence needed to hold it together.
Kosovo was left as a United Nations protectorate whose “final status” was uncertain.
These unresolved issues are now returning: prompted by Serbia’s government, Bosnia’s Serb leadership is contemplating secession, even as its Muslim leadership tries to increase central control.
And Kosovo’s Albanian population is clamoring for independence, while Serbia tries to postpone a decision by blocking action in the Security Council.
There is a real risk of renewed violence, though perhaps not on the scale of the 1990’s.
If the current negotiations on Kosovo’s status fail, Albanian extremists will seek to expel the more than 100,000 Serbs who live there.
Similarly, any move by Bosnia’s Serb Republic to secede could incite instability there.
Serbia, which traded violent nationalism for nonviolent nationalism when Slobodan Milosevic was overthrown eight years ago, has done all it can to impede resolution of these issues, with strong support from Vladimir Putin’s Russia.
Serbia wants as much independence as possible for the Serb Republic, while asserting its own sovereignty over Kosovo.
Serbs governed only by Serbs on their own territory is still Serbia’s goal.
The United States and the European Union are committed to a different vision: democratic transition and integration of all of the Balkans into NATO and eventually the EU.
But they have been reluctant to impose conditions on Serbia, for fear of bringing even more radical nationalists to power.
The US allowed Serbia into NATO’s Partnership for Peace, despite Serbia’s refusal to extradite General Ratko Mladic, the Bosnian Serbs’ military leader in the 1990’s, to The Hague to face war crimes charges.
The EU has negotiated and initialed (but not yet signed) a Stabilization and Association Agreement with Serbia, despite its recalcitrance in the Kosovo negotiations and meddling in Bosnia.
But appeasement has failed.
The US and the EU must use the strong hand that they still hold to ensure that their vision prevails, bringing lasting peace to a region that has repeatedly dragged great powers into conflict.
This requires, above all, a stiff warning to Serbia that it can no longer prevent Bosnia and Kosovo from moving towards Europe.
If for now a democratic Serbia prefers radical nationalism and alignment with Russia to membership in the EU and NATO, so be it.
No vital US interests are at stake, and Serbia will soon recognize its mistake.
The EU should be relieved not to admit such a Serbia.
At the same time, the US and the EU, acting together, must get serious in Bosnia and Kosovo.
In Bosnia, any further moves to undermine the essential compromise reached in the 1995 Dayton agreement should be met with the full powers of Bosnia’s “high representative,” who has recently negotiated an agreement that will strengthen the country’s fragile governing structure.
Bosnia’s leading Serb and Muslim politicians are playing with fire because they know the fire department is standing by.
It is time to take away their matches.
In Kosovo, now that a last-ditch round of negotiations has concluded with a report to the UN Secretary General, the US and the EU should agree to recognize Kosovo’s independence, provided the Kosovars agree to implement the plan submitted by Finnish mediator Marti Ahtisaari.
The Ahtisaari plan provides ample protection for Serbs and an international presence in Kosovo – which the US and the EU will need to deploy even without a new Security Council resolution – to ensure implementation.
Ironically, Serbia’s resistance to the Ahtisaari plan undermines protection for Kosovo’s Serbs and increases the risk that they will be mistreated.
American officials are fond of pointing out that the US has repeatedly intervened to protect Muslims from war and dictatorship.
But this claim will be devalued if the so far successful international interventions in Bosnia or Kosovo end in tragedy.
A satisfactory outcome in both places is within reach.
To achieve it, the US and the EU must ensure that Serbia is blocked from making trouble, Kosovo becomes independent, and Bosnia stays united.
Expanding Crime and Punishment in Tibet
NEW YORK – China has been widely criticized for its harsh treatment of almost any form of political dissent in Tibet.
In 2008, for example, a Tibetan named Wangdu, an AIDS educator in Lhasa, received a life sentence for sending news about Tibetan protests to Tibetans abroad.
The logic was clear: preserve what China’s leaders call “stability” and “harmony” in order to maintain state power.
But two recent events in Tibet, involving the trials of two leading Tibetans who had not attacked or criticized the state at all, do not follow this logic.
In the first trial, on June 24, Karma Samdrup, 42, one of the wealthiest Tibetan businessmen in China, received a 15-year sentence from a court in Xinjiang for stealing antiques.
Human rights groups suggested the charge was invented, because the police had dropped the case for lack of evidence when it was first investigated 12 years ago, and neither witnesses nor new evidence were produced in court.
Despite a detailed critique of the prosecution’s case by two Chinese defense lawyers, the sentence, which had been known privately among officials for several days, was confirmed.
On July 3, Karma’s elder brother, Rinchen Samdrup, 46, was tried on charges of “endangering state security.”
His crime was failing to register a small environmental group run by him and his younger brother in their remote home village of Gonjo, in eastern Tibet.
Having been found guilty -- the conviction rate in China is around 98%, and is even higher in Tibet, so the verdict was never in doubt – he was sentenced to five years in prison.
The younger brother, Chime Namgyal, 38, who is disabled, has been hospitalized since June 11 for serious injuries received whilst in custody.
He did not even receive a trial, but was given a 21-month sentence by local officials for the same offense as Rinchen – endangering state security by unofficially organizing litter-collection, tree-planting, and nature patrols to stop the hunting of endangered species.
Even in China, such activities are not usually considered threats to the state.
These three cases are doubly inexplicable, because none of the three brothers has been accused of actually criticizing China, opposing the Communist Party, or even talking about politics.
On the contrary, they have been hailed as ideal Tibetan citizens.
Karma had founded and financed a leading Tibetan environmental organization in 2001, and was named China’s philanthropist of the year in 2006 by China Central Television (for “creating harmony between men and nature”).
And, last year, the One Foundation, a humanitarian fund run by the film star Jet Li, awarded him one million renminbi by for his “model project.”
Rinchen was well regarded, too.
His group was awarded a major environmental prize from Ford Motor Company in 2006, and in 2008 the Chinese government described him and his organization as “an extremely beneficial supplement to the government’s environmental protection work.”
This February, China’s most important paper, the People’s Daily, published a large photograph of him receiving the award, together with praise of his work. (The paper was apparently unaware that by then he had been in custody for five months.)
Indeed, a book praising the brothers for their work, Tianzhu (“Heavenly Beads”), was published in China late last year, to wide acclaim.
In June, for no apparent reason, the book was banned throughout the country, despite its lack of political content.
So, why is China targeting Tibetans who have no connection with politics and are regarded as model citizens?
Part of the answer may lie with corrupt local officials. Rinchen and Chime had criticized a local police chief for hunting endangered animals.
One of his superiors at the nearby prefectural headquarters in Chamdo is suspected of having decided to punish them, as well as two of their cousins, Sonam Choephel and Rinchen Dorje, who are also in custody in Tibet for vague or unspecified offenses.
But local officials could not have arranged for Karma to be tried in far-away Xinjiang, let alone persuade the central government to ban the brothers’ innocuous book about their love of nature.
Higher-level leaders may have taken up the case against Karma – persuading their counterparts in Xinjiang to resurrect the old antiques case – because he had used his connections in Beijing to complain about the treatment of his brothers by officials in Tibet.
This theory has gained credence because the Communist Party’s current leader in the Tibet Autonomous Region formerly held a powerful position in Xinjiang Province.
If it is true, the case against Karma suggests that officials stationed in Tibetan areas may be gaining more power, able to reach out beyond their jurisdictions to pursue what appear to be little more than personal grievances.
Nor are these the only cases.
Dorje Tashi, the wealthy owner of the Yak, a leading tourist hotel in Lhasa, is also said to be languishing in prison on vague political charges.
In Tibet, where for the last 30 years major Tibetan businessmen had been seen as natural allies of the state, such developments are unprecedented.
China’s central government has the power to rein in its local chieftains, so its failure to do so in Tibet is puzzling.
If it continues to allow such cases to go forward, it risks losing even more credibility among those Tibetans who, like the three environmentalists, have tried to stay within the law and avoid politics.
Other Tibetans may conclude that China’s government has relegated governance of their region to local satraps who have their own interests to pursue.
In an area full of suspicion and antagonism towards the state, expanding the targets of its political prosecutions from Tibetan protestors to environmentalists and from dissident monks to businessmen risks further undermining China’s own objectives in its most troubled region.
Expansion is Solidarity
Nowadays it is often alleged that the European Union’s sense of solidarity was put in jeopardy, if not shattered outright, by its enlargement to take in the countries of central and eastern Europe.
As Bulgaria and Romania come closer to membership, and with accession talks with Turkey and Croatia set to begin, it has become increasingly important to challenge that view.
The values and interests of the EU’s newest member states coincide in most ways with those of the 15 earlier members.
It is, of course, true that enlargement has fundamentally changed the Union and given rise to new problems and policy concerns. But the new member states in central and eastern Europe are deeply embedded in the economic, social, and cultural development of our Continent.
The ties that bind us together were frayed by forty years of Soviet domination, but this did not fundamentally change these states’ European character.
My country, Poland, has always had deep cultural ties to other European countries, especially France.
We participated in all the major developments in European music, literature, and film (think of Andrzej Wajda’s films from the Solidarity era, such as “Danton,” which were French co-productions).
Even in sport, East Europeans have long been integrated with the rest of Europe.
Indeed, before World War I the German national football team consisted entirely of players with Polish names. But, above all, there is a deep sense among Poles, Hungarians, Czechs, and others, that they are Europeans.
This is the very meaning of the word “solidarity,” as defined in the Oxford English Dictionary: “unity resulting from feelings and sympathies.”
Solidarity, in the sense of unity resulting from common interests, also clearly exists within both the original EU-15 and the enlarged Union.
The exceptions prove the rule.
The EU’s disunity over the war in Iraq should not overshadow its member states’ agreement on almost all other great questions of international affairs. In economic matters, disagreements on, say, a single EU regulation should not be allowed to mask the fact that no member state, new or old, has ever contested the internal market.
Finally, the enlargement process itself is also manifestly a symbol of European social, civic, and cultural unity.
The fact that it provoked debate and dispute does not detract from the conviction shared by old and new member states that they had an obligation to rebuild the Continent after 40 years of division.
But there are concerns that, if not fundamentally divisive, are worrying.
Should we fear the fact that Europe is no longer a purely Jewish/Christian and white continent?
Will EU citizens whose origins are in other continents and whose religion is Hindu or Islam, Sikh or Buddhist, be able to identify with “European” values and culture?
Will they be able to feel European, like the Poles or the Czechs have always felt?
These questions apply most pointedly – indeed, they cannot be avoided – in the case of Turkey’s possible accession to the EU.
Is European integration animated by respect for another’s values?
Is it about sharing them or about contributing to them?
These are obviously knotty questions. They are particularly difficult if we see culture as the cement of Europe’s future.
All European countries probably believed at the outset that non-European newcomers could be assimilated in the same way that Polish immigrants were assimilated into Germany’s Ruhr region in the nineteenth century.
That this has not happened, at least on a large scale, is not to say that it cannot happen at all.
Look at the growing number of prominent citizens of Turkish origin in Germany. Consider the many second generation Indian and Pakistani Britons who are now seen in business suits carrying laptop computers and flying around the world.
But Europeans must admit that these individuals represent a small minority.
Many immigrant groups in Europe find themselves flung back on their own communities by the impossibility of social and economic integration.
The constant threat of terrorism has made this isolation even more dramatic for the Europe’s Islamic populations.
The EU cannot simply proclaim “solidarity” as a core value and then do nothing to foster it among those who feel marginalized.
They, too, must be allowed to feel those ties of “unity resulting from feelings and sympathy.”
European solidarity cannot and will not survive their neglect.
Experimental China
HONG KONG – Five years ago, few would have expected that China would produce four of the top ten global Internet companies (by number of visitors) – Alibaba, Baidu, Tencent, and Sohu – as well as innovative multinationals like Huawei and Xiaomi.
Nor would most have anticipated China’s increasing provision of global public goods, including its “one belt, one road” strategy, which aims to provide the infrastructure needed to knit Eurasia into a single vast market.
More remarkable news has just emerged: despite slowing economic-growth rates, China, together with Hong Kong, has recorded $29 billion in initial public offerings so far this year – almost twice the funds raised in US markets.
By any measure, the pace and scope of innovation in China has begun to increase.
How has this happened, and why is it happening now?
The answer lies in the unprecedented challenges that China faces, including corruption, pollution, unsustainable local debts, ghost towns, shadow banks, inefficient state-owned enterprises (SOEs), and excessive government control over the economy.
Certainly, no one would argue that these are positive developments for China; nonetheless, they have arguably been a blessing in disguise.
They have imbued reform efforts with a degree of urgency that has had a far-reaching impact; indeed, conventional GDP data do not reflect the scale of the transformation that they are driving.
Of course, China has long been committed to market-driven structural reforms, at the national and municipal levels.
It could not have attained its position as the world’s second-largest economy otherwise.
But the key to China’s success has been constant experimentation, and the pursuit of that credo appears to have intensified.
For example, the networking of telecommunications, roads, rail, air, and maritime transport enabled China to become a global hub for the production of consumer durables, and improve their distribution.
More recently, China began to apply the same approach to building a more innovative, knowledge-based economy – one in which the services sectors, together with domestic consumption, drive growth.
As a result, the country has increasingly been focusing on the so-called “killer apps” that, according to the historian Niall Ferguson, drove the West’s rise to economic dominance: competition, science, property, modern medicine, consumerism, and an ethic of hard work.
In particular, China has worked to boost market competition and foster science and innovation, with progress in these areas underpinned by efforts to improve governance, strengthen mechanisms of accountability, and boost investment in public goods.
Crucially, even as China’s specific goals have shifted, its policymakers have adhered to the experimental approach that has served the country so well thus far.
Indeed, it was the combination of broad-based education, openness to science and innovation, investment in advanced telecommunications infrastructure, and knowhow in manufacturing smart-phones that fueled China’s rapid advancement in the e-tail and Internet industries.
This openness to innovation – along with what some say is lax regulation – also allowed platforms like Alibaba to integrate payments and logistics before many Western players did.
China’s “learning by doing” approach is likely to continue to yield innovative solutions to emerging problems.
For example, faced with a shrinking labor force, the government has ramped up investment in robotic automation and other productivity-enhancing technologies.
The impact on China’s competitiveness of rising real wages – which have been increasing by more than 15% annually since 2008 – will, the country’s leaders expect, ultimately be offset by the benefits of productivity-led growth, not to mention the much-needed increase in domestic consumption.
Of course, China’s approach has brought significant stresses, setbacks, and failures.
China’s real-estate, credit, and stock-market bubbles – which produced ghost towns, bad local debts, and stock-price volatility – attest to that.
But the policy decisions that gave rise to these problems – decentralizing control over land and permitting markets to direct the flow of talents, trade, investment, and capital – have also been critical to progress.
China’s leaders understand this well.
Rather than avoiding risk, they remain prepared to reverse failing policies; and, if necessary, they are willing to pay for mistakes.
Given the savings the country has built up, reflected in bulging foreign-exchange reserves, the central government has the fiscal room to afford it.
Today’s anti-corruption campaign should be viewed as an effort by China’s leaders to correct another negative consequence of past policies.
The approach is two-pronged: the government is privatizing some SOEs, so that market competition can check the behavior of corporate managers, while treating the managers of other (typically larger) SOEs as public servants, subject to the increasingly severe rules of public accountability, including party discipline.
Earlier this month, President Xi Jinping announced a new wave of measures.
China’s government is running real risks as it pushes through structural reforms that are unprecedented in speed, scale, and complexity.
Fortunately, China has both the experience and the wherewithal to experiment with the next stage of structural transformation.
The Trouble with North Korea
NEW YORK – Nobody would care much about North Korea – a small and isolated country of 24 million people, ruled by a grotesque dynasty that calls itself communist – if it were not for its nuclear weapons.
Its current ruler, Kim Jong-un, the 30-year-old grandson of North Korea’s founder and “Great Leader,” is now threatening to turn Seoul, the rich and bustling capital of South Korea, into “a sea of fire.”
American military bases in Asia and the Pacific are also on his list of targets.
Kim knows very well that a war against the United States would probably mean the destruction of his own country, which is one of the world’s poorest.
His government cannot even feed its own people, who are regularly devastated by famine.
In the showcase capital, Pyongyang, there is not even enough electricity to keep the lights on in the largest hotels.
So threatening to attack the world’s most powerful country would seem like an act of madness.
But it is neither useful nor very plausible to assume that Kim Jong-un and his military advisers are mad.
To be sure, there is something deranged about North Korea’s political system.
The Kim family’s tyranny is based on a mixture of ideological fanaticism, vicious realpolitik, and paranoia.
But this lethal brew has a history, which needs to be explained.
The short history of North Korea is fairly simple.
After the collapse in 1945 of the Japanese empire, which had ruled quite brutally over the whole of Korea since 1910, the Soviet Red Army occupied the north, and the US occupied the south.
The Soviets plucked a relatively obscure Korean communist, Kim Il-sung, from an army camp in Vladivostok, and installed him in Pyongyang as the leader of North Korea.
Myths about his wartime heroism and divine status soon followed, and a cult of personality was established.
Worshipping Kim, and his son and grandson, as Korean gods became part of a state religion.
North Korea is essentially a theocracy.
Some elements are borrowed from Stalinism and Maoism, but much of the Kim cult owes more to indigenous forms of shamanism: human gods who promise salvation (it is no accident that the Reverend Sun Myung Moon and his Unification Church came from Korea, too).
But the power of the Kim cult, as well as the paranoia that pervades the North Korean regime, has a political history that goes back much further than 1945.
Wedged awkwardly between China, Russia, and Japan, the Korean Peninsula has long been a bloody battleground for greater powers.
Korean rulers only managed to survive by playing one foreign power off against the other, and by offering subservience, mainly to Chinese emperors, in exchange for protection.
This legacy has nurtured a passionate fear and loathing of dependency on stronger countries.
The Kim dynasty’s main claim to legitimacy is Juche, the regime’s official ideology, which stresses national self-reliance to the point of autarky.
In fact, Kim Il-sung and his son, Kim Jong-il, were typical Korean rulers.
They played China against the Soviet Union, while securing the protection of both.
Of course, this did not stop North Korean propagandists from accusing the South Koreans of being cowardly lackeys of US imperialism.
Indeed, paranoia about US imperialism is part of the cult of independence.
For the Kim dynasty to survive, the threat of external enemies is essential.
The fall of the Soviet Union was a disaster for North Korea, as it was for Cuba; not only did Soviet economic support evaporate, but the Kims could no longer play off one power against another.
Only China was left, and North Korea’s dependence on its northern neighbor is now almost total.
China could crush North Korea in a day just by cutting off food and fuel supplies.
There is only one way to divert attention from this humiliating predicament: propaganda about self-reliance and the imminent threat from US imperialists and their South Korean lackeys must be turned up to a hysterical pitch.
Without this orchestrated paranoia, the Kims have no legitimacy.
And no tyranny can survive for long by relying on brute force alone.
Some people argue that the US could enhance security in northeast Asia by compromising with the North Koreans – specifically, by promising not to attack or attempt to topple the Kim regime.
The Americans are unlikely to agree to this, and South Korea would not want them to.
Apart from anything else, there is an important domestic political reason for US reticence: a Democratic US president cannot afford to look “soft.”
But small things – a shot in Sarajevo, as it were – can trigger a catastrophe.
And North Korea still has those nuclear bombs.
A Tale of Two Theories
PARIS – Global growth disappoints again.
A year ago, the International Monetary Fund expected world output to rise 4% in 2015.
Now the Fund is forecasting 3.3% for the year – about the same as in 2013 and 2014, and more than a full percentage point below the 2000-2007 average.
In the eurozone, growth in the latest quarter was underwhelming.
Japan has returned to negative territory.
Brazil and Russia are in recession.
World trade has stalled.
And China’s economic slowdown and market turmoil this summer have created further uncertainty.
True, there are bright spots: India, Spain, and the United Kingdom are beating expectations.
The United States’ recovery is solid.
Africa is doing well.
But, overall, it is hard to deny that the global economy lacks momentum.
This is partly because trees cannot grow forever: China’s economy could not continue to get 10% bigger every year.
And in part, it is because growth is not unconditionally desirable: Citizens may be better off with a little less of it, and more clean air.
But many countries are still poor enough to be endowed with strong growth potential, and many others, though rich, have not yet recovered from the global financial crisis.
So there must be something else holding growth back.
There are essentially two competing explanations.
The first, the Secular Stagnation Hypothesis, has been proposed by Larry Summers.
Its key premise is that the equilibrium interest rate at which demand would balance supply is currently below the actual interest rate.
This seems paradoxical, because interest rates are close to zero in most advanced economies.
But what matters is the real rate of interest, that is, the difference between the market rate and inflation.
Aggregate economic balance may require a negative real interest rate; but with inflation at an all-time low – the IMF expects it to be negative this year and next in the advanced economies, and zero in the emerging economies – this is not feasible.
There are several reasons why the equilibrium interest rate could have reached negative territory.
Some are structural: saving is high globally, especially in Asia but also in Europe, where aging countries like Germany put money aside for retirement.
At the same time, the new digital economy is less capital-intensive than the old brick-and-mortar economy.
This may be accentuated in the future by the advent of the so-called sharing economy.
Other factors are temporary.
In several countries, debt-financed housing booms have left households and companies over-leveraged; and governments have reduced deficits to contain their own debt.
As a result, there are likely to be too few investors and too many savers.
The Secular Stagnation Hypothesis is worrying, because it gives few reasons to believe that things will improve by themselves.
True, debt deleveraging is not without limits.
But it is impeded by slow growth and, thanks to high unemployment and weak global demand, persistently low inflation.
Worse, over the longer term, low investment undermines productivity, while protracted unemployment destroys skills.
Both reduce future potential growth.
A vicious circle, it seems, is at work.
The way to break it, according to Summers, is to sustain monetary stimulus and boost demand aggressively through fiscal policy.
The alternative explanation for the persistence of weak global growth has been best formulated by the Bank for International Settlements, an organization of central banks.
The BIS maintains that excessively low interest rates are a big reason why growth is disappointing.
This explanation may seem even more paradoxical than the first, but the logic is straightforward: Governments often try to escape the hard task of improving economic efficiency through supply-side reforms and rely on demand-side fixes instead.
So, when confronted with a growth slowdown caused by structural factors, many countries responded by lowering interest rates and stimulating credit.
But cheap credit promotes bad investment and excessive debt, which borrowers often are unable to repay.
More fundamentally, investment is a bet that cannot pay off if growth is structurally depressed.
Artificial growth promotion only ends in tears.
Furthermore, the BIS claims that credit may well aggravate structural deficiencies.
Housing bubbles and investments in dubious projects result in a waste of resources and a misallocation of capital that ultimately dampens potential growth.
The best example is perhaps Spain in the 2000s, where students left university before graduating to take part in the real-estate frenzy.
Amassing useless concrete and losing human capital, the country lost twice.
So here, too, the logic points to a vicious circle: Slower growth leads to artificial remedies and further erosion of long-term growth potential.
The BIS argues in favor of fiscal restraint, debt restructuring if needed, and swift normalization of monetary policies – quite explicitly criticizing the US Federal Reserve’s caution and the European Central Bank’s aggressive stance.
Both theories are internally consistent.
Both also fit only some of the facts.
The Secular Stagnation Hypothesis accounts well for the mistakes made in the eurozone in the aftermath of the global recession, when sovereigns attempted to deleverage while companies and households were unwilling to spend, and the ECB was keeping monetary policy relatively tight.
The BIS’s explanation reads like a summary of the woes of China, where growth has slowed from 10% to 7% or less, but the authorities still push investment amounting to almost half of GDP and promote all sorts of low-return projects.
So which theory fits the facts better globally?
So far, it is odd to claim that advanced countries have stimulated demand excessively.
Persistently low employment and near-zero aggregate inflation do not suggest that they have erred on the side of profligacy.
True, financial recklessness remains a risk, but this is why regulatory instruments have been added to the policy toolbox.
So the BIS’s call for across-the-board monetary normalization is premature (though this does not mean that reforms should wait).
In the emerging world, however, the mismatch between growth expectations and actual potential has often become a serious issue that demand-side stimulus and endless debt accumulation cannot cure.
Rather, governments should stop basing their legitimacy on inflated growth prospects.
A New Chance for European Politics
MADRID – Most political leaders in Europe want the European Union to emerge from its current crisis stronger and more united.
But the economic policies that have been implemented in most EU countries since the crisis began have given rise to an unprecedented threat to deeper integration – and, indeed, to what already has been achieved.
After five years of financial and economic crisis, anti-European politics has come resoundingly to the fore in many EU countries – France, the United Kingdom, Italy, Austria, Holland, Finland, Greece, Portugal, and even Germany.
Growing institutional disaffection has become a corrosive reality almost everywhere in Europe.
The only way to overcome Europe’s existential crisis, and to respond to citizens’ demands for change, is to confront Europe’s domestic opponents head-on: politics without palliatives.
Europe needs, first and foremost, to break the vicious circle of recession, unemployment, and austerity that now has it in its grip.
That means, first of all, refocusing economic policy on growth, employment, and institutional innovation.
It is impossible to advance toward political union while seeming to abandon Europe’s citizens along the way, which is the impression that unremitting austerity has created.
Sacrifice, too many Europeans believe, is not laying the groundwork for a better, more prosperous Europe, but is dragging them into a fatal tailspin.
European leaders cannot remain passive in the face of the dangerous populist tsunami now crossing the continent, and they know it.
There is still time to react – by demonstrating strong leadership and prioritizing growth over short-sighted policies – but that time is limited and the clock is ticking.
Next year will be crucial, for it will mark the end of the current political cycle and the beginning of a new one.
There will be a new German government, European Parliament elections, and, at the end of the year, a new European Commission.
It is here that political leaders should devote their efforts.
No one wants the EU to fail because of its citizens’ disaffection.
To take advantage of the political opportunity offered in 2014 requires launching an open, pedagogical effort now.
European citizens have already shown a sense of responsibility and capacity for sacrifice, but they should know why hope – in the form of higher employment and living standards – is not futile.
If that does not happen, next year’s European elections may give rise to an unfortunate paradox.
Just when, as a result of the Lisbon Treaty, the European Parliament gains more power than it has ever had, the risk of it being condemned to irrelevance is greatest.
If, reflecting the mood in the member states, the elections result in a fragmented Parliament – possibly rendered less representative by low voter turnout – paralysis, disaffection, and ineffectiveness are guaranteed.
That is why Europe’s leaders should take advantage of the coming political cycle to correct Europe’s institutional design and strengthen its democratic legitimacy, thereby enabling them to respond to Euro-skepticism and ad hoc bilateral deals with more integration.
If Europeans are to overcome their fear of giving up sovereignty in order to achieve political union, a civic sense of attachment to Europe and its institutions must be regained and nurtured.
Achieving this requires, among other things, the recovery of the Franco-German axis as Europe’s driving force.
It also presupposes a European budget that is sufficient to meet expectations and equal to the challenges that await.
Resolving these issues is as important as resolving individual countries’ economic problems.
Indeed, they are in large part the same problem.
Institutions are legitimized in part by their effectiveness, and the EU must recover its authority to defend common interests and harmonize them with national concerns.
The European Parliament can exercise its power only if citizens feel represented there.
As Kemal Derviş, a vice president of the Brookings Institution, recently put it: “If independent technocrats are allowed to determine long-term policy and set objectives that cannot be influenced by democratic majorities, democracy itself is in serious jeopardy.”
Next year will also mark the centenary of the outbreak of World War I. From that moment until the present, Europe has both endured the worst and enjoyed the best of its history.
We should bear in mind the enormous symbolism of this date in order to understand how much Europe has changed – and, at the same time, to recognize the need to defend those changes.
The EU is one of the great political milestones of mankind.
For this reason, and in order to emerge stronger from the difficult situation in which Europeans now find themselves, Europe’s leaders must work with the conviction that the future is inexorably linked to a more integrated and more capable Union.
Extreme Weather and Global Growth
CAMBRIDGE – Until recently, the usual thinking among macroeconomists has been that short-term weather fluctuations don’t matter much for economic activity.
Construction hiring may be stronger than usual in a March when the weather is unseasonably mild, but there will be payback in April and May.
If heavy rains discourage people from shopping in August, they will just spend more in September.
But recent economic research, bolstered by an exceptionally strong El Niño – a complex global climactic event marked by exceptionally warm Pacific Ocean water off the coast of Ecuador and Peru – has prompted a rethink of this view.
Extreme weather certainly throws a ringer into key short-term macroeconomic statistics.
It can add or subtract 100,000 jobs to monthly US employment, the single most-watched economic statistic in the world, and generally thought to be one of the most accurate.
The impact of El Niño-related weather events like the one this year (known more precisely as “El Niño Southern Oscillation” events) can be especially large because of their global reach.
Recent research from the International Monetary Fund suggests that countries such as Australia, India, Indonesia, Japan, and South Africa suffer adversely in El Niño years (often due to droughts), whereas some regions, including the United States, Canada, and Europe, can benefit.
California, for example, which has been experiencing years of severe drought, is finally getting rain.
Generally, but not always, El Niño events tend to be inflationary, in part because low crop yields lead to higher prices.
After two crazy winters in Boston, where I live, it would be hard to convince people that weather doesn’t matter.
Last year, the city experienced the largest snow accumulation on record.
Eventually, there was no longer any place to put it: four-lane highways narrowed to two lanes, and two-lane roads to one.
Roofs collapsed and “ice dams” building up from gutters caused severe flooding.
Public transport closed, and many people couldn’t get to their jobs.
It was a slow-motion natural catastrophe that lasted for months.
The US as a whole did not have a winter as extreme as New England’s in the first part of 2015, and the effects of the weather on the country’s overall economy were subdued.
True, New York City had some significant snowfalls; but no one would have paid much attention had the mayor been more competent in getting the streets plowed.
Eastern Canada suffered much more, with severe winter weather playing a role (along with lower commodity prices) in the country’s mini-recession in the first half of the year.
This year’s winter is the polar opposite of last year’s.
It was 68º Fahrenheit (20º Celsius) at Boston’s Logan Airport the day before Christmas, and the first speck of snow didn’t come until just before New Year’s Day.
Trees and plants, sensing spring, started to blossom; birds were just as confused.
Last winter Boston was something of an anomaly.
This year, thanks in part to El Niño, weird weather is the new normal.
From Russia to Switzerland, temperatures have been elevated by 4-5º Celsius, and the weather patterns look set to remain highly unusual in 2016.
The effect on developing countries is of particular concern, because many are already reeling from the negative impact of China’s slowdown on commodity prices, and because drought conditions could lead to severe crop shortfalls.
The last severe El Niño, in 1997-1998, which some called the “El Niño of the Century,” represented a huge setback for many developing countries.
The economic effects of El Niño events are almost as complex as the underlying weather phenomenon itself and therefore are difficult to predict.
When we look back on 2016, however, it is quite possible that El Niño will be regarded as one of the major drivers of economic performance in many key countries, with Zimbabwe and South Africa facing drought and food crises, and Indonesia struggling with forest fires.
In the American Midwest, there has lately been massive flooding.
There is a long history of weather having a profound impact on civil strife as well.
Economist Emily Oster has argued that the biggest spikes in witch burnings in the Middle Ages, in which hundreds of thousands (mostly women) were killed, came during periods of economic deprivation and apparently weather-related food shortages.
Some have traced the roots of the civil war in Syria to droughts that led to severe crop failure and forced a mass inflow of farmers to the cities.
On a more mundane level (but highly consequential economically), the warm weather in the US may very well cloud the job numbers the Federal Reserve uses in deciding when to raise interest rates.
It is true that employment data are already seasonally adjusted to allow for normal weather differences in temperate zones; construction is always higher during spring than winter.
But standard seasonal adjustments do not account for major weather deviations.
Overall, the evidence from past El Niños suggests that the current massive one is likely to leave a significant footprint on global growth, helping support economic recovery in the US and Europe, while putting even more pressure on already weak emerging markets.
It is not yet global warming, but it is already a very significant event economically – and perhaps just a taste of what is to come.
Exuberant Brazil
Brazil’s stock market, as measured by the inflation-corrected Bovespa index, has more than quadrupled in value since President Luis Inácio Lula da Silva’s first election victory in October 2002, and is now at almost twice the peak achieved in 2000.
In comparison, the inflation-corrected Shanghai Composite only doubled during this period, while the American stock market, as measured by the inflation-corrected Standard and Poor’s 500, increased only 50%.
Indeed, the United States has never experienced a fourfold increase in stock prices in less than five years, even during the late 1990’s bubble.
Given that Lula is an avowed leftist who counts Hugo Chávez and Fidel Castro among his friends, Brazil’s performance is all the more surprising.
How could he manage to preside over such a spectacular stock-market boom?
Are Brazilians too exuberant?
Might it be time for foreign investors to pull their money out?
Stock-market movements are certainly hard to explain, but there are reasons to believe that Brazilians might be rationally exuberant.
Corporate earnings in Brazil have gone up roughly as fast as stock prices.
With the price/earnings ratio remaining stable and moderate, the stock-market boom does not appear to reflect merely investor psychology.
On the contrary, the real question is why the increase in stock prices has not outpaced growth in corporate earnings.
After all, in the 1990’s, the US stock-market surge (as in many countries) was fueled by record-high price/earnings ratios.
In 1998, the price-earnings ratio in the US was 24, compared to a historical average of around 15.