And while it may not be possible to prove a causal connection, the influx of Indians into America has coincided with a shift in both countries’ geopolitical orientations, as evidenced by the historic 2008 nuclear deal by which the US abandoned its policy of equidistance between India and Pakistan.
With so many people on the move, it is even possible to become a settler superpower without being recognized as a state.
The estimated 35 million Kurds – who regard themselves as a nation without a country – are becoming one of the most politically active migrant populations in Europe.
It is likely no coincidence that the governments of Sweden and Germany, with their large populations of Kurdish origin, are providing militarily support to the Kurdish Peshmerga in their fight against the Islamic State (ISIS).
The second type of superpower is the integrator.
Libraries could be filled with books about how the United States has benefited from its ability to transform people from around the world into American citizens.
Similarly, Angola and Brazil have reversed the brain drain and are receiving large flows of immigrants from their former colonial ruler, Portugal.
But the two most eye-catching experiments in integration today are Israel and ISIS.
Immigration from the diaspora is essential to Israel, which is reflected in the Hebrew word for it: aliyah, derived from the verb “to ascend.”
Indeed, the government provides “aliyah consultants,” as well as free one-way flights, language classes, and practical support.
As a result, Israel’s population has risen ninefold since the country’s founding in 1948.
In Start-up Nation: The Story of Israel's Economic Miracle, co-authored with Saul Singer, the American writer and political adviser Dan Senor poses a fundamental question.
“How is it,” he asks, “that Israel – a country of 7.1 million people, only sixty years old, surrounded by enemies, in a constant state of war since its founding, with no natural resources – produces more start-up companies than large, peaceful, and stable nations like Japan, China, India, Korea, Canada, and the United Kingdom?”
The answer, of course, is immigration.
ISIS’s leaders would not be happy with the comparison, but their group’s rapid emergence on the map has drawn some lessons from Israel.
The so-called Islamic State may not be officially recognized by anyone, but it is being built on the basis of immigration.
According to the Soufan Group, roughly 30,000 people from 86 countries have traveled to ISIS-held territory in Syria and Iraq.
The third type of immigration superpowers are go-betweens, which use their geography to extract concessions from migration-phobic neighbors.
The most notable example is Turkey; once forced to beg to be considered for European Union membership, it now dictates the terms of its relationship with Brussels.
A leaked transcript of a recent summit with European leaders revealed how President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan threatened to bus refugees to Greece and Bulgaria if his demands were not met.
Niger is another go-between.
As a major transit hub through which 90% of all West African migrants pass on their way to Italy, Niger succeeded in securing €600 million ($680 million) in the last EU aid budget.
In doing so, it followed the example of Libya’s Muammar el-Qaddafi, who famously warned that Europe would “turn black” if it did not pay him to hold back migrants attempting to cross the Mediterranean.
If the established powers that first benefited from the globalization of trade are known as the G-7, the countries, regions, and organizations that are benefiting from migration – China, India, Kurdistan, Israel, ISIS, Turkey, and Niger – could be called the M-7.
As control over population flows become a currency of power, states that follow the M-7’s lead will have the opportunity to boost their geopolitical heft.
For the West, the biggest challenge will be to reconcile domestic pressure for closed borders with the geopolitical advantages of embracing migration.
For now, at least, it seems that the G-7 – for which an easily affordable influx of refugees has somehow become a “crisis” – will continue to aid the M-7’s rise.
Immigration into the Welfare State
MUNICH – The armed conflict destabilizing some Arab countries has unleashed a huge wave of refugees headed for Europe.
About 1.1 million came to Germany alone in 2015.
At the same time, the adoption of the principle of freedom of movement within Europe has triggered massive, but largely unnoticed, intra-European migration flows.
In 2014, Germany experienced an unprecedented net inflow of 304,000 people from other EU countries, and the number was probably similar in 2015.
Some EU members, including Austria, Hungary, Slovenia, Spain, France, and the initially welcoming Denmark and Sweden, have reacted by practically suspending the Schengen Agreement and reinstating border controls.
Economists are not really surprised at this.
In the 1990s, dozens of academic papers addressed the issue of migration into welfare states, discussing many of the problems that are now becoming apparent.
I myself wrote much on the subject at the time, trying – mostly in vain – to raise awareness among policymakers.
A fundamental issue is at stake.
Welfare states are defined by the principle that those who enjoy above-average income pay more taxes and contributions than what they get back in the form of public services, while those with below-average earnings pay less than they receive.
This redistribution, channeling net public resources toward lower-income households, is a sensible correction to the market economy, a kind of insurance against life’s vicissitudes and the rigors of scarcity pricing that characterize the market economy and have little to do with equitableness.
Welfare states are fundamentally incompatible with the free movement of people between countries if the newcomers have immediate and full access to public benefits in their host countries.
In such cases, countries can act as welfare magnets, attracting many more migrants than would be economically advisable, because the newcomers receive, in addition to their wages, a migration grant in the form of public transfers.
Only if migrants received only wages could efficient self-regulation in migration be expected.
British Prime Minister David Cameron drew the right conclusion from this: Welfare magnetism not only leads to an inefficient geographical distribution of people; it also erodes and damages the magnet.
That’s why Cameron is demanding a limitation of the inclusion principle, even for intra-European economic migrants.
Even if they find a job, says Cameron, migrants should get access to tax-financed welfare benefits only after four years.
As it stands, a substantial waiting period is in force only for non-working EU migrants, who must be resident in the United Kingdom for five years to gain full access to public benefits.
The proposal does not necessarily imply hardship for EU migrants; it simply means that any support they may require over the four-year period is to be financed by their home country.
There is indeed much to be said for frontloading the home-country principle in EU rules: a migrant’s country of origin should continue to be responsible for providing social benefits for a certain number of years, until the inclusion principle is applied.
It is difficult to see why, for example, a German welfare recipient who is unfit for work should be supported by the Spanish state if he decides to live in Mallorca.
It would be equally implausible to deny this person the right to choose his place of abode just to protect the Spanish state.
If we are to take the free movement of people seriously, we should slaughter the sacred cow of immediate eligibility for host-state benefits.
This of course does not apply to economic migrants from non-EU countries, and even less to refugees.
The home-country principle would usually be impossible to apply in these cases.
But, for the same reasons outlined above, these migrants cannot be integrated by the hundreds of thousands into the welfare state without jeopardizing the system’s viability.
Therefore, the currently prevailing wage-replacement benefit system, which is applied when recipients do not work, should be replaced with a system offering wage supplements and community work.
This would lower the benefits’ net costs and weaken incentives to migrate.
Andrea Nahles, Germany’s labor minister, recently suggested as much, defending what Germans call the one-euro-jobs concept, which basically converts welfare into a wage.
That is sound advice in an otherwise chaotic state of affairs.
If freedom of movement within Europe is to be maintained – and if high inflows of non-EU citizens continue – European welfare states face a stark choice: adjust or collapse.
The Politics of Polio Eradication
CAMBRIDGE – A few years ago, the global campaign to eradicate polio seemed to have stalled.
After decades of eradication efforts, the virus remained stubbornly endemic in Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Nigeria.
Then, in 2013 and 2014, it was found to have returned to seven previously polio-free countries in Africa and the Middle East, prompting the World Health Organization to declare the disease’s resurgence a “public-health emergency of international concern.”
Despite this recidivism, the world today is closer than ever to eradicating polio.
In 2015, there were just 74 new cases of the disease – 80% fewer than the previous year and the lowest annual total ever.
And all of the cases were concentrated in just two countries, 54 in Pakistan and 20 in Afghanistan.
Moreover, it has been eighteen months since the virus was last detected in Africa.
The reasons behind this remarkable turnaround are instructive, illustrating the challenges facing public-health workers and the best ways to overcome them.
The barriers to polio eradication are no longer medical; the disease does not occur where vaccination programs operate unhindered.
During the past five years, polio cases have occurred almost exclusively in five conflict-affected countries: Nigeria, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Somalia, and Syria.
Because immunization programs are led by national governments and the WHO, which, as a specialized agency of the United Nations, works closely with incumbent regimes, it can be difficult to carry out vaccinations in areas where militants wage war against the state.
The fall in the number of polio cases largely resulted from improved access to such areas.
In Nigeria and Pakistan, vaccination programs were able to proceed after troops asserted the state’s control over conflict-affected territory.
Most polio cases occurred in northern and eastern Nigeria, where the terrorist group Boko Haram had killed and kidnapped immunization workers, disrupting vaccination programs and leaving more than a million children unprotected.
After a regional military force pushed the group into sparsely populated mountains and forests, immunization workers were provided access to previously rebel-controlled areas.
In Pakistan, polio is concentrated in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas in the northwest of the country, where the Taliban are strongest.
In 2012, militant leaders in the region banned immunization programs over concerns that they were being used to gather intelligence for drone attacks by the United States.
Consequently 1-3.5 million Pakistani children were not vaccinated.
That changed in the summer of 2014, when the Pakistan military brought large areas of the region under government control.
In the space of a single year, the number of polio cases fell from 306 to 54.
Using troops to assert control over conflict-affected areas is not the only way to improve access for polio workers, and in some cases it may not be the most effective.
In Afghanistan, Somalia, and Syria, the government was either unable or unwilling to assert authority over rebel-controlled territory.
Instead, immunization workers adapted to the political reality and worked with militants to gain access to areas under their control.
The Afghan Taliban have cooperated with polio vaccination programs since the 1990s.
In most cases, local-level leaders have welcomed immunization workers, seeing vaccination programs as a form of patronage that reinforces their authority.
The few polio cases that have been detected have been either cross-border transmissions from Pakistan or have occurred in areas where intense conflict between the Taliban and the Afghan government has temporarily disrupted polio campaigns.
By contrast, in Somalia, the terrorist group al-Shabaab has historically forbidden polio workers from operating in areas under their control, viewing vaccination campaigns as part of a foreign campaign to impose a centralized government.
One million children were unvaccinated between 2010 and 2013, when a polio outbreak occurred.
Since then, immunization campaigns have improved their access to rebel-controlled areas by employing locally recruited staff to work within their own clans and negotiate access with local-level militant leaders.
In Syria, after the start of the uprising in 2011, the government prevented the WHO from operating in areas outside its control.
Over three million children were not vaccinated for polio, leading to an outbreak in rebel-controlled regions in 2013.
In response, an ad hoc coalition, including moderate opposition groups, Turkish authorities, and local NGOs carried out a series of vaccination campaigns and contained the outbreak.
The coalition negotiated access with local rebel leaders, allowing them to choose volunteer vaccinators.
Militant groups – even the so-called Islamic State – permitted immunization campaigns to operate in areas under their control.
The lesson is clear.
Successful immunization campaigns must secure the support of de facto political leaders – whether of an internationally recognized state or of a vilified militant organization.
As objectionable as working with groups like the Islamic State might be, it is important to remember that the main objective of efforts like the campaign to eradicate polio is to improve the health of people wherever they may live.
Executing Foreign Policy
NEW YORK – The filmmaker Woody Allen is often quoted as saying that “Showing up is 80% of life.”
One can quibble with the percentage, but Allen’s insight is important: You have to get in the game – be a player – to have any chance of obtaining your objectives.
The same is true of world affairs.
If showing up is 80% of life, at least 80% of foreign policy is following up.
Smart plans, good intentions, and strong negotiating skills are essential, but they are never enough – not even close.
As with business, education, and much else in life, most of what makes foreign policy work – or not – is a matter of implementation and execution.
This observation will be tested more than once in 2016 and subsequent years.
One prominent example is the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), the trade pact signed in October by 12 Pacific Rim countries in Asia and the Americas.
If the accord enters into force, it will expand world trade, boost economic growth, and strengthen the United States’ ties with regional allies who would otherwise be tempted to move closer to China.
The agreement’s entry into force, though, is subject to ratification by most of the 12 signatories’ legislatures.
The outcome in the US and Japan, the world’s largest and third largest economies, respectively, will be particularly consequential.
Indeed, everyone is waiting to see what happens in the US.
But approval by the US Congress is far from certain, especially as the presidential candidates –all of the Democrats and the leading Republicans – have come out against it.
The vote, if it takes place, will be close, and the stakes are high, as failure to ratify the TPP would raise fundamental questions about America’s political effectiveness and ability to be a reliable partner to its allies.
A second test will come in Syria, arguably the biggest international failure of recent years.
In December, the United Nations Security Council unanimously adopted Resolution 2254, which establishes a political framework for a civil war that has raged for nearly five years, claiming as many as 300,000 lives and creating millions of refugees.
A framework, however, is nothing more than an outline.
In this case, it was less than that, because the resolution was silent about Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s political fate and the timing of his departure.
It also raised more questions than it answered about which Syrian opposition groups would participate in negotiations.
Given the many divisions both within Syria and among its neighbors, getting from the resolution to a cease-fire and political settlement is likely to take years – and even that assessment may prove to be overly optimistic.
Yet a third test for diplomats also stems from the climate agreement reached in Paris in December.
The agreement comprises voluntary pledges by governments that amount to no more than promises to do their best.
In many cases, there is a lack of specificity about what is to be done.
And, because the agreement is not legally binding on its signatories, the only sanction it permits is to “name and shame” countries that fail to deliver.
A fourth test stems from the agreement signed over the summer by the Security Council’s five permanent members, Germany, and Iran limiting Iran’s nuclear program.
There are sure to be numerous disagreements over whether the parties in general, and Iran in particular, are meeting their obligations.
Perhaps most important, steps will need to be taken to reassure Iran’s neighbors so that they are not tempted to proceed with their own nuclear programs.
At some point, the implementation challenge will include additional measures to ensure that Iran does not develop nuclear weapons once the agreement’s time limits on specified programs expire.
There are a few lessons to be learned from all of this.
For starters, while international accords are rarely reached easily, no one should get carried away at the signing ceremony.
The negotiators still must be able to deliver their governments’ full backing, and this is never automatic, especially when it comes to democracies such as the US, where different branches of government are often controlled by different political parties.
A second reality is that there is an unavoidable trade-off between negotiations and implementation.
In many cases, agreement is possible only if critical details are left unresolved.
But such “creative ambiguity” also ensures that the implementation phase will be more difficult, as tough choices that were postponed suddenly must be addressed.
Third, there will inevitably be moments when one or another party does not implement the pact in a manner judged to be adequate.
Dealing with episodes of alleged non-compliance can prove to be every bit as demanding as the original negotiation.
Which brings us back to where we began.
All four of the major international accords reached in 2015 – the TPP, the Security Council’s Syria resolution, the Paris climate agreement, and the Iran nuclear deal – required great effort to negotiate.
Making them work in 2016 and beyond will prove even harder.
As Woody Allen could tell you, it is akin to the difference between writing a screenplay and making a movie.
Europe’s Plan A
FRANKFURT – Europe’s politicians nowadays are desperately looking for someone to blame for the euro crisis.
Germany blames France, and vice versa.
Even lawyers are getting into the act, trying to identify legal responsibility for the monetary union’s design flaws.
Meanwhile, as the crisis has deepened, a new consensus about Europe’s monetary union has emerged.
The euro, according to this view, was devised in a fit of giddy and irresponsible optimism – or, alternatively, panic at the prospect of German hegemony over Europe – in the wake of the fall of the Berlin Wall.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
The Report on economic and monetary union in the European Community, which laid out the euro blueprint, was presented in April 1989 – a time when no one (with the possible exception of some Kremlin strategists) was thinking about German reunification.
Moreover, the salient issues concerning monetary unions were well understood, and remedies for the most significant obstacles were proposed at the outset.
The committee that drafted the report – now known as the Delors Report, after its chairman, Jacques Delors – was a fundamentally rather conservative group of central bankers, with even the governor of the Bank of England (BoE) signing on.
Its internal debates highlighted two problems of the potential monetary union.
First, the committee explicitly discussed whether the capital market would suffice to impose fiscal discipline on the currency union’s members, and agreed that a system of rules was needed.
But those rules were steadily weakened, and by the early 2000’s were widely derided (including by Romano Prodi, Delors’ successor as President of the European Commission), as governments found that they could run large deficits without paying higher market interest rates.
The second problem was more serious.
In the original plan for the European Central Bank, the proposed institution would have had overall supervisory and regulatory powers.
Indeed, the drafters of the ECB statute produced an astonishingly far-sighted approach to banking supervision.
Their 1990 version of the Maastricht Treaty’s Article 25 on Prudential Supervision included the following provisions (placed in square brackets to show that they were not completely consensual): “The ECB may formulate, interpret, and implement policies relating to the prudential supervision of credit and other financial institutions for which it is designated as competent supervisory authority.”
The demand that the ECB should be the central supervisory authority in an integrated capital market met strong resistance, above all from Germany’s Bundesbank, which worried that a role in maintaining financial stability might undermine the Bank’s ability to focus on price stability as the primary goal of monetary policy.
There was also bureaucratic resistance from existing regulators.
Most important, supervision suggested some potential responsibility to recapitalize problematic banks, and thus involved a fiscal cost.
The most energetic actor behind the early thinking on banking supervision was a BoE official, Brian Quinn.
But his credibility was sapped in the wake of criticism of the BoE’s handling of the collapse in 1991 of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International – an episode that anticipated later issues in managing the failure of large, cross-border institutions.
A legal vestige of the original plan may offer an easy path to a greater ECB supervisory role today.
According to Article 25 of the Maastricht Treaty, the ECB may “offer advice to and be consulted by” the Commission or the Council on the scope and implementation of legislation relating to prudential supervision.
When that phrase was inserted in the Treaty, it appeared as if the hurdles to effective European banking supervision could hardly be set higher.
The ECB was not given overall supervisory and regulatory powers.
And, until the outbreak of the financial crisis in 2007-2008 highlighted the connections between financial and fiscal health, no one considered that a problem.
They do now.
Nevertheless, fiscal rules and common banking supervision are still regarded in many quarters as an illegitimate encroachment on member states’ sovereignty.
After all, the European Union has avoided becoming a focus of heated contestation precisely because it never got much of a share of what Europeans produced (its budget, at just over 1% of the EU’s GDP, has barely changed in relative terms for the past 40 years).
It was the member states that did politics and budgets.
Delors had a different vision.
At the time of his report, he concluded that the European budget would amount to some 3% of GDP – identical to the peacetime US federal budget’s share of GDP during the country’s first stage of monetary union, in the nineteenth century.
Moreover, as in Europe today, when Alexander Hamilton proposed a central banking system, the Bank of the United States, alongside consolidation of states’ Revolutionary War debt into federal debt, the implementation of his sensible plan was imperfect.
In the American case, the principles of federal finance were not worked out until the Civil War, and the Federal Reserve System was established even later, coming only in 1913.
Europeans can learn from the United States and implement a fundamentally sound plan.
But they must also recognize that political backlashes and setbacks are inevitable – and thus that the road from vision to reality may be longer than expected.
National Security Babies
WASHINGTON, DC – From the emergence of the Islamic State to Russian expansionism and China’s rise, there is no shortage of national-security challenges facing the United States.
But, as a new report – Worthy Work, STILL Unlivable Wages – demonstrates, nothing poses a more potent threat to America’s future than the failure to provide adequate care and education to children under the age of five.
If young children do not receive high-quality care from educated professionals who understand how to stimulate and shape brain development, the next generation of Americans will suffer from an ever-widening achievement gap relative to their counterparts in other advanced countries and emerging competitors.
Yet Americans pay these trained professionals the same wages paid to those who park our cars, walk our dogs, flip our burgers, and mix our drinks.
The implication is clear: American children require no more nuanced attention than animals or inanimate objects.
This is a grave error.
Early childhood care can shape a person’s lifelong capacity for learning, emotional resilience, confidence, and independence.
In fact, providing high-quality care that engages and instructs children in their first five years of life has a greater impact on their development than any other intervention over the course of their lifetime.
This is not new information.
The book Neurons to Neighborhoods: The Science of Early Childhood Development, published more than a decade ago by the National Academy of Sciences,&nbsp;begins by acknowledging that, from conception to the first day of kindergarten, the pace of development exceeds “that of any subsequent stage of life.”
That development “is shaped by a dynamic and continuous interaction between biology and experience.”
This observation is now backed by neuroscience, which has identified how&nbsp;the brain develops over that period and has created a system for measuring learning gaps.
Such research has confirmed that building the brain is just as important as feeding the body to produce healthy, intelligent, productive, and resilient adults.
A recent study tallied the results of the Carolina Abecedarian Project, a North Carolina social experiment that began in the early 1970s.
The study compared two sets of disadvantaged children, with one set receiving excellent nutrition and high-quality, stimulating care for eight hours a day from birth to age five, and the other receiving ordinary formula and care.
Four decades later, the adults who had received better care were not only physically healthier; they were more than four times likelier to have a college degree.
Clearly, there is a lot more to early-childhood care than setting out juice and cookies, supervising naps, and taking kids to the playground.
According to Megan Gunnar, who specializes in the intersection of developmental psychology and neuroscience, a good early childhood caregiver “requires [the] capacity to analyze what’s happening in the moment” and determine what concept – whether a numerical concept, or one related to language or physics – the child could be learning.
Responding “in the moment, dynamically, really takes analytic skills, executive function, ordering and sequencing, and knowing a lot of information.”
Unfortunately for America’s children, the high-functioning circuits in the caregiver’s prefrontal cortex that these skills demand are directly affected by stress.
And, in the US, the vast majority of early-childhood workers are under enormous economic stress.
In 2012, almost half of all childcare workers’ families received some kind of federal public support, from food stamps to children’s health insurance.
Such economic stress does not decrease with education.
A male teacher working in the civilian labor force with a bachelor’s degree or higher in 2012 had an average annual salary of $88,000.
Early childhood educators with the same qualifications had an average annual salary of $27,000-28,000.
The exception is the US military, which pays teachers according to the same scale as other defense department employees, based on criteria like training, education, seniority, and experiences.
In other words, the segment of the US government that is directly responsible for upholding national security recognizes the need to attract and retain highly educated workers to provide care and early learning to the children of all employees.
Could this be because the military and civilian leaders of the US defense establishment have seen first-hand the costs of stunted intellectual growth, hyperactivity, and lack of impulse control?
To compete in a digital global economy, the US – indeed, any country – needs a capable, well educated, innovative, and healthy workforce.
The development of such a workforce begins at birth.
Anyone can change a diaper, but not everyone can engage, stimulate, and respond to a baby or a toddler in a way that will build neurons, much less impart skills calibrated to the child’s stage of development.
The US has the world’s most dynamic technological sector – not least because it offers the high salaries needed to attract the best talent.
You get what you pay for, and Americans are paying far too little for their children to thrive.
Impotent America?
JERUSALEM – Israel’s 60th anniversary has come and gone.
So, too, has President George W. Bush’s final visit to the Middle East.
Amidst the celebrations and the soul-searching, no meaningful breakthrough in the deadlocked Israeli-Palestinian negotiations is visible.
There are immediate reasons why this is so: Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert’s government is weak and unpopular, mainly due to the botched 2006 war against Hezbollah in Lebanon.
The Palestinian Authority under Mahmoud Abbas is even weaker, having lost control of Gaza to Hamas after a violent putsch last year.
On the Palestinian side, this is part of a deeper phenomenon: a longstanding failure to create the institutional structures necessary for nation building.
For example, in 1936-1939, a Palestinian uprising against British rule deteriorated into a bloody civil war, in which more Palestinians were killed by their brethren than by the British army or the Jewish self-defense forces.
This is repeating itself now in Gaza.
Looking back at 60 years of American involvement in the region, one can discern two scenarios in which the United States can bring the local players to an agreement.
Absent these conditions, the US is ultimately powerless.
The first scenario is when a real war threatens to spill over into a wider conflict, destabilizing the region and Great Power relations.
At such times, resolute American steps can stop the fighting and impose a cease-fire, if not peace.
In 1973, at the end of the Yom Kippur War, Israel was poised to encircle the entire Egyptian Third Army in Sinai.
Its troops were on the road to Cairo, threatening to inflict a major defeat on Egypt.
Soviet intervention became a real threat.
A few tough messages from President Richard Nixon stopped the Israelis in their tracks and enabled the Americans to start a lengthy process of de-escalation that led to a number of interim agreements.
Likewise, in 1982, during the invasion of Lebanon, Israeli troops were about to enter Muslim West Beirut after Syrian agents assassinated the pro-Israeli Lebanese President-elect Bashir Gemayel.
This would probably have brought Syria into the war.
A few tough calls from President Ronald Reagan to Prime Minister Menachem Begin prevented this.
During the first Gulf War in 1991, when Iraq fired 39 Scud missiles at Israeli civilian targets and US forces failed to stop the Iraqi attacks, Israel was set to strike Iraqi targets, which would have split the US-Arab anti-Iraq coalition.
The US warned Israel not to get involved, and Israel was forced to comply.
In all these cases, American involvement was swift and focused on a clear aim, and compliance was verifiable within days, if not hours.
In such dramatic situations, US power is at its greatest.
The other scenario is when the two sides have already engaged in bilateral peace talks, paid the domestic political price, and reached agreement on most issues, though some matters remain unresolved and threaten to derail the process.
In such cases, America can step in and, by using both carrot and stick, make both sides go the extra mile.
After Anwar Sadat’s visit to Jerusalem in 1977, Israel and Egypt negotiated for a year and reached agreement on most issues: peace, diplomatic relations, and full Israeli withdrawal from all occupied Egyptian territory in Sinai.
At this point, President Jimmy Carter – who initially opposed the process – invited both sides to Camp David to hammer out a peace treaty.
In 1993, in secret bilateral negotiations in Norway (unknown to the Americans), Israel and the PLO reached an agreement about mutual recognition and the creation of a provisional Palestinian Autonomous Authority.
Yet some issues remained unresolved.
President Bill Clinton stepped in, and prevailed upon the two sides to work out their remaining disagreements.
When either of these two scenarios is lacking, American initiatives are stillborn.
This happened to Clinton at Camp David in 2000, when he failed to bring Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat to an agreement, and to Bush’s Road Map in 2003, when both sides agreed in principle to its general guidelines, but did little to implement them.
Absent local political will, and when confronted with a peace-making project that may take years to complete, the US is virtually powerless.
It is extremely successful as a fire brigade or as a midwife , but not as an initiator .
What applies to the US is even truer for the European Union, whose “soft power” is no match for its lack of local credibility.
The same dynamic can be seen elsewhere: for all its power, the US has failed to resolve the conflicts in Cyprus, Bosnia, or Kosovo.
The Annan Plan failed in Cyprus because of one party’s opposition; progress now (the minor but symbolically important opening of the Ledra Street crossing in downtown Nicosia) reflects internal political changes on the Greek Cypriot side.
Similarly, if Belgrade will change its obstreperous position on Kosovo, this will be due not to US or EU pressure, but to internal political changes in Serbia.
Recognizing the limits of US power doesn’t mean that America is irrelevant: it can stabilize a conflict, help bring about confidence-building measures, and negotiate interim agreements.
But at the end of the day, in the case of Israel-Palestine, as in any conflict between two national movements, the key is in the hands of the local players.
No national conflict has ever been solved by outside powers, however well intentioned they may be.
Making Water Conservation Pay
NEW YORK – Call it a sign of the times.
Rarely a month passes in which a water crisis does not make headlines somewhere in the world.
In early August, an algal bloom in Lake Erie, the result of agricultural runoff, contaminated drinking water in Toledo, Ohio.
In September, the reservoirs in China’s Henan province dried up, leaving crops to shrivel and forcing some residents to drink from puddles on the ground.
In late October, the city of Hyderabad, India, discovered that its water supply might be diverted next year for agricultural uses upstream, leaving some eight million people to wonder where they will find the 190 million gallons of water they need every day.
City officials usually respond to such supply crises by upgrading their water infrastructure, namely, drilling, damming, and laying pipes.
Every day, the world’s largest 100 cities move 3.2 million cubic meters of water more than 5,700 kilometers to address local water shortages or problems with pollution.
But this is an expensive solution, one that only the wealthiest cities can afford.
It also puts city managers at odds with environmentalists, who campaign for restrictions on development to ease pressure on forests and watersheds.
Fortunately, it is not the only option.
Nature, it turns out, can play an important – and so far largely untapped – role in water delivery and treatment.
Protecting water at its source can be cheaper and more efficient than treating it after it has already been polluted.
In a new report, my colleagues at The Nature Conservancy, the C40 Climate Leadership Group, and the International Water Association show that investing in forest protection, reforestation, stream bank restoration, improved agricultural practices, and forest-fire management can reduce the amount of pollutants flowing into supplies of drinking water.
The report, “The Urban Water Blueprint,” analyzes the state of water supplies in 534 cities and 2,000 watersheds to provide a comprehensive overview of the potential natural solutions that can be integrated with traditional infrastructure.
The results are compelling.
Water quality for more than 700 million people could be significantly improved by adopting conservation practices in watersheds.
And at least one in four cities examined would find such interventions financially viable, based solely on savings from avoided water-treatment costs.
In some places, such measures have already been introduced.
Farmers near Beijing, for example, have been paid to convert croplands from rice to corn.
Rice paddies need to be constantly flooded, and, because they are often located on steep slopes, this leads to significant runoff of fertilizers and sediment.
Shifting to corn not only reduces water consumption; it also cuts the amount of pollution that reaches city residents downstream.
The program costs about $1,330 per hectare of farmland to implement, but produces $2,020 per hectare of benefits.
In Brazil, a water-conservation fund is working to restore the Cantareira watershed, the source of 50% of Sao Paulo’s water.
The area has lost 70% of its original forest cover, and sediment from eroding hillsides has clogged the city’s reservoir, jeopardizing the water supply of Brazil’s largest city.
Under the new program, farmers and ranchers are paid $120 per hectare to reforest or terrace their fields.
So far, about 3,500 hectares have been planted with trees or put under improved soil-management practices.
Reforesting another 14,200 hectares could cut the concentration of sediment in the watershed by half.
The savings produced by these programs should be viewed in the context of the $90 billion per year that cities spend to build treatment plants, pipes, and other components of water infrastructure.
The authors of “The Urban Water Blueprint” have calculated that more than $18 billion could be productively directed toward conservation activities, saving cities money and creating a new market comparable in size to the market for the water sector’s existing technologies.
But if these solutions are to be adopted at the necessary scale, environmentalists and city officials alike will have to expand the scope of their traditional activities.
Environmentalists will have to embrace the idea that conservation does not only mean protecting pristine landscapes.
It also sometimes requires the improvement of lands under production.
Indeed, these are the areas where some of the most cost-effective solutions are to be found.
Water quality would be improved for more than 600 million people if the farms and ranches operating within their watersheds limited runoff and restored stream banks.
City officials, meanwhile, need to think beyond their municipalities’ boundaries.
The 100 largest cities occupy much less than 1% of the planet’s land, but the watersheds on which they depend account for a full 12%.
Because many cities share water resources, cross-jurisdictional financing mechanisms and a shared sense of commitment will be needed in order to protect and restore natural sources of clean water.
These partnerships will require the cooperation of a broad variety of interest groups, all of which will have to be persuaded to support efforts to improve the water supply.
Farmers and ranchers should be at the top of the engagement list.
Land use and water security are firmly linked.
By embracing both natural and traditional water infrastructure, cities will not only secure their future water supply; they will also reshape our planet’s landscape for the better.
Health Care’s New Frontier
BEIJING – Developing countries face a seemingly insurmountable hurdle in providing health care to their rapidly growing – or, in some cases, rapidly aging – populations, especially as health systems become increasingly over-burdened and infections and other diseases spread.
Because access to medicine in these regions is a multifaceted challenge, it is best tackled by several parties.
Lasting, collaborative relationships among pharmaceutical companies, governments, nonprofit organizations, and community leaders are needed to help disadvantaged populations overcome their health-care challenges.
Together, these parties should take a binary approach, addressing both “hardware” factors (which remain constant, such as physical distance to treatment centers and elongated supply chains) and “software” factors (the intangibles that vary greatly in each region, such as the role of family and cultural beliefs).
These principles are especially true in places like China’s rural Xinjiang province, where life expectancy is stunted at 67 years (compared to 73.5 for China as a whole), and lack of access to health care undermines well-being.
Xinjiang covers nearly 650,000 square miles (1.7 million square kilometers), but it is home to only 21 million people, many of whom are members of nomadic tribes.
From an economic standpoint, Xinjiang’s resilience is crucial to China’s economic growth strategy – it is seen as the country’s gateway to the west.
But the reality is that maintaining the livelihood and well-being of this area’s population and those in other rural parts of China is a serious challenge.
Throughout rural China, the spread of infectious diseases – particularly hepatitis B, which affects millions – reflects a lack of hygiene education.
The health ministry cited a 9.5% increase in deaths caused by infectious diseases from 2011 to 2012.
Moreover, there is a serious shortage of health-care workers – just 1.3 per 1,000 rural inhabitants in China.
Free medicines are only part of the solution.
We need to go beyond donations and reduced-pricing schemes to build sustainable health-care systems with strong distribution channels and education programs for the public and for health-care workers.
Without these components, the model collapses.
Through public-private partnerships, we can leverage unique strengths and be better equipped to expand access to health care.
This can create a symbiotic relationship, offering benefits to government, business, and the local community.
For example, Novartis’s Jiankang Kuaiche (“Health Express”) program in Xinjiang is a partnership between Novartis and the local government that aims to expand access to medicine, build capacity, and educate the public.
Health Express achieves this by training local physicians in prevention and treatment of infectious diseases and educating primary and middle-school students on health and hygiene via a traveling caravan that moves from school to school.
During a recent trip to Xinjiang, I met several physicians from rural hospitals who had received training through Health Express.
They told me that in the past, hepatitis patients had to travel for hours to be diagnosed and treated at a city hospital, while many others who were unable to make the journey suffered without treatment.
Now, with physicians trained in infectious diseases, hepatitis treatment is possible in rural areas of Xinjiang, and patient outcomes have improved significantly.
I also met with school children at Urumqi Dengcaogou Boarding School, which is situated in a rural area outside of the provincial capital.
The students were proud to be able to bring their new health-care knowledge back to their families.
They told me how they had told their parents to quit smoking after learning about the consequences of the habit on health.
These children join more than 500,000 others in Xinjiang who have participated in the educational component of Health Express.
By targeting schools as hubs for health-care education and shaping students into health ambassadors for their families and friends, we can reach an even greater number of people in Xinjiang’s nomadic communities.
Xinjiang means “new frontier,” and right now, we are at the edge of a new frontier in delivering sustainable health-care solutions to communities where limited resources and infrastructure constrain access to health care.
These multidimensional, scalable interventions help to bridge the gaps in developing regions.
But neither corporations nor governments can do it alone.
They need to work together to achieve the best possible outcome.
We also must abandon the idea of a one-size-fits-all model for expanding access to health care and adjust our approaches to ensure the best fit with local health priorities and customs.
With education and prevention, capacity-building, and new kinds of partnerships, we can continue to improve access to health care in Xinjiang and beyond, boosting well-being throughout the developing world.
The African Breadbasket
KIGALI – On the first World Food Day in 1945, people around the world celebrated the creation of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization and the launch of the first coordinated global action to combat hunger.
This year, on the 70th World Food Day, countries are mobilizing behind the Sustainable Development Goals – one of which calls for the elimination of hunger and malnutrition by 2030, together with the creation of a more resilient and sustainable food system.
Can it be done?
With the world population growing rapidly (to an estimated 8.5 billion by 2030), the impact of climate change becoming increasingly apparent, and the amount of arable land dwindling, there can be no denying that achieving this goal will be a daunting challenge.
But for Africa, which boasts 60% of the world’s arable land and climates conducive to a tremendous diversity of crops, striving to do so represents a remarkable opportunity to ensure food security for Africans (one in four is undernourished) and boost its economy by becoming a major food exporter.
Though many African economies have experienced rapid growth in recent years, the agricultural sector has remained stagnant.
Indeed, African agriculture is still dominated by small-scale farmers who lack access to productivity-boosting technology, focus mainly on a narrow range of products, and remain poorly linked to markets, manufacturing, and the broader economy.
Beyond undermining food security – Africa remains a major food importer – low agricultural productivity contributes to the persistence of rural poverty, even as a middle class emerges in many of Africa’s cities.
Africa can and should be the world’s breadbasket.
But to realize this vision – and to do it in an environmentally sustainable way – its agricultural sector must undergo a genuine transformation that entails higher capital investment, significant crop diversification, and improved linkages to burgeoning urban consumer markets.
Moreover, Africa must start manufacturing more value-added food products for both internal consumption and export, especially to countries like India and China, where demand is growing.
From Europe and North America to East Asia and Latin America, agricultural advances have proved to be key precursors of industrial development and gains in living standards.
Africa has the added benefit of technologies that other regions lacked at this stage of their agricultural development, from cost-competitive off-grid solar power to mechanisms for mapping soil characteristics, regulating water use, and ensuring farmers’ access to accurate price information.
And innovation is already happening.
Rwanda, for example, is working to link agriculture support with broader services like electricity and education.
And the country’s farming communities are pioneering participatory decision-making structures for agricultural planning and conflict-resolution mechanisms to settle disputes among growers.
To bolster agricultural innovation and modernization, governments must ensure that farmers have secure titles to their land, and thus an incentive to make the needed investments.
The challenge lies in the fact that, in many parts of Africa, land is communally owned, with almost everyone in a village having traditional rights to some farming land – a system that has helped to prevent landlessness and destitution in rural areas.
Given this, reforms to make land tenure more compatible with modern commercial agriculture must be sensitive to local traditions and respect the ownership rights of communities and traditional smallholders.
Of course, agricultural development can have serious economy-wide pitfalls, which must be navigated carefully.
For example, as technology-driven productivity gains reduce the number of workers needed on farms, strategies to boost employment in other parts of the value chain and to manage migration to cities become even more essential.
With Africa’s rural population already largely underemployed, there is no time to waste in implementing such strategies.
Fortunately, Africa’s large population of increasingly well-educated young people, who are largely uninterested in the backbreaking work of subsistence farming, is well suited to fill the higher value-added jobs that emerge in the agricultural sector and beyond.
Another potential pitfall of agricultural development is environmental damage, including land degradation, soil nutrient mining, excessive water use, and water pollution.
Here, again, Africa can benefit from experience and know-how that other regions could not access at a similar stage in their agricultural development.
By drawing on other countries’ best practices – and avoiding their mistakes – Africa can develop an environmentally sustainable agricultural system that fits African conditions.
Such a system must place a high priority on protecting biodiversity and prevent the emergence of monocultures across the continent, which is home to some of the world’s richest ecosystems.
Climate-change considerations – including the expected costs of mitigation and adaptation – must be central to the process of upgrading agriculture, including the relevant infrastructure.
Ultimately, each country must chart its own course toward agricultural development.
But cooperation – even just to exchange ideas and emulate best practices – can help the process considerably.
That is why, next March, the African Transformation Forum in Kigali will convene leading figures from African governments, business, academia, and civil society to discuss practical next steps toward agricultural transformation in Africa, and the broader push to build globally competitive economies.
Africa’s agricultural transformation will be a long and complex process.
But it has the potential to ensure regional food security, promote broader economic development, and ultimately help to feed the world.
We are confident that African leaders will rise to the challenge.
Breaking the Ice in the South China Sea
MANILA – Three months ago, the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague ruled that there was no legal basis for China to claim historic rights to the resources in the West Philippine Sea (also known as the South China Sea), and thus that the Philippines has exclusive rights to the territory.
China rejected the ruling, and an icy chill overcame the once-friendly bilateral relationship.
It is time to bring back some warmth.
Soon after the ruling, Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte unexpectedly designated me, at age 88, to be my country’s special envoy to China, with the goal of doing just that.
Thanks to Hong Kong bankers (including my personal friend Wai Sun Ng of Jibsen Capital), my first point of contact was Fu Ying, who has served as China’s ambassador to the Philippines and as Deputy Foreign Minister.
I was fortunate to meet Fu, who is now Chair of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the National People’s Congress.
She not only possesses detailed knowledge of the issues surrounding the South China/West Philippine Sea, but is also well informed about Philippine culture and politics.
In our first exploratory meeting, I also made contact with the similarly knowledgeable Wu Shicun, President of China’s National Institute for South China Sea Studies.
The atmosphere at our meeting was friendly.
In their private capacities, Wu and Fu openly discussed the need to find a way forward that would ensure enduring peace and closer cooperation between China and the Philippines.
But, reflecting the deep sensitivity of the territorial issue on both sides, our meeting’s primary conclusion was that reducing tensions would require more discussions aimed at boosting trust and confidence.
Such discussions would, over time, have to address a wide range of issues.
For starters, China and the Philippines should agree on the need for marine preservation.
To avoid tensions, fishing in the West Philippine Sea should be carefully managed.
In fact, cooperation on fishing should be added to the bilateral agenda, as should joint efforts to confront drug trafficking, smuggling, and corruption.
Mutually beneficial efforts to improve tourism and encourage trade and investment, and to promote exchanges among think tanks and academic institutions on relevant issues, also hold substantial promise.
These priorities are reflected in the recommendations that I presented to Duterte.
The Philippines must, in my view, expedite the appointment and confirmation of an ambassador to China, in order to continue exploratory talks and seize opportunities to build trust and find common ground.
As we make progress on that front, we must pursue agreements on issues relating to fishing, tropical fruits, tourism, and infrastructure that support China’s maritime Silk Road initiative in and around the Philippines.
But, throughout all of this, it is vital to remember that the discussions are not just about rocks and atolls; they are about war and peace.
Just a year ago, the United Nations General Assembly adopted a resolution – since approved by 195 UN member states – setting out a long-range strategic framework for avoiding a global armed conflict that could lead to World War III.
In our meetings with Chinese actors, my team and I found the resolution to be particularly relevant – a clear reminder of the far-reaching implications of the current tensions.
As we told our Chinese counterparts, “The seas should be used to save and improve our lives, and to ensure mankind’s future survival.
They should not be places where peoples are killed and institutions destroyed.”
Fortunately, the Chinese accepted and even reiterated this fundamental belief.
In practice, this belief should translate into a commitment to avoid violent confrontation of any kind.
A war would do serious damage to the interests of both the Philippines and China, which possesses substantial wealth and military might, but needs peace to transform its economy and deliver a better life to the hundreds of millions of Chinese who still live in poverty.
Perhaps more significant, given the central role of the United States in Asian security, any dispute with China could quickly escalate.
This stark reality must underpin all discussions about the West Philippine Sea in the weeks, months, and years ahead.
Of course, bilateral talks may be contentious at times.
But there is plenty of incentive to make progress.
Indeed, our geographical proximity makes the search for common ground between China and the Philippines a necessity, not a choice.
Re-establishing the kind of long-term, mutually beneficial bilateral relationship that we enjoyed in the past – one that supports peace and sustainable development in our region – must be a priority for both sides.
Don’t Do Stupid Economic Stuff
PARIS – On August 30, 2013, the United States was about to launch air strikes on Syria, where more than a thousand civilians had died in a sarin gas attack perpetrated by the army of President Bashar al-Assad.
But a few hours before the strikes were to commence, US President Barack Obama canceled them, surprising America’s allies.
Instead, US diplomats engineered a deal with Russian President Vladimir Putin, whereby Russia would take responsibility for removing chemical weapons from Syria.
The Syrian civil war went on, without the US becoming directly involved.
According to his recent interview with Jeffrey Goldberg in The Atlantic magazine, Obama is “very proud” of the moment when he considered, pondered, and, bucking his advisers, decided not to follow the “Washington playbook.”
Not everybody applauded.
According to Goldberg, then-Secretary of State Hillary Clinton privately complained that “if you say that you are going to strike, you have to strike.”
But Obama refused to give priority to credibility: “Dropping bombs on someone to prove that you’re willing to drop bombs on someone,” he said, “is just about the worst reason to use force.”
Obama’s stance was in keeping with his now-famous foreign and security-policy mantra: “Don’t do stupid shit.”
That dictum obviously alludes to his predecessor’s ill-judged decision to intervene in Iraq; but, more fundamentally, it expresses the way Obama approaches the balance of risks involved in major policy choices.
Evidently, he does not hold concerns about credibility in high enough regard to let his hands be tied.
The adequacy of the ultimate decision matters more to him than consistency with previous statements.
Preserving freedom of choice in addressing a problem is more important than sending the right message.
Judgment should not be obfuscated.
One thing that security policy and economic policy have in common is that they force governments to choose between minimizing immediate damages and safeguarding credibility.
Economic debates also frequently place in opposition to one another those who emphasize unconstrained judgment and those who regard consistency as the gold standard of good policy.
This tradeoff was apparent in the summer of 2008, as the global financial crisis came to a head.
After the US government had decided to bail out the investment bank Bear Stearns and to backstop the mortgage-finance agencies Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, a congressional uproar led President George W. Bush’s administration to vow not to inject any public money into Lehman Brothers, another ailing investment bank.
When it became clear that no private investor was willing to take over Lehman, the US Treasury lacked the resources needed to prevent a disaster.
And disaster happened on September 15.
Similar tradeoffs repeatedly arose in the course of the euro crisis.
Virtually all major episodes involved a choice between sticking to first principles and finding a way to fix a fast-developing crisis.
But German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s own mantra was not quite the same as Obama’s.
For her, unconventional action could be justified only by an imminent existential threat to the eurozone’s stability.
This so-called ultima ratio doctrine was repeatedly invoked to postpone decisions or reject early fixes.
It is hard to overestimate the significance of the dilemma between solving looming problems and avoiding moral hazard.
It is pervasive in finance and arises often in monetary or fiscal decisions.
One school of thought, epitomized by the US government, considers moral hazard a valid concern but thinks it shouldn’t be overplayed: “Firehouses don’t cause fires,” as former Treasury secretary Tim Geithner put it (or, in the words of Federal Reserve Deputy Chair Stan Fischer, “condoms don’t cause sex”).
Germany is the most prominent avatar of the other view: The long-term consequences of any decision should guide policy choices, and the expectation of insurance must not cause imprudence.
The existence of such differences in attitude should come as no surprise: The tradeoff is a real one, and policymakers may have different views, depending on their experience and time preference.
The German school of thought, for example, emphasizes a policy system’s permanent rules of the game and tends to disregard the short-term costs of particular decisions.
Another, perhaps deeper reason is power.
For seven decades, the US government has been the ultimate fireman of the global system.
Over that period, it has dealt with myriad crises worldwide and has learned to value discretion more than policy consistency.
So what can be done to avoid stupid economic policymaking?
What matters most is the transparency of the decision-making process and its aftermath.
Avoiding the rigidity of rules must not lead to arbitrariness.
A robust and critical exchange of arguments, and – especially when urgency does not leave time for prior discussion – awareness that any decision will need to be explained and justified ex post are excellent antidotes to the abuse of discretionary powers.
Debate and accountability can go a long way toward killing bad ideas.
Arguably, this is easier to apply to economic policymaking than to the battlefield.
But even economic and financial decisions may require secrecy and speed.
This is no reason for the relevant institutions not to organize an effective internal process or ensure proper ex post scrutiny.
In this respect, much progress can still be made.
Memperbaiki Tata Kelola Pemerintahan di Dunia Arab
WASHINGTON, DC – Sebuah survei terbaru terhadap 100 thought leaders di negara-negara Arab yang dilakukan oleh Carnegie Endowment for International Peace mengungkapkan konsensus umum tentang pokok permasalahan di kawasan tersebut: lemahnya tata kelola pemerintahan yang baik.
Sesungguhnya, para responden menegaskan masalah-masalah domestik akibat sejumlah kegagalan – otoritarianisme, korupsi, sistem pendidikan yang kuno, dan pengangguran – di tingkat regional, termasuk ancaman ISIS atau campur tangan dari raksasa di kawasan atau kekuatan eksternal.
Ini bukan informasi baru.
Gerakan Arab Spring mengemukakan kelemahan kontrak sosial yang usang di tengah munculnya tantangan-tantangan baru dalam politik dan ekonomi.
Sayangnya pemerintah di negara-negara Arab tidak juga tersadarkan.
Lima tahun setelah meletusnya pemberontakan tersebut, opini warga Arab tidak diperhitungkan – atau hanya berpengaruh sedikit – dalam pengaturan urusan negara.
Selain itu, penduduk di kawasan tersebut bergantung pada ekonomi rentier yang tidak mampu menciptakan lapangan kerja yang cukup bagi kelompok penduduk muda dan berpendidikan.
Mereka juga menghadapi kondisi yang mengkhawatirkan akibat tidak adanya supremasi hukum, sehingga tidak ada jaminan perlakuan yang sama dan adil bagi warga negara meskipun berbeda gender, asal-usul etnis atau agama.
Akan tetapi, lemahnya tata kelola pemerintahan tidak berarti dunia Arab terancam akan terpuruk.
Tunisia memberi contoh bagaikan secercah harapan.
Setelah revolusi 2011, Tunisia mengedepankan proses yang inklusif dan melalui permufakatan untuk mengembangkan kontrak sosial baru yang menjunjung tinggi hak-hak individual dan kolektif seluruh warga negaranya.
Meskipun Tunisia masih menghadapi permasalahan ekonomi dan keamanan yang serius, dialog nasional yang berlangsung merupakan langkah awal yang krusial menuju penyelesaian masalah-masalah tersebut.
Masyarakat Arab lainnya kini juga harus melakukan dialog-dialog serupa dengan tujuan utama membangun perekonomian dan lembaga demi memenuhi kebutuhan rakyat.
Sejarah mengajarkan kita bahwa proses-proses transformasional sejenis itu membutuhkan waktu.
Ide-ide yang lama terkubur dan energi-energi yang terbebas oleh kejadian seperti Arab Spring harus dimatangkan terlebih dahulu sebelum bisa menghasilkan dampak penuh bagi masyarakat.
Ambil contoh pemberontakan di Eropa tahun 1848, ketika warga memprotes otoritarianisme, sistem feodal, dan rendahnya kesempatan ekonomi.
Di akhir tahun, kekuatan status quo berhasil merebut kembali tampuk kekuasaan dan pemberontakan itu hampir dipatahkan.
Pergeseran ini hampir tidak disadari oleh pemerintah, ini adalah cerminan betapa jauh pemerintah dari rakyatnya sendiri.
Namun tidak lama lagi, proses ini tidak mungkin bisa diacuhkan.
Semuanya terjadi ketika sebuah perkembangan penting sedang berlangsung: sistem rentier berbasis minyak semakin menipis akibat merosotnya harga energi dalam dua tahun terakhir.
Arab Saudi terutama terpaksa untuk memprakarsai peralihan menuju model ekonomi yang menekankan pada investasi dan produktivitas sebagai penggerak utama pertumbuhan ekonomi.
Negara-negara lain di kawasan tersebut harus mengikuti langkah Saudi dan mereformasi sistem ekonominya atau menghadapi kemarahan warganya yang semakin tidak puas.
Satu unsur penting dalam strategi reformasi perekonomian adalah teknologi.
Kini 240 juta penduduk Arab – umumnya pemuda – mengakses internet melalui telepon genggam; pada tahun 2020 nanti, diperkirakan bahwa semua pemuda Arab akan terkoneksi ke internet.
Teknologi memudahkan pembuatan dan pertukaran pengetahuan, di kawasan yang secara historis mengalami ketinggalan di bidang ini, dan start-up teknologi semakin bertambah.
Namun bukan berarti teknologi adalah obat mujarab.
Bagaimanapun juga, ISIS juga menggunakan teknologi tapi dengan cara yang kejam untuk menyebarkan propaganda keji dan merekrut anggota baru.
Teknologi bisa mempercepat kemajuan sosial dan ekonomi di negara-negara Arab walaupun di tengah pembangunan kerangka kelembagaan modern yang mampu menyokongnya.
Kini, tidak ada satu negara yang bisa berkembang tanpa pembentukan lembaga-lembaga yang efektif dan kredibel, sistem politik checks and balances yang berfungsi, dan pembagian kekuasaan dalam pengambilan keputusan.
Unsur-unsur ini penting agar negara berkemampuan untuk memberikan warganya kualitas hidup yang baik.
Pada akhirnya dunia Arab akan memperolehnya.
Ketika komunitas internasional berfokus pada ISIS atau peran destruktif Iran di Timur Tengah, sebagian besar penduduk Arab berfokus pada memperbaiki kualitas hidupnya.
Pemerintah di negara-negara Arab harusnya membangkitkan semangat mereka.
Mencapai Kesuksesan dengan Berbuat Kebajikan
WASHINGTON, DC – Dua tahun lalu, CEO Tesla Elon Musk memutuskan untuk membuka akses publik kepada paten perusahaan yang dimilikinya – sebuah tindakan yang sangat berlawanan dengan perilaku persaingan yang lazim.
Mengapa sebuah perusahaan bersedia mengungkapkan berbagai desain dan teknologi yang diperoleh dengan susah payah kepada rival-rivalnya?
Apapun pendapat orang tentang Elon Musk, keberaniannya layak dipuji.
Ia menyusun kembali aturan-aturan bisnis berdasarkan kepercayaan bahwa keberhasilan Tesla bergantung pada keseluruhan pasar mobil listrik dan kepentingan komersial perusahaannya tidak dapat dipisahkan dari kepentingan masyarakat.
Strategi Musk yang tidak biasa ini dapat memutarbalikkan seluruh industri – demi kemaslahatan manusia.
Jika paten terbuka Tesla sukses membawa masuk pemain-pemain lain ke sektor tersebut, aksi ini bisa mengubah niche product menjadi fenomena pasar yang massal – sebuah transformasi yang secara signifikan memperkuat perjuangan melawan perubahan iklim.
Percuma dipertanyakan apakah Musk berusaha melawan perubahan iklim atau hanya mencari laba.
Ia melakukan keduanya.
Selain itu, justru gagasan kapitalisme berpikiran publik semacam ini yang diperlukan agar perusahan-perusahaan bisa berhasil di masa depan.
Kita hidup di era transformasi besar-besaran – sebuah era yang mana berfokus hanya pada keuntungan finansial jangka pendek adalah resep bencana, dan menangani kebutuhan-kebutuhan masyarakat justru sangat kompatibel dengan profitabilitas jangka panjang.
Meskipun pandangan ini terkesan tidak konvensional di masa sekarang, waktu akan membuktikan bahwa para pionir ini benar.
Dalam beberapa tahun ke depan, perusahaan-perusahaan yang sukses akan memimpin upaya pemberantasan tantangan-tantangan pembangunan yang paling mendesak – mulai dari isu kemiskinan, penyakit, perubahan iklim.
Contohnya M-KOPA, perusahaan asal Kenya yang memasang panel surya dan menarik pembayaran via telepon seluler.
Melalui penyediaan listrik dengan harga lebih murah dibandingkan lampu petromak, M-KOPA telah mengalirkan tenaga surya kepada lebih dari 330.000 keluarga miskin di Kenya, Uganda, dan Tanzania.
Instalasi baru tengah dilakukan berjumlah rata-rata 500 rumah per hari.
Penghapusan minyak tanah berdampak besar pada kehidupan konsumen M-KOPA, kesehatan anak-anak mereka, dan lingkungan hidup.
Namun perusahaan ini tidak bisa dianggap sebagai badan amal: pendapatan yang dihasilkan diperkirakan mencapai 60 juta dolar AS pada tahun 2016, meningkat 400% hanya dalam 2 tahun.
Contoh lainnya bisa dilihat di Peru dimana lebih dari 30 lembaga keuangan memilih jalur profitabilitas yang juga tidak lazim dan bekerja sama mendirikan Modelo Perú – sebuah platform yang memberi layanan keuangan digital.
Di Peru, transaksi tunai ialah norma yang berlaku.
Perusahaan-perusahaan yang tergabung menyadari adanya kepentingan bersama untuk menciptakan platform tunggal berskala nasional untuk pembayaran mobile, lalu mereka bekerja sama dengan pemerintah dan empat perusahaan telekomunikasi untuk  mendirikannya.
Kini, jumlah warga Peru yang mengakses layanan keuangan terjangkau bertambah secara signifikan.
Dan lembaga-lembaga di balik proyek kini memperoleh akses kepada konsumen yang jauh lebih besar dibandingkan jika masing-masing diantaranya mengembangkan platform digital tersendiri.
Organisasi tempat saya bekerja, International Finance Corporation (IFC), juga sadar akan pentingnya menyusun kembali aturan-aturan.
Pada tahun 2006, kami memperkenalkan suatu standar kinerja untuk membantu perusahaan-perusahaan klien kami memitigasi risiko dengan menerapkan prinsip-prinsip lingkungan hidup dan sosial (environmental and social atau E&amp;S) dan memperkuat kepemimpinan sektor swasta dalam pembangunan yang bertanggung jawab.
Pada awalnya, lembaga keuangan lainnya bersifat skeptis terhadap pendekatan kami; mereka melihat standar-standar yang lebih ketat sebagai kepastian menuju kerugian dan kepailitan.
Akan tetapi dalam beberapa tahun, sejumlah bank dan lembaga pembangunan terkemuka bersatu untuk menyusun Equator Principlesberdasarkan standar E&amp;S yang ditetapkan IFC.