When I wear my headscarf or chador , people relate to me as an individual, not an object; I feel respected.”
This may not be expressed in a traditional Western feminist set of images, but it is a recognizably Western feminist set of feelings.
I experienced it myself.
I put on a shalwar kameez and a headscarf in Morocco for a trip to the bazaar.
Yes, some of the warmth I encountered was probably from the novelty of seeing a Westerner so clothed; but, as I moved about the market – the curve of my breasts covered, the shape of my legs obscured, my long hair not flying about me – I felt a novel sense of calm and serenity.
I felt, yes, in certain ways, free.
Nor are Muslim women alone.
The Western Christian tradition portrays all sexuality, even married sexuality, as sinful.
Islam and Judaism never had that same kind of mind-body split.
So, in both cultures, sexuality channeled into marriage and family life is seen as a source of great blessing, sanctioned by God.
This may explain why both Muslim and orthodox Jewish women not only describe a sense of being liberated by their modest clothing and covered hair, but also express much higher levels of sensual joy in their married lives than is common in the West.
When sexuality is kept private and directed in ways seen as sacred – and when one’s husband isn’t seeing his wife (or other women) half-naked all day long – one can feel great power and intensity when the headscarf or the chador comes off in the sanctity of the home.
Among healthy young men in the West, who grow up on pornography and sexual imagery on every street corner, reduced libido is a growing epidemic, so it is easy to imagine the power that sexuality can still carry in a more modest culture.
And it is worth understanding the positive experiences that women – and men – can have in cultures where sexuality is more conservatively directed.
I do not mean to dismiss the many women leaders in the Muslim world who regard veiling as a means of controlling women.
Choice is everything.
But Westerners should recognize that when a woman in France or Britain chooses a veil, it is not necessarily a sign of her repression.
And, more importantly, when you choose your own miniskirt and halter top – in a Western culture in which women are not so free to age, to be respected as mothers, workers or spiritual beings, and to disregard Madison Avenue – it’s worth thinking in a more nuanced way about what female freedom really means.
Through the Venezuelan Looking Glass
CAMBRIDGE – When we hear of a catastrophe that has befallen a friend, we feel both empathy and a sense of vertigo.
We wonder whether it could happen to us: Is this catastrophe the result of some peculiar characteristic that we fortunately do not share?
Or are we also vulnerable?
If so, can we avoid a similar fate?
The same logic applies to countries.
On the weekend of July 16-17, Venezuelans were given the opportunity to cross the border into Colombia for up to 12 hours.
It was an event reminiscent of the fall of the Berlin Wall.
More than 135,000 people used this respite to go to Colombia to buy basic necessities.
They traveled hundreds of miles and converted their cash for just 1% of the foreign exchange they would have received had they been allowed to exchange it at the official rate applicable for food and medicines.
And yet they found it worthwhile, given the hunger, shortages, and desperation at home.
The international press has reported the collapse of Venezuela’s economy, of its health system, of personal security, and of constitutional rule and human rights.
All of this is happening in the country with the world’s largest oil reserves, just two years after the end of the longest oil-price boom in history.
Why?
Could it happen elsewhere?
The particulars of any situation are always, well, particular, and hence do not travel well.
But that can provide us with a false sense of security; properly viewed, Venezuela’s experience holds important lessons for other countries.
Venezuela’s crisis is not the result of bad luck.
On the contrary, good luck provided the rope with which the country ended up hanging itself.
Instead, the crisis is the inevitable consequence of government policies.
In Venezuela’s case, these policies included expropriations, price and exchange controls, over-borrowing in good times, anti-business regulations, border closures, and more.
Just consider this small absurdity: President Nicolás Maduro has refused, on several occasions, to authorize printing larger-denomination banknotes.
The largest bill currently is worth less than $0.10.
This has caused havoc in the payment system and in the functioning of banks and ATMs – a source of untold nuisances to the public.
So the relevant question is: why would a government adopt harmful policies, and why would society go along?
The chaos into which Venezuela has fallen may seem to be beyond belief.
In fact, it is a product of belief.
Whether policies sound crazy or sensible depends on the conceptual paradigm, or belief system, that we use to interpret the nature of the world we inhabit.
What looks crazy under one paradigm may seem like plain common sense under another.
From February 1692 to May 1693, for example, the normally sensible people of Massachusetts accused women of practicing witchcraft and hanged them.
If you don’t believe in witchcraft, this behavior seems incomprehensible.
But if you believe that the Devil exists and takes over women’s souls, then hanging, burning, or stoning their bodies looks like sensible public policy.
The paradigm of Venezuela’s chavismo blamed inflation and recession on devious business behavior that had to be controlled through more regulation, more expropriations, and more managers in jail.
The destruction of people and organizations was perceived as a step in the right direction.
By getting rid of those witches, the country would be healed.
Societies’ conceptual paradigms for understanding the nature of the world they inhabit cannot be anchored only in scientific fact, because science can at best establish the truth of individual beliefs; it cannot devise an overarching belief system or assign moral value to outcomes.
Politics is about the representation and evolution of alternative belief systems.
Harvard’s Rafael Di Tella has shown that the fundamental determinant of public policy choices is the public’s beliefs.
In countries where people regard the poor as unlucky, they want redistribution; where they regard them as lazy, they don’t.
Where people believe that businesses are corrupt, they want more regulation; and, with enough regulation, the only successful businesses are corrupt.
So beliefs may even be self-perpetuating.
Consider Donald Trump, the Republican presidential nominee in the United States.
According to him and his many supporters, the US is led by weaklings who are being exploited by savvy foreign powers, masquerading as allies.
Free trade is a Mexican invention to take away American jobs.
Global warming is a hoax invented by China to destroy American industry.
It follows from this that the US should stop playing a leading role in creating a functioning global order based on universal values and rules, and instead use its power to coerce others into submission.
Under the current paradigm, as argued by Harvard’s Joseph Nye, this would imply the unilateral destruction of America’s most important source of “smart” power.
But according to Trump’s worldview, it would be a step forward.
Much the same may be true of the United Kingdom’s vote to leave the European Union.
Were immigrants and EU rules really blocking the country’s progress, implying that Brexit will open a path to greater prosperity?
Or is the economic downturn since the vote an indication of how valuable integration and the free movement of Europeans was to the UK’s own vitality?
The danger that Venezuela highlights – and that Britain may soon highlight as well – is the damage that dysfunctional belief systems can have on national wellbeing.
While the particular chavista creed that destroyed Venezuela will most likely end up collapsing under the weight of its own cataclysmic failure, the lesson for others is how costly it is to adopt a potentially dysfunctional belief system.
When it comes to wholesale shifts in paradigms of belief, Venezuela shows how unaffordable such experiments may turn out to be.
Stopping Venezuela’s Harvest of Sorrow
CARACAS – Two years ago, public protests erupted in both Kyiv and Caracas.
Whereas Ukraine’s Revolution of Dignity quickly took power, political change in Venezuela followed a much slower path.
But Venezuela’s parliamentary election on December 6, which gave the opposition a two-thirds majority, is moving political developments into the fast lane.
Although President Nicolás Maduro accepted defeat on election night, his government has promised to disregard any laws that the National Assembly enacts, and has appointed an alternative Assembly of the Communes not envisaged in the constitution.
Moreover, he used the National Assembly’s lame-duck session to pack the Supreme Court and has called on supporters to prevent the newly elected Assembly from being seated on January 5.
Like Ukraine two years ago, Venezuela is heading toward a constitutional crisis.
But there is an older and more ominous parallel between Venezuela and Ukraine: the Soviet Union’s man-made famine of 1933.
Stalin’s decision in 1932 to force independent farmers – the kulaks – into large collectivized farms caused 3.3 million Ukrainians and ethnic Poles to starve to death the following year.
The catastrophe was unleashed when Stalin, convinced that the kulaks were hiding grain from the Soviet state, requisitioned the seed grain, believing that this would force the kulaks to use the hidden grain as seed.
But there was no hidden grain – and thus no seed to plant the 1933 crop.
Stalin blamed the ensuing collapse in food production on conspiracies by the dead and dying.
Instead of dealing with the unfolding catastrophe, Stalin increased grain requisitions, despite dismal production levels – a move that led to mass starvation.
Information was hidden from the public, preventing remedial action.
Even offers of international humanitarian assistance, especially by Poland, were rejected.
A famine in a country as fertile as Ukraine was hard to imagine before it happened.
And it is hard to imagine a similar catastrophe in a country with the world’s largest oil reserves.
But, heading into 2016, Venezuela faces precisely such a scenario.
There are four fundamental ingredients of such man-made disasters: repression of the market, suppression of information, systematic persecution of dissent, and attribution of blame for the disaster to the victims (which justifies radicalizing the policies that led to the problem in the first place).
Sadly, Ukraine is not the only example: The human toll in China of Mao Zedong’s Great Leap Forward of 1958-1961 was even greater, causing an estimated 15-45 million deaths.
As in Ukraine and China, Venezuela’s government has been trying to collectivize production.
After Hugo Chávez was re-elected in 2006, he decided to accelerate the “revolution” and nationalized banks, telecoms, cement, steel, supermarkets, hundreds of other firms, and millions of hectares of land.
And, as in Ukraine and China, the affected firms’ output quickly collapsed.
Beyond outright expropriation, the government implemented a system that attacked the market’s natural ability to self-organize the economy.
The market is no panacea, and it can work only with a state that operates properly, but it is a powerful stabilizing force.
Market prices provide information about what is in short supply. Profits create incentives to respond to the information contained in prices.
And capital markets allocate resources in pursuit of profits.
Markets may fail, and policies can improve on outcomes; but Chávez and Maduro, like Stalin and Mao, attacked the market mechanism itself.
In Venezuela, a generalized system of price and foreign-exchange controls is causing havoc.
Foreign exchange is allocated administratively at a price that is about 130 times cheaper than the market rate.
Not even drug trafficking is as profitable as this arbitrage opportunity, with obvious consequences.
A formula for “just” prices keeps all prices artificially low (setting higher prices buys violators a ticket to prison), causing shortages, rationing, and queues that consume many hours of most Venezuelans’ days.
Shortages of critical items have already cost many lives, not to mention the devastating effects on production.
And, despite price controls, inflation is above 200%, because the central bank monetizes a fiscal deficit of more than 20% of GDP.
The rising oil prices that accompanied the adoption of these policies initially muted their impact, as imports could make up for the fall in output.
In 1998, when Chávez was first elected, oil was languishing at $8 per barrel; in 2012, prices averaged $104.
But, rather than using the windfall to build a financial cushion for a rainy day, Chávez chose to use high oil prices as collateral to borrow massively, quadrupling the public external debt.
This allowed him to spend in 2012 as if the price of oil were $197 per barrel.
But now, with Venezuelan crude below $30 dollars and the country cut off from international capital markets, imports are declining to a fraction of their 2012 level.
The previous destruction of productive capacity has come home to roost.
Without the market mechanism, the adjustment is taking place with too little information and too many perverse incentives, making its impact on production and welfare even more devastating.
The coming year will see a further drastic cut in imports.
Not only are oil prices even lower, but imports in 2014-2015 were financed in part by running down reserves and other assets, and by authorizing private imports but not paying for them, de facto expropriating the working capital – the seed grain – of private companies.
Maduro is not trying to do any of this; instead, he is devoting his energy and creativity to maintaining power, by fair means or foul.
But time is running out.
Unless Maduro changes, the new National Assembly – where the opposition’s two-thirds majority enables it to amend the constitution – will have to change him.
Victors’ Justice, Iraqi-Style
Saddam Hussein is dead, but not all Iraqis are celebrating.
On the contrary, the way in which the various religious and ethnic groups in Iraq responded to his execution is emblematic of the difficulty of holding Iraq together as a coherent entity.
To the Shiite majority, long brutally oppressed by Saddam and all previous Sunni-dominated Iraqi regimes, Saddam’s death symbolizes their attainment of political hegemony.
Moreover, their triumphalist rejoicing is a cruel reminder that when the oppressed become liberated, they can very easily turn into oppressors themselves.
To the Sunni minority, pushed from power by the American invasion and giving vent to their frustration with daily attacks on the Shi’a population and their holy sites, Saddam will remain a hero for a long time to come.
The Kurds – who, like the Shi’a, were victimized by Saddam for decades – quietly cling to their de facto independence in the north, making sure that they will never again come under Arab rule.
Iraq’s prime minister, Nuri el-Maliki, representing the ruling Shi’a-Kurdish coalition, expressed the hope that the dictator’s end would help to heal the sectarian divides.
But, however sincere his words may sound, reality is moving in the opposite direction, and the ugly verbal exchanges surrounding the act of execution itself will certainly do little to dispel the notion that this was “victors’ justice” – the victors being not the United States, but the Shi’a.
None of this augurs well for the future of what we should get used to calling “the former Iraq.”
Indeed, the Washington debate surrounding how to “fix Iraq” is irrelevant, because something that does not exist any longer – namely, Iraq as a functioning state – cannot be fixed.
Under the guise of US-inspired constitutional arrangements, the Shia majority has succeeded in arrogating near-absolute power to itself.
Thus, what only a few months ago had looked from Washington like a successful transition to some sort of representative government is obviously a travesty: just as under Saddam, power today grows out of the barrel of the gun – only now the state does not hold a monopoly on the means of violence.
Every militia, every ministry, every Shia political faction, has its own guns, goons, and death squads – while the Sunnis continue to use the stockpiles of weapons they accumulated under Saddam to fight a rear-guard action against the new order, apparently legitimized by elections.
There is no power – save a new violent dictatorship – that can bring Shi’a, Sunnis, and Kurds to live once again in one body politic.
America’s chimerical dream of democratizing overnight a deeply divided society accustomed only to violence and coercion has unleashed a terrifying array of political demons.
In these circumstances, the post-Baker-Hamilton debate in Washington is largely irrelevant to the future of Iraq – though it continues to be crucial to the future of US power, prestige, and standing in the world.
The future of Iraq will be decided by the people of Iraq, but with bullets, not ballots.
The US and the entire international community are utterly unequipped to deal with this Middle Eastern version of Yugoslavia and its regional consequences.
And, unlike Yugoslavia’s successor states, which could look to Europe, the lack of a legitimate Arab democratic role model makes crafting a democratic order even more difficult.
Some Europeans and others may gloat over America’s failure in Iraq, and the ineptness – or worse – of US post-occupation policy cries to heaven.
Yet the root causes of that failure go deeper, to Iraq’s creation as an artificial entity in the 1920’s by British imperialist planners, who stitched together three disparate provinces of the defeated Ottoman Empire into a state that never had a coherent identity.
Indeed, the very foundation of Iraq was based on victors’ justice: the British Empire, having vanquished the Ottomans, made the Sunni Arabs overlords in a country in which they were a minority.
That arrangement has now come unglued following another cycle of victors’ justice.
The consequences of this re-ordering of power are not yet clear.
But a coherent Iraqi state – whether unitary, federal, or confederal – will not grow out of a society in which one part of the population views Saddam, rightly, as a gruesome oppressor, while another part reveres him as a hero and martyr.
Wars always have unintended consequences and cruel ironies.
In Iraq, only now is it becoming evident that some states cannot be saved without being destroyed.
The Humanitarian Impact of Nuclear Weapons
VIENNA – In 1983, three years before I was born, a chilling television docudrama about the consequences of a nuclear war was broadcast around the world.
The Day After, now cited as the highest-rated film in TV history, left then-US President Ronald Reagan “greatly depressed” and caused him to rethink his nuclear strategy.
At their summit in Reykjavik in October 1986, he and Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev came tantalizingly close to eliminating all nuclear weapons.
My generation has conveniently consigned such fears to history.
Indeed, with the Cold War tensions of 1983 far in the past and the international order dramatically changed, many people nowadays ask why these memories should concern us at all.
But the premise of that question is both wrong and dangerous.
This week, Austria is providing the world an opportunity to rethink its complacency.
On December 8-9, representatives from the governments of more than 150 countries, international organizations, and civil-society groups will meet in Vienna, to consider the humanitarian impact of nuclear weapons.
These weapons, which terrified people 30 years ago, still remain in countries’ arsenals and continue to pose a grave risk to human security and safety.
Austria’s concern is that as long as nuclear weapons exist, the risk of their use exists, either by accident or design.
An overwhelming majority of states share this view.
Consider how many nuclear weapons there are: an estimated 16,300 around the world, with 1,800 on high alert and ready for use on short notice.
Nearly 25 years after the Cold War’s end, we remain stuck with its strategic legacy: Nuclear weapons continue to underpin the international security policy of the world’s most powerful states.
There are too many risks – human error, technical flaws, negligence, cyber attacks, and more – to believe that these weapons will never be used.
Nor is there good reason to believe that adequate fail-safe mechanisms are in place.
The history of nuclear weapons since 1945 is studded with near misses – both before and after the Cuban missile crisis.
On more than one occasion, the actions of plucky individuals, applying their intelligence against orders, saved us from catastrophe.
For example, in 1983, the Soviet Union’s nuclear early-warning system reported, not once but twice, the launch of US missiles.
Fortunately, Stanislav Yevgrafovich Petrov of the Soviet Air Defense Forces recognized these as false alarms, preventing a mistaken nuclear retaliation.
It is remarkable that the world has avoided disaster thus far.
Why continue to push our luck?
Since 2012, when the humanitarian impact initiative was conceived, most countries have stepped up to support it, owing to their anxiety and frustration at the snail-like pace of disarmament.
Still, one might legitimately ask whether world leaders shouldn’t first focus their attention on other problems, such as climate change and sustainable development.
In fact, like past generations’ loading of the earth’s atmosphere with carbon, nuclear weapons represent a legacy to overcome.
But nuclear weapons, unusable and extremely expensive to maintain, are low-hanging fruit – a risk that we can easily grasp and eliminate.
Enticing the nuclear-weapon states to give up their arsenals will not be easy.
As long as some states possess them, other states will be led by envy or fear to desire their own.
But the status quo reflects yesterday’s thinking.
Acknowledgement that these Cold War relics are outmoded security tools – indeed, that they cause insecurity – is coming from a diverse range of voices.
Thirty years ago, The Day After galvanized a president.
The goal of next week’s Vienna conference is to provide the public with new and updated evidence of the impact of using nuclear weapons.
The picture is even grimmer and the consequences more dire than we believed in 1983.
As long as nuclear weapons exist, it is irresponsible not to confront the implications of their use – implications for which there is no antidote or insurance policy.
They are not some deadly virus or long-term environmental threat.
They are the poisonous fruit of a technology that we created – and that we can and must control.
Vietnam’s Chinese Lessons
TOKYO – For 30 years after World War II’s end, Vietnam claimed the global spotlight.
Its victories over France and the United States were the defining wars of independence of the post-colonial era.
But ever since those immortal scenes of US army helicopters hovering above the abandoned US embassy in Saigon in 1975, Vietnam has mostly slipped from the world’s consciousness.
No longer. Vietnam’s strategic position – as a neighbor of China, situated parallel to the great sea trade routes of Asia – always made the country tremendously important, which may be one reason why its anti-colonial wars lasted so long.
In recent years, however, Vietnam’s strategic significance has increased dramatically, owing to huge – and not always widely recognized – transformations in its economic performance and foreign-policy orientation.
Reinvigorated by two decades of rapid economic growth and a broad-based opening to the outside world, Vietnam is now an emerging player in regional economic and security affairs.
Indeed, in recent months the country has played a pivotal role in helping to establish Asia’s emerging security order.
In late October, Hanoi hosted the East Asian Summit, a meeting at which the US and Russia were recognized as Asian powers with vital national interests in the region.
Earlier in October, at the inaugural summit of ASEAN defense ministers in Hanoi, US Defense Secretary Robert Gates declared the US a “resident power” in Asia.
And earlier this summer, while hosting US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, Vietnam encouraged her to intervene in the growing maritime disputes between China and Malaysia, the Philippines, Japan, and Vietnam itself.
Vietnam’s emergence as a central player in Asian affairs should not be surprising, for the country was the catalyst of perhaps the key turning point in modern Asian history.
In February 1979, China’s leader, Deng Xiaoping, ordered the People’s Liberation Army to invade Vietnam. Deng wanted to punish the Vietnamese for their own invasion of Cambodia, which ended the genocidal rule of China’s allies, the Khmer Rouge.
So vital was this decision to Deng that he assigned overall command of the invasion to his fellow Long March veteran, General Hsu Shih Yun (who had given Deng shelter when, in 1976, he was purged for the second time by the dying Mao Zedong).
The British military analyst Major General Shelford Bidwell has dubbed this form of Chinese military strategy “teach a lesson” warfare.
The first example of it was the brief Sino-Indian War of 1962.
That Chinese invasion was intended to teach India a lesson for its support of the Dalai Lama and the Tibetan resistance. An existing border dispute was used as a pretext to launch a swift invasion (one that caught Nehru’s India by surprise), inflict a humiliating defeat, and then stage a seemingly magnanimous unilateral withdrawal designed to highlight India’s impotence.
Deng’s invasion of Vietnam in 1979 was supposed to be another “teach a lesson” war.
But, when the fighting ended, it was Deng who had to absorb most of the lessons.
In a war that lasted barely a month, 250,000 Chinese front-line soldiers were thrashed by 100,000 Vietnamese border-militia troops.
The Chinese lost more soldiers (perhaps 20,000) in those four weeks than the US lost in any single year of the Vietnam War.
The scale of China’s defeat stunned Deng, and historians often credit the PLA’s miserable performance with forcing him to take a hard look at China’s moribund Maoist system.
Within months of the war’s end, indeed, Deng initiated the reforms that have since transformed his country.
Ten years later, Vietnam’s Communist rulers also concluded that Marxism-Leninism was an economic dead end, and decided to start down the same path of market reform that Deng had taken.
As in China, it took time for the benefits to appear, but over the past few years Vietnam has seen the same rapid, poverty-reducing growth that China has experienced.
An agricultural miracle has transformed a country of nearly 90 million people who were once barely able to feed themselves into a global food-exporting powerhouse.
Vietnam has also become a major exporter of clothes, shoes, and furniture.
These are soon to be joined by microchips, given the $1 billion factory that chipmaker Intel built outside Ho Chi Minh City.
Vietnam’s total trade turnover now equals 160% of GDP, making it one of the world’s most open economies.
With Vietnam’s emergence as a pivotal player in Asia, we are able to view the Vietnam War in the context of the US strategy of global containment, which led it to defend not only South Vietnam, but also South Korea and Taiwan – “the three fronts,” as Mao Zedong put it.
Then and now, Vietnam was the locus of a struggle between the vision of a monolithic Asia and that of an Asia that is open internally and to the world. 
Today, that choice must be made anew.
By acting to invigorate an Asian order that rejects hegemonic dominance, even to the extent of improving its military ties with the US, Vietnam has shown that it has learned its own lessons from the blood and treasure that it lost in its long wars of independence.
The Global Classroom
MOUNTAIN VIEW, CALIFORNIA – When I taught at Stanford University in the 1970’s, I was always on the lookout for ways that technology could help to improve learning.
The big innovation of that time was that my classes were broadcast around the San Francisco Bay Area.
We even sent videotapes of lectures farther afield.
Today, teachers record and upload their lectures, and, thanks to the Internet, students anywhere in the world can watch them as many times as they want.
Education – one of the last big economic sectors yet to be transformed by the digital age – is on the cusp of a revolution.
And why shouldn’t it be digitized?
The Web is the fuel of the twenty-first century, and it will propel students of all ages, from all corners of the globe, into a successful future.
For example, MOOCs (Massive Open Online Courses) offer free or low-cost, high-quality higher-education classes to hundreds of thousands of people on the Internet, making it easier to learn whatever – and wherever – they want.
I see similar opportunities coming to primary and secondary education in the future.
MOOCs enable an unlimited number of students to take courses on almost any subject, from computer science to music, taught by some of the world’s leading specialists.
Some MOOCs have mass appeal, like those from the University of Alicante in Spain and the Humboldt Institute in Germany, both of which offer courses on the practical aspects of starting up a business.
The University of Alicante is now on its second version and has already welcomed more than 30,000 + attendees.
Other MOOCs, like an upcoming one on cellular metrics offered by France’s Institut Mines-Télécom, are more tailored to niche audiences.
MOOCs can also be creative or unique.
Anyone who has ever wanted to figure out just how and why footballers get paid as much as they do can sign up for the Valoración de Futbolistas MOOC offered by the University of Valencia.
In this program, one can learn all one ever wanted about how to assess a footballer’s value.
Watching a football match might never be the same again!
Wherever youth unemployment remains high, MOOCs offer a new way to boost skills and employability.
A key area should be support for teachers, particularly in computer science, especially in middle and high school curricula.
Fortunately, many governments are taking steps to promote the online education revolution.
Malaysia’s government has announced a plan to provide lightweight laptops to primary and secondary schools nationwide, and has adopted free Web-based email, calendar, and document processing for ten million students, teachers, and parents.
Providing Web-based services to students and educators enables access to information and makes it possible for everyone – regardless of financial resources, location, or influence – to become educated.
But much more needs to be done.
Governments must expand national infrastructure so that students in densely packed urban areas and remote rural villages alike can get online.
Public-private partnerships are often a good way to do this.
For example, 10,000 Malaysian public schools should get 4G access this year through a collaboration with a local telecom provider.
Once students are online, there is no limit to what they can do with the vast amount of information available to them or how they will collaborate with and learn from one another.
Imagine students in Malaysia working with students around the world on a weather project.
They could conduct virtual experiments, work simultaneously to update data in a spreadsheet or document, and create a shared final presentation.
Where desktop or laptop computers are not widely available, students might use smartphones or tablets to augment their learning.
For example, they could turn to sophisticated mobile biology apps that let them interact with a 3D version of a cell, or polling apps that they could use to conduct a psychology experiment.
Study groups can be far more accessible and flexible with the Web.
It might be difficult for a child to go to a classmate’s house to study after school, because of bad roads, unsafe neighborhoods, or parents who are working and cannot provide a lift (or do not own a car).
With sufficient bandwidth, students can now meet virtually via Google+ Hangouts or other social-media platforms and study together – or with the leading experts on the planet.
Thanks to the Internet, distances no longer matter: the world really can be our classroom.
More War than Peace
WINCHESTER – “Only the dead have seen the end of war.”
George Santayana’s dictum seems particularly appropriate nowadays, with the Arab world, from Syria and Iraq to Yemen and Libya, a cauldron of violence; Afghanistan locked in combat with the Taliban; swaths of central Africa cursed by bloody competition – often along ethnic/religious lines – for mineral resources.
Even Europe’s tranquility is at risk – witness the separatist conflict in eastern Ukraine, which before the current ceasefire had claimed more than 6,000 lives.
What explains this resort to armed conflict to solve the world’s problems?
Not so long ago, the trend was toward peace, not war.
In 1989, with the collapse of communism, Francis Fukuyama announced “the end of history,” and two years later President George H. W. Bush celebrated a “new world order” of cooperation between the world’s powers.
At the time, they were right.
World War II, with a death toll of at least 55 million, had been the high point of mankind’s collective savagery.
But from 1950 to 1989 – the Korean War through the Vietnam War and on to the end of the Cold War – deaths from violent conflict averaged 180,000 a year.
In the 1990s, the toll fell to 100,000 a year.
And in the first decade of this century, it fell still more, to around 55,000 a year – the lowest rate in any decade in the previous 100 years and equivalent to just over 1,000 a year for the “average armed conflict.”
Sadly, as I note in my new book The World in Conflict, the trend is now turning upward.
Given that so many of Africa’s wars, from the Democratic Republic of Congo to the conflict in Somalia, began decades ago, the explanation lies elsewhere: in the Muslim world from northern Nigeria to Afghanistan and beyond.
Since Syria’s civil war erupted in 2011, the death toll has reached more than 250,000, and half of the population has been displaced, causing a flood of refugees into surrounding countries and into the European Union.
Indeed, the Syrian conflict alone has been enough to change the graph of conflict — and the upward trajectory becomes even steeper when the deaths in Iraq, Yemen, and Libya are included.
Those who hailed the Arab Spring five years ago must now recognize that its blooms died fast.
Only Tunisia has reasonable democratic credentials, whereas Libya, Yemen, and Syria have joined Somalia as failed states, and Egypt, the most populous country in the Arab world, has reverted to an autocracy verging on dictatorship.
The question is when – or if – the trend will turn down again.
Thanks largely to multilateral bodies such as the United Nations, states very rarely go to war with other states (Russia’s brief war with Georgia in 2008 is an exception proving the rule).
Likewise, thanks to the EU – awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2012 because it had “for over six decades contributed to the advancement of peace and reconciliation, democracy, and human rights in Europe” – another Franco-German war is inconceivable.
Instead, wars are between states and non-state actors – between, say, Nigeria and Boko Haram, or between India and its Naxalite insurgents.
Or they are civil wars – for example, in South Sudan or Libya.
Or they are proxy battles of the type that characterized the Cold War – witness Iran’s deployment in Syria of Lebanon’s Hezbollah fighters to defend Bashar al-Assad’s regime.
Whatever the various, often overlapping, causes of conflict – ideology, religion, ethnicity, competition for resources – the Prussian general Carl von Clausewitz two centuries ago gave the pithiest answer to the question of why we resort to violence: “War is an act of force to compel our enemy to do our will.”
But can force alone compel the submission of the Islamic State and the demise of jihadist extremism in the Muslim world?
There are two reasons to doubt that it can.
One is the reluctance of militarily strong outside powers, whether America and its NATO allies or Vladimir Putin’s Russia, to “put boots on the ground” after their painful experiences in Iraq and Afghanistan (a disaster for the Soviet Union in the 1980s and in this century for the US and NATO).
The second reason is the underlying appeal of the Islamist message to many of the world’s 1.3 billion Muslims.
The nation-states of the Arab world are colonial inventions, superseding the caliphates – Umayyad, Abbasid, Fatimid, and finally Ottoman – that once spread civilization from Mesopotamia to the Atlantic.
When Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi in June 2014 announced a new caliphate, with himself as “commander of the faithful,” it struck a chord.
Moreover, the brutality of his fundamentalist Islamic State seems to many not so very different from the behavior of Saudi Arabia, which has spent decades spreading its Wahhabi fundamentalism through mosques and madrassas around the world.
In other words, the message must change if peace is to return to the Muslim world.
That will not happen soon.
Sunni Saudi Arabia will first have to moderate its antipathy to Shia Muslims in general and Shia-majority Iran in particular.
Meanwhile, the Islamic State has manpower, money, territory, and military expertise (much of it from former officers in the Iraqi army).
Saudi Arabia will eventually recognize that it needs Iran’s help to defeat the Islamic State.
And eventually the Islamic State will implode as its subjects demand the right to listen to music and behave as they want.
Sadly, “eventually” is the key word.
Saudi Arabia’s instinct, born of the centuries-old antipathy between Arabs and Persians, is to see Iran as a threat to be confronted, rather than accommodated.
As for the Islamic State, North Korea is proof that brutal regimes can be very durable.
In the meantime, the graph of deaths from conflict will keep trending upwards, mocking the world’s diplomats, peacemakers, and pretensions to humanity and civilization.
Virtual Vices
In a popular Internet role-playing game called Second Life, people can create a virtual identity for themselves, choosing such things as their age, sex, and appearance. These virtual characters then do things that people in the real world do, such as having sex.
Depending on your preferences, you can have sex with someone who is older or younger than you – perhaps much older or younger.
In fact, if your virtual character is an adult, you can have sex with a virtual character who is a child.
If you did that in the real world, most of us would agree that you did something seriously wrong.
But is it seriously wrong to have virtual sex with a virtual child?
Some Second Life players say that it is, and have vowed to expose those who do it.
Meanwhile, the manufacturers, Linden Labs, have said they will modify the game to prevent virtual children from having sex.
German prosecutors have also become involved, although their concern appears to be the use of the game to spread child pornography, rather than whether people have virtual sex with virtual children.
Laws against child pornography in other countries may also have the effect of prohibiting games that permit virtual sex with virtual children.
In Australia, Connor O’Brien, chair of the criminal law section of the Law Institute of Victoria, recently told the Melbourne newspaper The Age that he thought the manufacturer of Second Life could be prosecuted for publishing images of children in a sexual context.
The law is on solid ground when it protects children from being exploited for sexual purposes.
It becomes much more dubious when it interferes with sexual acts between consenting adults.
What adults choose to do in the bedroom, many thoughtful people believe, is their own business, and the state ought not to pry into it.
If you get aroused by having your adult partner dress up as a schoolchild before you have sex, and he or she is happy to enter into that fantasy, your behavior may be abhorrent to most people, but as long as it is done in private, few would think that it makes you a criminal.
Nor should it make any difference if you invite a few adult friends over, and in the privacy of your own home they all choose to take part in a larger-scale sexual fantasy of the same kind.
Are computers linked via the Internet – again, assuming that only consenting adults are involved – so different from a group fantasy of this kind?
When someone proposes making something a criminal offense, we should always ask: who is harmed?
If it can be shown that the opportunity to act out a fantasy by having virtual sex with a virtual child makes people more likely to engage in real pedophilia, then real children will be harmed, and the case for prohibiting virtual pedophilia becomes stronger.
But looking at the question in this way raises another, and perhaps more significant, issue about virtual activities: video game violence.
Those who play violent video games are often at an impressionable age.
Doom, a popular violent videogame, was a favorite of Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold, the teenage Columbine High School murderers.
In a chilling videotape they made before the massacre, Harris says “It's going to be like fucking Doom….That fucking shotgun [he kisses his gun] is straight out of Doom!”
There are other cases in which aficionados of violent videogames have become killers, but they do not prove cause and effect.
More weight, however, should be given to the growing number of scientific studies, both in the laboratory and in the field, of the effect of such games.
In Violent Video Game Effects on Children and Adults, Craig Anderson, Douglas Gentile, and Katherine Buckley, of the Department of Psychology at Iowa State University, draw these studies together to argue that violent video games increase aggressive behavior.
If criminal prosecution is too blunt an instrument to use against violent video games, there is a case for awarding damages to the victims, or families of the victims, of violent crimes committed by people who play violent video games.
To date, such lawsuits have been dismissed, at least in part on the grounds that the manufacturers could not foresee that their products would cause people to commit crimes.
But the evidence that Anderson, Gentile, and Buckley provide has weakened that defense.
André Peschke, editor-in-chief of Krawall.de , one of Germany’s leading online computer and video game magazines, informs me that in ten years in the video game industry, he has never seen any serious debate within the industry on the ethics of producing violent games.
The manufacturers fall back on the simplistic assertion that there is no scientific proof that violent video games lead to violent acts.
But sometimes we cannot wait for proof.
This seems to be one of those cases: the risks are great, and outweigh whatever benefits violent video games may have.
The evidence may not be conclusive, but it is too strong to be ignored any longer.
The burst of publicity about virtual pedophilia in Second Life may have focused on the wrong target.
Video games are properly subject to legal controls, not when they enable people to do things that, if real, would be crimes, but when there is evidence on the basis of which we can reasonably conclude that they are likely to increase serious crime in the real world.
At present, the evidence for that is stronger for games involving violence than it is for virtual realities that permit pedophilia.
Vladimir de Gaulle?
MOSCOW &#45;&#45; The greatest disappointment of the postcommunist era has been the failure of the West – particularly Europe – to build a successful relationship with Russia.
Most policymakers and experts expected that, after an inevitably troublesome period of transition, Russia would join the United States and Europe in a strategic and economic partnership, based on shared interests and values.
The pace of change might be doubtful, but not its direction.
Vladimir Putin’s massive electoral triumph in this week’s Duma elections has put the lie to that notion.
Today, shared interests have shrunk and values have diverged.
A resurgent Russia is the world’s foremost revisionist power, rejecting a status quo predicated on the notion of a Western victory in the Cold War.
Its two super-power assets – nuclear weapons and energy – make it a potential leader of all those lesser powers dissatisfied with their position in the world.
A potential Russia-China axis based on shared resistance to US hegemony carries the seeds of a new bipolarity.
Western expectations of postcommunist Russia’s trajectory rested on three assumptions that proved to be mistaken.
First, most of Russia’s elite rejected the view that the loss of empire was irreversible.
Second, the Bush administration’s unilateralism shattered the belief that the US would continue to provide the world with “multilateral” leadership; indeed, US unilateralism was a cue for Russia to pursue its own unilateral policy.
Third, Russia has not yet become economically integrated with the West, especially Europe, as was expected.
What happens when the pull of a country’s imperial history meets the constraints of its current international position?
Will it try to weaken the constraints? Or will it adjust to them?
The first option may involve international conflict, the second domestic conflict.
I believe that the attempt by President Putin’s Kremlin to impose “liberal empire” or “sovereign democracy” on the post-Soviet states will fail.
Of course, Russia is bound to exercise strong influence in the former Soviet territories, but it will have to share that influence with others.
Russia has too little to offer for exclusive dominance.
The European Union, the US, and China offer the former Soviet republics opportunities for “balancing” against Russia.
Of course, it is not very difficult to envisage the voluntary reincorporation of the ethnic Russian populations of Belarus, eastern Ukraine, and northern Kazakhstan into the Russian Federation – but only in a context in which Russia emerges as a true regional leader on a par with the EU.
Alternatively (or coincidentally), Russia might discover a new business center of gravity in Central Asia and East Asia, though this would hardly be the “liberal empire” that Anatoli Chubais once envisaged, for it would be based on the mutual attraction of autocrats.
Russia also will not transform its economic system along Anglo-American lines.
Apart from their incapacity to do so, Russians are well aware of the Anglo-American model’s faults.
We may see some compromise between European (Sarkozy-style) capitalism and an authoritarian, protectionist model with a lot of industrial policy.
This is the kind of civilizational choice that sovereign countries are entitled to make for themselves.
The territorial and economic imperatives of empire will continue to make it difficult for Russia to develop a political system that conforms to Western norms.
The middle class will expand, but there is no assurance that it will become “liberal” in the Western sense.
So Russia’s political system will probably remain autocratic for the foreseeable future, with a facade of democracy.
While this is disappointing, it is an improvement on anything Russia has ever experienced, except briefly.
It is hard to see Russia offering the world a new type of universalism, as it once did with communism.
The Russian strain of political messianism is pretty much exhausted.
Nevertheless, Russia may be able to develop, out of its own spiritual and cultural resources, an attractive alternative to both the American and European models, provided it achieves long run economic success.
If Russia fails in its attempt to become an independent center of power to rival the US (and eventually China), what role will it play?
A suggestive analogy may be to France during the long period of Anglo-American hegemony.
Broadly speaking, France has been the “awkward partner” in the Anglo-American club – a role it played right up to its orchestration of opposition to the Iraq war in 2003.
Twice in the twentieth century – in 1931 and again in 1969-70 – France helped to bring down the world monetary system.
Charles de Gaulle took France out of the NATO military alliance in 1966.
France, uniquely in Western Europe, built its own independent nuclear deterrent, and has been a champion of creating a European military capacity outside NATO.
Without explicitly challenging US leadership, France tried to build its own “Ostpolitik” with Russia, and to use its axis with Germany to create a European position on foreign policy.
The French have been the most insistent that Europe has interests that are not identical to America’s – particularly in the Middle East, where France has been pro-Arab.
And, like de Gaulle, Putin has sought to rescue his country from humiliation and defeat by carving out a role consonant with popular feelings of national mission and pride, with national interest interpreted as “sovereignty.”
The Gaullist dream of creating an independent power center never succeeded, but the role of “awkward partner” has given a distinctive flavor to French diplomacy, and it may be equally viable for a shrunken, proud, but no longer hegemonic Russia.
Being an “awkward partner” may offer Russia its best hope of reconciling its yearning for independence with the realities of the modern world.
Vladimir Putin, Part Two
LONDON &#45;&#45; Opinions about Vladimir Putin run the gamut.
In the West, he is regarded as an “authoritarian,” an “autocrat,” even as a “dictator” while in Russia a huge majority regard him as the most “democratic” of leaders, on the grounds that he has done more than his predecessors to improve the lot of ordinary people.
But there is one point on which both camps agree: Putin intends to remain in power indefinitely.
That conclusion stems from Putin’s recent statement that he might become prime minister after relinquishing the presidency next May.
But, regardless of what Putin does, his personal influence and the strategic direction in which he has taken Russia will remain dominant for years to come.
Given this reality, what matters now is how this “Putin system” will work, which will depend on institutional frameworks and practices.
At stake, both for Russia and the wider world, are stability and legitimacy, hence the prospects for steady political and economic modernization.
Legitimacy and stability are inseparable in practice, because maintaining stability in the absence of legitimacy would ultimately require Tiananmen-style repression.
But this can be ruled out in today’s Russia, because the instruments to implement it – notably an army that would obey orders to mow people down in the streets – are lacking.
Much opinion poll evidence shows that the presidency is the only institution that Russians accept as legitimate (in contrast to the legislature and judiciary, which are perceived as corrupt and ineffective).
This is not surprising, given the country’s history and culture.
More important is that an almost equally large majority values the power to hire and fire their czar – in free elections held at regular intervals in line with the constitution.
In Russia’s current political cycle, which will culminate in the presidential election of March 2008, there will be no difficulty in meeting the main conditions of legitimacy: respecting the constitution’s rules about regular free elections to the presidency.
Given Putin’s popularity, these rules present no threat to the ruling group’s power.
The voters will enthusiastically elect anyone who has Putin’s blessing.
But looking forward to the next political cycle in 2012, or the one after that in 2016, there is no guarantee that today’s conditions will still apply.
Invincible popularity can evaporate.
Even in the rosiest economic scenario, expectations about rising living standards will outstrip reality, causing disenchantment.
If, in the meantime, the political system has not acquired more institutional cushioning, and the presidency’s unique legitimacy remains – like today – based merely on the public’s approval of an incumbent surrounded by shady and bickering Kremlin factions, there would be a high risk of chronic destabilisation.
In these circumstances, an isolated and increasingly unpopular regime might decide to cancel or rig the presidential election when it fell due.
This is what happened in Ukraine in November 2004, with revolutionary consequences.
It would be rash to assume that the outcome in Russia would be as benign as Ukraine’s “Orange Revolution.”
Integrating the presidency into broader political structures and procedures – especially into party politics – would reduce this risk.
A political party infused with a normal instinct for self-preservation would produce a fresh face to run in a proper presidential election, replacing an unpopular incumbent and his cronies.
As it happens, Putin is now entrenching the already dominant United Russia party by his decision to head the party’s candidate list in December’s parliamentary election.
Could Russia emulate Japan’s post-war model, in which a single dominant party revives and modernizes the country?
Like all historical analogies, this one may prove flawed, but it is not absurd.
Japan’s
While inferior to the open alternation of power between two or more political parties, the evolution of United Russia into something resembling the LDP would still leave Russia in a much better shape than a personal regime confined to the Kremlin.
Despite Russia’s history after 1917, one dominant political party is preferable to none at all.
Putin’s recent public statements point to such a vision: a dominant center-right ruling party, with a (non-communist) social democratic alternative waiting in the wings to maintain stable government should the main party falter.
As so often in politics, much will depend on how far Putin matches deeds to words after leaving the presidency.
Should he choose to exercise his vast residual influence through United Russia (with its inevitable majority in the newly elected parliament), we will know that he means what he says.
If, by contrast, he leaves the presidency, gets himself appointed prime minister, and overhauls the constitution to shift powers from the former to the latter, we will know that he is going for a personal regime after all.
Emasculating the elected presidency, which is Russia’s sole source of political legitimacy, would pave the way to chaos.
The habit of changing the rules to keep power would persist after the strongman eventually leaves the scene, but the superficial stability of his rule would not.
Vladimir Putin’s Potemkin Nation
MOSCOW – “Image is everything” might be a viable credo if you are the house of Gucci or a catwalk model, but it is definitely not appropriate as a national strategy.
Yet “Putinism,” the ruling ideology of the Russia that Vladimir Putin has forged during his ten years in power, is all about image – the image of a reconstituted great power restored to the world stage.
The problem is that, unlike the rail thin catwalk model who starves herself half to death to stay slim, the image of Russia that Putin seeks to project is completely imaginary.
The Russian economy is a shambles, and Russia’s mighty military had to exert itself to its fullest to vanquish tiny Georgia in 2008.
Of course, Russia’s rulers have usually preferred myth to reality.
After all, it was during the reign of Catherine the Great that the “Potemkin village” was invented, whereby the squalor of the lives of Catherine’s serfs was hidden behind cheerfully painted housing façades as the Empress toured her country.
In today’s Russia, the overriding myth is that Putin has presided over a rapidly modernizing country.
Here the cheerful façade is composed of Russia’s miniature president, Dmitri Medvedev, whose job – like that of the American First Lady – is to keep up appearances.
And the appearance that needs the most maintenance is that of a modern and civilized Russia.
Upon assuming the presidency in 2008, Medvedev proclaimed: “We must achieve a true respect for law, and overcome the legal nihilism that is hampering modern development.”  And, in a much discussed newspaper article entitled “Russia Forward,” he declared, “Should we continue to drag into the future our primitive raw-materials economy, endemic corruption, and inveterate habit of relying on the state to solve our problems?
Today, for the first time in our history, we have a chance to prove to ourselves and the world that Russia can develop democratically.
Our political system will be extremely open, flexible.”
And, just this October, remembering the victims of Stalin, Medvedev wrote in his blog (itself a sign meant to convey how up-to-date he is), “We can hear voices saying that those numerous deaths were justified by some supreme goals of the state.
I am convinced that no development of a country, no success or ambitions, can be achieved through human grief and losses.
Nothing can be valued above human life, and there is no excuse for repressions.”
Of course, if Medvedev actually meant what he says, he would be leading the opposition to the Russian state that Putin has built.
But, since Putin put Medvedev in his job and can remove him anytime he pleases, Russia’s president is not opposed to the ways of the Putin regime.
So what is going on here?
Putin’s political genius is that he understands that, for Russians, being perceived as powerful is even more important than actually being powerful.
He does not need to modernize Russia so that it can actually compete with the world’s mightiest powers; he just needs to bluster enough that people – particularly his own – believe that Russia is once again among the first rank of nations.
Putin’s promise to restore national self-respect, shattered by Russia’s bitter loss of superpower status in 1991, is centered around cowing Europe into submissively accepting Russia’s sphere of “privileged interest” in the post-Soviet nations.
As in the Soviet era, the dictatorial mask disguises the system’s economic and political fragility.
Thus, instead of investing in the energy industry – the lifeblood of the economy – in order to reverse declining output, the Kremlin is devoting its energy to a presidential commission to “counteract attempts to falsify history to the detriment of Russia’s interests.”
This means that the state will decide which interpretations of history should be considered “true,” creating endless opportunities for manipulation to serve the agenda of those in power.
Likewise, instead of welcoming the sort of foreign investors who can modernize the economy, the regime continues to wage its judicial war against Mikhail Khodorkovsky and Platon Lebedev of Yukos Oil.
They were convicted for financial crimes in a 2004 trial, but in August faced a fresh round of charges, including tax evasion and embezzlement.
Journalists and human rights activists and lawyers – Anna Politkovskaya, Stanislav Markelov, Anastasia Baburova, Natalia Estemirova, and dozens of others – are murdered, and no one in the Kremlin seems to mind, because they are not really a part of the New Russia that Putin is building.
Indeed, just this November, Sergei Magnitsky, a lawyer for Hermitage Capital Management, died in prison because of his captors’ negligence.
Perhaps US Vice President Joe Biden summed up Russia’s predicament best: “The reality is, the Russians are where they are, having a shrinking population base, a withering economy, and a banking structure that is unlikely to withstand the next 15 years.
The world’s changing before them and they’re clinging to something in the past that’s not sustainable.”
So long as the façade holds, Russians will continue to cling to Putin’s illusion of power.
The Goebbels of the Kremlin
MOSCOW – In Soviet Russia, everybody knew that they were being watched.
Any deviation from officially sanctioned behavior would be treated with suspicion and most likely punished.
The Soviet state saw itself as being at war with almost everything – foreign spies, class enemies, people wearing jeans or playing jazz.
The regime’s dominant ideology was not Marxism-Leninism, but suspicion and animosity.
Not since the early 1980s, before the first rays of glasnost in Russia, have those dark times felt as close as they do now.
Protecting society from enemies, foreign and domestic, is once again the order of the day.
Indeed, an ethos of perpetual vigilance is central to sustaining President Vladimir Putin’s high popular-approval ratings.
And no one plays a more important role in creating the necessary public atmosphere than Vladislav Surkov.
Once Putin’s chief of staff, Surkov served as Deputy Prime Minister from 2011 to 2013.
He now formally advises Putin on foreign affairs, but is really the regime’s chief propagandist.
He has been credited with the introduction of the concept of “managed democracy” in Russia, and he played a leading role in nurturing the secession of Abkhazia and South Ossetia from Georgia.
More recently, he was a guiding hand behind Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and annexation of Crimea, inspiring the feverish media campaigns that have delivered near-universal public support for these moves.
Surkov is the man most responsible for nurturing pro-Putin sentiment, which increasingly resembles a Stalin-like cult of personality.
Surkov is Chechen by descent, infused – like Stalin – with the saber-rattling mindset of the Caucasus.
Under his watch, the central focus of the Kremlin’s communication strategy has been to sustain the perception that the West wants to destroy Russia.
Thus, the conflict in Ukraine has been framed as a renewed struggle against fascism – and in defense of Russia’s true, anti-Western identity.
The supposed threat to Russia today was underscored for the 70th anniversary of the end of World War II, with billboards springing up across Moscow to remind Russians of the sacrifices that victory required.
Like the Nazi propagandist Joseph Goebbels, Surkov is not overly concerned about facts.
Emotions are at the core of the Kremlin’s message; indeed, they are the tie that binds Putin to his subjects.
This is why Surkov portrays Putin, who recently divorced his wife of 30 years and is rumored to have fathered several children with a former Olympic gymnast, as an avatar of conservative values, with the Orthodox Patriarch constantly at his side.
The Kremlin’s campaign against gay rights has secured the support of the church, while reminding ordinary Russians that the state takes a watchful interest in their lives.
Today’s Russian propaganda combines quintessentially Soviet-style heavy-handedness and state-of-the-art technique.
There have been no mass purges and few large rallies.
Western values may be under assault, but Western goods are welcome.
A common sight in Russia is a shiny German-made car with a bumper sticker recalling the glories of World War II: “On to Berlin” or “Thank you, grandfather, for the victory, and grandmother for the tough bullets.”
For the last two decades, Russians have been able to travel internationally without restrictions.
Now, however, many seem ready to give up this right.
Last month, the Kremlin warned the country’s citizens that the United States was “hunting” Russians abroad.
A few Russians have indeed been arrested and extradited to the US: the arms dealer Viktor Bout, for example, who is charged with providing aid to terrorists, or the hacker Vladimir Drinkman, who is accused of stealing millions of credit card numbers.
There is no credible threat to ordinary Russians, yet Surkov’s campaign is having a profound impact.
Rather than risking mockery with outlandish claims – a staple of Soviet propagandists – that Russia will one day surpass the West economically, Surkov taps a deeper and safer emotion: fear.
Whatever Russians think of the country’s economic malaise – GDP is expected to contract by 3.8% this year, while inflation could top 15% – they are assured that they would be much worse off without Putin.
And Russians have fallen into line.
A few years ago, it seemed that every tenth person wore a white ribbon, a symbol of protest against Putin.
Today, one gets the impression that every third Russian is wearing the Ribbon of Saint George, an orange and black symbol of patriotism and loyalty to the Kremlin.
Those who do not wear the ribbon can expect to be asked – and not very politely – why they choose not to.
It is an insidious and effective strategy, one that marginalizes dissenters and generates the impression of near-universal support for the regime.
On my last visit to Moscow, I noticed that a friend, a singer in the Bolshoi opera, had tied a small Ribbon of Saint George to her white Mercedes.
Though she is no fan of Putin, she did not want to stand out unnecessarily.
It is through small surrenders like hers that men like Surkov ultimately succeed.
Citizens pretending to be loyal build a culture of conformity.
With dissent suppressed, the authenticity of citizens’ loyalty becomes irrelevant.
Indeed, like Goebbels, Surkov understands that when public life and private expression can be turned into theater, there is no difference between performance and reality.
The Middle East’s Three Timelines
BERLIN – Three distinct timelines are shaping developments in the Middle East: the short-term timeline of daily struggles and politics; the medium-term timeline of geopolitical shifts, which is measured in decades; and the long-term timeline of sociocultural transformation, or what the historian Fernand Braudel called the longue durée.
Understanding each is essential to craft an effective strategy in the region.
The first timeline certainly receives the most attention.
The media report relentlessly on the latest round of fighting between Israel and Hamas; recent negotiations over Iran’s nuclear program; ongoing opposition activity and political repression in Egypt and Bahrain; and the slaughter and humanitarian tragedies unfolding in Syria and Iraq.
But political thinking in the Middle East is often linked to the second timeline.
Indeed, it is impossible to grasp the region’s contemporary history and politics without understanding the emergence of the regional state system after World War I and the demise of the Ottoman Empire.
For example, there are the constant reminders that external powers – most notably, the United Kingdom and France – established the existing borders.
Resistance against the so-called Sykes-Picot order nurtured the founding myths of many states and political movements in the region.
That order has remained largely intact for almost a century, enabling the emergence of separate, though not necessarily exclusive, political identities in Syria, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, and, to varying degrees, in Saudi Arabia and the other Gulf countries.
It has dictated the political parameters for 4-5 generations in the Arab world, including today’s main protagonists, who have battled over it, adapted to it, and attempted to manipulate it.
But the system may finally be unraveling.
The border between Iraq and Syria is evaporating, as the Sunni militants of the Islamic State capture a widening swath of territory.