Even though economic conditions were dire in the USSR’s final months, people could see the freedoms that were coming and, unlike today, were willing to stand up for them.
Indeed, in the early years of the democratic transition that followed, most post-communist voters did not succumb to the temptation to elect extremists who promised to end the hard times they were enduring.
Instead, they usually chose the most sensible candidate available.
Russians, for example, rejected Vladimir Zhirinovsky, a clownish Donald Trump-like nationalist and anti-Semite, in favor of Boris Yeltsin, who had stared down tanks during the failed 1991 coup and recognized that his country’s future lay with democracy and the West.
In Romania, the extremist poet Corneliu Vadim Tudor lost to a succession of corrupt pragmatists, beginning with Ion Iliescu, who had led the ouster of the country’s last communist leader, Nicolae Ceaușescu.
Since then, the world has been turned upside down.
As life has gotten easier, with people’s material expectations largely met, voters have increasingly favored neo-autocrats who promise to “protect” the people from this or that threat.
Russian President Vladimir Putin, of course, leads this group, but there are also Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán and Czech President Miloš Zeman.
And the trend extends beyond the former communist countries to include, for example, Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan.
The French philosopher Jean-François Revel saw the rise of violent dictatorships in the twentieth century as driven by a “totalitarian temptation.”
What we are witnessing today is something a bit less sinister – call it an “authoritarian temptation.”
But it is a growing threat not only to democracy, but also to global stability.
After all, the one thing today’s autocrats have in common with their totalitarian predecessors is contempt for the rule of law, both domestically and internationally.
One cause for this shift toward authoritarianism is that many countries no longer view the United States as a beacon of democracy and a model of stability and prosperity to be emulated.
Putin’s claim that democratization is actually an American plot “to gain unilateral advantages” resonates with many societies following the disastrous invasion of Iraq and revelations about the National Security Agency’s spying on citizens and leaders worldwide.
But even before these developments, the Cold War’s winners – and especially the US – were showing a boastfulness that probably alienated many.
When even allies are treated with disrespect – recall George W. Bush’s infamous shout of “Yo, Blair,” as if then-British Prime Minister Tony Blair were some cowhand – people naturally wonder whether their country, too, is deemed subservient.
Rising “soft” dictators – what the journalist Bobby Ghosh calls authoritarian democrats – have used these feelings of unease and alienation to attract votes.
Their supporters do not want to be oppressed, but they do want stability and national sovereignty – desires that their leaders fulfill partly by limiting opposition.
Given the reach of today’s mass media and social networks, only a few people must be targeted to cow the rest of society into conforming to the leader’s vision.
So, instead of building gulags, neo-authoritarians launch criminal cases.
The defendants range from political opponents and critics in Russia – such as the oil oligarch Mikhail Khodorkovsky and the anti-corruption lawyer Alexei Navalny – to independent journalists in Erdoğan’s Turkey.
Citizens seem convinced.
At least 70% of Russians agree with Putin that this kind of “managed democracy” is superior to the chaotic version practiced in the West.
Almost half of Hungary’s citizens find membership in the European Union, whose liberal values Orbán mocks, unnecessary.
And more than 70% of Turks have a negative view of the US, which Erdoğan blames for the rise of social media (the “worst menace” facing Turkey today – trumping, it seems, even the Islamic State’s deadly attacks in Turkish cities).
When the Berlin Wall fell in 1989, people did not understand the link between capitalism and democracy.
Many wanted a Western lifestyle, with access to the kinds of jobs and goods available in the US, but seemed not to recognize that access to that lifestyle requires increased economic and personal freedom – precisely the kind of freedom that underpins democratic societies.
If, in the current environment, Western powers attempted to point this out to the people of Russia, Hungary, or Turkey, they would likely stoke even greater resentment.
The better option would be to work on the countries’ leaders.
If the Putins, Erdoğans, and Orbáns of the world want to continue to benefit economically from the open international system, they cannot simply make up their own rules.
The power of such an approach can be seen in Russia, where Western sanctions, imposed following Putin’s annexation of Crimea, are the main factor limiting the pro-Russian rebels’ incursion in eastern Ukraine.
Putin’s efforts to reclaim “great power” status for Russia may find support among his people; but that support will probably dwindle if Russians face the prospect of losing all of the comforts derived from the relatively open economy that their country has had for more than two decades.
At a time when more and more Russians are being denied passports to travel outside the country, those tempted by authoritarianism would do well to recall the elementary point made by John F. Kennedy in his Berlin speech in 1963.
“Freedom has many difficulties, and democracy is not perfect,” Kennedy said.
“But we never had to put up a wall to keep our people in.”
The Erosion of Law
MADRID – In assessments of global events and trends in 2014, words like chaos, disorder, and fragmentation are likely to feature prominently.
But the word “soft” should also appear.
Indeed, 2014 was characterized by the continued rise of “soft” instruments to address global challenges: pledges, decrees, self-regulation, joint plans of action, and handshake deals.
Are the days of organizing international relations according to traditional, formal law over?
To be sure, this shift toward “soft” law is also occurring in domestic contexts.
In the United States, President Barack Obama used his executive power to sidestep Congress on immigration reform.
At the supranational level, the new European Commission is pursuing its goal of “better regulation” using as little formal lawmaking as possible, focusing instead on recommendations, codes of conduct, and guidelines.
But the erosion of traditional law remains most pronounced in the international arena.
The G-20’s decisions have become increasingly informal, while rule-making authority has been outsourced to private regulatory bodies, such as the Basel Committee and the International Accounting Standards Board.
Moreover, a growing number of arrangements are being introduced with little or no built-in enforcement.
November’s much-celebrated climate agreement between Obama and Chinese President Xi Jinping, and the interim “joint plan of action” between Iran and its international interlocutors on the country’s nuclear program (essentially two unilateral statements linked by a press release), are but two recent examples.
Such agreements may be positive developments, but they are no substitute for official, enforceable international rules of conduct.
And states, despite their reticence to be formally bound by preset terms, recognize this.
From trade regulations and nuclear non-proliferation to climate action and maritime boundaries, there is a yearning for the clarity and certainty that only “hard” law can provide.
So what is preventing the international community from making firm rules?
The protracted travails of the Doha Round of World Trade talks offer some clues.
One key problem is the rapid rise in the number of actors.
It is simply more difficult for 193 states to reach agreement than it was for the original 51 signatories of the post-World War II conventions that established the contemporary international order.
This challenge is rooted in two developments: the post-colonial and post-Soviet proliferation of states, and the disaggregation and erosion of state sovereignty.
Another would be to work from treaties involving fewer actors to build broader agreements.
In international trade, for example, mega-regional deals like the Trans-Pacific Partnership and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership could serve as de facto standard setters, helping to facilitate a global agreement.
Likewise, a binding and enforceable deal on Iran’s nuclear program could encourage progress at this spring’s Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference toward instituting firm commitments to implement the action items agreed upon at the 2010 round – in particular, establishing a nuclear-weapons-free zone in the Middle East.
Unless non-proliferation deals are infused with traditional legality, they will remain inadequate to achieve their goal of making the world a safer place.
This year will offer one more critical opportunity to reestablish hard legality in international negotiations: the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Paris in December.
It is widely believed that the conference may well represent the world’s last chance to limit the global temperature increase to 2º Celsius over pre-industrial levels – the threshold beyond which the risks of climate change become particularly daunting.
To succeed, the Paris conference can look nothing like the disastrous meeting held in Copenhagen six years ago.
And the negotiating parties must move beyond the soft “intended nationally determined contributions,” agreed to last month in Lima, to establish legally binding commitments.
Such a result would be a boon not just for efforts to limit climate change, but also for addressing other global challenges.
A firm, enforceable climate-change deal would show that, as difficult as it is to reach a hard-law agreement nowadays, it is possible.
Indeed, world leaders should not settle for less.
More flexible approaches to international negotiations may have facilitated “landmark” deals in 2014.
But without strong compliance mechanisms, such agreements could amount to little.
Finding ways to adapt formal legal processes to today’s complex global environment is a key challenge for 2015.
World leaders need a success story to get them motivated.
Soft Power and the Struggle Against Terrorism
Last year, at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, George Carey, the former Archbishop of Canterbury, asked Secretary of State Colin Powell why the United States seemed to focus only on its hard power rather than its soft power.
Secretary Powell replied that the US had used hard power to win World War II, but he continued: "What followed immediately after hard power?
Did the US ask for dominion over a single nation in Europe?
No.
Soft power came in the Marshall Plan¼.We did the same thing in Japan."
After the war in Iraq ended, I spoke about soft power (a concept I developed) to a conference co-sponsored by the US Army in Washington.
One speaker was Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld.
According to a press account, "the top military brass listened sympathetically," but when someone asked Rumsfeld for his opinion on soft power, he replied, "I don't know what it means."
One of Rumsfeld's "rules" is that "weakness is provocative."
He is correct, up to a point.
As Osama bin Laden observed, people like a strong horse.
But power, defined as the ability to influence others, comes in many guises, and soft power is not weakness.
On the contrary, it is the failure to use soft power effectively that weakens America in the struggle against terrorism.
Soft power is the ability to get what one wants by attracting others rather than threatening or paying them.
It is based on culture, political ideals, and policies.
When you persuade others to want what you want, you do not have to spend as much on sticks and carrots to move them in your direction.
Hard power, which relies on coercion, grows out of military and economic might.
It remains crucial in a world populated by threatening states and terrorist organizations.
But soft power will become increasingly important in preventing terrorists from recruiting new supporters, and for obtaining the international cooperation necessary for countering terrorism.
The US is more powerful than any country since the Roman Empire, but like Rome, America is neither invincible nor invulnerable.
Rome did not succumb to the rise of another empire, but to the onslaught of waves of barbarians.
Modern high-tech terrorists are the new barbarians.
The US cannot alone hunt down every suspected Al Qaeda leader.
Nor can it launch a war whenever it wishes without alienating other countries.
The four-week war in Iraq was a dazzling display of America's hard military power that removed a vicious tyrant.
But it did not remove America's vulnerability to terrorism.
It was also costly in terms of our soft power to attract others.
In the aftermath of the war, polls showed a dramatic decline in the popularity of the US even in countries like Britain, Spain, and Italy, whose governments supported the war.
America's standing plummeted in Islamic countries, whose support is needed to help track the flow of terrorists, tainted money, and dangerous weapons.
The war on terrorism is not a clash of civilizations - Islam versus the West - but a civil war within Islamic civilization between extremists who use violence to enforce their vision and a moderate majority who want things like jobs, education, health care, and dignity as they pursue their faith.
America will not win unless the moderates win.
American soft power will never attract Osama bin Laden and the extremists.
Only hard power can deal with them.
But soft power will play a crucial role in attracting moderates and denying the extremists new recruits.
During the Cold War, the West's strategy of containment combined the hard power of military deterrence with the soft power of attracting people behind the Iron Curtain.
Behind the wall of military containment, the West ate away Soviet self-confidence with broadcasts, student and cultural exchanges, and the success of capitalist economics.
As a former KGB official later testified, "Exchanges were a Trojan horse for the Soviet Union.
They played a tremendous role in the erosion of the Soviet system."
In retirement, President Dwight Eisenhower said that he should have taken money out of the defense budget to strengthen the US Information Agency.
With the Cold War's end, Americans became more interested in budget savings than in investing in soft power.
In 2003, a bipartisan advisory group reported that the US was spending only $150 million on public diplomacy in Muslim countries, an amount it called grossly inadequate.
Indeed, the combined cost for the State Department's public diplomacy programs and all of America's international broadcasting is just over $1 billion, about the same amount spent by Britain or France, countries that are one-fifth America's size and whose military budgets are only 25% as large.
No one would suggest that America spend as much to launch ideas as to launch bombs, but it does seem odd that the US spends 400 times as much on hard power as on soft power.
If the US spent just 1% of the military budget on soft power, it would quadruple its current spending on this key component of the war on terrorism.
If America is to win that war, its leaders are going to have to do better at combining soft and hard power into "smart power."
Revolusi Tarif Tenaga Surya
POTSDAM – Revolusi sunyi sedang berjalan.
Pada bulan November, Dubai mengumumkan  pembangunan solar energy park yang akan menghasilkan listrik dengan tarif kurang dari $0.06 per kilowat-jam– jauh mengalahkan biaya pilihan investasi alternatif, pembangkit listrik tenaga gas atau batubara.
Pembangkit ini – diharapkan beroperasi pada tahun 2017 – lagi-lagi menjadi pelopor masa depan dimana energi terbarukan mampu menyaingi bahan bakar fosil yang konvensional.
Bahkan jarang sekali satu minggu berlalu tanpa pemberitaan tentang kesepakatan besar untuk membangun pembangkit listrik tenaga surya.
Pada bulan Februari saja terdapat pengumuman proyek-proyek baru pembangkit listrik tenaga surya di Nigeria (1,000 megawat), Australia (2,000 MW), dan India (10,000 MW).
Tidak diragukan lagi perkembangan ini bagus untuk perjuangan melawan perubahan iklim.
Namun pertimbangan utama yang menggerakkannya adalah keuntungan, bukan lingkungan hidup, sebab adanya peningkatan efisiensi dalam distribusi negara, dan apabila diperlukan, dalam penyimpanan, akan mengurangi biaya produksi energi terbarukan.
Seiring dengan manfaat lain yang timbul dari upaya-upaya memperbaiki pengelolaan listrik dari sumber tenaga yang berfluktuasi, biaya tenaga surya akan terus menurun.
Dalam waktu sepuluh tahun, tenaga surya akan dapat diproduksi di banyak negara di seluruh dunia dengan tarif 4-6 sen per kilowat-jam, menurut studi terkini oleh Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy Systems (dirumuskan oleh satu think tank, Agora Energiewende).
Pada tahun 2050, biaya produksi akan menurun hingga 2-4 sen per kilowat-jam.
Sebagaimana disampaikan oleh Patrick Graichen, direktur eksekutif Agora, sebagian besar perkiraan tentang pasokan energi dunia di masa depan tidak memperhitungkan lonjakan keberhasilan yang mampu dicapai tenaga surya dibandingkan pesaingnya yang merupakan bahan bakar fosil.
Dengan memperbarui perkiraan-perkiraan tersebut, kita akan mampu mendapatkan gambaran yang lebih realistis tentang biaya dan dampak produksi dan konsumsi energi terhadap iklim dunia, mengungkapkan pentingnya energi terbarukan terhadap pembangunan ekonomi, dan memungkinkan perencanaan infrastruktur energi yang lebih baik.
Kita tidak boleh meremehkan potensi besar yang dimiliki tenaga surya dan angin dalam meningkatkan kesejahteraan global dan memberantas kemiskinan.
Ketika tenaga surya menjadi semakin hemat biaya, negara-negara yang berada di sun-belt dapat mengembangkan model bisnis baru seiring dengan adanya energi murah dan bersih yang memungkinkan mereka untuk memproses bahan baku secara lokal, menambah nilai – dan keuntungan – sebelum mengekspornya.
Berbeda dengan pembangkit tenaga listrik konvensional berskala besar lainnya, instalasi pembangkit tenaga surya dapat dibangun dalam hitungan bulan; selain hemat biaya, instalasi ini memberikan metode cepat untuk memenuhi kenaikan permintaan global.
Selain itu, karena pembangkit listrik tenaga surya umumnya dapat dioperasikan secara terpisah dari jaringan listrik interregional yang kompleks, maka mereka menciptakan cara bagi negara yang kurang berkembang untuk menghasilkan listrik tanpa membangun infrastruktur baru yang mahal.
Pembangkit listrik tenaga surya dapat memainkan peran yang sama di bidang energi sebagaimana dilakukan telepon genggam dalam bidang telekomunikasi: menjangkau komunitas secara luas dan cepat, komunitas yang tidak mendapat layanan memadai di wilayah yang jarang penduduknya, tanpa perlu mengeluarkan dana untuk pembangunan kabel dan infrastruktur penunjang yang dulu diperlukan.
Di Afrika,  66% dari populasinya sudah mendapatkan akses kepada teknologi komunikasi sejak tahun 2000.
Tidak ada alasan mengapa tenaga surya tidak bisa melakukan hal yang sama mengenai pemenuhan akses kepada listrik.
Sekarang tiba waktunya untuk berinvestasi pada produksi tenaga surya berskala besar.
Sebagai awalnya, biaya konstruksi pembangkit listrik tenaga surya akhirnya cukup rendah sehingga dapat menghasilkan listrik dengan tarif yang kompetitif dan stabil selama 25 tahun.
Memang saat ini harga minyak merosot tajam, namun akan kembali naik.
Pembangkit listrik tenaga listrik memberikan jaminan dibandingkan ketidakjelasan harga yang inheren pada bahan bakar fosil.
Menjadi lebih penting juga sebab biaya modal saat ini di sejumlah negara sangat rendah.
Hal ini merupakan faktor penentu bagi kelayakan ekonomi pembangkit listrik tenaga surya, sebab pembangkit listrik jenis ini membutuhkan hanya sedikit perawatan walaupun perlu investasi di muka yang relatif tinggi.
Studi yang dilakukan Fraunhofer Institute menunjukkan bahwa selisih dalam pengeluaran modal (capex) sama pentingnya bagi biaya per kilowat-jam dengan selisih pada cahaya matahari.
Tenaga surya saat ini lebih murah di Jerman yang cuacanya berawan dibandingkan dengan wilayah dengan cuaca cerah, dimana biaya pinjaman lebih besar.
Tentu mustahil bagi kita untuk mengubah jumlah paparan cahaya matahari yang menyinari suatu negara, namun negara dapat mengendalikan biaya modal.
Dengan membuat kerangka hukum yang stabil, memberikan jaminan kredit dalam konteks perjanjian internasional, dan melibatkan bank sentral dalam investasi skala besar, pemerintah dapat membantu menjadikan tenaga surya lebih mudah diakses.
Faktor-faktor semacam ini menggambarkan alasan mengapa kebijakan-kebijakan iklim internasional semakin berfokus tidak hanya kepada tenaga surya, tapi juga bentuk energi terbarukan lainnya.
Terobosan teknologi telah meningkatkan persaingan sumber-sumber energi ini dibandingkan bahan bakar fosil.
Sebagai akibatnya, semua perangkat yang tersedia untuk membuat penggunaan sumber energi ini lebih terjangkau sudah menjadi salah satu senjata terpenting yang kita miliki dalam perjuangan melawan perubahan iklim.
Solidarity Fatigue
Democracy tarnishes its heroes as surely as revolutions devour their children.
For 25 years, the leaders of Solidarity personified the qualities needed to win Poland’s struggle for democracy: unbending courage in the face of the communist Leviathan and magnanimity and clear-sighted determination during the transfer of power.
All of these were great and noble qualities, and all of them now seem utterly superfluous to most Poles.
That is the sad lesson of Poland’s parliamentary election two weeks ago, and of Sunday’s indecisive presidential election (which will be decided by a run off between Donald Tusk and Lech Kaczynski on October 23rd.)
To be sure, the communists-cum-postcommunists who have dominated Polish politics since 1989 were utterly repudiated – the left got scarcely 11% of the vote in the parliamentary poll.
But Solidarity’s old guard has also been cast aside.
Poland yearns for something new.
Poland’s recent elections were the first in which the postcommunist left was irrelevant.  The postcommunists know that they can no longer live off their legacy of organization and discipline, so they have chosen a clever and attractive 34-year-old leader.
He has nothing to do with the communist era and has sacked all former Party members from important positions, even barring former Prime Minister Leszek Miller from standing for parliament.
This is undoubtedly all to the good. But the overall health of Polish democracy is another matter.
Turnout for the parliamentary election was 40%, which puts Poland near the bottom in voter participation among the democratic nations of the world, and about 25-30% below the European average.
Political apathy reflects many factors, but two stand out.
A few days before the parliamentary election, people were asked if they hoped for a better life.
An astounding 60% said that they do not.
Hopeless people do not vote.
Second, one of the necessary conditions of a functioning democracy are clear and sufficiently distinct party political programs.
That is not the case in Poland. Parties’ programs changed with the public opinion polls, and their economic proposals were either too complicated or too muddled for voters to grasp.
So the 40% who voted did so for emotional reasons, not as a clear political choice.
Among the leading politicians of the parties that overwhelmingly won the parliamentary elections – the neo-liberal Civic Platform and the conservative-populist Law and Justice  – almost every face has been around since 1989.
So the members of the new government, although not physically old, are politically geriatric.
The Solidarity/postcommunist divide seems to have pickled Polish politics, leaving it without a new generation of leaders and thus without enthusiasm.
Unsurprisingly, the young are the most estranged.
When I asked my students at Warsaw University how many intended to vote, only two raised their hands.
Perhaps others were ashamed to say they care about politics and did, in fact, vote, but they can’t have been many.
An entire generation has grown up to be apolitical, even anti-political, which bodes ill for the future.
The most difficult problems in Poland are unemployment, which hovers around 20% – the highest rate in the EU – and the growing divide between rich and poor.
Indeed, only in Russia (and perhaps in Ukraine) is the income gap wider.
Yet neither of these issues was raised decisively in the campaign.
The main issues that both victorious parties highlighted were the communist past and public corruption.
Both are important issues, but they are secondary to the problems of joblessness and poverty.
Indeed, it is estimated that 30% of Polish children do not get enough to eat. This is Europe, so they do not die of hunger.
But that a third of all children in a member country of the European Union live on one meal a day is a source of shame – and thus should also be a primary political issue.
This is all the more peculiar given that the victorious parties that emerged out of Solidarity are keen to promote its values, particularly “solidarity” with a small “s.”
But their purpose is purely instrumental, for to call somebody a “liberal” nowadays in Poland is more pejorative than calling him a “son of a bitch.”
Indeed, “liberal” in both its meanings – economic and moral – is disdained.
Liberals are viewed as vampires, seeking only to make money for themselves and their cronies.
So it is understandable that both leading presidential candidates, Donald Tusk and Lech Kaczynski, ran as fast as they could from “liberal” ideas.
But what does small-s solidarity mean in practical terms?
Nobody knows, and neither Tusk nor Kaczynski was saying.
They suggested only some vague notions of state intervention on behalf of the poor and needy.
The death of postcommunism in Poland has thus been greeted not with a bang but with a whimper.
There is nothing devastating in this, of course, but Poland’s political malaise may one day prove dangerous, and so should be scrutinized in other democracies, old and new.
For the problems of anomie, apathy, and political charade are not Polish problems, but maladies that increasingly afflict democracies everywhere, and that urgently call for a restoring of faith in parties and politics.
Solidarity in a Pluralist Age
VIENNA – Solidarity is essential to democratic societies; otherwise, they fall apart.
They cannot function beyond a certain level of mutual distrust or a sense on the part of some members that other members have abandoned them.
Many view the development of an individualistic outlook as the greatest threat to solidarity nowadays. But this is closely linked to a diminishing sense of common identity.
It is no accident, for example, that Europe’s most successful welfare states were created in ethnically homogeneous Scandinavia.
People in those countries had the sense that they could understand their neighbors and fellow citizens, and that they shared a close link with them.
The challenge nowadays is to maintain that sense of intense solidarity amid diversifying populations. There are two ways to do this.
One is to hark back to older modes of solidarity. French identity, for example, is based on the country’s unique brand of republican secularism, known as laïcité.
But France’s efforts to shore up solidarity by insisting on laïcité and erecting a dam against Muslim immigrants are both ineffective and counter-productive, because they exclude from a sense of fully belonging to the nation many people who are actually in France already.
The other way to preserve solidarity is to redefine identity.
All democratic societies today are faced with the challenge of redefining their identity in dialogue with some elements that are external, and some that are internal.
Consider the influence of feminist movements throughout the West.
These are not people who came from outside their countries. They are people who in some ways lacked full citizenship, who demanded it, and who redefined the political order by obtaining it.
Today the great task is to calm the fears that our traditions are being undermined; to reach out to people who are coming into our lands from other countries; and to find a way of recreating our political ethic around the kernel of human rights, equality, non-discrimination, and democracy.
If we succeed, we can create a sense that we belong together, even though our reasons for believing so may be different.
But increasing individualism – a focus on one’s own ambitions and economic prosperity – in many countries poses a stubborn obstacle to realizing this vision.
Indeed, the utter lack of a sense of solidarity among so many people – horrifyingly evident in the US health-care debate – is now undermining the very basis of what a modern democratic society is.
A society’s sense of solidarity can be sustained only if all of its different spiritual groups recreate their sense of dedication to it: if Christians see it as central to their Christianity, if Muslims see it as central to their Islam, and if the various kinds of lay philosophies see it as central to their philosophies.
Religion provides a profound and powerful base of solidarity, and to marginalize it would be a big mistake, just as marginalizing atheistic philosophies would be a mistake.
Democratic societies, in their tremendous diversity, are powered by many different engines of commitment to a common ethic. They cannot afford to switch off any of these engines and hope to maintain a political community.
Historically, the political ethic of confessional societies has been grounded in a single, basic foundation.
In Europe, various kinds of laïque societies have tried to invent themselves out of the ruins of the Christian foundation, but they have made the same mistake in another way, with a kind of Jacobin insistence on the civil religionof the Enlightenment.
Well, we can no longer have a civil religion – not one based on God, nor on laïcité and the rights of man, nor, indeed, on any particular view.
We live, today, in uncharted territory.
We face a challenge that is unprecedented in human history: creation of a powerful political ethic of solidarity self-consciously grounded on the presence and acceptance of very different views.
This can succeed only if we engage in vigorous exchange with each other in order to create a kind of mutual respect for these different views.
The advancing force of Islamophobia in Europe and the US, with its attempt to reduce Islam’s complex and varied history to a few demagogic slogans, is the kind of utterly ignorant stupidity – there’s no better description of it – on which democratic societies founder.
But that is true of any kind of dismissive view of the “other.”
Our societies will hold together only if we talk to each other with openness and frankness, and, in doing so, recreate a certain sense of solidarity from all our different roots.
New Frontiers in Affordable Housing
SHANGHAI – Providing decent, affordable housing is a growing challenge in developing and developed economies alike.
With demand far exceeding supply, the adverse effects – on mobility, productivity, and growth – are (or will be) increasingly apparent.
Fortunately, there are ways to narrow the affordable-housing gap substantially, using mostly market-based approaches at the municipal level.
Worldwide, 330 million low- and moderate-income urban households either live in substandard housing or are so financially stretched by housing payments that they must forgo spending on essentials like health care and education.
By 2025, that figure could reach 440 million households, or about 1.6 billion people (one-third of the world’s urban population) – and that does not even cover some of the world’s poorest people, who often live outside of cities, on urban streets, or as squatters, leaving them unaccounted for in census estimates.
Replacing today’s substandard housing and building the additional units needed by 2025 would require an investment of an estimated $16 trillion – a daunting figure, to say the least.
But there are four key “levers” that can reduce the cost of housing delivery by 20-50%, thereby making housing affordable (amounting to no more than 30% of total income) for households earning 50-80% of the median income in most cities.
The first lever is more efficient land use.
Acquisition of land for development in the right location at a reasonable price has the greatest potential for reducing housing costs.
Location is especially important in developing countries, where many areas lack adequate transport, water, electricity, and sanitation infrastructure.
Investment in these areas would improve and expand land use – whether by unlocking unused land or equipping areas to support more inhabitants – thereby helping to reduce housing costs.
Similarly, cities can loosen land-use restrictions, such as unit size requirements, to allow for higher-density, and thus more valuable, projects.
In exchange for providing the increased value to real-estate developers, municipal authorities could require that a portion of the land or a certain number of units be set aside for affordable housing.
Such a cross-subsidy would increase the housing supply across income bands, at no direct cost to the public.
The final step toward improving land use is the implementation of measures to discourage land hoarding.
China, for example, imposes an idle-land tax on formerly public land if its owners fail to initiate the development process within a year.
This brings us to the second key lever to expand affordable housing: a more cohesive and efficient construction industry.
As it stands, the housing-construction industry is highly fragmented, impeding its ability to take advantage of economies of scale, and builders often rely largely on the same methods used 50 years ago.
By standardizing design elements like ceiling heights, fixtures, and flooring, construction companies can cut costs and raise productivity, as workers gain experience with repetitive tasks.
Further savings are possible through industrial approaches, such as the use of components – for example, walls and flooring slabs – built offsite.
And most builders lag behind other industries in terms of the efficiency of purchasing and other processes.
Together, these improvements could cut housing-construction costs by up to 30% and delivery time by 40-50%.
The third key lever to make housing more affordable relates to operations and maintenance – everything from heating the building to repairing cracked tiles – which account for 20-30% of total housing costs.
Here, the biggest opportunity lies in efforts to improve energy efficiency, with insulation, windows, and other retrofits generating energy savings of 20-30%.
Additional savings would be possible if maintenance and repair companies were more transparent and competitive, and operated on a larger scale.
To this end, public institutions could certify and list suppliers that meet quality standards, or bring owners together in buying consortia – an approach that has helped the United Kingdom’s social-housing agencies cut costs on some items by more than 20%.
The final affordable-housing lever is expanded access to finance, especially for low-income households, which often face the highest borrowing costs – if they can gain access to finance at all.
For the world’s many “unbanked,” who cannot accumulate savings or establish a credit record, the only option is to pay steep risk premiums for high loan-to-value mortgages.
To expand access to finance, countries can improve underwriting by establishing credit bureaus, which are uncommon in developing economies, and training and certifying property appraisers.
In some countries, collective-savings programs – that is, provident funds and building societies – have helped low-income households to accumulate down payments, with the pooled savings also providing capital for low-interest mortgages.
At the same time, to reduce financing costs for developers, municipal bodies can “de-risk” projects by committing to purchase affordable units or guaranteeing qualified tenants.
Cities can also streamline approval processes to accelerate completion.
These four levers, if used systematically, can reduce the costs of housing for those who need it the most, while creating a better-functioning market that provides more choices for households across income levels.
Indeed, while municipal and national governments will have to take additional measures to address the needs of their poorest citizens, cities have powerful tools at their disposal for closing their affordable-housing gaps.
Though no single solution will work everywhere, initiatives that integrate land policy and more accessible finance with efforts to modernize housing construction and management can lead to progress everywhere.
Perompak Somalia yang Baru
MOGADISHU – Somalia diberkati dengan garis pantai terluas di benua Afrika.
Perairan laut kami yang kaya termasuk salah satu yang paling produktif di dunia, penuh dengan ikan tuna sirip biru, marlin biru, mahi-mahi, dan sarden.
Akan tetapi selama lebih dari 30 tahun, lingkungan laut yang berlimpah ini juga menjadi sumber dan lokasi konflik, seiring dengan kapal-kapal asing memasuki wilayah perairan dan melakukan penangkapan ikan yang tidak sah, tidak dilaporkan, dan tidak sesuai aturan (illegal, unreported, and unregulated (IUU) fishing) dan menjual hasil tangkapan mereka di pelabuhan-pelabuhan di luar Somalia.
Hanya beberapa tahun yang lalu, pelanggaran yang dilakukan oleh kapal-kapal ikan ilegal memicu aksi bajak laut di Somalia yang menimbulkan kerugian pada industri pelayaran maritim internasional hingga miliaran dolar.
Ketika kapal-kapal penangkap ikan asing ilegal melarikan diri dari perairan kita, bajak laut Somalia dengan cepatnya mengalihkan fokus mereka ke kapal-kapal yang lebih menguntungkan, seperti kapal kargo dan tanker minyak.
Kini saat aksi bajak laut hampir seluruhnya diberantas, terdapat cukup banyak bukti bahwa kapal-kapal asing telah kembali untuk lagi-lagi merampas perairan kita.
Laporan baru yang dikeluarkan oleh kelompok Secure Fisheries yang disebut Securing Somali Fisheries mengungkap data satelit baru yang menunjukkan bahwa kapal-kapal asing ilegal kini melakukan penangkapan ikan yang tiga kali lebih banyak dibandingkan kapal-kapal dari Somalia.
Mereka menargetkan penangkapan beberapa ikan dengan harga tertinggi di perairan kita, sehingga warga Somalia terpaksa bersaing untuk mendapatkan ikan-ikan dengan harga/nilai lebih rendah.
Laporan tersebut menunjukkan bahwa kapal-kapal asing ini berkontribusi pada penangkapan ikan yang berlebihan (overfishing) terhadap populasi ikan todak, kakap, marlin, dan hiu.
Kapal-kapal asing yang menggunakan pukat dasar (bottom trawl) melakukan penangkapan ikan yang tidak bertanggung jawab dan bertindak berdasarkan impunitas, menyeret jaring-jaring berukuran besar, menghancurkan dasar laut dan merusak habitat laut yang vital seluas 120.000 kilometer persegi (46.000 mil persegi).
Kerusakan ini sangat buruk sehingga walaupun penggunaan pukat ini dihentikan sekarang, pemulihan di kawasan ini akan membutuhkan waktu bertahun-tahun.
Penjarahan terhadap ekosistem laut kita terus berlangsung bahkan ketika Somalia telah menerapkan perbaikan selama 18 bulan terakhir tentang pengelolaan wilayah perairan yang lebih baik.
Pada bulan Juni 2014, pemerintah di bawah kepemimpinan saya membuat klaim atas zona ekonomi eksklusif (ZEE) Somalia seluas 200 mil laut, sejalan dengan Konvensi PBB tentang Hukum Laut. Pada bulan Desember lalu, kami juga mengundangkan UU Perikanan Somalia yang secara jelas mengkriminalisasi penggunaan pukat dasar.
Peraturan yang mendobrak ini menyerukan penguatan monitoring atas penyimpanan ikan pasca tangkap, suatu pendekatan berbasis ekosistem dalam pengelolaan perikanan dimana kawasan tersebut akan dikelola secara menyeluruh, serta perlindungan spesies ikan yang terancam punah atau langka.
Meskipun terdapat sejumlah kemajuan dalam penguatan pengelolaan perikanan domestik, kami memiliki kelemahan dalam mengamankan dan mengawasi wilayah perairan yang luas.
Komunitas internasional dapat membuat perbedaan yang signifikan di bidang ini, dengan membantu pemerintah kami melakukan mengawasi dan mengendalikan ZEE Somalia, serta menyempurnakan pertukaran intelijen kritis yang diperoleh dari patroli angkatan laut internasional.
Menurut laporan yang diterbitkan Secure Fisheries, pemberantasan IUU fishing akan memungkinkan Somalia untuk memulai sistem perizinan dan menjual tuna yang bernilai komersial secara berkelanjutan dan menghasilkan dana hingga $17 juta per tahun.
Dana tersebut kemudian dapat diinvestasikan kembali untuk membangun infrastruktur yang lebih baik – seperti pembangunan pelabuhan, perbaikan ruang penyimpanan dingin, dan fasilitas pengolahan modern – untuk memfasilitasi kapal-kapal milik nelayan tradisional dan industri perikanan.
Pemberantasan IUU fishing juga akan memungkinkan cadangan ikan yang mengalami overfishing untuk pulih dan membantu pengembangan perikanan domestik Somalia yang sejahtera, seiring dengan bertambahnya dukungan pemerintah dan anggaran untuk pengumpulan data dan pengelolaan sumber daya.
Laporan tersebut menunjukkan bahwa jumlah cadangan ikan (fish stocks) yang wajar akan memberikan jumlah sumber daya yang jauh lebih besar dibandingkan sekarang.
Bahkan, hampir setengah dari perikanan yang kita kelola saat ini tengah dieksploitasi pada tingkatan yang berkelanjutan.
Tetapi kita memerlukan investasi lebih besar untuk perbaikan infrastruktur untuk mewujudkan potensi industri secara maksimal.
Praktik penangkapan ikan di perairan Somalia tidak boleh dibiarkan terbuka/bebas untuk semua (free-for-all), sehingga menyebabkan kapal-kapal asing mengeksploitasi ekosistem dengan cara yang tidak berkelanjutan.
Saya menyerukan kepada komunitas internasional untuk bekerja sama dengan pemerintah yang saya pimpin untuk memastikan bahwa IUU fishing di perairan Somalia dihentikan selamanya.
Tindakan ini akan meningkatkan keamanan maritim dan memajukan industri perikanan domestik yang kuat dan memberikan manfaat serta menunjang penghidupan seluruh warga Somalia.
Industri perikanan yang berkelanjutan dan dinamis akan membantu kita membangun Somalia yang lebih stabil dan sejahtera.
Mengingat potensi besar yang negara kita miliki serta lokasi strategis, hal ini merupakan hasil yang selayaknya didukung semua orang.
Somalia’s Endless Hell
MOGADISHU &#45;&#45; Somalia’s internal conflict is propelled by a combustible mix of religion, politics, and clan rivalry.
Civilians are killed daily in Mogadishu, there are roadside bombs and mortar attacks, and politicians and journalists are targeted.
Making matters worse, the country has suffered this year from both floods and drought.
This combination of insecurity and natural disasters has displaced huge numbers of people and caused suffering on a scale painful to behold.
According to the most recent United Nations figures, 400,000 people, or roughly one-third of Mogadishu’s population, have fled the city.
Yet Somalia still rarely gets into the headlines.
This partly reflects the near impossibility of gathering news.
Few foreign journalists venture in – it is too difficult and too dangerous for them to work inside the country – and local reporters are harassed by the authorities.
And, even when there is news, the world’s capacity to absorb bad and sad stories from yet another hellish place is limited.
Since last December, Somalia has been in a de facto state of civil war.
The secular government, supported by the UN, the European Union, and the United States, with military reinforcements from Ethiopia, has been fighting insurgents from the Union of Islamic Courts, a group accused of harboring al-Qaeda terrorists whose leaders are supported by Eritrea.
The lawlessness and absence of security makes finding a political solution almost impossible.
When local elders and delegates wanted to assemble in Mogadishu for a reconciliation conference, security conditions forced them to postpone the conference for several months (though when they did meet, in big numbers and for a long time, they achieved no breakthrough).
A plane with the UN envoy for human rights was denied landing rights in Baidoa (seat of the Somali parliament) not long ago, and pilots sometimes refuse to fly foreigners to Mogadishu, because it is too dangerous.
The same lack of security applies to delivering aid: on a recent visit to North Somalia to assess humanitarian needs, a team from the International Rescue Committee of which I was a part spent more time, effort, and funds on security issues than on inspecting wells and evaluating the need for latrines, although the lack of water and sanitation is acute.
On a 25 mile stretch of road between the southern cities of Kismayo and Jilib, there are at least 35 checkpoints manned by armed men who take $50 to $200 from passing travelers.
Offshore, piracy seriously disrupts aid being brought in by ships.
One incident in southern Somalia vividly demonstrated how insecurity can hamper humanitarian work.
While our assessment team was in the town of Marare, a banal scene of two friends in their twenties having breakfast turned into a major drama when one of the boys mishandled his Kalashnikov and accidentally killed his friend.
The boys were from the same clan, but, alas, from different sub-clans.
The customary procedure is that the victim’s family gets to kill someone from the perpetrator’s sub-clan.
The elders of the two sub-clans spent four days negotiating a less bloody solution, and the agreed price of 100 camels – worth $7,000 – was paid as compensation.
But during those four days, work at the local hospital (run by an international non-governmental organization) was impeded, as all staff from the perpetrator’s sub-clan stayed away from their jobs, lest they be targeted for a revenge killing.
The dilemma that the accident presented is not easy for a foreigner to understand.
But the way the elders steered clear of a violent resolution is an admirable example of good governance.
If only such practices were used to tackle the vast majority of the problems that overwhelm Somalia.
In this quintessential “failed state,” this sort of elders’ wisdom may be the only option to start dealing with the quagmire created by the lawlessness that has gripped the country since the departure of the dictator Said Barre in 1991.
Ignoring the situation in Somalia and not trying to reestablish law and order is not an option.
The two main factions fighting in Mogadishu are backed, respectively, by Ethiopia and Eritrea.
Because those nations - among the poorest in Africa - have an unresolved border dispute that led to a 1998-2000 war in which tens of thousand died on both sides and hostilities in the area continue, their involvement, by proxy, in the Somali civil war may have grave implications for the entire Horn of Africa.
Sorry States
PARIS – National repentance is in the news again, as it has been with remarkable frequency in recent years.
In 2008, Australia’s then-Prime Minister Kevin Rudd apologized to his country’s Aborigines, while Queen Elizabeth II offered a moving gesture of contrition in Ireland a few months ago.
And now, French President Nicolas Sarkozy, on a recent visit to the Caucasus, reiterated his advice to the Turks to “repent” for the massacres of Armenians committed by the decaying Ottoman regime in 1915.
Of course, Sarkozy would be surprised to be told that the same logic should lead to a declaration of repentance by the French state to Algeria, not to mention to the Algerian soldiers who fought under the French banner, the so-called “Harkis,” many of whom were abandoned to a terrible fate when France left the country in a hurry.
As for those who managed to survive and cross the Mediterranean, France dumped them in segregated, under-served ghettos.
For many political leaders and analysts, repentance is a misplaced and excessive form of sensitivity.
History is tough, they say.
Besides, where does one begin apologizing – or, rather, end?
Should one apologize for the Crusades, for the destruction of German cities by the armies of King Louis the XIV in the seventeenth century, not to mention the armies of Napoleon?
Wouldn’t the result simply be to turn history into a perpetual cycle of contrition?
Yet, in a globalized age, which demands transparency and posits interdependence, repentance can be considered an instrument of good governance.
A country that has lifted the carpet of myth and indifference under which the negative aspects of its past were swept is better able to manage itself and accommodate others.
Japan has never learned to interact with its Asian neighbors the way that Germany after World War II learned to cooperate with its future European partners, partly because its apologies have appeared formalistic and half-hearted, when they have taken place at all.
The European Union exists (whatever its current difficulties) because Germany asked for forgiveness.
And Germany today is able to distance itself – though clearly at the margin – from Israel’s current government because Germans fully confronted their past in ways that many of their neighbors have not.
To ask for forgiveness enables one to speak to the “Other” without ambiguity, with the freedom of speech needed to express truth.
Indeed, former French President Jacques Chirac won a place in French history by proclaiming France’s responsibility for the crimes committed by the collaborationist Vichy government against its Jewish citizens during the Nazi occupation. The fiction, popularized by General Charles de Gaulle and pursued by François Mitterrand, that “Vichy was not France” had finally been interred.
Who will be the French president courageous enough to apologize to Algeria and the Harkis?
Of course, French crimes during Algeria’s war of independence resemble those of Nazi Germany in neither scale nor motivation.
It can be argued that during the colonial era, France willed the happiness of Algerians, not only the greatness of France.
But it was the French who defined “happiness,” without consultation with the Algerians, much less their consent.
Today, as France engages the progressive forces of the “Arab Spring” – politically, if not militarily, as in Libya – can it continue to maintain a hypocritical stance towards Algeria, paying a high price in credibility for continuing its silence about the past?
In terms of forgiveness, it is the strongest party that must apologize first.
And democracy is an essential component of that strength, for it constitutes the most favorable ground for a responsible pedagogy of historical honesty.
Of course, one should not entertain too many illusions.
The current Algerian government is quite comfortable denouncing France, and might continue to do so regardless of anything that the former colonial power does or says.
But that should not serve as an alibi for doing nothing.
In July 2012, France and Algeria will commemorate the 50th anniversary of the birth of the Algerian Republic.
Coming immediately after the upcoming French presidential election, the event offers an ideal opportunity for Sarkozy or his successor to engage in a symbolic act of repentance.
Such a gesture would strengthen France both externally and in terms of the sentiments of its citizens of Algerian descent, whose difficulty in reconciling their dual identity has led some to turn to fundamentalist Islam.
Repentance is not a sign of weakness.
On the contrary, it is a demonstration of tranquil and conscientious strength – and a precondition of good and realistic governance.
Soulless Bodies
The world’s leading scholar in artificial intelligence once described people as machines made of meat.
This nicely captures the consensus in the fields of psychology and neuroscience, which tell us that our mental lives are the products of our physical brains, and that these brains are shaped not by a divine creator, but by the blind process of natural selection.
But, with the exception of a small minority of philosophers and scientists, nobody takes this view seriously.
It is offensive.
It violates the tenets of every religion, and it conflicts with common sense.
We do not feel, after all, that we are just material bodies, mere flesh.
Instead, we occupy our bodies. We own them.
We are spontaneously drawn to the view defended by René Descartes: We are natural-born dualists, so we see bodies and souls as separate.
This dualism has significant consequences for how we think, act, and feel.
The philosopher Peter Singer discusses the notion of a moral circle – the circle of things that matter to us, that have moral significance.
This circle can be very small, including just your kin and those with whom you interact on a daily basis, or it can be extremely broad, including all humans, but also fetuses, animals, plants, and even the earth itself.
For most of us, the circle is mid-sized, and working out its precise boundaries – does it include stem cells, for instance? – can be a source of anguish and conflict.
The nature of these boundaries is related to our common-sense view that some objects have souls and others do not.
If one attributes a soul to something, then it has value; if one sees something as a mere body, it does not.
This is often explicit; historically, debates about abortion, for example, are often framed in terms of the question: When does the soul enter the body?
This reasoning can apply as well to how we regard adults.
Normally, when we interact with others we see them as both body and soul.
We appreciate that they have beliefs, desires, and consciousness, and we recognize that they are solid physical things that take up space and are subject to gravity.
Both stances coexist well enough in the normal course of things.&#160;But when we emphasize one perspective over another, there are moral consequences.
Social&#160;psychologists have shown that simply getting an experimental subject to take another person’s perspective will make the subject care more about the person and be more likely to help.
Focusing on the soul, then, leads to moral concern, and can expand the moral circle.
The opposite can occur when someone is viewed solely as a body, and one emotion that supports this outcome is disgust.
The psychologist Paul Rozin has shown how disgust, as Charles Darwin first noted, is an evolutionary adaptation that deters us from bad meat, so it is naturally triggered by animals and animal waste products.
But disgust can readily extend to people.
People, after all, are made of meat.
Hence, every movement designed to stigmatize or malign some group – Jews, blacks, gays, the poor, women, and so on – has used disgust.
Once a group of people is viewed as disgusting, attention shifts away from them as moral individuals.
They become soulless bodies, and the moral circle closes in to exclude them.
Our reaction to soulless bodies is well illustrated in a story told about Descartes after he died.
It was known that Descartes had an illegitimate daughter, Francine, who died when she was five years old.
According to the story, Descartes was so struck with grief that he created an automaton, a mechanical doll, built to appear identical to his dead daughter. The two were inseparable.
When Descartes crossed the Holland Sea, he kept the doll in a small trunk in his cabin.
Curious about the contents of the trunk, the captain of the ship crept down to Descartes’ cabin one night and opened it.
To his horror, the robot Francine arose.
The captain, struck with revulsion, grabbed her, dragged her up to the deck of the ship, and&#160;threw her overboard.
This story captures how disturbing – in some cases, revolting – we find a body without a soul, and it embodies the emotional pull that our common-sense dualism often has.
But it also raises a serious problem.
Science tells us that common-sense dualism is wrong.
There is no consensus as to precisely how mental life emerges from a physical brain, but there is no doubt that this is its source.
Thus, if a “soul” means something immaterial and immortal, then it does not&#160;exist.
All of us are soulless bodies, no less than the robot Francine.
This is perhaps the main reason why the scientific rejection of dualism may be so hard to swallow: it seems to diminish the moral status of people.
If we are to accept scientific facts, we need to construct morality on a new foundation, one without souls.
Reigniting South African Growth
JOHANNESBURG – A paradox of Sub-Saharan Africa’s rapid economic expansion is the fact that the region’s most sophisticated economy seems not to be part of it.
Since 2008, South Africa has recorded average annual GDP growth of just 1.8%, less than half the rate of the previous five years.
The International Monetary Fund expects output in the rest of Sub-Saharan Africa to grow at a rate of close to 5% next year, but South Africa is projected to manage little more than 1% growth.
More worrying still, the country’s unemployment rate – at over 25% – is one of the highest in the world.
South Africa needs to reclaim the economic initiative, by – literally – building the Africa of the future.
Countries across the continent are racing to construct the roads, ports, power stations, schools, and hospitals they will need to sustain their growth and meet the needs of their fast-growing and urbanizing populations.
And what they need most of all is expertise.
But while South Africa has highly capable architecture, construction, and engineering sectors, its current share of foreign-built projects in Sub-Saharan Africa stands at only 7%, compared to 32% for China.
According to the McKinsey Global Institute (MGI), a coordinated effort by South African construction firms, banks, financial institutions, and government ministries – in partnership with their counterparts in other African countries – could triple this share, potentially creating 80,000 new domestic jobs from exports of construction services by 2030.
The opportunities are not limited to the construction industry.
South Africa has the know-how to meet Africa’s burgeoning need for a wide range of services, from banking and insurance to retail and transport.
The country currently provides only 2% of Sub-Saharan Africa’s service imports – a market worth some $40 billion annually.
The contrast with other regions’ economic leaders is telling.
Brazil provides 26% of Latin America’s service imports, and the United Kingdom provides 19% of Europe’s.
South Africa is home to several well-established, innovative banks that are well placed to offer low-cost, digital services to millions of currently unbanked African households and businesses.
Indeed, South African banks already command a 12% share of Sub-Saharan Africa’s banking market (outside their home country); with the regional market growing by more than 10% per year, they could nearly double this share by 2030.
The potential is just as promising in insurance.
South Africa has a highly developed insurance sector, with a long history of creating products for every demographic and income level.
It is ideally placed to provide insurance to the rest of Sub-Saharan Africa, where just 1% of households have insurance of any kind.
South Africa also has been punching below its weight in merchandise trade.
It should be playing a much more active role both in meeting Africa’s demand for imports and in stimulating industrial and agricultural development across the continent.
The recently announced Tripartite Free Trade Area, which will create an integrated market across 27 African countries, is a major opportunity for South Africa and the rest of the region.
That agreement could help South Africa triple its exports of agricultural goods.
It could also bring products from other African countries into South Africa’s strong supply chains and trade networks, benefiting the entire region.
The key to reigniting South Africa’s economic growth is an ambitious regional strategy driven by government and business leaders working in partnership.
A massive scale-up of vocational education is particularly important, as this will provide young South Africans with the technical skills needed to support the expansion of export industries.
Putting in place infrastructure to support growth – notably power generation, which currently lags demand – will also be crucial.
South Africa’s economic transformation since its transition to democracy two decades ago has been remarkable.
But its renaissance is in danger of running out of steam.
Only by boldly seizing the initiative can South Africa put itself at the core of Africa’s economic renewal, and only by embracing its role as regional leader can it revitalize its own prospects.
South Asia at War
CAMBRIDGE – Last month’s terrorist assault in Mumbai targeted not only India’s economy and sense of security.
Its broader goal was to smash the India-Pakistan détente that has been taking shape since 2004.
The attackers did not hide their faces or blow themselves up with suicide jackets.
Anonymity was not their goal.
They wanted to be identified as defenders of a cause.
Unless this cause is fully understood, and its roots revealed across the region, this attack may prove to be the beginning of the unmaking of South Asia.
Regional conflict, involving all of the region’s states and increasing numbers of non-state actors, has produced large numbers of trained fighters, waiting for the call to glory.
Within both India and Pakistan, economic disparities and a sense of social injustice have created fertile ground for conflict.
The use and abuse of religious fervor, whether “jihadi” or “Hindu fundamentalist,” are striking at the roots of communal harmony across South Asia.
Much of the current trouble can be traced to Afghanistan, whose tragedy could never have remained confined within its designated borders.
The dynamics of the region changed when the Afghan freedom fighters of 1980’s were converted into “mujahidin” through a criminal enterprise in which both the West and the Muslim world happily participated.
Pakistan, always insecure about India, became the hub of this transformation.
The West thought it had moved on after the fall of the Soviet empire, but the region – and increasingly the global community – continues to pay a heavy price for this unholy project.
The ills of two decades in South Asia can be attributed to the Afghan jihad years: the rise of the Taliban, the dominance of Pakistani-sponsored religious fanatics within the Kashmir freedom movement, and the eventual spread of sectarian conflict within Pakistan.
In Afghanistan, Pakistan’s military and intelligence agencies sought “strategic depth” against India.
Moreover, they wanted payback for India’s role in supporting the revolt in the 1960’s and 1970’s that led to Bangladesh’s independence from Pakistan.
India is not blameless here.
It was pursuing a two-pronged strategy – making the argument that all was well in Kashmir (a blatant lie) and supporting ethnic confrontation in Pakistan.
Violent intelligence wars between Pakistan’s Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) and India’s Research and Analysis Wing (RAW) have become a brutal reality in South Asia.
Lashkar-e-Taiba (LET, Army of the Pure), a Pakistan-based militant outfit supporting insurgency on the Indian side of Kashmir, was a product of these years.
According to Indian investigators, this group is implicated in the Mumbai attacks.
Pakistan’s clampdown on its offices throughout the country essentially confirms this conclusion, though Pakistan is publicly demanding more evidence.
LET was the armed wing of an Ahle-Hadith organization, a South Asian version of Saudi-style fundamentalism, whose purpose was to hit Indian forces in Kashmir.
Though the group was banned by former Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf after the terrorist attacks on the United States of September 11, 2001, some of its operators went underground and others joined Jamaat-ud-Dawa (JuD, Party of Proselytizing) – an organization that runs religious educational centers and charities.
Given its established linkages with Pakistan’s intelligence outfits, the group was never targeted strongly.
In fact, it was even involved in rescue operations on the Pakistani side of Kashmir after the devastating 2005 earthquake there.
What Pakistan’s military strategists failed to realize was that groups like LET and JuD had local agendas as well – converting Pakistan into a theocracy.
Hafiz Saeed, the founder of LET and currently the head of JuD, once proudly argued that: “We believe in the Clash of Civilizations, and our Jihad will continue until Islam becomes the dominant religion.”
JuD, along with many other like-minded groups, radicalized thousands of young Pakistanis.
Through its web and print publications, it also routinely challenged the teachings of the Sufi mystics who originally brought Islam to South Asia by promoting pluralism and love for humanity.
Even while demanding strong action against JuD, India must recognize that Pakistan is itself a victim of terror.
Any military confrontation with Pakistan will only empower Pakistani radicals.
India also needs to look inward, as anti-Muslim violence in Gujarat and the activities of Hindu fundamentalist groups have potentially created recruitment opportunities for Muslim extremists within India.
An amicable resolution of the Kashmir conflict will only help improve peace prospects in South Asia.
For Pakistan, a concerted and sustained effort against all extremist groups operating in the country is necessary.
Militants of all stripes must be decommissioned completely and transparently.
Equally important for Pakistan is to expand and reform its public education system and improve basic services so that radical groups cannot lure young people into their educational and welfare networks.
Otherwise, the status quo can gravely threaten Pakistan’s – and South Asia’s – future.
Trade in a Time of Protectionism
COLOMBO – As China’s economy slows and growth in the developed world remains anemic, governments across Asia are working to keep their economies on an upward trajectory.
In Sri Lanka, where I am Prime Minister, the challenge is to find a way to accelerate our already steady economic growth.
One thing is clear: We cannot expect the rest of the world to welcome our economic ambitions the way it once opened its arms to China’s rapid rise as an economic power or – in earlier decades – cheered on the growth of Japan and the so-called Asian Tigers, including South Korea.
Today, we Asians are witnessing, on an almost daily basis, fierce political assaults on the tools and policies that have helped lift hundreds of millions of our citizens out of poverty.
Indeed, this year, free trade appears to be the scapegoat of choice among the world’s assorted populists and demagogues.
In the United States’ presidential election campaign, for example, the leading candidates in both the Republican and Democratic primaries have questioned the wisdom of seeking greater openness in world trade.
In the United Kingdom, euroskeptics campaigning for the country to leave the European Union denigrate the benefits of the single European market.
Elsewhere in Europe, populists are demanding that the drawbridges of trade be raised.
Open trade is under attack even in parts of Asia.
Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe had to drag some of his country’s special-interest groups kicking and screaming into the Trans-Pacific Partnership.
Similarly, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi has been unable to convince state governors to lower trade barriers within the country.
And in Sri Lanka, the “economic and technology agreement” that my government recently planned to sign with India, in order to bring about greater economic integration, has come under ferocious political attack.
For the most part, however, Asia’s political leaders retain a very positive view of the benefits of open trade.
After all, much of the past four decades of robust growth can be attributed to the fact that world markets were receptive to Asian goods.
All we needed to do to get our economies growing, it seemed, was to identify our comparative advantage, produce quality goods at competitive prices, and then export as much as we could.
For decades, this model worked extraordinarily well, and China, Japan, South Korea, and the countries of Southeast Asia benefited greatly from it.
Even today, with world trade in the doldrums, regional trade remains a key component of these countries’ growth strategies.
In South Asia, however, we have been much slower to take advantage of the opportunities that can arise from more open trade – with regrettable consequences: The region is home to 44% of the world’s poorest people.
We have an obligation to try to use trade to lift our people out of poverty.
But with free trade rapidly becoming a global bugbear, the window for generating growth by tapping into world markets appears to be closing quickly.
If trade is to become a key driver of growth in Sri Lanka or elsewhere in the region, we will most likely have to generate it ourselves – by transforming South Asia from one of the world’s least economically integrated regions into one of its most integrated.
Today, intra-regional trade accounts for just 5% of South Asia’s total trade, compared to 25% for the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
This vast untapped potential presents the region with an opportunity for growth that does not rely on the strength of the world economy.
Last year, the World Bank estimated that annual trade between India and Pakistan could jump from $1 billion today to $10 billion – if tariffs and other barriers were slashed to levels recommended by the World Trade Organization.
Tariffs and other needless restrictions hobble trade among all South Asian countries.
These obstacles were supposed to be swept away with the establishment of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation, the largest of all the world’s regional trading blocs, with close to two billion people.
But SAARC’s reliance on bilateral negotiations has slowed the process to a crawl, keeping the region much poorer than it needs to be.
If SAARC is to succeed, a new multilateral mechanism for cooperation will be needed.
As climate change takes its toll, the stakes will only get higher.
Our still largely agrarian countries, with much of their territory in low-lying coastal regions, are dangerously exposed to rising sea levels and violent weather.
Receding Himalayan glaciers will disrupt the lives – and livelihoods – of some 600 million people in Pakistan, Nepal, and northern India.
The political obstacles to effective action will be stiff.
Indeed, there is political opposition to greater regional economic integration in every SAARC country.
But the scale of the challenges facing the region should impel all of SAARC’s members toward greater cooperation.