Iranian President Hassan Rouhani and US President Barack Obama would both benefit from a deal.
The sanctions imposed on Iran are starting to weigh heavily on its economy, and a settlement to the dispute is a prerequisite for any effort by the two countries to cooperate on a peace deal in Syria or to address the threat posed by the Islamic State.
Iran is just emerging from a three-year internal political struggle.
The military and hardline mullahs, who believe that Iran should produce a nuclear weapon, faced off against the bulk of the business community and reformist mullahs, led by Rouhani and former President Mohammad Khatami, who believe that it should not.
The outcome was uncertain – until Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei reiterated a fatwa banning nuclear weapons.
For as long as the issue remained unsettled, the Iranian delegation to the talks could not agree on the desired outcome.
This was evident in cases where the International Atomic Energy Agency was granted access to suspected facilities during the negotiations, only to have local commanders turn away its inspectors when they arrived.
(To be sure, the US delegation has also appeared inconsistent at times, often including officials vehemently hostile to Iran, along with disciplined diplomats seeking an agreement at Obama’s request.)
There is also another, more fundamental, reason for hope.
The Middle East is undergoing a tectonic shift – the Shia awakening.
As with the slow, sure movement of the earth’s plates, this deep, broad, underlying transformation is manifesting itself in local, destructive eruptions.
When America’s misguided war in Iraq deposed Saddam Hussein in 2003, it upset a delicate balance.
Saddam was venal and cruel, but his regime was predominantly secular.
Far from harboring weapons of mass destruction, he was focused on maintaining his grip on power.
Having learned his lesson during Iraq’s brutal and costly war with Iran in the 1980s, Saddam was careful not to disturb the region’s geopolitical equilibrium.
For more than a thousand years, the Islamic world has been riven by the Sunni-Shia conflict.
Until the US-led invasion, Iran, alongside Syria’s Alawite regime, was the only country where Shia controlled the state.
Some 70% of the Arab world’s population is Sunni, and the Shia are a minority in every Arab country – except Iraq and Bahrain.
The fall of Saddam allowed Iraq’s Shia majority to take power through elections.
But it also triggered civil war and regional turmoil (including ongoing Shia protests in Bahrain).
In Syria, the situation is almost a mirror image.
The country is a mosaic of Druze, Kurds, Christians, a few Jews, many Shia, and a Sunni majority.
Like Saddam, President Bashar al-Assad heads a secular regime that rules through brutal repression.
The determination in the West to depose him in the name of human rights and democracy was perceived by the Sunni majority as an opportunity to overthrow their oppressor.
Unfortunately, Syria’s moderate Sunnis came under attack from two sides: Assad’s government and extremist adherents of Wahhabism, Islam’s most intolerant school of thought.
The result is the emergence of the Islamic State, carrying with it the threat of extermination of the country’s minorities, including Christians and Alawites.
The upheaval in these two neighboring countries has reshaped regional geopolitics.
Along with Iran, Russia, which seeks to undermine American and British influence in the Middle East, supports the Shia awakening, whereas Sunni-dominated Turkey, the region’s strongest military power and a NATO member, has done little to hide its sympathy for the Islamic State.
Recently, for example, Turkey’s government forbid the country’s Kurds from supporting their ethnic kin in Iraq and Syria, whom the Islamic State has targeted for annihilation.
Assad’s brutal regime and Iran have become key players in the fight against the Islamic State.
Unblocking the nuclear talks between the P5+1 and Iran is thus crucial; by unfreezing the regional status quo, a final deal could lead to a change of alliances, with far-reaching consequences.
Indeed, perhaps the most compelling reason to hope that the negotiators will move quickly toward an agreement is their governments’ fear of the alternatives.
Iran: One Year Later
WASHINGTON, DC – This month marks the one-year anniversary of the contested re-election of hard-line Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, which spurred the country’s largest popular uprisings since the 1979 Islamic revolution.
While the regime gradually succeeded in violently quelling the momentum of the opposition Green Movement, the country’s deep internal rifts – both among political elites as well as between government and society – are far from being reconciled.
Among the numerous post-election casualties was the notion of Iran as an “Islamic Republic.”
As the late Grand Ayatollah Ali Montazeri put it, the regime’s brutality towards its own people has rendered it “neither Islamic nor a Republic.”
Another casualty was the legitimacy of Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei. For two decades, Khamenei deceptively cultivated an image of an impartial and magnanimous guide, but his defiant public support for Ahmadinejad exposed him as a petty, partisan autocrat.
Among the unprecedented slogans of last summer’s street protests were thunderous chants of “Khamenei is a murderer, his leadership is void!”
Under Khamenei’s leadership, an unholy trinity of nouveau-riche Revolutionary Guardsmen, hard-line clergymen, and indoctrinated Basij militiamen increasingly wield power.
Despite his religious pretensions as a spiritual guide, Khamenei’s future rests largely in the hands of the Revolutionary Guards. While opposition to his rule among top clerics in Qom worries Khamenei, opposition within the Revolutionary Guard could be fatal for him.
Despite the government’s crisis of legitimacy and endemic mismanagement, the Green Movement – nominally led by opposition presidential candidates Mir Hossein Mousavi and Mehdi Karroubi – faces major obstacles.
Their brain trust is either in prison, under virtual house arrest, or unable to communicate freely. They lack organization and strategy.
As protests began last year, the grass-roots nature of the Green Movement was initially thought to be advantageous, given that it could not be easily decapitated.
“Thirty years ago people were sheep and Khomeini was their shepherd,” a prominent Iranian democratic activist told me.
“Today we don’t have a shepherd, but the people are no longer sheep.”
Despite their strength in numbers however, Mousavi and Karroubi’s excessive reliance on street protests is misguided.
While their courageous supporters espouse tolerance and practice non-violence, they are overwhelmed by armed government forces who are willing to kill and die to retain power.
If the Green Movement is to mount a serious challenge to the government it must incorporate support from bazaar merchants, workers in major industries, transportation unions, and government workers. Sustained strikes by these groups would bring the country’s economy to a halt.
This is a tall order, however, given that Iran’s labor groups, while deeply discontented, are just as amorphous as the Green Movement itself.
What’s more, Mousavi and Karroubi, perhaps chastened in part by the unfulfilled promises and excesses of the Islamic Revolution – are seemingly in no hurry to see abrupt change.
Instead, they have pursued a gradualist approach that aims to co-opt and recruit disaffected members of the traditional classes, including clergy and Revolutionary Guardsmen, to the Green Movement.
The Green Movement’s deliberate approach is complicated by the sense of urgency that the United States, Europe, and especially Israel, feel about the Iranian government’s nuclear ambitions.
While the role that outside powers like the US can play in affecting political reform in Iran is limited, the Obama administration faces two fundamental challenges in its Iran policy.
First, how do you reach an accommodation with a regime that seemingly needs you as an adversary?
While a large majority of Iranians want to make amends with the US, for Iran’s hardliners, enmity toward the US has become a central part of the Islamic Republic’s identity.
“If pro-American tendencies come to power in Iran, we have to say goodbye to everything,” conceded Ayatollah Ahmad Jannati, head of the powerful Guardian Council.
“After all, anti-Americanism is among the main features of our Islamic state.”
The second challenge for the US is to champion human rights and democracy in Iran without compromising the independence of opposition forces.
Given the diversity of the Green Movement, there is no clear consensus as to which US policies are most constructive.
There is a seemingly universal belief that America should absolutely refrain from military action, condemn the Islamic Republic’s human rights abuses, and express moral solidarity with the Iranian people.
There is little agreement, however, when it comes to more contentious questions, such as the potential efficacy of targeted sanctions.
Iran’s first post-revolution prime minister, Mehdi Bazargan, reportedly once said that the real leader of the 1979 revolution was not Ayatollah Khomeini but rather the Shah, who united diverse groups of people against him.
Today, a somewhat similar dynamic exists: the two individuals arguably most responsible for the opposition’s resilience are not Mousavi and Karroubi, but Ahmadinejad and Khamenei.
Governmental brutality and intimidation can withstand the march of history for years, but not indefinitely.
Whatever becomes of the Green Movement in the short term, millions of courageous Iranian protestors made clear to the world last summer that their country’s centennial quest for a democracy is an idea whose time has come.
Iran on the Warpath
BERLIN – While Europe remains preoccupied with its own slow-motion crisis, and other global powers continue to be mesmerized by the bizarre spectacle of European officials’ myriad efforts to rescue the euro (and thus the global financial system), clouds of war are massing over Iran once more.
For years, Iran has been pursuing both a nuclear program and the development of long-range missiles, which points to only one conclusion: the country’s leaders are intent on building nuclear weapons, or at least on reaching the technological threshold beyond which only a single political decision is required to achieve that end.
The latter course would arguably keep Iran within the scope of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), to which it is a signatory.
But there can be no reasonable doubt about the Iranian leadership’s intentions.
Otherwise, Iran’s nuclear and missile programs would be a pointless waste of money.
After all, Iran does not need uranium-enrichment technology. The country has only one civilian nuclear reactor, with fuel rods supplied by Russia, and the Iranian technology now being developed cannot be used in it.
But uranium enrichment makes a lot of sense if you want a nuclear weapon; indeed, for that purpose, enrichment is indispensable.
Moreover, Iran is building a heavy-water reactor, supposedly for research purposes, but which is also needed to build a plutonium bomb.
Iran has, in violation of the NPT, hidden substantial parts of this program.
The country has also spent millions of dollars on illegal purchases of enrichment technology and nuclear-weapon designs from the Pakistani nuclear scientist and black marketeer A.Q. Khan, the “Father of the Pakistani bomb.”
Iran tried to conceal these transactions for years, until its cover was blown when Libya began to cooperate with the West and exposed the Khan network.
An Iran armed with nuclear weapons (or one political decision away from possessing them) would drastically alter the Middle East’s strategic balance.
At best, a nuclear-arms race would threaten to consume this already-unstable region, which would endanger the NPT, with far-reaching global consequences.
At worst, nuclear weapons would serve Iran’s “revolutionary” foreign policy in the region, which the country’s leaders have pursued since the birth of the Islamic Republic in 1979.
The combination of an anti-status quo foreign policy and nuclear weapons and missiles is a nightmare not only for Israel, which at least has second-strike capabilities, but also for Iran’s non-nuclear Arab neighbors and Turkey.
Indeed, the Gulf States, including Saudi Arabia, feel more existentially threatened by Iran than Israel does.
Europe’s security profile, too, would change dramatically if Iran were to possess nuclear warheads and long-range missiles.
All attempts at negotiations have led nowhere, with Iran continuing to enrich uranium and improve its nuclear technology.
Sanctions, while useful, work only in the very long term, and a change in the balance of power within the country is not foreseeable in the short term.
So it is only a matter of time – and not much time – until Iran’s neighbors and the international community will confront a fateful choice: either accept Iran as a nuclear power, or decide that the mere prospect, as it becomes more realistic, is leading to war.
President Barack Obama has already made clear that the United States will not accept Iran as a nuclear power under any circumstances.
The same is true of Israel and Iran’s Arab neighbors in the Gulf.
The next year promises to be critical.
The Israeli government recently suggested that Iran would reach the nuclear threshold within nine months, and Iran could become a major issue in the long run-up to the US presidential election in November 2012.
And it is difficult to imagine that Israel’s current government will stand by idly while Iran becomes a nuclear power (or a nuclear quasi-power).
On the other hand, talk of military intervention – which, under the circumstances, would largely boil down to air strikes – is cheap.
There are grave doubts about whether the Iranian nuclear program could be eliminated from the air.
In fact, with large parts of the world most likely condemning any attack, military intervention could clear the diplomatic path to an Iranian bomb.
It is better not to dwell on what the Middle East might look like after this kind of confrontation.
Iranian opposition forces would likely be the first victim of Western military action, and, elsewhere in the region, the Arab Spring would likely be submerged under a massive anti-Western wave of solidarity with Iran.
The region would be pushed back into violence and terror, instead of continuing its transformation from the bottom up.
The effects on the global economy would be no less significant, to say nothing of the humanitarian consequences.
A last-ditch diplomatic solution appears unlikely, given that the nuclear question plays a decisive role in the Iranian regime’s factional struggles, in which anyone favoring compromise can be considered the loser.
Moreover, Iran’s leaders seem to assume that the country is too big and too strong to be subdued by sanctions or air strikes.
Historically, the road to disaster has usually been paved with good intentions and grave errors of judgment.
That could happen again in 2012, when miscalculations on all sides could clear the path to war or a nuclear Iran – or, quite realistically, to both. Further escalation in the Middle East will culminate in these wretched alternatives sooner rather than later, unless a diplomatic solution is found (or unless diplomacy can at least buy time).
Unfortunately, that may be unlikely in the year ahead.
In the absence of any viable route to US diplomatic engagement with Iran, the burden of organizing, convening, and conducting such highly sensitive negotiations falls on Europe.
And European leaders, as Iran knows very well, have other things on their minds.
Iran’s Syrian Power Grab and Saudi Arabia
RIYADH – Inviting Iran to the next round of talks on the Syria crisis in Vienna, Austria – an invitation that was reiterated last week – has far-reaching implications.
In fact, Iran’s current government is attempting to overthrow a balance of power that has endured for some 1,400 years – and Saudi Arabia, as the cradle of the Muslim world, will not allow it.
The divide between Iran and Saudi Arabia, the Middle East’s most prominent Shia and Sunni powers, respectively, has deep roots.
If we are to understand what is really happening in the Middle East today – not just in Syria – one must consider the origins of the Sunni-Shia schism, the Arab-Persian divide, and past struggles over the governance of Islam.
Islam was divided between Sunni and Shia after the prophet Muhammad died and a new successor had to be chosen.
Most of his followers, who became known as Sunni Muslims, felt that the faithful should base their decision on ability, and supported the Muslim elders’ choice of Muhammad’s father-in-law, Abu Bakr.
But a small dissident group, who would eventually become known as Shia Muslims, were adamant that the new caliph should be a blood relative of the prophet, and thus decided that Muhammad’s son-in-law and cousin Ali ibn Abi Talib (the fourth caliph, according to Sunnis) was his rightful successor.
Today, 90% of all Muslims are Sunni, and 10% are Shia.
While this disagreement was playing out, so was the Muslim conquest of Persia, which began just a year after the prophet’s death in 632.
The Persian Sassanid Empire, exhausted financially and militarily from decades of warfare with the Byzantine Empire, endured a decisive defeat in the Battle of Qadisiyyah in 636.
The next year, the Persian emperor, Yazdegerd III, fled to the border province of Khorasan and the Arabization of Persia began, with Persians taking Arab names and converting to Islam.
By 651, almost all major urban centers in Persia were under Arab control, adding momentum to the process.
The mass conversion to Islam among Persians was the first step toward the establishment of the first caliphate, a political-religious state comprising all Muslim lands.
At various times in history, caliphates have extended into Asia, Africa, and parts of Europe.
The effort by various forces seeking to control or restore the caliphate is a recurrent theme throughout Islam’s history.
The so-called Islamic State is only the latest example of this.
Until the year 1500, almost all Persians were Sunni Muslims.
Then, Shah Ismail – the first Shah and the founder of the Safavid Dynasty – began a brutal policy of forcing Persian Muslims to become Shia, in order to distinguish his iteration of Persia’s empire from the more powerful Constantinople-based and fervently Sunni Ottoman caliphate.
This history clearly informs Iran’s actions today.
As Shia Muslims, Iranians are a minority within the Muslim community, a reality that has caused them to feel persecuted.
Rather than accept their minority status, various Iranian governments have attempted to establish their country’s hegemony in the Arab world.
Of course, Iran not only represents only a tiny minority of Muslims; Iranians are not Arabs.
It is thus unfathomable that they would dictate to Arab countries in any capacity.
But this has not stopped Iran’s government from attempting to commandeer the main levers of Islam, both politically and theologically.
Using Arab countries’ Shia communities, it is trying to wield control over them, with the ultimate objective of taking over Islam’s two holiest sites, Mecca and Medina, over which the Saudi monarch exercises authority as the Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques.
As the Sunni world’s most influential country, Saudi Arabia knows that it must do what it takes to limit Iran.
In 2011, a Saudi-led Gulf Cooperation Council coalition had to neutralize an Iran-sponsored Shia insurgency in Bahrain.
This year in Yemen (a predominantly Sunni country), a Saudi-led coalition is fighting the Zaydi Shia Houthi rebels, whom Iran armed in order to take over the country and gain a foothold on the Arabian Peninsula.
In Syria – a Sunni-majority country where, incidentally, a Sunni Muslim caliphate, the Umayyads, once prospered – Iran is spending billions of dollars to prop up President Bashar al-Assad’s regime, dominated by members of a minority Shia sect, the Alawites (historically known as Nusayris).
Actions by Assad’s supporters have so far caused more than 270,000 deaths, displaced over seven million people internally, forced nearly four million people to flee, and left close to 12 million in need of desperate assistance.
They have enabled – indeed, fueled – the rise of the Islamic State, and with it a growing threat to the global order, as the successive terrorist attacks in Sharm el-Sheikh, Beirut, and Paris tragically have shown.
Given this, Saudi Arabia’s leadership – regardless of what temporary results are achieved through the Vienna talks – will continue to work hard to ensure that Assad is removed from power and that the mayhem is finally brought to an end.
The terrorism, proxy wars, arms shipments, nuclear ambitions, and grandiose delusions emerging from Iran are part of an age-old struggle with which the Saudis have had enough.
That is why King Salman is overseeing the greatest military acquisition and expansion program in Saudi Arabia’s history.
And Saudi Arabia will not stop until Iran – and its Shia proxies – abandons its revolutionary fantasies and begins working to bring peace and stability to the Middle East and the wider Arab world.
The Middle East’s Cold War
PRINCETON – The breach in diplomatic relations between Iran and Saudi Arabia is a dangerous watershed in an already unstable, war-torn region.
The trigger was the execution by Saudi Arabia of Nimr al-Nimr, a firebrand Shia sheikh who had called for the end of the country’s monarchy.
But the rupture has its roots in a strategic rivalry that stretches across the Middle East.
The tensions between the two countries go back many decades, but they became especially acute after Iran’s Islamic Revolution in 1979.
The revolution’s leader, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, did not hide his contempt for the Saudi royal family; he quickly positioned Iran as a champion of “the oppressed” against “the forces of arrogance” – the United States and its local allies, Saudi Arabia and Israel.
But while the rivalry has sectarian and ideological components, it is, above all, a pragmatic dispute over regional interests.
Because Iran views the political order in the Arab world as serving its enemies’ interests, it has continuously sought to upend it, promoting terrorist groups and deploying proxies in order to establish and expand its influence in the region.
The non-state actors Iran has supported include rioting pilgrims in Mecca, suicide bombers in Lebanon, and Hezbollah militants, who have launched attacks on Israel and, more recently, battled Saudi-backed rebel groups in Syria.
Until the turn of the century, Saudi Arabia’s response was tepid; it sought to establish its Islamic legitimacy through strict enforcement of the religion’s dictates at home and support for Muslim liberation causes abroad, most notably in Afghanistan and Bosnia.
But in recent decades, the cold war between the two regional powers has heated up.
After the 2003 invasion of Iraq led to the formation of a Shia-dominated government in Baghdad, Saudi Arabia’s rulers watched in alarm as Iran extended its influence across the Middle East.
In 2006, Hezbollah fought Israel to a standstill in Lebanon.
Then, in 2014, Shia Houthi rebels – another Iranian proxy group – conquered the capital of Yemen.
In the royal palaces in Riyadh, the prospect of Iranian-backed uprisings in Bahrain – or in Saudi Arabia itself – began to look alarmingly plausible.
Things came to a head in 2015, when the US and the other five permanent members of the UN Security Council (plus Germany) reached a nuclear accord with Iran, agreeing to lift economic sanctions while allowing the country to maintain its regional influence.
With Iranian allies or proxies operating in Syria, Iraq, Lebanon, and Yemen, Saudi Arabia’s leaders have felt increasingly surrounded.
Since Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud’s accession to the throne in January 2015, the kingdom’s principal strategic aim has been to roll back Iran’s influence – with or without US help.
The rivalry’s principal battlegrounds are Syria and Yemen.
In Syria, Saudi Arabia has dedicated itself to the overthrow of President Bashar al-Assad, a key Iranian ally, and has worked to unite the woefully disorganized opposition groups.
Iran, for its part, continues to back Assad, with the help of Russia.
The war has turned into a quagmire.
With no side able to gain the upper hand, the violence is likely to continue.
A recent US-led effort to broker a peace deal in Lebanon, carried out in the hope that this could lead to a breakthrough in Syria, fell victim to the distrust between the two countries.
The proposed power-sharing agreement would have replaced Assad with one of his allies and installed a long-time Saudi client as Prime Minister.
But while the Saudis appeared willing to accept the deal, Iran rejected it after Hezbollah balked at both candidates.
In Yemen, Saudi Arabia and its Sunni allies launched a military campaign in March 2015 that quickly ground down into another stalemate.
Pro-Iranian Houthi fighters and forces loyal to former President Ali Saleh have fought off a force of southern Yemenis backed by Saudi and Emirati air power and special forces.
Negotiations to resolve the conflict have collapsed.
In the absence of a full-scale invasion – which is not likely, given the potential for large-scale casualties – the war will almost certainly drag on.
Saudi Arabia’s execution of al-Nimr was part of a broader crackdown on domestic opposition; the sheikh was one of 47 people executed on charges of terrorism, all but four of them Sunni militants accused of supporting Al Qaeda.
The reaction of Iran and its supporters – with violent anti-Saudi protests not only in Tehran, where the kingdom’s embassy was sacked, but also in Iraq and Bahrain – merely revealed the full depth of the underlying bilateral enmity.
In the short term, Iran’s response has benefited Saudi Arabia’s rulers, rallying Sunnis both within the kingdom and abroad and silencing their jihadi opponents.
But without some external intervention to bring the two countries to the bargaining table, their rivalry will derail efforts to stabilize the Middle East and could lead to spillover and escalation, making a bad regional environment much worse.
God and Woman in Iran
PRINCETON – My grandmother was one of the first women to study mathematics and physics at the University of Vienna.
When she graduated, in 1905, the university nominated her for its highest distinction, an award marked by the presentation of a ring engraved with the initials of the emperor.
But no woman had previously been nominated for such an honor, and Emperor Franz Joseph refused to bestow the award upon one.
More than a century later, one might have thought that by now we would have overcome the belief that women are not suited to the highest levels of education, in any area of study.
So it is disturbing news that more than 30 Iranian universities have banned women from more than 70 courses, ranging from engineering, nuclear physics, and computer science to English literature, archaeology, and business.
According to Shirin Ebadi, the Iranian lawyer, human-rights activist, and winner of the Nobel Peace Prize, the restrictions are part of a government policy to limit women’s opportunities outside the home.
The bans are especially ironic, given that, according to UNESCO, Iran has the highest rate of female to male undergraduates in the world.
Last year, women made up 60% of all students passing university exams, and women have done well in traditionally male-dominated disciplines like engineering.
It may well be female students’ very success – and the role of educated women in opposing Iran’s theocracy – that led the government to seek to reverse the trend.
Now, women like Noushin, a student from Esfahan who told the BBC that she wanted to be a mechanical engineer, are unable to achieve their ambitions, despite getting high scores on their entrance exams.
Some claim that the ideal of sexual equality represents a particular cultural viewpoint, and that we Westerners should not seek to impose our values on other cultures.
It is true that Islamic texts assert in various ways the superiority of men to women.
But the same can be said of Jewish and Christian texts; and the right to education, without discrimination, is guaranteed in several international declarations and covenants, such as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, to which almost all countries, including Iran, have agreed.
Discrimination against women is part of a broader pattern of official bias in Iran, especially against those who are neither Muslim nor members of one of the three minority religions – Zoroastrianism, Judaism, and Christianity – recognized in the Iranian Constitution.
To enroll in a university, for example, one must declare oneself to be a believer in one of the four recognized religions.
Atheists, agnostics, or members of Iran’s Bahai community are not accepted.
Imagine how we would react if someone tried to excuse racial discrimination by arguing that it is wrong to impose one’s culture on others.
It was, after all, for many years the “culture” of some parts of the United States that people of African descent should sit at the back of the bus and go to separate schools, hospitals, and universities.
It was the “culture” of apartheid South Africa that blacks should live apart from whites and have separate, and inferior, educational opportunities.
Or, to put it more accurately, it was the culture of the whites who held power in these places at that time.
The same is true in Iran.
The country’s rulers are all male and Muslim.
Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei’s call in 2009 for the “Islamization” of universities led to courses being changed and the replacement of some academic staff by more conservative figures.
Two months ago, Khamenei said that Iranians should return to traditional values and have more children – which would have obvious implications for the role of women, quite apart from the environmental impact.
The international sanctions against Iran that are currently in place seek to prevent the regime from building nuclear weapons, not to persuade it to end discrimination against women or on religious grounds.
There are no widespread boycotts of Iran’s universities, or of its other products, as there were against apartheid South Africa.
It seems that we still take sexual and religious discrimination less seriously than we take racial and ethnic discrimination.
Perhaps we are more ready to accept that the biological differences between men and women are relevant to the roles they play in society.
There are such differences, and they are not purely physical.
So we should not leap to the conclusion that if most engineers are men, there must be discrimination against women.
It may be that more men than women want to be engineers.
That, however, is a completely different question from whether women who do want to become engineers and are qualified to study engineering should be denied the opportunity to achieve their ambition.
By explicitly preventing women from enrolling in courses open to men, Iran has taken a step that is as indefensible as racial discrimination, and that should be condemned just as forcefully.
Iran’s Electoral Strategy
WASHINGTON, DC – Negotiations over Iran’s nuclear program have again hit a wall, but the country’s Supreme Leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, appears unconcerned.
Indeed, Khamenei seems convinced that neither the United States nor Israel will attack its nuclear facilities – at least not before the US presidential election in November.&nbsp;
Ironically, while Khamenei is no fan of democracy, he relies on the fact that his principal enemies are bound by democratic constraints.
Khamenei controls Iran’s nuclear program and its foreign policy, but the US and Israel must work to reach consensus not only within their respective political systems, but also with each other.
Iran’s leaders, who closely follow Israeli political debates, believe that Israel would not launch an assault on their nuclear facilities without America’s full cooperation, because unilateral action would jeopardize Israel’s relations with its most important strategic ally.
Given that an Israeli offensive would need to be coordinated with the US, while an American assault would not require Israeli military support, Iran would consider both to be American attacks.
But Iran’s leaders remain skeptical of either scenario, despite America’s official position that “all options are on the table” to prevent Iran from developing nuclear weapons capability.
So far, they simply do not feel enough pressure to consider a compromise.
In fact, Iran’s leaders continue to deride Israel from afar, calling the country an “insult to humanity,” or a “tumor” in the region that must be eradicated.
Meanwhile, Iran’s citizens – including clergy in the holy city of Qom, near the Fordow nuclear facility – are deeply concerned about the consequences of an attack.
Ayatollah Yousef Sanei, a former attorney general and a religious authority (marja’), has asked the government to refrain from provoking Israel.
Indeed, critics of the government believe that its incendiary rhetoric might lead to a devastating war.
But, from the perspective of Iran’s leadership, the taunting has tactical value to the extent that it reinforces the view among the Israeli public that Iran is a dangerous enemy, willing to retaliate fiercely.
In fact, anti-Israel rhetoric reflects Iranian leaders’ confidence that Israel will not attack – a view that is bolstered by the situation in Syria.
They are convinced that, even if Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s regime falls, Iran will be able to destabilize the country in such a way that would pose a major security threat to Israel.
According to this view, it is Israel that has an interest in refraining from further antagonizing Iran, not vice versa.
Recent editorials in Kayhan – the hardline Iranian newspaper that serves as a mouthpiece for the Supreme Leader – indicate that Khamenei is looking forward to the US presidential election.
Regardless of the outcome, he foresees no threat of military action, at least through next year.
A victory by Obama would reinforce America’s unwillingness to attack Iran and renewed efforts to rein in Israel.
And, if Republican challenger Mitt Romney is elected, he will need months to form his national security team and assemble his cabinet, leaving him unable to attack Iran immediately.
That said, since the Islamic Republic’s emergence in 1979, Iran’s leaders have generally preferred Republican presidents to Democrats: despite their harsh rhetoric, Republicans have been more willing to engage with Iran in practice.
Indeed, given that Iran has so far survived severe international sanctions, its leaders believe that they could get an offer from the US after the election – particularly if Romney wins – that recognizes their right to enrich uranium.
In fact, it is far from certain that Iran will be able to withstand current sanctions-related pressures indefinitely.
But its leaders’ confidence that they can remains a crucial element of their strategy, and the West cannot afford to ignore their perceptions.&nbsp;America, whether led by Obama or Romney, must understand that Iran will not negotiate seriously on its nuclear program until it perceives a clear, convincing, and unified consensus in the US and Israel on an approach that addresses both Iran’s ambitions and Israel’s concerns.
Achieving such a consensus in the context of an American presidential election will be no small feat.
Nor is it easy to create consensus in Israel, especially as its political parties prepare for elections next year.
But only with significantly greater cohesion within the US and Israel will Iran’s leaders even consider accepting a compromise on their nuclear program.
Iran’s Hardline Choice
Iran’s choice for its next president, the hardline Mayor of Teheran Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, is likely to worsen relations with the West and the country’s international isolation.
Yet in domestic terms the Islamist regime is likely to be better off than it would have been with a more moderate result.
Clearly, Ahmadinejad has a real base of support.
But the fact that he ran as a populist, talked about helping the poor, condemned the government’s performance, and acted almost like an opposition candidate are all irrelevant: he was the regime’s choice, and, in the end, he received official help even against rival hardline candidates.
The regime played its hand brilliantly.
It turned the slightly more pragmatic Hashemi Rafsanjani, who disagreed with some current policies, into the “establishment” figure and its own man into the rebel.
The government thus used anti-establishment feeling to revitalize its own rule.
Given the fact that the last president, Muhammad Khatami, was a supporter of the reform movement – albeit a timid one who ultimately accomplished nothing – only underlines how thoroughly the rulers turned around the political situation.
Ahmadinejad is a representative of the younger activists in the anti-Shah revolution of a quarter-century ago.
He was directly involved in the holding of American hostages in Iran, though exactly how much so remains a matter of dispute.
Most worrisome of all, he is close to the two main groups that represent the most extreme elements in Iran: the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps and the Basij organization.
The first is a parallel pro-regime army; the second is an organization for intimidating opponents and anyone seeking a more open society.
However, concern that an even more radical leadership has taken over in Iran is mitigated by two factors.
First, Ahmadinejad is more likely to focus on domestic issues, trying – with whatever degree of success is unclear – to improve living standards for the poorest Iranians.
Second, the same group that has been in control ever since the revolution will basically continue to run ideological and foreign policy.
The president has fewer powers than it seems, overshadowed particularly by Supreme Guide Ayatollah Ali Khamenei.
Nevertheless, Ahmadinejad’s election starkly clarifies the challenge that Iran poses for Western policy and Middle East stability.
First and foremost, it sends a signal to the most extreme elements in Iran and that country’s terrorist clients – Lebanon’s Hezbollah, the Palestinian Hamas and Islamic Jihad, and various small groups operating against Saudi Arabia, Iraq, and other Arab countries – that they have a green light for launching attacks.
They are likely to assume that Iran will support them whatever they do.
Outwardly, Iran has often been relatively cautious, but, at the covert level, it has been the world’s leading sponsor of terror.
Sometimes individual Iranian officials may have acted on their own to order and coordinate specific operations; they will now feel freer to do so.
Moreover, Ahmadinejad openly advocates Iran’s crash program to obtain nuclear weapons.
Most Iranian politicians – at least those allowed by the government to function openly – support the program, but favor a quieter and more cautious approach.
Rafsanjani, for example, put building better economic relations with the West ahead of pushing forward on the nuclear front.
If Ahmadinejad is president of a nuclear Iran, he is more likely to use the weapons in an adventurous manner.
This does not mean that he would fire them, but rather that he would use them for purposes of diplomatic blackmail, raising threats to crisis levels.
Since Iranian leaders daily proclaim their desire to wipe Israel off the map and to fight the US (Ahmadinejad stepped on a picture of an American flag on his way to vote), the risk of confrontation has increased.
Finally, Ahmadinejad is likely to be bolder in subverting stability in Iraq, and his victory will encourage radical Iranian officials and extremists within Iraq itself.
Iran is already sending many agents into Iraq and supporting clients seeking to turn that country into a clone.
Iraqis, including Shia Muslims – who follow the same version of Islam as Iranians — generally reject such interference.
A more militant Iranian posture is likely to increase friction with Iraq, as well as inspire more anti-American violence there.
In short, Iran’s electoral outcome is a dangerous one, though precisely how destabilizing it ultimately turns out to be will depend on Ahmadinejad’s actions and the degree of power granted him by Khamenei.
Moreover, dealing with such an openly extreme Iran – radical even by the hardline regime’s standards – will be a challenge not just for the US, but for Europe as well.
Will European countries try to pretend that Ahmadinejad’s militant rhetoric and provocations don’t matter and that some diplomatic solution to Iran’s nuclear ambition can be found?
With Rafsanjani, either a real agreement or the pretense of cooperation would have been easy to maintain.
But, with Ahmadinejad, a high level of appeasement will be necessary for even the most minimal diplomatic process to continue.
Some Iranian reformers and exiles put a bright face on Ahmadinejad’s election, arguing that his administration is more likely to show the regime’s real face and disabuse any Western hopes of compromise.
Yet it may also represent the regime’s success at co-opting dissatisfaction with a quarter-century of radical Islamist rule.
Whatever the outcome, for the West, Ahmadinejad’s victory means that everything related to Iran is set to become even hotter.
Iran’s Less-is-More Nuclear Policy
NEW YORK – The recent United States National Intelligence Estimate (NIE), which reports that Iran once had a “nuclear weapons program” but suspended it in 2003, means that there will probably be no American attack on Iran during the Bush administration.
How could America’s president explain to the world why he was bombing nuclear weapon facilities that his own intelligence services have said do not exist?
So, in all likelihood, the world has been spared a policy that would be as futile as it would be destructive.
Indeed, the one act most likely to guarantee that Iran obtains nuclear weapons would be to attack it.
(Nine years after Israel’s bombing raid on Iraq’s nuclear reactor at Osirak in 1981, Saddam Hussein was nevertheless within a year of having an atomic bomb.)
Yet the NIE arrived at its result by a strange route.
Every technically competent person knows that the paths to civilian nuclear power and to nuclear weapons are the same, except for a few last, comparatively simple steps.
The hard part is obtaining the fissionable materials – plutonium or highly enriched uranium.
Once that’s done, any nation – or even a sophisticated terrorist group – can do the rest.
Nuclear power requires low-enriched uranium as fuel.
Enrich it further, in the same facilities, and you have bomb-grade highly enriched uranium (HEU).
The remaining step – slamming two pieces of HEU together to create a critical mass and an explosion – is easy: the blueprints can be downloaded from the Internet.
Indeed, the “secret” of the hydrogen bomb was published in 1979 in an article by Howard Morland in The Progressive magazine, sparking a failed legal suit by the US government to suppress it.
The hard work of building facilities for enriching uranium is precisely what the Iranians are now already doing, if not yet in sufficient quantity to make a bomb, which might take them five or ten more years to acquire. But, once they acquire sufficient capacity, only the easy steps will remain.
Yet it is work on the easy steps, allegedly attempted and then canceled, that the NIE called Iran’s “nuclear weapon program.”
In light of the technical realities, it would have been more accurate to designate the difficult and openly acknowledged enrichment activity as the nuclear weapons program, for this is what can supply the guts of an atomic bomb.
Ironically, Iran’s suspension of the easy steps creates the impression that its weapon program has been stopped, while the most important activity continues in plain sight.
Of course, this does not mean that once Iran has adequate enrichment facilities, it will make a bomb. But it is capacity, not intention, that counts.
Iran could easily do what Japan does – hold enrichment facilities in readiness to make a bomb without actually doing so.
Or, like India in 1974, it might wait a long time, then dash to the finish line and conduct an atomic test.
How has this confusion arisen?
One answer lies in the provisions of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT), which forbids nuclear weapons to most of its signatories but guarantees them the right to build technology for nuclear power, including uranium enrichment.
Thus, the treaty unfortunately permits any signatory to acquire the most important facilities needed for making atomic bombs.
So, when the Bush administration wanted to oppose Iran’s program, merely pointing to the bare fact of enrichment wasn’t enough.
It had to point to other acts, including concealment efforts, which violate the NPT, and argue that these infractions were so serious that Iran’s enrichment right must be taken away.
The US was thus led to a series of over-statements.
In December 2005, Vice President Dick Cheney said, “There is every reason to believe that they are seriously pursuing nuclear weapons.”
President Bush now argues that all along it has been the above-board enrichment of uranium, not some other, secret program, that carries Iran ever closer to having nuclear weapons.
But he makes that legitimate point in vain: having rested its case on misjudgments, the administration now finds itself discredited by its own intelligence estimate.
We are left in a situation that layers paradox upon paradox.
A disastrous possible policy – military attack on Iran – has been headed off by a misguided, misinterpreted intelligence report.
One question is why Bush and Cheney set themselves up for this embarrassment.
Bush has said that he learned of the NIE’s conclusion only a week before it came out – a statement that either is false or reveals a level of incompetence beyond anything suspected so far.
None of that matters now.
The Bush administration’s habits of falsehood have undone its aggressive proclivities, leaving a gaping vacuum.
The doctrine according to which great powers, many of them nuclear-armed, try to stop lesser powers from acquiring nuclear weapons by force and threats of force – a fiasco in Iraq, nuclear-armed North Korea, and now Iran – has reached a dead end.
But, report or no report, the danger that Iran will acquire nuclear weapons is real, and may even have increased.
What’s missing is a policy to address it.
Iran’s Muddled Presidential Politics
WASHINGTON, DC – The decision of former Iranian president Mohammad Khatami not to seek the presidency again has revealed how muddled Iranian presidential politics now is.  In trying to sort out this muddle, the most important thing to keep in mind is not so much who will be elected, but what that choice will reveal�about the intentions of the country’s Supreme Leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei.
Unfortunately, the most likely outcome will be continuing transformation of the Islamic Republic from a civil government into a garrison state in which the military plays a major role in determining political and economic matters.
Who will actually win the vote is unpredictable, but not because Iran is democratic.
Ayatollah Khamenei, who is also the commander-in-chief of the armed forces, oversees the agencies that will run the election: the Guardian Council and the Ministry of Interior, which supervise the electoral process, and the Basij militia and Revolutionary Guard (IRGC), which unofficially control the ballot-boxes and the vote-counting process.
Recent surveys show that the increasing unpopularity of the current president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, stems primarily from his economic policies.
Although oil prices reached an all-time high in 2008, unemployment and inflation (now 31%) are out of control and the government is facing a $44 billion budget deficit.
The public sector accounts for roughly 80% of the economy, and relies mostly on now-plummeting oil revenue, while Iranian banks face a credit crisis, with Mahmoud Bahmani, the governor of the Iran Central Bank, estimating total delinquent payments to be $38 billion.
But Ahmadinejad’s unpopularity does not necessarily weaken his chances of being re-elected.
A few months before the election, neither of the two main political currents, conservative and reformist, has settled on its candidate.
Among the reformists now in the race, Mehdi Karrobi, the former speaker of the Majlis is a declared reformist candidate. Mir Hossein Moussavi, a former prime minister, and Abdullah Nouri, a former interior minister, are also expected to enter the race.
On the conservative side, Ahmadinejad so far stands alone.
But many conservatives also oppose his economic policies, as well as his management style.
Conservative voices have repeatedly argued that supporting Ahmadinejad will cost them votes and reinforce the economic crisis.
Conservative disenchantment with Ahmadinejad is apparent in the current Majlis, which is predominantly conservative.
The Majlis has rejected the government’s economic bills, and has repeatedly impeached or challenged Ahmadinejad’s cabinet ministers.
Iran’s main diplomatic challenge will center on its nuclear program and relations with the United States.
Since the president has no authority over these issues, any disagreement between the Supreme Leader and the next president will place the president in a difficult position with no real power.
In terms of domestic policy, the major challenge for the next president will be the economy.
Over-reliance on oil revenues, the effect of longstanding international sanctions, and the reluctance of foreign companies to invest in Iran have exacerbated the economy’s structural problems.
Perhaps one of the most significant elements in Iran’s stagnation is that the Revolutionary Guards control a large portion of the economy, and are beyond the reach of government regulation.
In order to manage the economic crisis successfully, any president must not only shift economic policy, but also amass enough political power to be able to thwart the intervention of the Revolutionary Guards and other organizations in economic policy-making.
Former President Khatami’s initial decision to run for the post again grabbed the international community's attention.
Yet a Khatami victory would not have guaranteed change.
As president, he faced criticism from reformists for his failure to resist a range of powerful groups that sabotaged economic reform and improvement in Iran’s relations with the west.
Khatami’s organizational savvy had not improved much since then.
So far, he lacks even a media platform for his faction.
Reformist critics believe that in order to mobilize people it will not be enough just to campaign against Ahmadinejad.
If a reformer is to win he must prove that he will be able to sway Iran’s political structures toward a reform agenda.
But reformists ask: if the Supreme Leader does not even permit the Khatami faction to have a newspaper, would he really have allowed Khatami to become president?
Even if any reformer does become president, will he be able to overcome his differences with the Supreme Leader?�
Speculation about the outcome of the election is an interesting parlor game.
But it should not distract us from the fundamentals of Iranian politics.
The next president may have room to adjust economic or social policies.
But, on the big issues of foreign policy, relations with the West, and the nuclear program, the identity of the president is not important.
These issues will be decided by a man who is not running for office in June, but whose power is secure: Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Iran’s Supreme Leader.
Iran’s Nuclear Grass Eaters
MADRID – After long years of failed international efforts to end Iran’s cunning drive to develop nuclear weapons, the question today is no longer whether the West can prevent the nuclearization of Iran’s military arsenal, but whether the Islamic regime collapses first.
Unfortunately, if it does not, the only option for stopping Iran is war – and war is a very bad option.
Pakistan is worth invoking when assessing whether the sanctions now imposed on Iran will force it to surrender its nuclear program.
In 1965, Pakistani Foreign Minister Zulficar Ali Bhutto famously declared that if India, its sworn enemy, went nuclear, his country would “eat grass and even go hungry” in order to develop a nuclear bomb of its own.
Today, Pakistan, a near-failed state on the verge of disintegration, possesses more nuclear warheads than India.
Iran’s theocratic regime, immersed in a momentous struggle for survival against what it regards as an unholy alliance of Israel, the American “Great Satan,” and a surrounding Arab world that abhors its hegemonic ambitions, will not surrender its nuclear ambitions easily. Indeed, nuclear weapons appear to be the regime’s only real route to self-preservation.
The French and the Soviet revolutions taught us that exporting the revolution is one way to protect it.
Iran tried that, and failed.
The almost inevitable fall of Iran’s closest ally in the region, the Baath regime in Syria, only adds to the regime’s paranoid anxieties – and makes developing a nuclear capability seem all the more necessary for its survival.
Iran’s leaders might be ready to let their people “eat grass and even go hungry” for the sake of their nuclear ambitions, but Iran’s squeezed middle class, one hopes, will not submit to such degradation.
Social unrest has been building up in Iran for years, and certainly began well before the West became serious about imposing economic and financial sanctions.
In fact, the popular revolts in Tunisia and Egypt were directly inspired by Iran’s Green movement, which emerged during the massive post-election protests in 2009, before succumbing to a brutal government crackdown.
The sanctions against Iran have undoubtedly bitten hard.
But the truth is that the severe economic hardships suffered by ordinary Iranians mainly reflect the regime’s economic mismanagement, and the widespread fear that the threat of war from both Israel and the United States, sometimes abetted by Iran’s own war rhetoric, has unleashed.
Indeed, Iran’s economy is now firmly in the grip of a war panic.
When a national currency loses 50% of its value in a matter of weeks, economic collapse is at hand.
Businessmen find it impossible to use the rial even for domestic transactions, because inflation is spiraling out of control.
Commodity prices, moreover, are skyrocketing, and the cost of small and mid-size apartments has become prohibitive for a middle class severely hit by unemployment.
Iran’s backward economy, a third of which is controlled by the Revolutionary Guard, is simply incapable of offering job opportunities to Iran’s growing cohorts of university graduates – the same segment of society that toppled the Shah.
The problem has become increasingly acute, because 60% of Iran’s population was born after 1979.
Moreover, rapid population growth and bungled economic policy have made Iran excessively dependent on food imports.
Yet, however crippling the effect of sanctions might be, they will not bring the regime to surrender its nuclear program.
The most for which one can hope is that sanctions enhance the chances of regime change by reawakening popular protest, thereby triggering an Iranian version of the Arab Spring.
This might be wishful thinking, however.
And, even if social unrest does erupt, repression might succeed again.
But an attack by either Israel or the US on Iran’s nuclear installations would be a calamitous mistake, or, as Meir Dagan, a former chief of Israel’s Mossad intelligence service, put it, “the stupidest idea” possible.
So it is to be hoped that Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu’s war rhetoric and vulgar manipulation of the memory of the Holocaust are nothing more than a ploy to divert the world’s attention from the Palestinian problem that he has done nothing to resolve.
Alas, one cannot rule out a scenario in which nothing – diplomacy, sanctions, or the push for a regime change – works.
In that case, one should not underestimate the pernicious effects of Israel’s Holocaust complex.
What led Israel to war in 1967 was not a sound assessment of Egypt’s intentions to attack, but fear of a second Shoah.
An attack on Iran might, however, produce precisely the effect that Netanyahu seeks to avoid.
Post-war global diplomacy might have to promote, perhaps more robustly than ever, the creation a nuclear-weapons-free zone in the Middle East, and thus address Israel’s nuclear capabilities, as well as the Palestinian problem – issues that Netanyahu has worked hard to ignore.
But if the path of war is finally taken, and, in its aftermath, the international community fails once again to pacify the world’s most dysfunctional region, the Middle East would devolve into an unruly chaos far more dangerous than the threat of an Iranian bomb.
Iran’s Nuclear Zealot
With negotiations over Iran’s nuclear program looming once again, understanding Iran’s new president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, is critically important.
Perhaps the best place to start is the moment the world first gained a glimpse of Ahmadinejad’s character and hardline program.
When President Ahmadinejad addressed the United Nations in New York last September, he suddenly felt himself surrounded by light.
It wasn’t the stage lighting, he said.
It was light from heaven.
Ahmadinejad related his otherworldly experience in a videotaped meeting with a prominent Ayatollah in Tehran.
A transcript of his comments and sections of the video-tape wound up on a hard-line, pro-regime website, baztab.com.
According to the transcript, Ahmadinejad said that a member of his entourage at the UN meeting first told him of the light.
“When you began with the words ‘In the name of God’… I saw a light coming, surrounding you and protecting you to the end [of the speech].”
Ahmadinejad confirmed sensing a similar presence.
“I felt it myself, too, that suddenly the atmosphere changed and for 27-28 minutes the leaders could not blink....They had their eyes and ears open for the message from the Islamic Republic,” he told Ayatollah Javadi-Amoli.
Ahmadinejad’s “vision” at the UN could be dismissed as political posturing if it weren’t for a string of similar statements and actions that suggest he believes that he is destined to bring about the “End Times” – the end of the world – by paving the way for the return of the Shia Muslim messiah.
Given that Iran continues to pursue suspect nuclear programs, which could bring the Islamic Republic dangerously close to weapons capability, a leader with messianic visions is worrying.
After all, this is the same man who recently pledged to use Iran’s newfound powers to “wipe Israel off the map” and to “destroy America.”
In a November 16 speech in Tehran to senior clerics who had come from all over Iran to hear him, the new president said that the main mission of his government was to “pave the path for the glorious reappearance of Imam Mahdi (May God Hasten His Reappearance).”
The mystical 12th Imam of Shia Islam disappeared as a child in 941 CE, and Shia Muslims have awaited his reappearance ever since, believing that when he returns, he will reign on earth for seven years, before bringing about the Last Judgment and the end of the world.
In order to prepare for the Mahdi, Ahmadinejad said, “Iran should turn into a mighty, advanced, and model Islamic society.”
Iranians should “refrain from leaning toward any Western school of thought” and abstain from “luxurious lives” and other excesses.
Three months into Ahmadinejad’s presidency, his views of the 12th Imam are being widely discussed in Tehran.
According to one rumor, as mayor of Tehran, Ahmadinejad drew up a new city plan for the Imam's return.
In recent weeks, Ahmadinejad’s aides have denied another rumor that he ordered his cabinet to write a pact of loyalty with the 12th Imam and throw it down a well near the holy city of Qom, where some believe the Imam is hiding.
Those who give credence to the rumor point to an early decision of his cabinet to allocate $17 million to renovate the Jamkaran mosque, where devotees of the 12th Imam have prayed for centuries.
Similarly, reports in government media outlets in Tehran have quoted Ahmadinejad as having told regime officials that the Hidden Imam will reappear in two years.
This proved too much for one Iranian legislator, Akbar Alami, who publicly questioned Ahmadinejad’s judgment, saying that even Islam’s holiest figures have never made such claims.
While many Shia Muslims worship the 12th Imam, a previously secret society of powerful clerics, now openly advising the new president, are transforming these messianic beliefs into government policies.
Led by Ayatollah Mesbah Yazdi, who frequently appears with the Ahmadinejad, the Hojatieh society is considered by many Shia as the lunatic fringe.
During the early years of the Islamic Revolution, even Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini found their beliefs too extreme and sent them scurrying underground.
As devotees of the 12th Imam, the Hojatieh believe that only great tribulation will warrant his coming.
Akin in some ways to Lenin’s doctrine that worsening social conditions would hasten revolution, the Hojatieh believe that only increased violence, conflict, and oppression will bring the Mahdi’s return.
Since taking office last August, Ahmadinejad has installed Hojatieh devotees in his cabinet and throughout the bureaucracy.
The Ministry of Information and Security (MOIS), largely sidelined by former President Mohammed Khatami, has re-emerged as a powerful repressive force, using plain-clothes agents, allied with the paramilitary Bassij and non-government vigilantes, to crack down on potential opponents of the regime.
As the world prepares to confront an Iranian regime that continues to defy the International Atomic Energy Agency on its nuclear programs, we must listen to what Iran’s leaders say as we watch what they do.
A religious zealot with nuclear weapons is a dangerous combination the world cannot afford to tolerate.
The US, indeed, should be prepared to eventually give such guarantees if it wants Iran to stop the more suspicious parts of its nuclear program.  
But Iran must do its part to make any future dialogue with the US a success.
In talks with members of Iran’s policy community, I am continually astounded that they see resolving the nuclear conflict (or, indeed, other problems in which Iran has a stake) to be primarily the responsibility of the US, Europe, and other major powers, not of Iran.
Such passivity is not in Iran’s interest.  As the Middle East’s essential regional player, Iran can trigger and heat up conflicts as well as contribute to their solution.
Yet few in the Iranian establishment understand that being the leading regional power brings responsibility; and that only responsible behavior can create legitimacy and acceptance that Iran craves.
Iranian policymakers must, therefore, try to develop their own ideas for a negotiated resolution of the nuclear and other regional security issues, as well as to think about how Iran can rebuild trust in its actions.
Iran’s leaders should begin by shunning hostile rhetoric.
Incendiary statements about Israel exacerbate the lack of trust among Iran’s would-be partners, and make it hard for those in Europe and the US who are interested in building more favorable relations.
Iran hints that it wants to have a high-level dialogue with the US in the not-too-distant future.
If true, Iran should realize that violent statements on sensitive issues will set back any serious attempt to get a dialogue going.
Iran could also build trust if it became more transparent, particularly about its own strategic ambitions.
A good start would be to publish key documents that are constantly referred to by Iranians but never seen – say, Ayatollah Khamenei’s fatwa that reportedly rules that Islam prohibits the production, stockpiling, and use of nuclear weapons?
It would also be helpful if Iran laid out its strategic vision for the region.
It should accept the concerns of its neighbors, seek to develop its own ideas for regional confidence- and security building, and participate in efforts to create regional security arrangements.
It should also positively respond to offers from the US to establish confidence-building measures between the two countries’ military forces, particularly their navies.
As to the nuclear issue, Iran should try to switch from the language of “inalienable rights” to one of pragmatic solutions.
This would help depoliticize the issue.
The right to independent nuclear research and development under the NPT is not disputed.
But rather than insist as a matter of principle on operating the fuel cycle independently under national sovereignty, Iran could engage the Saudis about their idea of a regional joint venture, or explore different options of multilateral consortia with other countries.
Iran’s parliament, now led by Ali Larijani, Iran’s former nuclear negotiator, could make a strong contribution to confidence building and to the resolution of the nuclear conflict by ratifying the NPT’s Additional Protocol.
Other clarifications are also needed.  Is Iran prepared to accept a compromise that responds to European and other international concerns about its nuclear program, and thereby gain wide-ranging economic, energy, technology and science cooperation?
Nuclear energy, after all, is only one technology, and a 20th century, rather than a 21st century one at that.
Eventually, partnership with Europe could help Iran keep the best of its young generation at home rather than having them queue for visas at foreign embassies – or, more often, the US consulates in Istanbul or Dubai.
The willingness of major countries to accept Iran with a nuclear status similar to Japan depends on whether Iran not only refers to itself as a status-quo power – which it occasionally does – but whether it acts as such.
If it wants to be seen as a status-quo power, it needs to accept local and international efforts at establishing peace between Israel and its neighbors.
For a grand bargain with the US, Iran needs to end its support for militant organizations like Hamas or Palestinian Islamic Jihad which undermine efforts at reaching a two-state solution for Israel and Palestine.
Even without such a bargain, however, Iran will have to do certain things if it wants to be seen as a constructive regional player.
It will have to accept all the other states in the region as legitimate players with their own legitimate interests as much as it wants to be recognized as such itself.
It will also have to accept the wish of the huge majority of Palestinians for a peaceful settlement with Israel.
Iranian officials sometimes try to make relative President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad’s more violent statements about Israel as nothing more than a call for “regime change.”
That is not a status-quo policy.
Iran is entitled to seek assurances against externally forced regime change. But it cannot have it both ways, seeking guarantees against regime change at home, and promoting it in its neighborhood.
Iran’s Political Clerics
Iran’s theocratic regime appears more confident than ever.
Its standoff with the West over its nuclear program, together with its ties to Syria and its growing influence in Lebanon and Iraq, suggest the emergence of a strong regional power.
But, while Western analysts and Iran’s neighbors raise the alarm, the regime’s authority is in fact built on insecure foundations.
The 1979 revolution, which ended Iran’s monarchical tradition, created a new political order based on Shiite theological foundations and giving absolute ruling power to a Shiite jurist/cleric.
Throughout Iran’s long history, Shiite seminaries exercised great influence on Iranian society and politics, but they had been considered civil institutions.
It was not until the Iranian revolution that the seminary establishment came to be considered a source of political legitimacy.
The change followed Ayatollah Khomeini’s theory of the “jurist-ruler.”
In Khomeini’s view, the jurist-ruler could modify religious laws, depending on his interpretation of the needs of the regime.
As a result, religious interpretation – previously, a highly decentralized function undertaken by various seminaries – was concentrated in the hands of a political leader.
Accordingly, the seminary establishment was no longer a civil structure managing only religious affairs, but instead developed into a unified, ideological party serving the interests of the regime.
That transformation was far-reaching.
Traditionally, Shiite seminaries were rather unorganized, unstructured places, based on pre-modern styles of management.
The concept of a decentralized religious establishment is difficult for Westerners to understand, given the highly structured administrative framework of Christian churches and ecclesiastical orders.
But this fluid hierarchy, an absence of written rules and organizational order, allowed the various seminaries – and their different interpretive traditions – to survive despotic political regimes and resist intervention by different dynasties and monarchies.
This change in Shiite orientation also reflects a very modern influence on politics.
Since Shiite fundamentalism is itself a recent phenomenon, the early Iranian revolutionaries inevitably rebuilt the religious seminaries along lines suggested by the Iranian opposition’s most powerful pre-revolutionary discourse: communist ideology.
By “modernizing” the seminaries following a single-party model, the revolutionaries gained control over them. The seminaries became little more than an extension of the political system.
The death of Ayatollah Khomeini – and that of other religious authorities ( marjas ) like Ayatollah Abul Qassem Khoi in Najaf, Iraq – marked the end of the ideal of a ruler who had mastered both religion and politics.
Iran’s current supreme ruler, Seyyed Ali Khamenei, whose religious degree was a focus of suspicion in the seminary and among the clerical elite, was not considered a jurist by merit.
Consequently, Khamenei’s evident lack of religious legitimacy has pushed the government to assume full control over the clerical establishment, further depriving the seminaries of their historical independence.
The last decades have provided the regime with near-ideal conditions to seize control over the Shiite clerical establishment in Iraq as well.
Under Saddam Hussein, restrictions were imposed on the Shiite seminary in Najaf – traditionally a counterbalance to Iran’s Shiite establishment – forcing the emigration of a number of clerics to the Iranian seminary in Qom.
Indeed, growing Iranian control of the Shiite clerical establishment extended beyond Iraq.
It was also strengthened by the regime’s activities in the 1980’s, when it created Hezbollah as a guerilla organization in Lebanon, thereby expanding its domination over the most important Shiite areas in the region.
The Iranian regime then consolidated its mastery of the Shiite network in the Middle East, and now uses this control to further its own interests.
There is thus little prospect of an alternative Shiite power center emerging out of the chaos in Iraq.
Khamenei, the supreme leader, has succeeded in politicizing the Shiite clerical establishment, primarily by controlling the financial resources of the religious authorities and Shiite institutions in Iran and the region.
Iraq’s leading Shiite cleric, Ayatollah Ali Sistani, has not been able to act independently and has avoided opposing Iranian policies toward Iraq in order to protect his fragile network of institutions.
As a result, despite Saddam’s fall, the Najaf seminary remains impotent.
Ironically, it seems that theocratic theory in Iran has led to anti-theocracy.
With the seminaries politicized and their independence greatly reduced, the religious establishment is no longer in a position to confer political legitimacy on the regime.
Nor can it exercise its traditional functions in the religious sphere to provide support to civil society in the country.
At a time when the Islamic Republic has failed in its economic and political promises to the Iranian people, the regime’s most glaring weakness may prove to be the absence of a credible religious authority that can justify its shortcomings.
Iran’s Quest
A major shortcoming in today’s world is the persistence of a zero-sum sense of geopolitics.
The world expected something different in the post-Cold War era to promote peace and stability.
Instead, after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, momentum swung toward a “global war on terror” that, in practice, became the rationale for maintaining a Cold War mentality and supporting strategies of preemptive war and regime change that have intensified insecurity, instability, and international terrorism.
Consider my country, Iran, which has not invaded any country in the past 250 years.
After decades of struggle against dictatorship and foreign domination, we secured our freedom and independence in 1979 by establishing a political system of our own choosing.
But instead of establishing friendly relations with Iran based on this new reality, the United States has consistently sought to restore its domination, even providing massive diplomatic, financial, and military support to Saddam Hussein in his war against my country during the 1980’s.
The current dispute over Iran’s peaceful and legal nuclear program is part of this pattern, replete with unfounded accusations, double standards, and moral and legal inconsistency, all hidden behind the alleged threat of proliferation.
But Iran’s peaceful nuclear program originates from the late 1960’s and 1970’s.
Iran’s energy demand will exceed its supply, possibly reducing or even eliminating its oil export capacity in the near future.
Thus, Iran urgently needs to produce 20,000 megawatts of nuclear power by 2020.
As long ago as 1973, the US government itself saw that Iran would need nuclear power.
Indeed, the US expected that Iran would be capable of generating 20,000 megawatts by 1994.