And, because the current bout of high unemployment is self-reinforcing, once the equilibrium is broken for a while, the economy could move to a higher-employment equilibrium permanently, without the need for any further government support.
This prescription has one problem.
Asset purchases have no balance-sheet effect, because assets replace money.
Subsidizing labor, by contrast, is a pure injection of liquidity.
However, for precisely that reason, an employment subsidy is likely to be more effective in boosting demand, which implies that a smaller injection of this kind is likely to boost demand as much as a larger asset purchase would.
Among the few certainties in crafting economic policy is the need to adapt to external change.
Our challenge is like that of Industrial Revolution-era moths, which adapted to their new soot-laden environment by becoming darker (and thus better able to hide from predators).
In a globalized economy, national policymakers should not be left circling light bulbs.
The Lessons of America’s Election
STANFORD – Donald Trump’s surprise election as the 45th president of the United States has spawned a cottage industry of election post-mortems and predictions, in America and abroad.
Some correlate Trump’s victory with a broader trend toward populism in the West, and, in particular, in Europe, exemplified in the United Kingdom’s vote in June to leave the European Union.
Others focus on Trump’s appeal as an outsider, capable of disrupting the political system in a way that his opponent, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton – a consummate insider – never could.
There may be something to these explanations, particularly the latter. But there is more to the story.
In the months preceding the election, the mainstream media, pundits, and pollsters kept repeating that Trump had an extremely narrow path to victory.
What they failed to recognize was the extent of economic anxiety felt by working-class families in key states, owing to the dislocations caused by technology and globalization.
But, as I highlighted two months before the election, those frustrations were far-reaching, as was the sense of being ignored and left behind – and it was Trump who finally made that group feel seen.
That is why I recognized the possibility of a Trump upset, despite Clinton’s significant lead in the polls (five points, just before the election).
And an upset is what happened.
Trump narrowly won states that Republicans had not won in decades (Wisconsin, Michigan, and Pennsylvania), and won big in usually closely contested Ohio.
In fact, Republicans secured a broad victory.
The party retained control of the Senate, even though more than twice as many Republican seats were up for reelection than Democratic seats, and it lost just a handful of House seats, far fewer than the 20 predicted.
Moreover, the Republicans now control 33 governorships, compared to 16 for the Democrats, and have expanded their already-large majorities in state legislatures.
Now, talk has turned from the impending implosion of the Republican Party to the repudiation, disarray, and bleak future prospects of the Democrats.
Since the election, Trump has moved quickly to assert himself.
Republicans, even those who opposed Trump during the campaign, have coalesced behind him.
Meanwhile, the Democrats in government – most notably President Barack Obama – have largely echoed Clinton’s gracious concession-speech injunction that Trump should be given an opportunity to lead.
The US election’s unexpected outcome holds four key lessons, applicable to all advanced democracies.
First, growth beats redistribution.
Clinton’s barely discussed economic plan was to expand Obama’s left-leaning agenda, so that it looked more like the socialism of her opponent in the Democratic primary, Vermont Senator Bernie Sanders.
Higher taxes for the wealthy, together with more “free” (taxpayer-paid) services, was, she argued, the best route to combating inequality.
Trump, by contrast, hammered home messages about jobs and incomes.
Though the media almost exclusively covered his most hyperbolic and controversial statements, it was largely his economic message that won him support.
People want hope for a better future – and that comes from rising incomes, not from an extra government-issued slice of the pie.
The second lesson concerns the risk of dismissing, let alone condescending to, voters.
From the start, Clinton was not broadly liked.
Revelations during the campaign – for example, that, in a 2015 speech, she had said that “deep-seated cultural codes, religious beliefs, and structural biases have to be changed” to secure women’s reproductive and other rights – reinforced fears that she would push too progressive a social agenda.
Recognizing these shortcomings, Clinton tried to win the election by making Trump unacceptable.
But her remarks that half of Trump’s supporters belonged to a “basket of deplorables” – that they were racist, sexist, homophobic, xenophobic, Islamophobic – reinforced the impression that she and her party looked down on Trump voters as morally contemptible and even stupid.
Such statements could well have pushed some undecided voters to decide against Clinton.
The third lesson is that a society’s capacity to absorb rapid change is limited.
When technological progress and globalization, not to mention social and cultural change, outpace people’s ability to adapt, they become too jarring, disruptive, and overwhelming.
Many voters – not just in America – also fret over terrorism and immigration, especially in combination with these rapid changes.
Add to that concerns about America’s growing opioid epidemic and a tedious and intolerant form of political correctness, and, for many, change did not look like progress.
If democratic political systems do not find ways to ease transitions, provide shock absorbers, and accept heterodox attitudes and values without condemnation, voters will push back.
The final lesson relates to the danger of the ideological echo chamber.
The repeated claim by shocked Clinton voters that no one they knew voted for Trump reveals the extent to which too many people – Republicans as well as Democrats – live in social, economic, informational, cultural, and communication bubbles.
Declining trust in national media, combined with a proliferation of Internet communication, has created a world where the news people read is often created with the goal of “going viral,” not informing the public; the result can barely be called news at all.
Moreover, the information people see is often filtered, so that they are exposed only to ideas that reflect or reinforce their own.
(The corollary with this online world is that, as Trump and Clinton discovered, we are all just one hack away from YouTube or WikiLeaks, cable news or talk radio, fame or infamy.)
These developments undermine people’s capacity to engage in informed, rational discussions, let alone debates, with those who have different perspectives, values, or economic interests.
Even universities, which are supposed to foster knowledge-sharing and spirited debate, are now suppressing it, for example by spinelessly rescinding speaking invitations to almost anyone that some group or another considers objectionable.
When we fail to engage in such debates – when people choose “safe spaces” over tough discussions – we lose our best chance of building consensus on how to solve at least some of our societies’ pressing problems.
A Better Way to Fight Climate Change
NEW YORK – Of all major world regions, Europe has worked the hardest to implement policies aimed at countering human-caused climate change.
Yet the cornerstone of Europe’s approach – a continent-wide emissions trading system for the greenhouse gases that cause climate change – is in trouble.
That experience suggests a better strategy for both Europe and the rest of the world.
The basic story of human-caused climate change is becoming clearer to the global public.
Several gases, including carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide, warm the planet as their concentrations in the atmosphere increase.
As the world economy grows, so do emissions of these gases, accelerating the pace of human-caused climate change.
The main greenhouse gas is carbon dioxide.
Most CO2 emissions result from the burning of fossil fuels – coal, oil, and natural gas – for energy, global consumption of which is rising as the world economy grows.
As a result, we are on a path to very dangerous levels of CO2 in the atmosphere.
Twenty years ago, the world agreed to reduce sharply emissions of CO2 and other greenhouse gases, but little progress has been made.
Instead, the rapid growth of the emerging economies, especially coal-burning China, has caused global CO2 emissions to soar.
Dangerous changes in climate have already begun.
If the world continues on its current trajectory, global temperatures will eventually rise by several degrees centigrade, causing higher sea levels, mega-storms, severe heat waves, massive crop failures, extreme droughts, heavy flooding, and a sharp loss of biodiversity.
Yet changing the world’s energy system is a daunting challenge, because fossil fuels are so deeply embedded in the workings of the global economy.
Oil provides the main fuel for transportation worldwide.
Coal and gas are burned in huge and growing amounts to produce electricity and to provide energy for industry.
How, then, can we sustain worldwide economic progress while cutting back sharply on carbon emissions?
There are essentially two solutions, but neither has been deployed on a large scale.
The first is to shift massively from fossil fuels to renewable energy sources, especially wind power and solar power.
Some countries will also continue to use nuclear power.
(Hydroelectric power generation emits no CO2, but there are only a few remaining places in the world where it can be expanded without major environmental or social costs.)
The second solution is to capture CO2 emissions for storage underground.
But this technology, called carbon capture and sequestration (CCS), is not yet proven on a large scale.
One approach is to capture the CO2 at the power plant as the coal or gas is burned.
Another is to capture it directly from the air using specially designed chemical processes.
Either way, CCS will require significant investment in further research and development before it becomes a viable technology.
The big problem is time.
If we had a century to change the world’s energy system, we could feel reasonably secure.
Yet we must complete most of the transformation to low-carbon energy by mid-century.
This is extraordinarily difficult given the long transition period needed to overhaul the world’s energy infrastructure, including not only power plants, transmission lines, and transport systems, but also homes and commercial buildings.
Few economic regions have made much progress in this transformation.
In fact, the United States is now investing heavily in natural gas without recognizing or caring that its shale-gas boom, based on new hydraulic-fracturing technology, is likely to make matters worse.
Even if the US economy shifts from coal to natural gas, America’s coal will probably be exported for use elsewhere in the world.
In any event, natural gas, though somewhat less carbon-intensive than coal, is a fossil fuel; burning it will cause unacceptable climate damage.
Only Europe has tried to make a serious shift away from carbon emissions, creating a system that requires each industrial emitter to obtain a permit for each ton of CO2 emissions.
Because these permits trade at a market price, companies have an incentive to reduce their emissions, thereby requiring them to buy fewer permits or enabling them to sell excess permits for a profit.
The problem is that the permits’ market price has plummeted in the midst of Europe’s economic slowdown.
Permits that used to sell for more than $30 per ton before the crisis now trade for under $10.
At this low price, companies have little incentive to cut back on their CO2 emissions – and little faith that a market-based incentive will return.
As a result, much of European industry continues on a business-as-usual energy path, even as Europe tries to lead the world in this transformation.
But there is a much better strategy than tradable permits.
Each region of the world should introduce a tax on CO2 emissions that starts low today and increases gradually and predictably in the future.
Part of the tax revenue should be channeled into subsidies for new low-carbon energy sources like wind and solar, and to cover the costs of developing CCS.
These subsidies could start fairly high and decline gradually over time, as the tax on CO2 emissions rises and the costs of new energy technologies fall with more experience and innovation.
With a long-term and predictable carbon tax and subsidy system, the world would move systematically toward low-carbon energy, greater energy efficiency, and CCS.
Time is short.
The need for all major world regions to adopt practical and far-sighted energy policies is more urgent than ever.
Aleppo’s Sobering Lessons
NEW YORK – The fall of Aleppo to forces loyal to Syrian President Bashar al-Assad is neither the end of the beginning nor the beginning of the end of Syria’s five-and-a-half-year-old civil war – a war that is also a proxy, regional, and to some extent global conflict.
The next major battle will be fought in Idlib province; the only question is when.
And even after that, the war will continue to fester in various parts of what will remain a divided country.
Even so, now is a good time to take stock and focus on what has been learned, if only to learn from it.
Little in history is inevitable, and the outcome in Syria is the result of what governments, groups, and individuals chose to do – and what they chose not to do.
Indeed, not acting in Syria has proved to be as consequential as acting.
At no point was this clearer than when the United States did not fulfill its threat to make Assad’s government pay for its use of chemical weapons.
That proved to be a missed opportunity not only to alter the momentum of the conflict, but also to underscore the principle that any government that uses weapons of mass destruction will regret it.
Enforcement, after all, is essential to the effectiveness of future deterrence.
Deriving additional lessons requires going back to 2011, when peaceful anti-government protesters were met with deadly force, leading US President Barack Obama and others to demand that Assad step down.
Here, too, no action or resources backed the strong rhetoric.
The emergence of such a wide gap between means and ends almost always dooms a policy to failure.
This is especially so when the goal is regime change, and when the incumbent regime represents a substantial minority of a divided population.
These circumstances tend to give rise to winner-take-all – and loser-lose-all – struggles.
Not surprisingly, those with the most to lose tend to conduct the fight with enormous tenacity.
Scholars of international relations often write about the perceived limits to the utility of military force.
But Syria shows that military force can be decisive – especially when applied in massive doses, with little concern for the number of civilians killed or displaced.
Russia, Iran, and Assad’s government all demonstrated what large-scale and often indiscriminate use of military force could accomplish.
Another casualty of the Syria conflict is the term “international community.”
In fact, there is little in the way of a global community of thought or action.
And, with more than 500,000 dead and another ten million displaced in Syria, the much-vaunted doctrine of the “responsibility to protect” (R2P) has been exposed as well.
Adopted unanimously by the United Nations General Assembly in 2005 (partly in response to Rwanda’s genocide a decade earlier), R2P was premised on the notion that governments are obliged to protect their citizens from physical harm.
When they are unable or unwilling to do so, according to R2P, other governments are obliged to intervene to protect those being subjected to harm.
If any government failed to meet the R2P norm, it was Syria’s.
But the international intervention that came about was not designed to protect innocent lives or to weaken the government’s hold on power; instead, it was designed to ensure that the government prevailed. And it succeeded.
The international community did only somewhat better when it came to responding to the massive refugee crisis caused by the war.
The fact that many countries have been unwilling to open their borders to meaningful numbers of asylum-seekers highlights the reality that the best refugee policy is one that prevents innocent men, women, and children from becoming refugees in the first place.
Diplomatic efforts failed to achieve much in the way of saving Aleppo or its inhabitants, and they are no more likely to bring an end to the war.
However talented and committed diplomats may be, diplomacy tends to reflect, not create, realities on the ground.
Future diplomatic efforts to bring about an end to the fighting or a particular political outcome will succeed only to the extent that the military balance and trends allow.
Looking ahead, Assad’s government will remain in place and in control of much, but not all, of the country.
Various Sunni terrorist groups, less radical Sunni rebels, proxy forces such as Hezbollah, the Turkish army, Syrian Kurdish forces, and others will compete for control of particular regions.
Outsiders, such as the US, would be well advised to accept this reality for the immediate future and focus their energies on stabilizing areas liberated from the Islamic State, protecting civilian populations, developing political and military ties with non-terrorist Sunni groups, and forging local cease-fires to prevent further Aleppos.
The goal of bringing about a transition to a different and more broad-based government should be maintained. But that is a long-term proposition.
The lesson of the last five and a half years must be taken to heart: those who engage Syria with limited will and limited means must set limited goals if they are to accomplish even a limited amount of good.
Lessons of the Lebanon War
Wars are won not only on battlefields, but also in people’s minds.
So, while Hezbollah has not decisively won its current war with Israel, by maintaining its ability to fight in the face of the might of the Israeli army, it has captured the imagination of Arabs, restoring lost pride in the same way as the Egyptian Army’s crossing of the Suez Canal in the war of 1973 did.
Restored pride was central to Anwar Sadat’s eventual decision to go to Jerusalem and regain the entire Sinai Peninsula for Egypt.
Although ordinary Lebanese have paid a huge human, economic, and infrastructural price, Hezbollah has made it clear to the Israelis that they can no longer take their military predominance for granted.
The limits of military power have been exposed.
Moreover, the madness of war has been clearly demonstrated to all, and, once the current fighting is over, both sides are now more likely to be cautious about actions that might push their peoples and countries into war once more.
How this war is concluded will likely change the ways in which both Israel and the international community deal with the fundamental national aspirations of Arab peoples.
Holding Arab land and prisoners indefinitely will no longer be an asset but a terrible burden.
Conventional thinking in the Middle East has largely been built on Israel’s overwhelming military strength, together with the disunity and lack of purpose of Arab leaders.
But, in less than two months, the almost mythic power of the region’s most powerful army has been dented, and Hassan Nasrallah, Hezbollah’s leader, has come across as a steadfast and determined leader, in sharp contrast to the usual behavior of heads of Arab government.
The question now is whether this determination can bring about the type of surprising breakthrough to peace that Sadat’s newfound prestige in 1973 yielded.
Ironically instead of weakening Lebanon, one clear winner of this war is the unity and independent will of Lebanon.
Whether or not the war in Lebanon has helped or hurt the Palestinians is unclear.
Because most media attention has shifted to Lebanon, the Israelis have had a free hand to continue pressing the Palestinians without international protest.
Palestinians continue to be killed on a daily basis not only in Gaza but also in Nablus, in the West Bank.
More than 170 Palestinians have died since the violence began in June.
Yet the connection between the two wars has not gone unnoticed.
In the United States, President George W. Bush and Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice see the problems as linked, as does British Prime Minister Tony Blair.
Indeed, the crises in Lebanon and Gaza have brought about a realization that two festering issues – Arab prisoners in Israel, and Israeli unilateralism – must be resolved if there is to be any hope of a return to the peace process.
Given that both conflicts were triggered by the kidnapping of Israeli soldiers to be traded for Arab prisoners, Israel must now realize that holding Arabs indefinitely in prison can only beget violence.
Israel’s National Security Advisor, Giora Eiland, appears to have recognized this even before the violence began.
In May, he is said to have advised Israeli Prime Minister Yehud Olmert that Israel should hand over the disputed Sheba Farms area on the border with Lebanon and Syria, as well as returning Lebanese prisoners.
Olmert reportedly did not see the need.
But holding 300 Lebanese and nearly 10,000 Palestinians – all of the first group and many of the second group without charge or trial – has proven to be a major source of irritation to the Arab peoples of the region.
One group of prisoners that will likely benefit from the current situation are Jordanians held in Israeli jails.
Jordan, a US ally and one of the two Arab countries with a peace agreement with Israel, previously failed to secure the release of its 30 prisoners.
They are now likely to be the first ones set free.
Important as they are, however, the prisoners are not the crux of the matter.
The real issue is the unilateralism that has been adopted by the major parties that have ruled Israel.
Both the uncoordinated withdrawals from south Lebanon (by the Labor party after 22 years of occupation) and from Gaza (by Likud after 39 years of occupation) proved that you can’t simply evacuate an area and forget about it.
The population left behind must have secure governments and institutions in place.
On the most basic level, for example, the people of south Lebanon needed maps of where Israel had laid mines, but these were never provided.
The unilateralism that Israelis overwhelmingly voted for in their recent election is based on the idea that security can somehow be achieved by erecting physical walls and barriers.
The barrage of Hezbollah and Hamas rockets has shown the folly of such thinking.
And, although the West Bank has not been used to launch rockets against Israel, there is no reason why the Palestinians who reside there will not resort to such weapons if walls continue to be built deep inside their territories and Israel continues to act with arrogance towards them.
Soldiers are the first to recognize that military power is of limited value in achieving long-term peace.
It is past time that political leaders on both sides, especially moderate ones, also come to understand this.
They need to work together through negotiations to solve problems that simply cannot and should not be solved by brute force.
Let Developing Nations Rule
CAMBRIDGE – There is a silver lining for developing nations in the present crisis, for they will emerge with a much bigger say in the institutions that govern economic globalization.
Once the dust settles, China, India, Brazil, South Korea, and a handful of other “emerging” nations will be able to exercise greater influence over the way that multilateral economic institutions are run, and will be in a better position to push for reforms that reflect their interests. 
There are two related reasons for this.
First, the financial crisis has weakened the United States and Europe.
They will be unwilling or unable to provide the kind of leadership that sustained multilateralism in the decades that followed World War II.
Developing nations will have to step up to fill the gap.
Second, the relative weight and importance of developing nations in the global economy will have risen even more.
Many of the West’s leading financial institutions – those that have not been nationalized – as well some important industrial enterprises, will remain at the mercy of capital from China or the Gulf states.
In trade, the current round of global negotiations has demonstrated that if rich nations want developing nations to cooperate, they will need to let them shape the rules of the game.
To make the best of this outcome, developing nations will have to have a good sense of their interests and priorities.
So, what should they seek?
First, they should push for new rules that make financial crises less likely and their consequences less severe.
Left to their own devices, global financial markets provide too much credit at too cheap a price in good times, and too little credit in bad times.
The only effective response is counter-cyclical capital-account management: discouraging foreign borrowing during economic upswings and preventing capital flight during downswings.
So, instead of frowning on capital controls and pushing for financial openness, the International Monetary Fund should be in the business of actively helping countries implement such policies.
It should also enlarge its emergency credit lines to act more as a lender of last resort to developing nations hit by financial whiplash.
The crisis is an opportunity to achieve greater transparency on all fronts, including banking practices in rich countries that facilitate tax evasion in developing nations.
Wealthy citizens in the developing world evade more than $100 billion worth of taxes in their home countries each year, thanks to bank accounts in Zurich, Miami, London, and elsewhere.
Developing countries’ governments should request and be given information about their nationals’ accounts.
Developing nations should also push for a Tobin tax – a tax on global foreign currency transactions.
Set at a low enough level – say, 0.25% – such a tax would have little adverse effect on the global economy while raising considerable revenue.
At worst, the efficiency costs would be minor; at best, the tax would discourage excessive short-term speculation.
The revenues collected – easily hundreds of billions of dollars annually – could be spent on global public goods such as development assistance, vaccines for tropical diseases, and the greening of technologies in use in the developing world.
The administrative difficulties in implementing a Tobin tax are not insurmountable, as long as all major advanced countries go along.
It would then be possible to get offshore financial centers to cooperate by threatening to isolate them.
Developing nations also need to enshrine the notion of “policy space” in the World Trade Organization.
The goal would be to ensure that developing countries can employ the kind of trade and industrial policies needed to restructure and diversify their economies and set the stage for economic growth.
All countries that have successfully globalized have used such policies, many of which (e.g., subsidies, domestic-content rules, reverse engineering of patented products) are currently not allowed under WTO rules.
Policy space is also required to ensure that important social and political ends – such as food security – are compatible with international trade rules.
Developing nations should argue that recognizing these economic and political realities makes the global trade regime not weaker and more susceptible to protectionism, but healthier and more sustainable.
But with increased power comes increased responsibility.
Developing nations will need to be more understanding and responsive to legitimate concerns in rich countries, and be more willing to pay for some global public goods.
Capital-exporting developing nations should be willing to accept greater transparency in the operation of sovereign wealth funds and pledge not to use them for political purposes.
The largest developing nations – China, India, and Russia – will need to shoulder some of the burden of reducing greenhouse-gas emissions.
Similarly, developing nations must understand that policy space is a two-way street.
In countries like the US, where the middle class has reaped few of the benefits of globalization in the last quarter-century, trade policy will be under severe pressure to provide some redress.
President-elect Barack Obama made the plight of the middle class a central plank of his successful campaign.
His chief economic adviser, Larry Summers, has also been vocal of late on globalization’s adverse impact on workers.
It will not do much for good for developing countries to raise the specter of protectionism each time such concerns are voiced.
Political and economic reality demands a more nuanced and cooperative approach.
Developing countries should say no to obvious trade protectionism, but they should be willing to negotiate to avoid regulatory races to the bottom in such areas as labor standards or corporate taxation.
This is in their long-term self-interest.
Without support from the middle classes of rich nations, it will be difficult to maintain a global trade regime as open as the one we have had in recent years.
Let’s Get Real About Money
Throughout the world, people suffer from a serious perception error that has inhibited them from taking concrete steps to protect themselves from inflation or deflation.
The error is called the “money illusion ” – the belief that a nominal unit of currency is the best measure of value, even though its real value is unstable.
Historically, failure to protect against inflation or deflation has helped spur calamitous outcomes.
When spectacular inflation hit Germany in 1923, it wiped out the real value of the (unhedged and unindexed) life savings and social-security benefits of millions of people, whose anger contributed to the rise of Nazism.
Similarly, spectacular deflation in many countries around the world in the early 1930’s magnified the real value of (unhedged and unindexed) debts, leading to millions of defaults and widespread bank failures.
Deflation also magnified the real value of wages and salaries, thereby fueling layoffs and unemployment.
Failure to hedge or index brought us the Great Depression.
Much of Japan’s economic malaise in recent years also reflects (unhedged and unindexed) debts magnified by deflation since 1999.
In 2003, an IMF study raised the specter of Japan-like problems around the world, and listed thirteen countries, including, China, Germany, Singapore, and Poland, with a moderate to high risk of deflation.
Yet, in the face of overwhelming evidence of the importance of inflation or deflation risk, most people – even in countries that have been warned – generally still have not taken steps to protect themselves.
Given widespread apathy about changes in consumer prices, the modest success of a new market to hedge inflation risk, the European inflation futures market at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange (CME), is noteworthy.
Since September, this new market has traded the Eurozone’s Harmonized Index of Consumer Prices, or HICP – a contract that traders call the “hiccup.”
By purchasing or selling it, companies and individuals can protect themselves against losses stemming from changes in the value of their currency.
The open interest recently was 355 contracts, with a notional value of €355 million.
This is a real beginning, and we should encourage such contracts to grow in order to help billions of people hedge their inflation and deflation risks.
But this promising start follows a long trail of failures to create inflation futures, owing to the public’s lack of interest.
This failure can be explained only by the money illusion, which ultimately is connected with what psychologists call “framing.”
How a concept is framed, the context and associations with which it is presented, affect human judgments enormously.
A tax called a “death tax” is regarded very differently from a tax called an “inheritance tax,” even though the two are really identical.
The money illusion occurs because we are accustomed to economic values almost always being framed in terms of money.
For years, I have been arguing that national governments should take some simple steps to reframe economic quantities and help the public overcome the money illusion.
They could merely create an indexed unit of account to replace currency for measuring economic quantities and defining prices.
The unit would be nothing more than a consumer price index, given a simple name, and published daily, so that people could use this unit and its name to quote prices in real terms.
This would help reframe public thinking, which is all a government really needs to do.
It would be easy and virtually costless.
Indexed units of account are not a new idea; Chile’s government led the way in 1967 by creating the Unidad de Fomento (UF), and other Latin American countries have followed suit.
Despite the unit’s technical-sounding name, people in Chile seem to have learned to think in terms of the UF instead of the peso for important contracts.
Following Chile’s example, governments also could redefine the tax system in terms of the units of account rather than currency.
That way, people who fill out tax forms would have to learn the units of account.
As a side benefit, the tax system would be automatically, fully, and transparently indexed to inflation.
In my 2003 book The New Financial Order, I proposed that such units be called “baskets,” since a consumer price index is the price of a representative market basket of goods and services.
That name is very simple, and it conveys a new conceptual framing: by promising to pay someone so many baskets at a future date, one is promising to pay in market baskets of goods and services.
Of course, the actual payment will be made in ordinary currency at the contemporaneous exchange rate, based on the consumer price index, between baskets and the currency.
What if people really got used to expressing quantities in baskets?
Wouldn’t futures contracts sound completely different if they were reframed as contracts for ”baskets” instead of “hiccups?”
A futures market for the complete market basket that consumers buy certainly rings with importance.
Ultimately, the advance of information technology will be the salvation of ideas like the CME’s inflation futures market and indexed units of account.
Inflation futures appear to be gaining hold in part because the new contract is traded on an efficient electronic market (the Globex system) that allows futures contracts to get going without the initial splash that is required by open-outcry pit-based futures markets.
Indeed, this is also why an American exchange can make a market for European inflation; with new information technology, it no longer matters where people live.
This should help popularize indexed units of account, too, since computer technology can now handle all the calculations involved in translating them into currency.
The sooner this happens, the sooner one more scourge of financial instability will be behind us.
Letter from Palestine
Are Israelis and Palestinians really ready to strike a peace agreement?
Events have certainly moved at a brisk pace in recent months, with one obstacle after another to a lasting deal seeming to come down.
Yasir Arafat’s death was followed by the choice of his successor in a direct election with universal suffrage, which was accompanied by Israel’s decision – one unique in the world – to help, not hinder the democratic process in territories it occupies.
As a result, no one doubts Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas’s legitimacy.
Moreover, with Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon’s announcement of his intention to withdraw Israel’s army unilaterally from Gaza, the occupation itself is once again an open question, offering opportunities for further progress.
Indeed, Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak’s support for the Gaza withdrawal has helped open the door to real negotiations.
Such an impressive sequence of events has not been seen for a long time in that troubled region.
As a result, many – in and outside the Middle East – have become optimistic again.
Even Sharon ventures a few favorable comments, and American diplomats express visible sighs of relief that progress toward peace can at last be made.
I can attest to the gathering momentum towards peace, having just returned from Palestine, where I led a nearly five-week mission of European Union observers, the largest ever put in place by the EU.
The mission was 260-strong on the day of the election and the counting of the vote, while 40 of us had been there for the whole five-week period.
My testimony about the election is categorical: the circumstances were difficult, but the voting was unconstrained and without cheating.
Given the conditions, the 60% voter turnout was astonishing.
There can be no doubt that Abbas was democratically elected.
Nor is there any doubt that the Palestinian people made a choice for democracy, which entails a choice for a negotiated peace with Israel.
But this leaves out the terrorists, who have not made this choice.
They are not numerous, but they are very dangerous.
Only genuine progress towards a just peace settlement will neutralize them as a political force.
There is no question that current conditions present a unique window of opportunity.
But we must keep in mind the major difficulties that can limit our ability to seize this opportunity, and the international community must make these difficulties very clear to both parties.
The first difficulty is that, although Sharon evidently intends to go through with his military withdrawal from Gaza, he is vague about what he wants to achieve in future negotiations.
Indeed, he has never made the slightest allusion to the idea of including the West Bank and Jerusalem in such negotiations.
But, for the Palestinians, there can be no negotiations that do not include both issues.
The second difficulty concerns the fact that Sharon has always appeared to believe that it is within the means of the Palestinian Authority to eradicate all terrorism arising from Palestinian territories and aimed at Israel.
However, all external observers know very well that this is not the case, even if Abbas can undoubtedly succeed in reducing the level and number of attacks.
In order for the Palestinian people as a whole to cease to glorify, support, and shelter terrorists, they need to discover real hope for a new life for themselves.
That, in turn, depends on an economic recovery in the occupied territories and a belief that concrete steps toward a negotiated political solution are being taken.
The creation of such hope now depends exclusively on Israel, which must act immediately to boost the many Palestinians who yearn for peace, rather than insisting on a total disappearance of terrorism.
Delay will only retard terrorism’s disappearance.
The third difficulty concerns the fact that, on both sides, most religious authorities, rabbis and imams alike, have maintained a hard-line stance.
They continue to preach that the respective “taboos” of their communities, the very issues that block all efforts to make peace – in particular, the status of Jerusalem and the right of “return” to Israel for Palestinian refugees – are untouchable and non-negotiable.
To make these religious authorities acknowledge their responsibility is a duty that all of international civil society, including religious leaders, must embrace.
None of this is undoable. All of it will be demanding.
But a chance to achieve real, lasting peace between Israelis and Palestinians has clearly arrived.
We must all seize this moment.
Let the Doha Round Fail
Imagine that the world’s trade ministers simply walk away from their forthcoming Hong Kong meeting of the World Trade Organization (WTO) with this simple declaration: “We failed to reach an agreement; we’ll try to do better next time.”
This would bring the so-called Doha “Development” Round to an unsuccessful conclusion, but it would be no disaster.
Talk to World Bank and WTO officials, and you will get an earful of inflated claims about the benefits that a successful Doha round would bring.
These officials often make it sound as if the livelihood of hundreds of millions of poor people in developing nations hangs in the balance.
Look closer at these claims, and you find that they are built on sand.
The World Bank’s most recent estimate is that complete trade liberalization (including in manufactures and by developing nations themselves) would produce a net gain to the developing world of half a percentage point of their income.
But that hasn’t stopped the Bank doing its best to hide this meager impact behind impressive-sounding claims.
The fact is that the world economy is more open today than it has ever been, and will remain so even if the Doha talks collapse.
Most developing nations have opened themselves significantly to foreign trade and no longer employ the most damaging policies of the past (such as quantitative restrictions on imports).
The political balance in these countries has tilted decisively in favor of pro-trade groups with an outward-looking orientation.
In the advanced countries, trade barriers for manufactured goods and many services are at a historic low.
It would be hard to identify any poor country whose development prospects are seriously blocked by restrictions on market access abroad.
Any country with a sensible development strategy has the opportunity to make its economy grow, with assistance from trade.
But what about agriculture?
Don’t the farm subsidies and other forms of support in the United States and European Union undercut the livelihood of millions of poor farmers?
Wouldn’t phasing them out make a big dent in world poverty?
The reality is that the global impact of agricultural liberalization in rich countries would be relatively small and highly uneven.
These policies may hurt agricultural producers elsewhere, but they also benefit poor urban consumers.
The balance depends on the poverty profile of individual countries and on whether they are food exporters or importers.
Of course, there would be some big gainers from agricultural reform, but they are chiefly consumers and taxpayers in rich countries.
Some large middle-income food exporters (such as Brazil and Argentina) would also reap gains.
Such outcomes are not unimportant, but they represent a far cry from the picture painted by free-trade fundamentalists.
Indeed the only serious risk from the Doha round’s “failure” is that rich countries would take their own rhetoric seriously and react in unproductive ways that prove self-fulfilling.
The US, in particular, could intensify its pursuit of bilateral deals, by which it is able to impose increasingly inappropriate policy priorities on smaller nations.
The silver lining in an amicable break-up of the trade talks is that it would give negotiators a chance to focus on issues that are of much greater significance to developing nations.
The next time around, trade talks should take up the two most glaring omissions to date:
A comprehensive effort to enhance the mobility of temporary workers from poor countries to rich countries.
This is where the gains from liberalization would be the largest, because it is here that the barriers are the highest.
Creation of a “policy space” for developing countries in WTO agreements.
Developing nations’ pursuit of growth-promoting trade and industrial policies are increasingly running afoul of restrictive WTO rules.
Growth superstars such as South Korea, Taiwan, China, and many others would not have been able to adopt the growth strategies that they did if today’s WTO strictures had applied to them.
Trade officials must acknowledge the lessons from these countries’ experience and reform the rules accordingly.
There remains a possibility that trade negotiators will patch together a last-minute deal in Hong Kong and emerge claiming victory.
We will then end up with an agreement that will have been wildly oversold and is certain to lead to disappointment in the future – especially in developing nations.
We will also have given up the opportunity to have a real development round next time around.
Sometimes there is no success like failure.
The Doha round is a case in point.
Let the Good Times Roll Again?
CAMBRIDGE – Goldman Sachs announced this month plans to provide bonuses at record levels, and there are widespread expectations that bonuses and pay in many other firms will rise substantially this year.
Should the good times start rolling again so soon?
Not without reform.
Indeed, one key lesson of the financial crisis is that an overhaul of executive compensation must be high on the policy agenda.
Indeed, pay arrangements were a major contributing factor to the excessive risk-taking by financial institutions that helped bring about the financial crisis.
By rewarding executives for risky behavior, and by insulating them from some of the adverse consequences of that behavior, pay arrangements for financial-sector bosses produced perverse incentives, encouraging them to gamble.
One major factor that induced excessive risk-taking is that firms’ standard pay arrangements reward executives for short-term gains, even when those gains are subsequently reversed.
Although the financial sector lost more than half of its stock-market value during the last five years, executives were still able to cash out, prior to the stock market implosion, large amounts of equity compensation and bonus compensation.
Such pay structures gave executives excessive incentives to seek short-term gains – say, by making lending and investment decisions that would improve short-term earnings – even when doing so would increase the risks of an implosion later on.
Jesse Fried and I warned about this short-term distortion five years ago, in our book Pay without Performance .
Following the crisis, this problem has become widely recognized, including by business leaders such as Goldman Sachs’ CEO Lloyd Blankfein.
But it still needs to be effectively addressed: Goldman’s recent decision to provide record bonuses as a reward for performance in the last two quarters, for example, is a step in the wrong direction.
To avoid rewards for short-term performance and focus on long-term results, pay structures need to be re-designed.
As far as equity-based compensation is concerned, executives should not be allowed to cash out options and shares given to them for a period of, say, five years after the time of “vesting” – that is, the point at which the options and shares have been “earned“ and may not be taken away from the executive.
An executive’s inability to cash out shares and options for a substantial period would tie his or her payoff to long-term shareholder value.
The length of this period should be fixed, and should not depend on actions or conditions that are at least partly under executives’ control.
By contrast, prohibiting executives from cashing out shares and options until they leave the firm would provide executives who have accumulated shares and options with a large monetary value with counter-productive incentives to depart.
Similarly, bonus compensation should be redesigned to reward long-term performance.
For starters, the use of bonuses based on one-year results should be discouraged.
Furthermore, bonuses should not be paid immediately, but rather placed in a company account for several years and adjusted downward if the company subsequently learns that the reason for awarding a bonus no longer holds up.
In addition to the excessive focus on short-term results, a second important source of incentives to take excessive risks has thus far received little attention. The payoffs of financial-sector executives were tied to highly leveraged bets on the value of their firms’ capital.
Executives’ interests were tied to the value of their firms’ common shares – or even to the value of options on such shares.
As a result, executives were not exposed to the potential negative consequences that large losses could bring about for preferred shareholders, bondholders, and the government as a guarantor of deposits.
These structures provided executives with incentives to give insufficient weight to the possibility of large losses, which in turn motivated executives to take excessive risks.
To address this distortion, the payoffs of financial executives should be tied not to the long-term value of their firms’ common shares but to the long-term value of a broader basket of securities.
This basket should include, at the very least, preferred shares and bonds.
Such structures would provide incentives to take risks that are closer to the optimal level.
Reforming pay arrangements in ways such as those proposed here would help ensure that firms and the economy don’t suffer in the future from the excessive risk-taking that has contributed to bringing about the financial crisis.
Greece knows this very well. It was our belief in Europe as a catalyst for peace and prosperity that led us to support Turkey’s EU aspirations.
When the Panhellenic Socialist Movement (PASOK) government launched its policy of Greek-Turkish rapprochement during my tenure as foreign minister, many people were suspicious of mending ties with an old enemy.
Changing entrenched attitudes could not happen overnight: it required a step-by-step process of confidence-building measures, from the grassroots level to the heights of political power.
Five years later, the results speak for themselves.
Greece and Turkey have signed eighteen mutually beneficial agreements in areas ranging from trade and energy, to environmental protection and the fight against organized crime.
There is no denying that strong bilateral ties are good for Greece’s economy and security.
But our proactive policy of rapprochement was not designed merely to serve national interests.
It was part of a regional vision to promote stability from the Balkans to the Middle East. As a result, Greece and Turkey cooperated in humanitarian efforts in Kosovo and undertook a joint peace mission to Israel and Palestine.
Greece and Turkey also worked together to prevent the war in Iraq from spilling over into neighboring countries.
Greek-Turkish rapprochement has created the framework for closer relations between Turkey and the EU.
As a progressive party, PASOK has every interest in Turkey’s progress on democratic reforms.
That is why we have always supported a real rather than “virtual” European candidacy for Turkey – with full rights, but also with full responsibilities for completing the domestic reforms that have so far been implemented as a result of Turkey’s enhanced “Accession Partnership” with the EU.
Turkey’s governing Justice and Development Party (AKP) was elected on a pro-European platform, reflecting the public’s demand for modernization and democratization.
Several EU leaders have claimed that Turkish membership would spark a wave of migration and strain the European economy.
Others see no place for a Muslim country in Europe.
None of these objections is persuasive.
If properly managed, migration can enhance Europe’s cultural wealth and meet its labor-market needs, as fertility rates in the EU fall and its population ages.
Immigrants come to Europe in large measure because Europe needs them.
At the same time, to deny Turkey a European future on religious grounds is to deny our Union’s diversity.
Democracy is a universal value, not the property of specific religions.
Moreover, welcoming a country like Turkey will send a positive signal to the Muslim world. It will allay the growing tensions between Christianity and Islam fueled by international terrorism and knee-jerk nationalism.
Unlike the “war on terrorism,” European integration can serve as a model for resolving the underlying crises of the Middle East and addressing the roots of violence in the wider region.
In particular, the Ecumenical Patriarchate in Istanbul could be a great example of peaceful coexistence among Christians and Muslims.
For Orthodoxy, the Ecumenical Patriarchate is in many ways the equivalent of Mecca.
Allowing the Patriarchate to flourish, and reopening the Theological School on the island of Halki, would underscore Turkey’s progress on human and minority rights.
Turkey should view the Patriarchate not as a threat, but as an important asset ­– a bridge to Europe.
Similarly, Cyprus’s entry into the EU, coupled with Turkey’s EU aspirations, has created a unique catalyst for tearing down the “Berlin Wall” that runs through the capital, Nicosia, separating the island’s Christian and Muslim communities.
If Turkey is serious about joining the European family, it must recognize the Republic of Cyprus – like any other member state.
A road map must be drawn up for the withdrawal of Turkish troops from Cyprus and a settlement of the political division of the island.
At Helsinki in December 1999, the EU agreed that Turkey must resolve its differences with its neighbors peacefully by the end of 2004, within the framework of EU and international law; otherwise, any outstanding dispute would be settled at the International Court of Justice.
The time has now come for the EU to assess Turkey’s progress on these issues and for Turkey to fulfill its obligations.
As negotiations proceed in the years ahead, it is in the international community's interest to support Turkey’s European future, while making a constructive contribution to end the division of Cyprus, so that the progress we have achieved is not lost.
From religious and ethnic conflict, Europe can once again forge a model of peaceful cooperation – this time by creating an integrated zone of stability in the Eastern Mediterranean.
Networked Development
STOCKHOLM – The challenges that the world faces in the twenty-first century are systemic and global in nature.
There will be no easy answers to any of them, but one thing is clear: we need transformative solutions that are scalable.
Incremental measures will only distract us from the scope of the challenges that we confront.
One of the best examples of scale is the mobile telecommunications industry.
There are now 6.4 billion mobile phone subscriptions, with the number expected to increase to 9.3 billion by 2017 or 2018.
Ericsson estimates that by 2018, 85% of the world’s population will have access to mobile-broadband coverage via 3G networks, and 50% will have 4G.
In this context, the near ubiquity of mobile networks has created a new paradigm for sustainable development, putting technological advances at the forefront of policymaking.
Technology is enabling us to share, collaborate, and exchange knowledge in entirely new ways, creating a dynamic shift in mindset.
A new society – what we call the Networked Society – is emerging.
And in the Networked Society, we have an obligation to ensure that we exploit mobile and broadband technologies not just for collaboration and entertainment, but also for sustainable development.
Connectivity is a basic enabler of economic growth and improved quality of life, and there is a strong business case for investing in broadband to optimize the delivery of essential services in education, health care, safety, and security, and to redefine urban landscapes through intelligent electricity grids and more efficient transportation.
In 2000, when the United Nations Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) were established, broadband was in its infancy, and most of these benefits had not even been imagined.
Today, as world leaders consider the post-2015 development agenda, we cannot overlook the importance of including broadband as a key part of the infrastructure needed to achieve future goals.
The economic benefits of broadband are immense.
A 10% increase in broadband penetration can add a full percentage point to sustainable GDP growth, and doubling broadband speed increases GDP by 0.3% on average.
Moreover, mobile commerce – expected to reach $800 billion worldwide by 2016 – has enormous potential to improve social and financial inclusion.
Likewise, cloud computing is already starting to revolutionize the way content is delivered and accessed both by teachers and students.
An example of this is the cloud-based solution for schools developed by Ericsson in the Connect To Learn program.
By addressing the challenges of access and quality of education, Connect To Learn – a collaborative effort between Ericsson, Columbia University’s Earth Institute, and Millennium Promise – identifies strategies to integrate teachers’ professional development with twenty-first-century tools and practices in classrooms.
As for health care, half could be delivered remotely and more efficiently.
Evidence of this can be seen in the Millennium Villages Project, where mobile communications have had a particularly significant impact on health care: improved response times to emergencies, reduced isolation, and better training and equipment for health-care workers.
Building on this success, the One Million Community Health Workers campaign was recently launched to expand community health-worker programs in Sub-Saharan Africa by the end of 2015.
With the use of the latest communications technology and diagnostic testing materials, the health workers will be able to link the rural poor to the broader system of doctors, nurses, hospitals, and clinics.
These transformations are the result of both scale and innovation.
But they have been set in motion without concentrated government efforts.
If these examples were deliberately and specifically considered by the 110 countries that have national broadband plans (and those that still do not), we would be much more likely to achieve the positive transformations that we all want.
This shift in awareness among policymakers will be crucial not just for socio-economic improvement, but also for creating a low-carbon economy, which will require moving from the energy-intensive physical infrastructure of the last century to the connected, information-based infrastructure of the twenty-first century.
We need a new paradigm that enables us to decouple GDP growth from CO2 emissions, thereby ensuring further poverty reduction without causing greater environmental damage.
The potential is there, but too often government talks to government and industry talks to industry.
Public-private partnerships are essential to solving these shared challenges.
Development agencies, NGOs, and the private sector should work more effectively together to create scalable and maintainable solutions.
Two forums are making great strides.
One is the Broadband Commission, which advocates for broadband as a key infrastructure of the twenty-first century. The other is the UN’s Sustainable Development Solutions Network (SDSN), which seeks to leverage the private sector’s wealth of resources – its innovative capacity, research and development, management skills, and know-how – to turn policy ideas into reality.
Already, industries that have traditionally operated independently – from energy to utilities to transportation – are moving quickly toward cross-sector collaboration, radically altering the business environment, and creating opportunities for new low-carbon business models to thrive.
With concentrated public-private efforts, and proactive governments like those of Sweden, Australia, and India, to name a few, the Networked Society will produce transformative solutions that lift billions of people out of poverty and help us to sustain our planet.
We may not be able to imagine what the future holds, but we know that the Networked Society will shape its possibilities.
Russia and America at the Oscars
NEW YORK – Oscar has spoken.
Neither Leviathan, the Russian film nominated for the best Foreign Language Film, nor American Sniper, nominated for Best Picture, won.
Yet both, in a way, are the most representative films of the year, as each captures the essence of why Russia and the United States now seem doomed to wage a new Cold War.
Following Russia's invasion of Ukraine, Leviathan faced an uphill public-relations battle.
But Leviathan's bleak portrait of contemporary Russian life actually confirms many of the reasons why Americans have been largely dubious about Russia's ability to reform following communism's collapse.
That doubt has been reflected in popular culture.
Since 1991, Hollywood has documented American mistrust of post-Soviet Russia in a series of films – for example, The Saint, Air Force One, The Golden Compass of 2006, Salt, and The November Man.
Russian President Vladimir Putin's thuggish foreign policy has proved these Russophobes right, so nominating Leviathan, the superb biopsy of his regime, seemed only right.
And, though Oscar did not anoint Leviathan, the film deserves all of the accolades it has received.
Directed by Andrey Zvyagintsev in an eerie style that one might call the “realism of despair," the film is both epic and deeply nuanced.
The title harks back to the book of Job and recalls Herman Melville's Moby Dick.
Set in a small town on the Barents Sea, Leviathan shows that there is no escape, not even in the Arctic, from the Moscow-centric state and its hypocritical doppelganger, the Orthodox Church.
The giant skeleton of a whale – possibly Leviathan itself – is beached on the shoreline, along with the carcasses of old boats, beneath a severe gray sky that frames a human landscape of political abuse, adultery, lawlessness, and the cynicism of all-powerful priests.
The story, akin to Alexander Solzhenitsyn's ambitious 1962 masterpiece One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich, steadily indicts the corruption of state power – a power ever-willing to kill and to align itself with an even more corrupt power, the Orthodox Church.
Like communism, which once promised absolution for the worst crimes in exchange for loyalty, Russia's current state religion allows, even encourages, misdeeds – including murder – so long as one is loyal to God.
Nikolai, Leviathan's hotheaded main character, sees his life consumed by the fight to save his seashore property from the town's mayor.
“I'll kill him if he builds a palace here," shouts Nikolai, in a reference to current Russian leaders' proclivity for erecting garish monuments to their personal splendor: Putin's Italianate palace on the Black sea, for example, allegedly cost more than $1 billion.
At the end of his struggle, Nikolai's life is ruined.
His wife is killed, and he stands accused of murdering her for an affair she briefly had with his friend.
At the end, we learn that Nikolai was persecuted to make room not for the mayor's palace, but for a cathedral.
Even the Russian clichés – tragedy stemming from overweening power, vodka, swearing, shooting, and shouting – only strengthen the film's extraordinary depiction of the local effects of distant and devastating forces.
This is Russian politics at its most debased.
In Stalin's time, the masterpieces of, say, Boris Pasternak or Dmitri Shostakovich were entrusted to give artistic voice to a silenced civil society.
So it is ironic that Leviathan was partly financed by Russia's culture ministry – and telling that the Russian authorities had no interest in its winning at the Oscars.
Indeed, Culture Minister Vladimir Medinsky recently criticized the film for its darkness and pessimism.
American Sniper, directed by Clint Eastwood, reflects US mores as much as Leviathan reflects the current Russian Zeitgeist.
But, where Leviathan examines Putin's Russia with the unflinching eye of a surgeon, American Sniper merely trumpets supposed national values with no consideration of their application around the world.
During four tours in Iraq as a soldier/missionary, a stand-up Texan, Chris Kyle (played by Bradley Cooper) becomes known as Legend, a killer with a savior complex.
American Sniper, loosely based on Kyle's memoir, touts the frontier mentality – a neo-cowboy movie made by a former cowboy-movie star.
Just as Leviathan shows a Russia caught in the throes of a political nightmare, American Sniper shows a country trapped by its heroic mythology – defined in countless Western movies – of rugged individualism at home and defense of freedom and order abroad.
But the world has changed, and many no longer view America's global role as an expression of its unique innocence and goodness.
Given everything we have learned about the Iraq War – false claims about weapons of mass destruction, nonexistent links between Saddam Hussein and Al Qaeda, and so on – Eastwood's film comes across as a work of marketing, not reflection and contemplation.
Eastwood has merely updated his earlier films – think The Outlaw Josey Wales or Pale Rider – with their unwavering conviction that America's god of righteousness must prevail.
In short, American Sniper fails where Leviathan succeeds.
George Orwell neatly summarized why: “All propaganda is a lie even when it's telling the truth."
The Puzzle of Liberal Democracy
PRINCETON – Nearly two decades ago, the political commentator Fareed Zakaria wrote a prophetic article called “The Rise of the Illiberal Democracy,” in which he worried about the rise of popular autocrats with little regard for the rule of law and civil liberties.
Governments may be elected in free and fair elections, he wrote, and yet routinely violate their citizens’ basic rights.
Since Zakaria’s piece, illiberal democracies have become more the norm than the exception.
By Freedom House’s count, more than 60% of the world’s countries are electoral democracies – regimes in which political parties compete and come to power in regularly scheduled elections – up from around 40% in the late 1980s.
But the majority of these democracies fail to provide equal protection under the law.
Typically, it is minority groups (ethnic, religious, linguistic, or regional) that bear the brunt of illiberal policies and practices.
But government opponents of all stripes run the risk of censorship, persecution, or wrongful imprisonment.
Liberal democracy rests on three distinct sets of rights: property rights, political rights, and civil rights.
The first set of rights protects owners and investors from expropriation.
The second ensures that groups that win electoral contests can assume power and choose policies to their liking – provided these policies do not violate the other two sets of rights.
Finally, civil rights guarantee equal treatment before the law and equal access to public services such as education.
Property rights and political rights both have powerful beneficiaries.
Property rights are of interest primarily to the elite – owners and investors.
They may be comparatively few in number, but they can mobilize material resources if they do not get their way.
They can take their money elsewhere, or choose not to invest – imposing substantial costs on the rest of society.
Political rights are of interest primarily to the organized masses – the working class or ethnic majority, depending on the structure and cleavages in society.
Members of the majority may be comparatively poor, but they have numbers on their side.
They can threaten the elite with uprisings and expropriation.
The main beneficiaries of civil rights, by contrast, are typically minorities that possess neither wealth nor numbers.
Turkey’s Kurds, Hungary’s Roma, Russia’s liberals, or Mexico’s indigenous population ordinarily command little power within their countries.
Their demands for equal rights therefore do not have the potency that demands for property and political rights have.
Theories that purport to explain the historical origins of democracy have overlooked this asymmetry among claimants for different types of rights.
These theories revolve largely around a bargain between the propertied elite and the working classes: faced with the threat of revolt, the elites expand the franchise and allow the masses to vote.
In return, the masses – or their representatives – agree not to expropriate the elite.
Of course, the elite prefer an autocracy in which they rule alone and protect their own rights but no one else’s.
Throughout most of human history, they had their way.
A democratic bargain becomes feasible only when the masses are able to organize and mobilize around common interests.
This makes credible both their threat of insurrection before the bargain and their promise to protect property rights afterwards.
Historically, such mobilizations have been the product of industrialization and urbanization, wars, or anti-colonial struggles.