Officials acknowledged at the CDF that the biggest risks lie in the financial sector, particularly owing to local governments�� very large liabilities.
In the past, the government dealt with the problems that these liabilities caused for the banking system by injecting funds into the banks.
Environmental problems are another powerful drag on China’s current standard of living.
But they also represent a potential way to increase GDP should overall demand decline significantly.
China acknowledges that high levels of air and water pollution create discomfort and harm the public’s health.
Government spending on remedying environmental damage could absorb substantial funds if demand-side weakness exacerbates the expected supply-side slowdown.
Moreover, the very weak performance of state-owned enterprises, which continue to play a large role in heavy industry and in some service sectors, represents a powerful brake on growth.
Although official policy aims to reduce these firms’ role so that “the market can play the decisive role in resource allocation,” shrinking these firms has proved to be difficult, owing to their strong political backing within the Chinese Communist Party.
At the same time, China maintains restrictions on direct investment by foreigners, limiting both the kinds of firms and the share of joint ventures that they can own.
The official policy is to reduce the barriers to foreign corporate investment, especially in high tech and the service sector.
There were, of course, a number of subjects that remained just below the surface and were not discussed at this year’s CDF.
There was no indication of a slowdown in President Xi Jinping’s anti-corruption campaign, though some private conversations suggested that the campaign has resulted in decision-making delays that are hurting productivity and growth.
There was also no discussion of Chinese cyber theft of Western technology.
When that subject was raised in 2014, Li denied that the Chinese do such a thing, but noted that Chinese firms are hacked by domestic sources.
And, with the CDF’s emphasis on cooperation, there was no discussion of possible military action by the Chinese to stake their disputed territorial claims in the East and South China Seas.
Meetings like the CDF provide a useful window into a country whose importance for the global economy will continue to grow.
The current slowdown to a new normal makes such windows even more important.
China’s Growth Secret
SHANGHAI – Many people are profoundly pessimistic about the Chinese economy’s growth prospects, owing to the emergence of massive debt, excessive investment, overcapacity, and so-called “ghost cities” since the 2008 global financial crisis.
But these problems are not new.
They have, in various forms, affected China’s economy since 1978, and were evident in East Asia’s other high-performing economies – Taiwan, South Korea, and even Japan – during their periods of rapid growth.
Nonetheless, in the 35 years since Deng Xiaoping initiated his program of “reform and opening up,” China has recorded 9.7% average annual growth.
And it took only 40 years for South Korea and Taiwan to complete their transitions from low- to high-income status.
How did these economies manage to grow so fast for so long and overcome the serious problems that they faced along the way?
The answer is simple: resilience.
Economic development is a convoluted process, full of challenges and risks, successes and failures, external shocks and internal volatility.
And adverse effects – such as a rising debt-to-GDP ratio and excess capacity – are inevitable.
If a country fails to respond adequately to new challenges as they arise, economic growth and development stall.
Many countries in Latin America and South Asia, for example, have become mired in the so-called “middle-income trap,” because they failed to adjust their growth models in a timely manner.
East Asia’s economies, by contrast, consistently adjusted their growth strategies and engaged in continuous institutional reform.
The aim was not to tackle the problems they faced directly, but to induce new, more efficient activities that would help to turn debt into assets and maximize use of the economy’s capacity.
In this sense, East Asia’s economies have embraced the process of “creative destruction” described by the Austrian economist Joseph Schumpeter, whereby the economic structure is continually revolutionized from within.
Moreover, by implementing incremental reforms that facilitate – and even encourage – the replacement of old, inefficient sources of growth with new, more dynamic ones, they have expedited this process.
For example, China’s productivity-enhancing agricultural reforms in the 1980s were spurred partly by growth in the non-agricultural sector, a result of policies aimed at stimulating township and village enterprises.
Similarly, in the 1990s, China addressed the buildup of bad debt and unfinished construction projects – the result of state-owned enterprises’ chronic loss-making and excessive property investment, respectively – by implementing institutional reforms that stimulated growth in more dynamic sectors, thereby offsetting the SOEs’ declining return on capital.
Resilience has thus characterized the interaction between the government and markets since the introduction of Deng’s reforms.
Indeed, according to the late economist Gustav Ranis, the interactive dynamic of policy and market institutions was the key to the success of the East Asian economies.
For example, fiscal decentralization in China, spurred by local institutions’ demands for increased autonomy, has helped to fuel regional competition and sustain an increasingly market-oriented economic environment.
This interactive dynamic is also reflected in the formation of industrial policies.
In China, though clusters of vibrant smaller manufacturers are flourishing, policymakers have done relatively little to promote industrial development and upgrading.
This leaves it up to market institutions to guide the process, ensuring that they play a key role in the expanding industrial sectors.
Another source of resilience in East Asia are local governments.
For starters, they are responsible for public capital expenditure, driving the improvement in China’s physical infrastructure and yielding reasonable returns for private investors.
This advances the objective of helping local businesses, particularly innovative small and medium-size firms, to grow and thrive.
To this end, local governments are also helping entrepreneurs gain access to global production chains.
The Zhejiang and Guangdong provinces have been particularly successful in this effort – and, unsurprisingly, rank among China’s most robust regional economies.
Finally, local governments have demonstrated a willingness to support institutional innovation.
This allows for the flexibility needed to address structural challenges at the local level, thereby preventing them from blocking growth.
After three years of slowing growth and rising debt, China once again finds itself at a crossroads.
Fortunately, it seems to be choosing the path of flexibility and adjustment, as it pursues an ambitious reform plan that, it is hoped, will enable it to edge closer to – and eventually cross – the high-income threshold.
China’s Trial-and-Error Economy
HONG KONG – Chinese Prime Minister Li Keqiang’s work plan for 2015, revealed at this month’s National People’s Congress, highlighted the country’s shift to a “new normal” of 7% economic growth.
The shift to slower growth poses serious challenges, but it also creates an important opportunity for China to ensure its long-term economic development.
China’s leaders recognize this opportunity, and are taking action to support the shift to more sustainable growth models.
The finance ministry has raised the central-government budget deficit from 1.8% of GDP in 2014 to as much as 2.7% in 2015, and will allow highly leveraged local governments to swap CN¥1 trillion ($161.1 billion) of debt maturing this year for bonds with lower interest rates.
Likewise, the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) has provided monetary support, gradually lowering interest rates and reserve requirements.
Because wages are still rising, the inflation target for 2015 has been set at 3% – higher than the actual 2014 inflation of 2%, even though producer-price inflation has been negative for 36 months.
The PBOC also has projected a stable exchange-rate environment for this year – despite the steep depreciation of the Japanese yen, the euro, and emerging-economy currencies against the dollar – thereby promoting global stability.
These policies reflect a remarkable determination to continue on the path of structural reform, despite strong headwinds from the deteriorating external environment and domestic structural adjustments.
In short, China’s government seems to have a clear long-term vision.
But not everyone is optimistic about China’s trajectory.
Veteran China watcher David Shambaugh recently went so far as to warn that the challenges facing the political system, led by the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), may be severely compromising the government’s ability to implement the package of ambitious economic reforms that it unveiled in 2013.
And yet the claim that China’s economic and political development is in jeopardy seems to ignore the country’s adaptive learning process, which shapes every economic, diplomatic, military, and social policy.
This process – characterized by experimentation, assessment, and adjustment – emerged from the CCP’s military experience of the 1930s, was applied by Deng Xiaoping to his reform program in the 1980s, and has been refined by subsequent Chinese leaders.
Because no economy had ever experienced such rapid growth on such a large scale, the only way to manage China’s development was, as Deng put it, to “cross the river by feeling the stones.”
China’s adaptive policymaking approach has produced both spectacular failures, with entire markets being shut down, and remarkable successes, yielding models that could be applied across the country.
Some experiments have had less clear results, making, say, a positive contribution to GDP growth, but also contributing to problems like excess industrial capacity, pollution, corruption, and the creation of ghost towns.
In a context of experimentation, such unintended consequences are understandable.
The mere fact that they have emerged in no way suggests that China is headed for disaster; that would be the case only if these problems were allowed to persist.
Preventing such an outcome requires that efforts to adjust to China’s “new normal” go beyond policies intended to sustain economic growth.
Reforms must aim to bolster inclusivity, advance environmental sustainability, promote innovation, and boost competitiveness. And this is precisely the four-pronged approach that China’s leaders seem to be taking.
Indeed, from slashing coal consumption to address air pollution to plans for integrating information technologies with modern manufacturing, the government has shown time and again that it recognizes its reform imperatives.
And, by remaining dogged in its efforts to root out official graft, it has demonstrated its will to do what is needed to ensure that China succeeds.
This is not to say that it is all smooth sailing ahead.
The Chinese bureaucracy must adapt radically to cope with the risks – and take advantage of the benefits – of technology and globalization, with the biggest challenge being the shift to a knowledge-based, environmentally conscious, inclusive, and stable industrial base.
And China’s government must take steps to enable market forces to play a greater role in directing economic activity, including by reducing licensing and regulatory requirements in the private sector.
Market forces will also benefit from the growth in households’ spending power.
Indeed, continued real-wage growth is forcing inefficient industries that relied solely on cheap labor out of the market, while bolstering the competitiveness of producers that appeal to the evolving tastes of China’s increasingly potent consumers.
To support this process, China is now implementing deposit insurance, for example.
At the same time, China is reforming its inefficient approval-based system of initial public offerings to one based on registrations.
A more active and efficient IPO market will allow companies to meet their financing needs without bank intermediation – a step that is vital to helping firms eliminate their debt overhangs.
In fact, reducing the role of banks is essential to balancing China’s economy.
Despite the recent rebound, China’s stock-market capitalization amounts to only 40% of GDP, while banking assets total 266% of GDP.
Meanwhile, only 10% of total social funding comes from the equity market.
But there is one important component missing from the government’s reform agenda for 2015: improved bankruptcy procedures for failed borrowers.
Unless failed borrowers and projects exit the system quickly and smoothly, the market will be saddled with bad debt and incomplete projects, undermining its performance.
China has repeatedly proved its durability and adaptability.
Now, it must do so yet again, by ensuring that its “new normal” is as stable, sustainable, and inclusive as possible.
This entails strengthening China’s institutional foundations and establishing clear, transparent rules, in order to encourage experimentation and innovation, ensure the smooth exit of failed projects, and manage the fallout of errors.
Failure may be the mother of success – but only if one makes the effort to learn from it.
Fortunately, China’s leaders seem intent on doing just that.
China on the Move
BEIJING – The debate is over.
After six years of weighing the options, China is now firmly committed to implementing a new growth strategy.
At least, that’s the verdict I gleaned from the just-completed annual China Development Forum, long China’s most important dialogue with the outside world.
There were no surprises in the basic thrust of the strategy – a structural shift in China’s investment- and export-led growth model toward a more balanced consumer-based and services-led economy.
The transformation reflects both necessity and design.
It is necessary because persistently weak global growth is unlikely to provide the solid external demand for Chinese exports that it once did.
But it is also essential, because China’s new leadership seems determined to come to grips with a vast array of internal imbalances that threaten the environment, promote destabilizing income inequality, and exacerbate regional disparities.
The strategic shift is also a deliberate effort by Chinese policymakers to avoid the dreaded “middle-income trap” – a mid-stage slowdown that has ensnared most emerging economies when per capita income nears the $17,000 threshold (in constant international prices).
Developing economies that maintain their old growth models for too long fall into it, and China probably will hit the threshold in 3-5 years.
Three insights from this year’s China Development Forum deepened my confidence that a major structural transformation is now at hand that will enable China to avoid the middle-income trap.
First, a well-articulated urbanization strategy has emerged as a key pillar of consumer-led rebalancing.
This was emphasized by China’s new senior leaders – Executive Vice Premier Zhang Gaoli and Premier Li Keqiang – in the Forum’s opening and closing remarks, and considerable detail was provided in many of the working sessions.
Urbanization is a building block for consumption, because it provides powerful leverage to Chinese households’ purchasing power.
Urban workers’ per capita income is more than three times higher than that of their counterparts in the countryside.
The urban share of the Chinese population reached 52.6% in 2012 – up nearly three-fold from 18% in 1980, and is expected to rise toward 70% by 2030.
If ongoing urbanization can be coupled with job creation – a distinct possibility in light of China’s emphasis on developing its embryonic labor-intensive services sector – the outlook for household-income growth is quite encouraging.
The pace of urbanization should dispel Western doubts stemming from concerns over so-called ghost cities and chronic over-investment.
According to research by McKinsey & Company, with the annual influx of new urban residents totaling 15-20 million, China will need more than 220 large cities (at least one million people) by 2030, up from 125 in 2010.
Moreover, because urbanization is a capital-intensive endeavor and China’s capital stock per worker – a key driver of productivity growth – is still only 13% of the levels in the United States and Japan, China has good reason to remain a high-investment economy for years to come.
What is new today is the focus on urbanization’s negative externalities – especially the thorny issues of land confiscation and environmental degradation.
A well-developed “eco-city” framework was presented at this year’s Forum to counter both concerns, and features incentives promoting a new urbanization model that stresses compact land usage, mixed modes of local transportation, lighter building materials, and non-carbon energy sources.
The second insight from the 2013 China Development Forum is the new government’s focus on strengthening the social safety net as a pillar of a modern consumer society.
In particular, owing to the hukou (China’s antiquated household registration system), access to public services and benefits is not portable.
As a result, migrant workers – an underclass numbering roughly 160 million – remain shut out of government-supported health care, education, and social security.
Holes in the social safety net have led to high and rising levels of precautionary saving – driving a wedge between increases in labor income and any impetus to discretionary purchasing power.
Significantly, there were strong hints from senior Chinese leaders at the Forum that hukou reform is now under active consideration.
While that would be welcome, such efforts need to be accompanied by an expansion of benefits.
China’s retirement system has only about $430 billion of assets under management (national and local government social security and private-sector pensions).
I pressed newly appointed Finance Minister Lou Jiwei on this point, suggesting that China deploy some of its excess foreign-exchange reserves to fund such an effort – the same tactic used to provide a $200 billion start-up injection for the China Investment Corporation, the sovereign wealth fund that he ran for the previous five and a half years.
Unfortunately, he did not favor this suggestion.
The final – and possibly most important – insight that I took away from the Forum concerned the quality of China’s new leaders.
From President Xi Jinping and Premier Li Keqiang on down, China’s new leadership team is quite sophisticated in terms of analytics, risk assessment, scenario modeling, and devising innovative solutions to tough problems.
Moreover, under the organizational umbrella of the National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) – the latter-day version of the old central planning apparatus – China has marshaled considerable resources into the formulation of a comprehensive and well-thought-out economic strategy.
But, in the end, it takes more than strong policy and analytical skills to deal with tough economic challenges.
We have seen unfortunate examples of that repeatedly in the West in recent years, and there are no guarantees that China’s newly installed leaders will avoid comparable pitfalls.
Vision and strategy are vital for realizing the “China Dream,” as the country’s new leaders are now calling it.
But it will take courage and sheer determination to tackle what is perhaps the biggest obstacle of all – resistance from deeply entrenched local and provincial power blocs.
On this critical front, strong words must be accompanied by bold action.
Letting China’s Bubble Burst
NEW YORK – The problems with China’s economic-growth pattern have become well known in recent years, with the Chinese stock-market’s recent free-fall bringing them into sharper focus.
But discussions of the Chinese economy’s imbalances and vulnerabilities tend to neglect some of the more positive elements of its structural evolution, particularly the government’s track record of prompt corrective intervention, and the substantial state balance sheet that can be deployed, if necessary.
In this regard, however, the stock-market bubble that developed in the first half of the year should be viewed as an exception.
Not only did Chinese regulators enable the bubble’s growth by allowing retail investors – many of them newcomers to the market – to engage in margin trading (using borrowed money); the policy response to the market correction that began in late June has also been highly problematic.
Given past experiences with such bubbles, these policy mistakes are puzzling.
I was in Beijing in the fall of 2007, when the Shanghai Composite Index skyrocketed to almost 6,000 (the recent peak was just over 5,000), owing partly to the participation of relatively inexperienced retail investors.
At the time, I thought that the greatest policy concern would be the burgeoning current-account surplus of over 10% of GDP, which would create friction with China’s trading partners.
But the country’s leaders were far more concerned about the social consequences of the stock-market correction that soon followed.
Although social unrest did not emerge, a prolonged period of moribund equity prices did, even as the economy continued to grow rapidly.
In 2008, it was a combination of exploding asset prices and excessive household-sector leverage that fueled the global financial crisis.
When such a debt-fueled bubble bursts, its effects are transmitted directly to the real economy via household-sector balance sheets, with the reduction in consumption contributing to a decline in employment and private investment.
It is much harder to find circuit breakers for this dynamic than for, say, that caused by balance-sheet distress in the financial sector.
Yet the Chinese authorities seem not to have learned the lessons of either episode.
Not only did they fail to mitigate the risks, underscored in the 2007 collapse, that new retail investors introduce into the market; they actually exacerbated them, by allowing, and even encouraging, those investors to accumulate leverage through margin buying.
Making matters worse, when the current stock-market correction began in early June, Chinese regulators relaxed margin-buying restrictions, while encouraging state-owned enterprises and asset managers to purchase more stocks.
The authorities, it seems, were more interested in propping up the market than allowing for a controlled price correction.
To be sure, China’s stock-market bubble did not emerge until recently.
This is reflected in the persistently sluggish recovery in the advanced economies today.
Even the United States, which has fared better than most since the crisis, has recorded GDP growth of little more than 10% since the start of 2008; over the same period, China’s economy grew by about 66%.
Of course, with China’s household sector holding a relatively small share of equities compared to real estate, the current stock-market slump is unlikely to derail the economy.
Nonetheless, as in 2007, the prospect that lost savings will trigger social unrest cannot be dismissed, especially at a time when tools like social media enable citizens easily to share information, air grievances, and mobilize protest.
As previous crises have shown, and as the current downturn in China has highlighted, steps must be taken to mitigate market risks.
Specifically, China needs prudential regulation that limits the use of leverage for asset purchases.
Here, the country already has an advantage: relatively high levels of equity and low mortgage-to-value ratios typically characterize real-estate purchases by China’s household sector.
Moreover, once a market correction begins, the authorities should allow it to run its course, rather than prop up prices with additional leverage – an approach that only prolongs the correction.
If Chinese regulators allow the market to correct, sophisticated institutional investors with a long-term value orientation will ultimately step in, enhancing the market’s stability.
In the interim, the use of public balance sheets to purchase enough equity to prevent the market from over-correcting may be justified.
As China’s markets expand – the capitalization of the Shanghai and Shenzhen markets is on the order of $11 trillion – they are increasingly outstripping policymakers’ capacity to manage prices and valuations.
The only practical way forward is for the Chinese authorities to focus on regulatory and institutional development, while following through on their commitment to allow markets to play the decisive role in allocating resources.
The Untapped Potential of Sino-European Investment
BEIJING – Global economic growth, says the International Monetary Fund, has been “too slow for too long.”
A major reason has been sharply decelerating growth in global trade, which the World Trade Organization expects to grow by 1.7% this year – far below the 6.7% average in the decade preceding the 2008 crisis.
With trade alone no longer capable of underpinning global cooperation, it is time to add more investment linkages to the mix.
As it stands, there is no real global-level investment framework.
But the G20 recently approved the world’s first programmatic document on multilateral investment, entitled the G20 Guiding Principles for Global Investment Policymaking.
The general framework it provides could be particularly valuable for China and the European Union, as they attempt to negotiate a bilateral investment treaty (BIT).
So far, there have been several rounds of BIT talks, focusing on increased investment protection and market access.
Many more rounds are on the way, as some significant issues – including guarantees of regulatory transparency and the creation of an effective dispute-settlement mechanism – have yet to be fully agreed.
The Sino-European BIT is to be based on 26 existing BITs involving China and 28 individual EU members – treaties that are far from consistent, in terms of requirements for and restrictions on market access.
This lack of uniformity is a major motivation for China to negotiate a single treaty: it wants to ensure that its enterprises have equal market access in all EU member countries and avoid the costs and complications associated with adhering to different regimes.
Gaining access to the advanced technologies and management expertise of European firms is another major enticement.
The EU, for its part, hopes that money flowing in from China will help to boost its struggling economy and pave the way for increased trade.
Among its main demands is that access to China’s market be governed by a negative list (a list of exceptions to what would otherwise be open market access), rather than by a lengthy government-approval process.
Here, China has already taken some steps forward.
Last December, the State Council decided to introduce a negative list for market access that applies to all investment activities in China, by both domestic and foreign investors.
A pilot version of this list has proved itself in Shanghai, Guangdong, Tianjin, Fujian, and other free-trade trial areas.
Beyond addressing institutional issues, however, China and the EU need to dismantle cultural and conceptual barriers to investment.
Both sides must work to increase mutual understanding and trust through various negotiation mechanisms and to encourage “track II diplomacy” (interactions among smaller non-state actors).
To this end, the European Commission seems prepared to establish a transparent “investment project portal” – open to the European public, as well as to Chinese and other third-party investors – to facilitate the sharing of information, knowledge, and resources for European investments.
For both sides, there is plenty of work ahead to conclude a BIT.
But that is no reason to delay the expansion of investment cooperation.
In parallel with their BIT negotiations, China and the EU should be pursuing three main goals.
First, China and the EU must follow through on their 2015 agreement that key strategic initiatives for each economy should be better integrated.
On China’s side, these include the “one belt, one road” initiative, which focuses on strategic investment, and its structural reform plans, which focus on making the economy more market-oriented and bolstering innovation.
On Europe’s side, such initiatives include the Europe 2020 economic growth strategy and the European Commission’s Investment Plan for Europe, commonly known as the Juncker Plan, both of which aim to help Europe build a more innovative, sustainable, inclusive, and dynamic economy.
In addition, the “16+1 cooperation” between China and Central and Eastern European countries should become more transparent and integrated with wider Sino-European cooperation.
A second main objective for China and Europe should be to contribute to protecting and developing global value chains, which foster trade and investment through economic integration.
The emergence of these value chains has transformed global trade from a zero-sum game to a foundation for mutually beneficial collaboration.
Yet some political forces in Europe (as well as the United States) are now speaking out against international economic integration, proposing a return to the protectionism of the past.
As soon as one country blocks another country’s goods or services from entering its market, global value chains will be disrupted, producing spillover effects that hurt everyone – including the country that erected the barriers.
Given this, European and Chinese leaders must make the case for continued liberalization of trade and investment, despite the political challenges that may arise, particularly in Europe.
This is especially important with regard to the services sector.
Europe and China need to open up their services markets to two-way trade, including by dismantling remaining barriers to trade in information technology and promoting technology transfer.
The third key objective that the EU and China should be pursuing on the way to a BIT is the development of new mechanisms to finance investment.
Such efforts have been pursued by each separately: China led the establishment of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, while the EU has the European Investment Bank (EIB) and the European Fund for Strategic Investments (which forms a pillar of the Juncker Plan).
China and the EU should use such platforms to promote integration and cooperation in investment financing.
As it stands, there is far less direct investment between China and the EU than there is between China and its other large trading partners, including the US and Brazil.
With trade growth slowing, both sides should seek to tap their huge potential for mutual investment as quickly as possible.
China’s Economy at the Fifth Plenum
HONG KONG – The Chinese government’s intervention in the stock market and devaluation of the renminbi this summer provided a loud reminder that economic developments in China affect everyone.
Now, China is set to take some more world-shaping decisions at this month’s Fifth Plenary Session of the 18th Communist Party of China Central Committee.
Two years ago, at the Third Plenum, China’s leaders committed to pursue far-reaching reforms, declaring that markets must “play a decisive role in allocating resources.”
While the state sector would continue to play the leading role in the provision of public goods and services, policymakers would “unwaveringly encourage, support, and guide the development of the non-public sector, and stimulate its dynamism and creativity.”
Last year, the Fourth Plenum focused on leveling the economic playing field – in terms of rights, opportunities, and regulations – by strengthening the rule of law and improving the accountability, transparency, and legitimacy of government decision-making.
Specific reforms included establishing circuit courts to reduce local governments’ control over the legal system, and a larger role for the National People’s Congress Standing Committee to ensure official compliance with China’s constitution.
This year, the Party must agree on the direction of China’s 13th Five-Year Plan, which is to be launched in 2016 and is supposed to enable the country to graduate from middle-income status by 2020.
The question is how to balance the need for continued growth with the imperative for reforms that disrupt traditional pro-growth incentives.
China certainly faces serious challenges.
Economic growth has slowed to below 7%, at a time when the rest of the world is facing the threat of secular stagnation (very low growth and near-zero inflation).
Internal debts are rising; the renminbi is facing continued depreciation pressure; and investors are still digesting the implications of the recent stock-market intervention.
Add to that the bureaucracy’s increasing reluctance to take bold action – an unintended consequence of President Xi Jinping’s aggressive anti-corruption campaign – and the scale of the task China is facing becomes clear.
But there is also some good news.
On Xi’s recent state visit to the United States, he and US President Barack Obama reaffirmed their countries’ bilateral trade and economic relations.
Moreover, China is moving forward with its “one belt, one road” initiative, aimed at deepening China’s economic ties with countries throughout Central and Southeast Asia, the Indian Ocean, the Middle East, and eventually Europe.
Such efforts will complement those of the US-led Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement, which does not currently include China, in shaping the global trade and investment environment.
In fact, despite worrying short-term signals, China seems to be in the midst of a major transformation into a “lean, clean, and green” consumption-driven economy.
Of course, the process will be far from easy, owing not just to the complexity of China’s economy, but also to its globally integrated nature, which makes it vulnerable to external shocks.
But, despite the difficulty of coordinating China’s huge bureaucracy, the government has made considerable headway in addressing four serious challenges: corruption, environmental degradation, excessive local-government debt, and overcapacity.
Xi’s anti-corruption campaign has gone as far as taking down a retired member of the Politburo Standing Committee, China’s most powerful body.
Likewise, carbon-dioxide emissions have fallen dramatically since the beginning of this year, and the authorities appear to be well on the way to hitting the carbon-intensity target established in 2010.
Regulatory reforms are beginning to mitigate shadow-banking risks, and even some ghost towns are being revived by market forces.
At the upcoming Fifth Plenum, China’s leaders must build on this progress, agreeing to keep up the reform momentum.
To succeed, the government must, as Xi put it, “gnaw even tough bones” – that is, overcome vested interests that are resisting change.
At the same time, China’s rulers must recognize that reforms have significant short-term deflationary effects.
Officials initially underestimated these effects, resulting in this summer’s unanticipated volatility.
If China is to avoid the debt-deflation trap, its leaders must make some adjustments.
Beyond setting a slightly lower growth target of 6% per year, the authorities must provide more monetary and fiscal support to offset the expected slowdown in investment, consumption, and government expenditures.
At the same time, they must deal with the disruptions associated with technological advances.
As it stands, China’s inland cities are benefiting considerably from the improvements in market access and distributional efficiency enabled by the rise of e-commerce.
Moreover, automation is helping to offset the decline in the growth of the labor force (the result of population aging and slowing migration).
By contrast, China’s coastal cities, where manufacturing activities are concentrated, are experiencing creative destruction – a necessary process that nonetheless presents significant short-term challenges.
To cope, the government must create incentives for officials to overcome their risk aversion and become proactive in managing change.
Finally, as China’s leaders seem to recognize, an increase in real wages is vital to bolster domestic consumption.
Beyond reducing China’s dependence on external demand and helping to propel the country up the value chain, more spending in renminbi would help spur the use of renminbi in trade and investment.
The International Monetary Fund’s impending decision – which the US has now agreed not to oppose – to add the renminbi to the basket of currencies that comprise its reserve asset, the Special Drawing Right, would enhance the currency’s international position further.
With the right approach, the 13th Five-Year Plan can bring about significant improvements in the quality of market competition, government accountability, and the provision of public goods and services in China.
Given China’s global influence, this is good news for everyone.
China’s Malfunctioning Financial Regulation
SHANGHAI – The tumult in China’s equity market appears to have come to an end.
But considerable uncertainty remains, not only about what caused the recent plunge in the Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges, but also about what the episode will mean for China’s financial-reform efforts.
China’s stock-market crash has been attributed to a variety of factors.
Official media initially attributed the disaster largely to the “malicious” short-selling of Chinese shares by foreign banks and traders.
Later, domestic investors were added to the list of suspects, and the Chinese authorities announced a rigorous investigation into the source of short selling.
More recently, the discussion has shifted toward a seemingly more credible cause: the proliferation of margin financing since 2010.
With retail investors borrowing large amounts to finance share purchases, participation in the stock market surged, effectively turning a sound bull market into a “mad cow.”
But while margin financing, enabled by online platforms, amplified the risks of volatility, it alone could not cause such a crash.
The real culprit is the government, which first fanned the flames of excessive investment, then suddenly tried to cut off the fire’s oxygen supply.
China’s fragmented regulatory system – composed of the People’s Bank of China (PBOC), the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC), the China Banking Regulatory Commission (CBRC), and the China Insurance Regulatory Commission (CIRC) – exacerbated the situation considerably.
Last December, after two years of a “slow bull” market, People’s Daily, the mouthpiece of the Chinese Communist Party, announced the arrival of a so-called “reform bull” market that would push the Shanghai Composite Index far above 4,000.
This convinced practically everyone that a “big bull” market, possibly lasting a decade, had begun and spurred investors to buy stocks at already-high prices.
In other words, the authorities fueled a bubble.
The CSRC was pursuing an excessively narrow objective, focusing only on getting the bull market going by delivering policies and speeches aimed at boosting investor confidence and spurring participation.
After this crisis, it became clear that this incentive was both toxic and precarious.
The CSRC, as China’s capital-market regulator, together with other regulators, neglected to fulfill their proper mission: to create a robust institutional framework capable of sustaining strong investment.
Once the market took off, euphoria took over.
Even as stock-market indices moved well beyond reasonable bounds, regulators failed to predict the boom’s speed and scale.
Not surprisingly, they lacked any plan for stabilizing the market in its wake.
To be sure, as the A-market headed toward 5,000, regulators finally realized that the risk of a sharp correction was rising, too.
But, instead of working incrementally to create strong, targeted regulations, they performed an abrupt about-face, warning investors about risky bubbles and declaring war on margin finance.
With that, the soaring index started to plummet – and the CSRC fell into chaos.
Beyond issuing a flurry of administrative orders, it did little to interact with investors and the market, lacking the means to solicit public opinion and advice.
It was only when the rout was in full swing that the PBOC recognized what was happening – the CSRC had been unable to turn the tide alone – and declared that it would step in to capitalize the market.
The conclusion is clear: the current regulatory system, characterized by a clear and rigid division of responsibility among its constituent bodies, is completely out of sync with China’s rapidly growing, and increasingly integrated, capital markets.
Yet, according to China’s recently announced draft Internet finance regulations, the country’s “1+3” regulatory model is to be retained.
It is time for China’s leaders to recognize that its regulatory framework – and, in particular, its approach to regulating the capital market – is no longer tenable, and to pursue a major regulatory restructuring.
One option that has been proposed would be to create a single super-regulator, like the Financial Supervisory Committee that was established in South Korea after the 1990s Asian financial crisis.
With or without such a body, improved channels for cooperation among ministries will be vital.
Such cooperation is not unprecedented in China.
Indeed, although ministries, seeking to protect their own turf, undoubtedly impede one another on major issues, they have been collaborating wholeheartedly in China’s effort to reshape the world economic order.
Former Deputy Finance Minister Jin Liqun, whom the government has nominated to be the first president of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, has indicated that the AIIB’s successful launch was driven by such ministerial cooperation.
In order to protect the interests of investors better, China now must find ways to ensure such cooperation among its existing financial regulators, including by revamping the relevant institutions.
As it pursues far-reaching financial-sector reform, now is the time to do so.
The market plunge should provide added impetus.
The fear is that the recent stock-market crash may have spooked the government, causing it to slow the pace of reform, including efforts to open up China’s capital account.
Whether reform momentum is maintained will depend largely on whether the government recognizes that the crash was the result of a regulatory failure, or remains adamant that it was the work of some nefarious foreign force, determined to destroy the Chinese economy.
While the latter scenario is possible, it seems unlikely.
Judging by China’s reform progress in recent years, and the current government’s repeated promises to deepen those efforts, I am confident that the country’s leaders will respond to the recent crash by reaffirming the financial-reform agenda.
Ignoring the lessons of the recent crash would be a serious mistake – one that China’s pragmatic and tenacious authorities will be determined to avoid.
China’s Repressed SMEs
BEIJING – Financial repression – government policies that create an environment of low or negative real interest rates, with the goal of generating cheap financing for public spending – has long been a key feature of Chinese economic policy.
But, with funding costs for businesses trending up, this is finally starting to change.
Early this year, the State Council, China’s cabinet, made lowering funding costs for businesses, especially small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs), a top priority.
For its part, the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) has engaged in cautious monetary loosening, which includes freeing up more funds for lending by banks that allocate a certain proportion of their total loan portfolio to SMEs.
The PBOC, through its “pledged supplementary lending” program, has also started lending directly to banks that have promised to use the funds for social housing construction.
If it loosens monetary policy further – by, say, cutting banks’ reserve requirement ratio – the momentum for restructuring could be lost; and there is no guarantee that the additional liquidity would flow into the real sector.
But if the PBOC refuses to budge, the combination of high interest rates and slow growth may send the economy into a tailspin.
In fact, the PBOC has little choice but to engage in monetary-policy loosening.
But it can avoid the pitfalls of such an approach by placing it within a broader, more comprehensive strategy that accounts for the underlying causes of the increase in funding costs for businesses.
The first factor driving up funding costs is the outsize profitability of China’s commercial banks – more than 23%, on average, for the top five last year – which account for some 35% of total profits earned by the 500 largest Chinese companies.
Indeed, the average for banks is nearly four times that for Chinese companies as a whole, for which the average profit is just over 6%.
Moreover, slowing economic growth, tighter prudential regulation, and increased liability have made banks much more risk-averse, driving them to demand a significantly higher risk premium from borrowers, who must now not only provide collateral, but also find third parties to guarantee the loans.
In many cases, banks are requiring a second group of guarantors to guarantee the first group.
This growing aversion to risk makes it particularly difficult for SMEs to borrow from commercial banks, forcing them to turn to the under-regulated shadow banking sector.
Meanwhile, real-estate developers and local&nbsp;government financing vehicles (LGFVs), which offer banks a false sense of security and guarantee of profitability, have acquired a major share of financial resources.
And financial institutions, especially banks, have been using a substantial portion of their funds for financial arbitrage.
By reducing the amount of funding available to regular firms, especially SMEs, such activities drive up the average interest rate on loans.
Interest-rate liberalization is exacerbating the situation.
China has already removed all controls on interest rates on loans.
And, though it continues to guide interest rates on deposits, banks can easily evade these regulations by selling depositors off-balance-sheet wealth-management products, on which returns are not capped.
Increases in the cost of funds’ sources increase the costs of the funds’ uses – that is, credit to enterprises.
Finally, Chinese banks’ activities are impeded by outdated and unnecessary regulations, including limits on how much credit they can extend in a year and a 75% cap on the loan-to-deposit ratio.
In order to evade such controls, banks are moving a larger share of their lending activities off of their balance sheets.
But such off-balance-sheet loans involve a larger number of intermediaries, increasing transaction costs.
In fact, the rising cost of intermediation – largely a result of the distortions in China’s financial system – is among the most important factors driving the rise in borrowing costs for Chinese businesses.
That is why further monetary loosening by the PBOC, though necessary to address faltering growth, will not be enough.
In order to lower funding costs to a reasonable level, without undermining China’s economic-restructuring effort, monetary policy must be combined with well-designed and concerted financial reform.
Only then can Chinese SMEs finally gain access to the funding they need to thrive.
China’s Forex Follies
BERKELEY – On August 11, China devalued its currency by 2% and modestly reformed its exchange-rate system.
This was no earth-shattering event, but financial markets responded as if a meteorite had struck them.
The negative reaction is no mystery: China’s devaluation was a textbook example of how not to conduct exchange-rate policy.
One of the government’s motivations was presumably to give a boost to China’s slowing economy.
Although the service sector, which accounts for the majority of employment, is holding up relatively well, the country’s output of tradable goods, many of which are produced for export, is weakening sharply.
Chinese exporters are caught between the pincers of weak foreign demand and rapidly rising domestic wages.
Devaluation is the tried and true remedy for such ills.
But a 2% change in currency values is too little to make much of a difference, given that wages in Chinese manufacturing are rising at an annual rate of 10%.
It could be that Chinese policymakers regard the 2% devaluation as a down payment – the first in a succession of downward adjustments.
But, in that case, they violated the first rule of exchange-rate management: Don’t cut off a cat’s tail in slices.
The rationale for this rule is straightforward: If foreign investors expect that more currency depreciation will follow, they will rush out of Chinese markets to avoid further losses.
Capital outflows will accelerate, financial conditions will tighten, and investment will suffer.
In fact, this is precisely what China is experiencing.
A single large devaluation that gets the entire adjustment out of the way minimizes this risk.
Indeed, if investors expect the sharp improvement in competitiveness to lead to stronger economic performance, the currency will recover some of its lost value.
Capital will flow in rather than out.
Spending will rise rather than fall, which is precisely what China needs in the current circumstances.
Instead, by resorting to their traditional incremental approach, Chinese policymakers undermined confidence that they know what they are doing.
Because they adjusted the exchange rate without describing their motives, they merely encouraged the belief that China’s economic performance is even worse than official data suggest.
Another interpretation of the August 11 move is that it paved the way for the renminbi’s inclusion in the basket of currencies that comprise the International Monetary Fund’s unit of account, Special Drawing Rights.
In order to be included in the SDR basket, a currency must be widely used in international transactions. The renminbi is already widely used to invoice and settle international merchandise trade, notably other countries’ trade with China itself.
But it is less freely traded in global currency markets, ranking only 9th overall, according to the Bank for International Settlements.
This relatively low standing partly reflects China’s maintenance of controls on capital flows, which make it hard for financial-market participants to get their hands on renminbi.
But it is also a result of heavy-handed manipulation of the foreign-exchange market by the People’s Bank of China (PBOC), which makes changes in the price and availability of the renminbi opaque and uncertain.
The August 11 initiative may have been designed to alleviate this concern.
In addition to devaluing, China announced that the opening “fix” – the price at which trading of the renminbi would commence each day – would be largely based on the previous day’s closing market price.
Because the PBOC had been setting the opening fix pretty much wherever it wanted, this change could be seen as moving the renminbi toward a more market-determined exchange rate.
If so, it is at most a very modest move in that direction.
The PBOC continues to intervene heavily once the market is open, thereby limiting fluctuations in the dollar-renminbi exchange rate to less than 2% a day.
In any case, gaining admission to the SDR club is a poor excuse for wrong-footing the markets.
Given that the SDR, which the IMF uses to keep track of its own financial transactions, is of little practical importance, the Chinese authorities’ effort to add the renminbi to it amounts to little more than a vanity project.
Inclusion would make no difference in terms of progress toward China’s goal of developing its currency into a first-class international and reserve currency widely used by private and official foreign investors.
If Chinese officials are serious about pursuing this goal, they should stop focusing on the SDR and start developing stable and liquid financial markets that are not subject to official manipulation.
Only then will the international community embrace the renminbi as a proper international and reserve currency.
The events of the last month suggest that China still has a long way to go.
China’s Planning Addiction
TOKYO – In early September, I visited China for the first time in nearly ten years.
With so much time having passed since my last visit, it was easy to see where China has prospered – and where it continues to struggle.
China’s major cities embody the extraordinary success of the development policies that Deng Xiaoping initiated in the 1980s.
They are home to most of the hundreds of millions of Chinese who have been lifted out of extreme poverty in just a few decades.
Beijing and Shanghai are almost overwhelming in their scale and energy, lined with shimmering skyscrapers, adorned with bright neon lights, and teeming with increasingly cosmopolitan citizens.
Standing on the streets of one of these vibrant cities, one gains a deeper appreciation of recent data on China’s rising domestic consumption.
People are using the latest technologies and toting shopping bags bearing the names of international luxury brands.
Their rising prosperity is also reflected in the retail sectors of Tokyo and Seoul, where increasingly wealthy Chinese tourists engage in “binge shopping.”
But the impression I had of a modern, capitalist economy was soon tarnished by an improperly working phone in a first-class Beijing hotel.
An American friend suspected that it was tapped, probably because of my role as an adviser to the Japanese government.
Such claims are, of course, difficult to confirm, to say the least.
What is not open to dispute is that a week after my trip ended, the number of the credit card that I had used for shopping in Beijing was used to make purchases at a Chinese supermarket in New York City.
While identity theft is by no means exclusively a Chinese problem, such experiences create the impression that technological modernization in China may be outpacing regulation and data-security infrastructure.
Then there is the air quality.
This year, Beijing has experienced repeated bouts of severe air pollution, with two smog “red alerts” having been issued this month.
When I visited Beijing in 2005, immediately after the commemorations of the 60th anniversary of the end of World War II, the sky was clear.
Of course, air pollution was already a problem for China a decade ago.
But, before the commemorations, the government had prohibited many cars from driving (based on their license-plate numbers), stopped selected factories from operating, and forced some firms to move out of the city temporarily.
This approach – which could be pursued only within a centrally planned economy like China’s – provided temporary relief.
But ultimately it did little good; in fact, by obscuring the problem, it might have delayed effective action.
This was hardly the first or only time that China has used central planning to implement short-term solutions that fail to bring about – or, in some cases, even impede – long-term progress.
For example, this summer’s stock-market crash was widely viewed as a natural correction, because equity prices – driven largely by government interventions – had risen over the previous year far above what economic fundamentals merited.
Nonetheless, when prices collapsed, the government moved fast, suspending trading of a substantial number of stocks and pursuing price-keeping operations that resembled those pursued by Japan in the 1990s.
In this manner, China’s government managed to stop a rout, seemingly reinforcing the Marxist view that economic and financial crises do not occur in controlled economies.
Indeed, China’s leaders seem convinced that price-keeping operations amount to an effective mechanism for manipulating stock prices in whatever way they see fit.
As an adviser to the Chinese government said on my recent trip, “movements in the stock-price index are totally unrelated to the real state of the economy.”
What Chinese policymakers don’t seem to recognize is that such interventions carry serious long-term costs.
Few want to invest in a market where the government can change the rules at any moment.
China’s recent intervention in the currency market also sent mixed signals.
For years, the authorities tended to support the renminbi, as they pursued renminbi internationalization – an effort that culminated in the International Monetary Fund’s recent decision to add the renminbi to the basket of currencies that compose its reserve asset, so-called Special Drawing Rights.
Not long after the stock-market crash, however, the authorities allowed the currency to depreciate.
China should continue along this path, pursuing the kind of monetary-policy approach – aimed at securing the right combination of prices and employment – that prevails in free-market economies.
Continued currency depreciation would provide a much-needed boost to the slowing economy, just as depreciation of the yen through Abenomics has helped to lift Japan out of a protracted recession.
As 2015 closes, China’s leaders find themselves at a crossroads.
They must decide whether to continue trying to control the economy or to follow through on their promise to build a genuinely market-oriented system.
For China’s sake, and that of its neighbors, one hopes they stick to the free-market plan.
The Promise of China’s G-20 Presidency
HONG KONG – In just over a month, China will assume the G-20 presidency.
Over the next year – and especially at the organization’s September summit, to be held in Hangzhou – China plans to help lay the groundwork for a world economy that is more “innovative, invigorated, interconnected, and inclusive.”
The question is how.
One place to look is the current G-20 presidency, held by Turkey, which has emphasized inclusiveness, implementation, and investment for growth.
Though securing consensus within the G-20 is notoriously difficult, the Turkish presidency has had three key successes.
In the last year, Turkey has spearheaded a new accountability framework for efforts to boost growth in the G-20 countries.
It has launched a World Small and Medium Enterprise Forum aimed at enhancing the contributions of SMEs to the global economy.
And at the recent G-20 summit in Antalya, held just two days after the November 13 terrorist attacks in Paris, a consensus emerged that the fight against the Islamic State is a “major priority.”
In short, the G-20 has gained some momentum, and China can benefit.
If the current United Nations Climate Change Conference produces a binding global agreement to curb greenhouse-gas emissions, that momentum will become even stronger.
Given that the G-20 countries represent two-thirds of the world’s population and 85% of its GDP, they would be integral to the implementation of any deal.
By providing a framework for these countries to meet regularly to discuss global challenges like climate change, the G-20 – which is, at best, a club of self-selected members – gains legitimacy.
All of this bodes well for China’s capacity to help counter the global slowdown in growth, trade, and investment.
And not a moment too soon: The ongoing slowdown is among the greatest risks the world currently faces, because it could exacerbate desperation and instability in already-fragile countries, while compelling more robust economies to turn inward, rather than address proliferating crises.
Fortunately, China has lately been showing its commitment to becoming a more responsible global stakeholder.
Perhaps most notable, it recently led the establishment of the Beijing-based Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), which will serve largely as a vehicle for Chinese foreign investment.
Specifically, the AIIB will (among other things) provide funding for China’s ambitious “one belt, one road” policy, which aims to enhance trade linkages throughout Asia, across the Middle East, and into Europe, through massive infrastructure investment.
The fact that more than 50 countries signed on as founding members, despite opposition from the United States and Japan, indicates that members’ interest in securing resources to meet urgent infrastructure trumps geopolitical competition.
The same brand of pragmatism was apparent in China’s response to its exclusion from the recently agreed Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade agreement, spearheaded by the US and including 12 Pacific Rim countries.
Instead of grandstanding, China has shown its willingness to pursue different types of trade arrangements, as needed.
If China can grasp the opportunity of the G-20 presidency to broker a deal to conclude the World Trade Organization’s long-stalled Doha Development Round, its credentials as a global stakeholder would be enhanced.
To be sure, China might ultimately join the TPP, a move that some Chinese believe would, like accession to the WTO, support domestic reform.
But even if China stays out, it seems likely to continue doing its part to enhance trade.
There is more promising news.
The Chinese renminbi is poised to join the US dollar, the British pound, the euro, and the Japanese yen in the basket of currencies that determines the value of the International Monetary Fund’s reserve asset, Special Drawing Rights.
With the renminbi moving one step closer to becoming a reserve currency, China’s capacity to help the world – and especially emerging-market economies – cope with impending market volatility will be greatly enhanced.
Building a robust, unified, and fast-growing global economy will be extremely difficult even under the most favorable circumstances.
It will be impossible if large swaths of the world – most notably, the Middle East – remain mired in chaos and violence.
Given this, China could, like Turkey, use its G-20 presidency to promote consensus on the need to end the Syrian conflict and to support long-term peace and economic development throughout the Middle East by pursuing strategies that revive trade, investment, and employment.
In a multipolar world, emphasis on common interests is the key to fostering cooperation and progress.
Though the Syrian crisis is undoubtedly highly complex, and the actors involved – such as Iran, Russia, Saudi Arabia, and Turkey – have distinct objectives, no one can deny the economic benefits of social and political stability.
Likewise, while the advanced economies may be tempted to pursue austerity, the reality is that stronger growth would benefit everyone, with rising energy and commodity prices lifting the emerging economies out of their current low-growth and debt trap.
Next year, the G-20 has an important opportunity to show that it can deal effectively with global crises, from the risk of secular stagnation to the scourge of transnational terrorism.
With the right mix of realism and power sharing, China’s G-20 presidency could catalyze important progress – and perhaps even place a firm foundation beneath a new global economic architecture fit for the twenty-first century.
China’s G-20 Moment
BEIJING – The world caught a break in 2009.
The G-20, an assembly of the world’s largest developed and major emerging economies – which had thus far failed to make a serious mark on the world stage – was meeting in Pittsburgh to formulate a response to the global financial crisis.
US President Barack Obama, having gotten the message that the G-7 could no longer oversee the global economy on its own, led a summit that made the G-20 the primary body for coordinating global economic policy.
It was a highpoint for American leadership.
Next year, the world’s other economic superpower will assume the presidency of the G-20 and host its annual summit.
Though China’s leadership will, it is hoped, lack the drama of 2009, President Xi Jinping will undoubtedly make an impression of his own.
If he did not miss the opportunity to advance the goal of an Asia-Pacific trade agreement while hosting last year’s Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation summit, he certainly will not pass up the chance to ensure that the G-20 agenda serves China’s interests.
Of course, with Turkey’s term at the G-20’s helm having barely begun, Xi probably has not yet settled on specific priorities.
But some potential areas of concern are already apparent.
Elements of the current G-20 agenda align well with China’s domestic economic concerns, especially with regard to infrastructure.
Last year, G-20 members agreed to pursue a global infrastructure initiative aimed at facilitating investment and boosting financing for infrastructure projects and, crucially, for small and medium-size enterprises.
Given that SMEs will play a key role in China’s new growth strategy, and already account for some 85% of new jobs in the country, this initiative suits China well.
With Turkey having zeroed in on SMEs as a key vehicle for fostering more inclusive growth, this year’s summit could already produce progress on this front.
But other infrastructure-related opportunities beckon.
China has long sought to place Asia on par with North America and Western Europe in terms of connectivity – a project that the Asian Development Bank estimated in 2009 would cost $8 trillion by 2020.
China, the only major Asian emerging economy that is currently meeting the ADB’s spending target, could use its G-20 presidency to persuade its neighbors to increase investment in this area.
The G-20 may also enable China to advance a key geopolitical objective: the reform of voting rights at the International Monetary Fund.
Obama may be the leader who envisaged a premier role for the G-20; but the United States has displayed a distinct aversion to allowing emerging powers to exert the influence over multilateral institutions that their increased economic weight warrants and demands.
Indeed, the US Congress has consistently failed to ratify a package of IMF reforms, agreed in 2010, that would give countries like China greater say in decision-making – a failure that protects Western Europe, whose members benefit most from the status quo.
If China uses its G-20 leadership to push vigorously for change, it would not only improve its own chances of gaining more authority in the IMF; it would also gain favor with other emerging economies, which have been similarly frustrated by US (and European) leaders’ treatment of the issue.
There is also scope for China to assume a leadership role in another domain long dominated by the US and Europe: the global financial system.
China, where the US dollar’s predominant role is often criticized for having subjected global finance to unnecessary volatility, could use its G-20 presidency to demand a larger role for what is often considered the world’s only international currency: the IMF’s Special Drawing Rights.
In this effort, it would be in China’s interest to add the renminbi to the basket of currencies that determine the SDR’s value.
To be sure, the IMF rejected this proposition in 2011, because the renminbi did not yet meet the criteria of a freely convertible currency.
But the IMF also hinted at a willingness to be flexible, conceding that, because the SDR is fundamentally a reserve asset, the currencies that underpin it need only to be available in “sufficiently liquid and deep markets.”
And, over the last few years, China’s authorities have gradually loosened their grip on the capital account, allowing the renminbi to become the fifth most popular currency for settling global payments.
With at least 60 central banks now including renminbi among their foreign reserves, next year could present an ideal opportunity for China to advance its long-term goal of reshaping the world monetary system.
At the same time, China might pursue a shift in the dynamic of international financial regulation.
The G-7 economies – which, no surprise, have dictated international standards for the last 20 years – have rarely hesitated to name and shame emerging economies for their failure to comply with global norms.
Though China’s domestic regulatory regime remains subject to severe constraints, China’s leaders could use the G-20 summit to change the narrative, highlighting the failure of the US and Europe to complete their regulatory agendas.
If China managed to compel them to do so, it would benefit considerably – and not just in terms of its international reputation.
With an export-oriented economy and the world’s largest pile of foreign reserves, not to mention a conservative domestic financial system, China is exposed to international economic and financial volatility.
China may not be able to achieve all of its goals next year.
But, if it plays its cards right, it could do much to increase its international influence, while enhancing global economic and financial stability.
That should give China’s leaders much to consider in the coming months.
China’s Chance to Lead on Development
BEIJING – In September, China will host the G20 meeting of world leaders for the first time.
It could not have chosen a more opportune moment to assume a leadership role.
Chinese President Xi Jinping should seize the occasion to push China’s ambitious development agenda globally.
Specifically, Xi should make the case that development done right benefits everyone, and he should launch discussions on a multilateral investment agreement to be developed in the next year.
This is an achievable goal for the summit: the G20 has a record of relative success in coordinating multilateral efforts, such as in its response to the 2008 global financial crisis.
Moreover, the ingredients of successful development are very well known.
They include constant technological improvement, which is critical for sustained growth and employment; a focus on maximizing human and physical capital; and infrastructure investments geared toward reducing transaction costs and increasing efficiency.
We also know the current gaps that exist in development.
Developing countries today are constrained by low levels of human and financial capital, and by low reserves of or access to foreign exchange, which limits their ability to import the raw materials and equipment needed to ascend global value chains.
The best way to close the gaps in human and financial capital, and to increase access to foreign exchange, is through foreign direct investment.
FDI should not be difficult to attract, because the potential returns should be higher in developing countries, where capital is scarce relative to labor.
But as Nobel laureate Robert Lucas noted, capital has been flowing in the wrong direction, from low- to high-income countries.
This trend is depleting developing countries’ available capital, limiting development, and widening the global income gap.
As Laura Alfaro, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Vadym Volosovych pointed out in a 2008 study for the Review of Economics and Statistics, poorer countries are deprived of capital flows partly because they lack the institutions that are needed to receive and facilitate investments.
In a sense, these countries are trapped, because they need capital to develop these necessary institutions in the first place.
A multilateral investment agreement could fix this problem by making it easier to invest in developing countries.
It could also strengthen the economic foundation for growth in developing countries by establishing investment protections and incentives, dispute-resolution procedures, corporate social responsibility benchmarks, and regulatory frameworks for investments made by state-owned enterprises and sovereign funds.
The World Trade Organization (WTO) is the natural place to negotiate this agreement, but past efforts have failed partly because negotiations were seen as heavily favoring developed countries over developing ones.
With the global investment environment having changed dramatically in the past decade, negotiations should be restarted.
As the figure below shows, developing countries now account for a growing share of global outward direct investment (ODI).
This means that some emerging market economies themselves are becoming a source of capital and thus have a role to play in any future investment framework.
China is the prime example.
As the following graph shows, China has benefited so much from FDI that it is now increasing its own ODI.
According to the UN Conference on Trade and Development, in 2013 China became the third largest source of other countries’ FDI and is expected to become a net capital exporter for the first time in 2016.
This trend can only continue, considering the combined impact of China’s “Go Out Policy” of prodding domestic companies to make investments abroad, and it’s “One Belt, One Road” framework to build continent-wide trade infrastructure.
In time, China will likely be the world’s largest source of FDI.
Having gone from being a recipient of FDI to a net contributor in recent decades, China is perfectly positioned to lead G20 discussions on global development.
It should do so by setting a concrete goal for a workable development framework with a clear timeline for reaching specific milestones.
An early milestone should be to establish a non-binding investment facilitation framework for developing countries.
And, more generally, the agreement should emphasize inclusiveness and honest dealing to foster economic growth for developing and developed countries alike.
China and the Future of Commodity Prices
MANILA – There is no doubt that China’s ongoing growth slowdown has had far-reaching effects on the global economy.
But its role in the sharp fall in commodity prices that has occurred since 2014 – an outcome that has been devastating for commodity-exporting countries, including once-dynamic emerging economies – is more limited than the conventional wisdom suggests.
In fact, China’s slowdown is only a part of the commodity-price story.
To be sure, there is a clear correlation between Chinese GDP growth and commodity prices.
In the early 2000s, when Chinese growth accelerated, commodity prices rose sharply; since China’s slowdown began in 2011, energy prices have fallen by 70%, metals prices by 50%, and agricultural commodity prices by 35%.
But the view that China’s slowdown is the main driver of the collapse in commodity prices is incomplete, at best.
As new research by the Asian Development Bank shows, while China plays a significant role in commodity markets – accounting for about half of global consumption of metals, coal, and pork, for example – it is not nearly as dominant as is widely believed.
China accounts for less than one-fifth of world consumption of sugar, wheat, poultry, and beef; 12% of world consumption of crude oil; and 5% of natural gas.
And, in fact, some of the commodities that have experienced the largest price declines – most notably, oil (down 73%) and natural gas (down 55%) – are those in which China is a relatively minor player.
Moreover, China’s actual commodity consumption is even lower than the figures suggest.
Conventional measures, instead of taking into account cross-border production chains, simply take the sum of a country’s production and net commodity imports to determine its level of consumption.
But, for China, a sizeable proportion of the commodities it “consumes” is actually used in the production of goods that will be exported to the rest of the world.
Indeed, almost one-third of Chinese metals demand is used to satisfy export demand.
Subtracting the commodities embedded in China’s exported manufactured goods would substantially reduce China’s apparent role in these markets.
A look at the commodity-price fluctuations themselves reinforces this view.
Consider copper: From 2001 to 2006, prices gyrated wildly, with price declines of 30% in some years and increases of 150% in others – all while growth in Chinese industrial production and demand for copper remained relatively steady, at 15% and 20%, respectively.