The dream of a Europe free and whole, from the Atlantic to the Urals, remains to be completed.
Europe’s Harmony Overdose
PRAGUE – One pillar of the European Union’s single market is harmonization.
At first sight, that makes a lot of sense. Harmonized systems of rules make it easier for capital and labor to move around in search of their best use.
Alas, some Europhiles’ unifying zeal has all too often spilled beyond the bounds of economic reason, even common sense.
More unification and harmonization does not necessarily lead to effective – or even reasonable – solutions to the EU’s troubles.
The main point of the new European regulatory measures under consideration (apart from the so-called new Basel III rules) is to bring more stability to the financial system.
The indirect effect will be to reduce the financial sector’s size – in absolute terms and relative to the economy – and to hinder its growth in the future.
But these effects will also occur in EU countries whose financial sectors have maintained a high degree of stability in the current crisis.
Delivery of financial services will be made more difficult and expensive everywhere, even though some countries’ banks are financed by stable long-term deposits rather than short-term interbank loans, with few toxic assets and local loans that are more than comfortably covered by local deposits.
This is why one can hear many voices opposing the idea of a harmonized EU-wide bank levy or tax.
This levy, strongly backed by those countries whose financial sectors are in tatters after the crisis, is hard to swallow for EU states that did not intervene to bail out their banks.
The levy is an easy way to spread the political and financial costs of the crisis from some to all EU members.
If applied, bank capital will be scarcer, the flow of credit slower, and bank fees higher in countries with pretty stable financial sectors, simply because others have spent a fortune to support their financial systems – and because the European Commission never misses an opportunity to unify rules across the EU.
The same is true, for instance, for the derivatives trading system.
The post-crisis harmonization fervor in this area means that it will now be more costly everywhere in the EU to insure against currency volatility or unexpected changes in interest.
But such harmonization is neither necessary nor justified in every EU country.
We are also soon likely to have a unified, harmonized, and enforced-from-above system for euro payments, be they intrastate or interstate.
The Commission reckons that it is rather suspicious that every country currently has its own system, and that these national systems are used by more customers and for more transactions than the harmonized Single Euro Payment Area (SEPA) system of payments.
The irony here is that, at its beginning, participation by private banks in SEPA was strictly voluntary. But many of the national systems have been evolving for many years.
Millions of customers have willingly relied on them for their debit and credit payments, and simply have not found reason to switch to the SEPA system, with its different codes, abbreviations, and symbols.
This is the system that the Commission wants to prescribe for the whole Union, while banning all SEPA-incompatible products.
Customers will have to change their payment orders and habits just because harmonization has become an end in itself for many in the EU.
One simple rule should be applied as rigorously in this sensitive area as anywhere else: if it ain’t broke, don’t fix it.
Dubious harmonization and unification is in the pipeline in another area as well: macroeconomic performance.
Over the last decade, we have watched as the Stability and Growth Pact (in which EU countries pledge to keep their public debts and deficits low) has dissipated in a mist of permissiveness.
Recently, it almost looked as if the EU had finally come to understand that, given a lack of will, no pact – however commendable its purpose – can ensure sound fiscal policies.
But European institutions are now not only trying to repair the Pact, but are looking for ways to broaden its scope, making it possible to punish EU countries for “macroeconomic imbalances.”
Just look at some of the proposals of EU President Herman Van Rompuy’s task force on economic governance. For example, if a poorer member country undergoes a period of real convergence and has a temporary current-account deficit – as is usual in such cases – it may be punished for not being sufficiently “harmonized.”
The same is true of a country that undergoes a period of strong productivity growth because it has reformed its labor market or kept real wages low and has a current-account surplus.
Being too innovative, too competitive, too flexible, growing too much, and exporting too much might become “a problem” in this perverted logic of harmonization.
So, Germans and others, are you listening carefully to these voices? Aren’t you afraid?
There are many areas of economic life in the EU where harmonization does help. But not every aspect of financial regulation and macroeconomic performance necessarily belongs in this category.
We praise competition, not monopolies, in economic life. Competition in the rules that govern it might serve us better as well.
Europe’s High Court Confronts Racism
The European Court of Human Rights is hearing oral arguments in two of the most important cases in its history.
As in Brown v. Board of Education , the case that ultimately broke the back of racial segregation in America half a century ago, the European Court is being asked to give meaning to the fundamental principle of equality.
The resulting decisions could establish clear ground rules to guide future policy toward Europe’s increasingly numerous ethnic and religious minorities.
The plaintiffs are members of Europe’s poorest and largest minority group – the Roma, or Gypsies, whose ancestors are believed to have migrated from India centuries ago.
One case concerns 18 Roma children from the northeastern city of Ostrava in the Czech Republic who were placed in “special” schools for those deemed mentally deficient, where they receive a markedly inferior education.
The children argue that such schools are a barrier to social and economic progress.
Many Roma are sent to special schools even though they show no sign of mental disability.
Few go on to finish high school or attend university.
As a result, Roma unemployment rates in the Czech Republic, as in much of Europe, far exceed those for the rest of the population.
Evidence before the Court indicates that, in some Czech communities, Roma children are 27 times more likely to be sent to special schools than non-Roma children.
The plaintiffs suggest that this amounts to racial segregation. The government vigorously denies this.
The Court’s hearing is set for March 1.
The second case comes from Bulgaria.
In 1996, military police shot and killed two Roma conscripts.
The victims, who had recently absconded from a military construction crew, were known to be unarmed and not dangerous.
The shooting, by automatic weapon fire, took place in broad daylight in a largely Roma neighborhood, where the grandmother of one of the victims lived.
Immediately after the killing, a military police officer allegedly yelled at one of the town residents, “You damned Gypsies!” while pointing a gun at him.
Last year, one panel of the Court found that both the shootings and a subsequent investigation that upheld their lawfulness were tainted by racial animus.
At the request of the Bulgarian government, the Court’s Grand Chamber agreed to review the matter before the end of February.
Though the facts of both cases are heart wrenching, their importance extends beyond the courtroom.
At a time of rising concern about immigration, religious extremism, and ethnic violence, what must government do to secure the promise of equal opportunity for all?
Over the past decade, the European Union has grown more ethnically diverse.
Immigration to Spain, Italy, and Greece has surged, adding to longstanding immigrant populations in northern Europe and to the number of so-called “guest workers” in Austria, Germany, and Luxembourg.
The most recent stage of EU enlargement last May added millions of Roma from the new member states of Central and Eastern Europe.
Just as Europe’s ethnic makeup has been changing, so have its laws.
In 2000, the EU’s executive arm – responding in part to the growing popularity of anti-immigrant and neo-Nazi political parties – enacted the most far-reaching anti-discrimination legislation in the world.
To date, however, this legislation has lain dormant.
In many countries, lawyers and judges lack familiarity with legal concepts of discrimination.
Perhaps not surprisingly, acts of exclusion, segregation, and violence often go unpunished.
The two cases soon to be heard in Strasbourg provide an opportunity to change this.
A finding of discrimination would establish a landmark legal precedent, putting core values of non-discrimination and equal justice beyond dispute at a time when Europe’s politicians consider how best to absorb millions of new immigrants and minority members.
Just as importantly, such a ruling would send a powerful signal that racism and xenophobia have no place in the new Europe.
But perhaps the greatest significance of these cases lies in their very presence on the docket of Europe’s highest rights tribunal.
A decade ago, few minority victims would have been inclined or able to seek legal remedies for discrimination.
The success of some in having their claims heard is testimony to the growing power of law as a force for positive change in Europe.
Europe’s High-Risk Gamble
CAMBRIDGE – The Greek government needs to escape from an otherwise impossible situation.
It has an unmanageable level of government debt (150% of GDP, rising this year by ten percentage points), a collapsing economy (with GDP down by more than 7% this year, pushing the unemployment rate up to 16%), a chronic balance-of-payments deficit (now at 8% of GDP), and insolvent banks that are rapidly losing deposits.
The only way out is for Greece to default on its sovereign debt.
When it does, it must write down the principal value of that debt by at least 50%.
The current plan to reduce the present value of privately held bonds by 20% is just a first small step toward this outcome.
If Greece leaves the euro after it defaults, it can devalue its new currency, thereby stimulating demand and shifting eventually to a trade surplus.
Such a strategy of “default and devalue” has been standard fare for countries in other parts of the world when they were faced with unmanageably large government debt and a chronic current-account deficit.
It hasn’t happened in Greece only because Greece is trapped in the single currency.
The markets are fully aware that Greece, being insolvent, will eventually default.
That’s why the interest rate on Greek three-year government debt recently soared past 100% and the yield on ten-year bonds is 22%, implying that a €100 principal payable in ten years is worth less than €14 today.
Why, then, are political leaders in France and Germany trying so hard to prevent – or, more accurately, to postpone – the inevitable?
There are two reasons.
First, the banks and other financial institutions in Germany and France have large exposures to Greek government debt, both directly and through the credit that they have extended to Greek and other eurozone banks.
Postponing a default gives the French and German financial institutions time to build up their capital, reduce their exposure to Greek banks by not renewing credit when loans come due, and sell Greek bonds to the European Central Bank.
The second, and more important, reason for the Franco-German struggle to postpone a Greek default is the risk that a Greek default would induce sovereign defaults in other countries and runs on other banking systems, particularly in Spain and Italy.
This risk was highlighted by the recent downgrade of Italy’s credit rating by Standard &amp; Poor’s.
A default by either of those large countries would have disastrous implications for the banks and other financial institutions in France and Germany.
The European Financial Stability Fund is large enough to cover Greece’s financing needs but not large enough to finance Italy and Spain if they lose access to private markets.
So European politicians hope that by showing that even Greece can avoid default, private markets will gain enough confidence in the viability of Italy and Spain to continue lending to their governments at reasonable rates and financing their banks.
If Greece is allowed to default in the coming weeks, financial markets will indeed regard defaults by Spain and Italy as much more likely.
That could cause their interest rates to spike upward and their national debts to rise rapidly, thus making them effectively insolvent.
By postponing a Greek default for two years, Europe’s politicians hope to give Spain and Italy time to prove that they are financially viable.
Two years could allow markets to see whether Spain’s banks can handle the decline of local real-estate prices, or whether mortgage defaults will lead to widespread bank failures, requiring the Spanish government to finance large deposit guarantees.
The next two years would also disclose the financial conditions of Spain’s regional governments, which have incurred debts that are ultimately guaranteed by the central government.
Likewise, two years could provide time for Italy to demonstrate whether it can achieve a balanced budget.
The Berlusconi government recently passed a budget bill designed to raise tax revenue and to bring the economy to a balanced budget by 2013.
That will be hard to achieve, because fiscal tightening will reduce Italian GDP, which is now barely growing, in turn shrinking tax revenue.
So, in two years, we can expect a debate about whether budget balance has then been achieved on a cyclically adjusted basis.
Those two years would also indicate whether Italian banks are in better shape than many now fear.
If Spain and Italy do look sound enough at the end of two years, European political leaders can allow Greece to default without fear of dangerous contagion.
Portugal might follow Greece in a sovereign default and in leaving the eurozone.
But the larger countries would be able to fund themselves at reasonable interest rates, and the current eurozone system could continue.
If, however, Spain or Italy does not persuade markets over the next two years that they are financially sound, interest rates for their governments and banks will rise sharply, and it will be clear that they are insolvent.
At that point, they will default.
They would also be at least temporarily unable to borrow and would be strongly tempted to leave the single currency.
But there is a greater and more immediate danger: Even if Spain and Italy are fundamentally sound, there may not be two years to find out.
The level of Greek interest rates shows that markets believe that Greece will default very soon.
And even before that default occurs, interest rates on Spanish or Italian debt could rise sharply, putting these countries on a financially impossible path.
The eurozone’s politicians may learn the hard way that trying to fool markets is a dangerous strategy.
Europe’s Historic Gamble
BERKELEY – The last few weeks have been the most amazing – and important – period of the euro’s 11-year existence.
First came the Greek crisis, followed by the Greek bailout.
When the crisis spread to Portugal and Spain, there was the $1 trillion rescue.
Finally, there were unprecedented purchases of Spanish, Portuguese, Greek, and Irish bonds by the European Central Bank.
All of this was unimaginable a month ago.
Europe’s fortnight mirabilis was also marked by amazing – and erroneous – predictions.
Greece would be booted out of the monetary union.
The eurozone would be divided into a Northern European union and a Southern European union.
Or the euro – and even the European Union – would disintegrate as Germany turned its back on the project.
But, rather than folding their cards, European leaders doubled down.
They understand that their gamble will be immensely costly if it proves wrong.
They understand that their political careers now ride on their massive bet.
But they also understand that they already have too many chips in the pot to fold.
Those forecasting the demise of the euro were wrong because they misunderstood the politics.
The euro is the symbol of the European project.
Jacques Delors, one of its architects, once called the single currency “the jewel in Europe’s crown.”
Abandoning it would be tantamount to declaring the entire European integration project a failure.
It is true that Germans are incensed about bailing out Greece.
It is true that Angela Merkel is the first postwar German chancellor not to have lived through World War II.
But her views and actions are shaped by the society in which she lives, which in turn is shaped by that history.
And what is true of Merkel is still true of Europe.
This is why European leaders swallowed hard and took their unprecedented steps.
But, having doubled their bet, Europeans now must make their monetary union work. Europe has excellent bank notes.
It has an excellent central bank. But it lacks the other elements of a proper monetary union.
It needs to establish them – and fast – which requires finally addressing matters that have been off-limits in the past.
First, Europe needs a Stability Pact with teeth.
This will now happen, because Germany will insist on it.
As the European Commission has proposed, the strengthened pact will have tighter deficit limits for heavily indebted countries. Exceptions and exemptions will be removed.
Governments will be required to let the Commission vet their budgetary plans in advance.
Second, Europe needs more flexible labor markets.
Adjustment in the United States’ monetary union occurs partly through labor mobility.
This will never apply to Europe to a similar degree, given cultural and linguistic barriers.
Instead, Europe will have to rely on wage flexibility to enhance the competitiveness of its depressed regions.
This is not something that it possesses in abundance.
But recent cuts in public-sector pay in Spain and Greece are a reminder that Europe is, in fact, capable of wage flexibility.
Where national wage-bargaining systems are the obstacle, the European Commission should say so, and countries should be required to change them.
Third, the euro area needs fiscal co-insurance.
It needs a mechanism for temporary transfers to countries that have put their public finances in order but are hit by adverse shocks.
To be clear, this is not an argument for Germany’s dreaded “transfer union” – ongoing transfers to countries like Greece.
It is an argument for temporary transfers to countries like Spain, which balanced its budgets prior to the crisis but then was hit by the housing slump and recession.
It is an argument for fiscal insurance running in both directions.
Fourth, the eurozone needs a proper emergency financing mechanism.
Emergencies should not be dealt with on an ad hoc basis by 27 finance ministers frantic to reach a solution before the Asian markets open.
And European leaders, in their desperation, should not coerce the European Central Bank into helping.
There should be clear rules governing disbursement, who is in charge, and how much money is available.
It should not be necessary to obtain the agreement of 27 national parliaments each time action is needed.
Finally, Europe needs coherent bank regulation.
One reason the Greek crisis is so difficult is that European banks are undercapitalized, overleveraged, and stuffed full of Greek bonds, thereby ruling out the possibility of restructuring – and thus lightening – Greece’s debt load.
That happened because European bank regulation is still characterized by a race to the bottom.
“Colleges” of regulators, the supposed solution, are inadequate.
If Europe has a single market and a single currency, it needs a single bank regulator.
This is a formidable – some would say unrealistically ambitious – agenda.
But it is the agenda Europe needs to complete to make its monetary union work.
Europe Should Dump Anti-Dumping
Stockholm – Defending Europe’s economy against unfair international trade practices has long been a key element of the European Union’s external policies.
It is almost an instinct among some politicians and business leaders that if competition is deemed unfair, the European Commission should marshal new trade defenses.
But what are Europeans defending against, and what are “unfair” trade practices anyway? 
In the absence of international competition regulations to prevent predatory pricing and other anti-competitive activities, trade defenses are a second-best option.
By far the most widely used instrument are anti-dumping duties aimed at imposing some restraint on companies that behave in an anti-competitive way.
But, by increasing tariffs, prices also rise, which often means a welfare loss for society as a whole.
This fact has long been ignored by firms seeking trade defence.
What is new, however, is that the firms 
 themselves
 might not gain from trade defense.
The very word “defense” creates an image of a nation state that is commercially connected to the rest of the world only via traditional trade.
For such a state, all imports would truly be foreign goods, and its trade defenses would consequently be directed only against foreign interests.
But this is not true in today’s globalized world.
Although we still have traditional trade, we also have foreign direct investment, offshoring, and outsourcing.
We have global supply lines in which goods are developed in one country, manufactured in another, and assembled in a third.
Capital and know-how flows across borders, so traditional bilateral trade flows have been replaced by a complex web of international commercial relations. 
This has major implications for trade defense.
If your mobile phone was assembled in India, but developed and designed in Finland, is it an Indian or a Finnish product?
When European corporations outsource labor-intensive manufacturing to low-cost countries but keep the rest of the production process in Europe, they greatly complicate matters for anyone trying to evaluate the economics of trade defense.
To aim an anti-dumping measure against an Asian manufacturer may inflict most of the damage on a European producer.
That happened in the October 2006 anti-dumping action against leather shoes, when the EU decided to impose anti-dumping tariffs against China and Vietnam.
Sweden’s National Board of Trade conducted a case study of five European shoe producers in different countries and market segments to establish where the value added in their production processes was created.
Although manufactured in China and Vietnam, shoes were designed, developed, and marketed in Europe.
These largely intangible production processes before and after the physical manufacturing sometimes constituted 80% of the value added.
In other words, shoes from China were 80% European!
For less expensive shoes, with lower sums invested in the intangible parts of the production process, this figure was not as high, but still more than 50%.
The anti-dumping measures imposed by the EU therefore hit European companies in an unintentional way. 
Sectors with a higher human capital content – electronic consumer goods, for example – have much higher R&amp;D costs than the shoe sector, so manufacturing these goods on an assembly line in a low-cost country is probably not very costly in comparison to R&amp;D and other intangible costs.
For more advanced goods, the EU value added (if the intangible part of the production process is in Europe) is quite high.
Imposing trade defense against such goods, even if legally warranted, is likely to create problems for globalized European companies.
Many say that these problems are the price to be paid for ensuring that companies do not engage in anti-competitive behavior, or receive trade-distorting subsidies.
But, even if the measures worked as supposed, the majority of trade defense measures are probably not directed against anti-competitive business practices.
More often it is the politics of protectionism that are the crucial factor behind trade defenses.
Anti-dumping measures are frequently used against products that are simply so cheap that they pose a threat to European producers, even though that is no more than fair competition.
This raises a fundamental criticism Europe’s trade defense mechanisms.
International trade is by definition a competition between companies on an uneven playing field.
Some companies have easier access to capital, whereas their competitors cannot get access to finance at reasonable interest rates.
Some have excellent infrastructure at their disposal, while their international competitors may have to contend with constant power cuts.
Some must pay excessive taxes, while others operate out of tax havens.
Some find it easy to recruit top-notch engineers, whereas for others enjoy an abundance of cheap labor.
To create a completely level playing field in trade is impossible.
Yet many politicians and business leaders are keen to focus on the differences they don’t like and would like to see “leveled.”
In reality, what they don’t like is competition itself, and they fight it by deploying an instrument that can inflict even greater damage on themselves.
Europe Should Step Up By Standing Down
LONDON – Ten years on, the euro is a resounding success.
A financial-market heavyweight, it now outperforms the dollar, the yen, and, until recently, the mighty Chinese yuan, while euro-denominated bond trading rivals the US market in size.
But Europe should be doing better.
It should act with greater imagination to unleash more genuine economic freedom and competition, stop championing national enterprises, and start giving the European Central Bank more support.
Euro-zone policymakers should also seize the initiative in the world’s key economic clubs.
In particular, members of Europe’s economic and monetary union should give up their seats in the G-7 and the International Monetary Fund.
There may be some justification for each EMU state to be represented in the G-8, but not in the main economic organizations.
If they volunteered to act collectively at these forums, Europe would free up much-needed space for other important countries at the top table of world economic discussions, which would foster greater respect for global policymakers.
Internally, euro-zone “success” can best be measured by the yardstick of economic growth.
Many commentators cite the wide disparities between euro-zone members’ growth rates as a sign of failure.
But many other single-currency areas, including the US, display similar divergence.
It should also be obvious that, in the absence of currency markets to act as a “valve” for economic and financial pressures, economic volatility may increase.
In fact, euro-zone leaders should be less worried about variations in internal growth than about clear evidence of overall economic underperformance.
While growth has been reasonably stable since EMU started, per capita GDP – probably the best measure of economic success available – shows that Europe has lagged other regions, even when the figures are adjusted for workforce size.
It is also well known that European productivity is falling behind, too, probably due to the same factors that make Europe seem dull, cautious, and lacking in ambition when compared with many of its competitors.
When it comes to internal competition policies, most European countries still think within the national “box.”
For the euro to help lift European growth and productivity in any significant way, governments must allow – indeed, encourage – stronger competitive forces across the EMU area.
In terms of external economic policy, European policymakers have done very little in response to the wholesale changes now underway in the world economy – beyond complaining about Chinese imports and Russia’s aggressive use of its commodities, and, most recently, becoming embarrassingly obsessed with so-called Sovereign Wealth Funds.
This is a poor showing for countries that successfully confronted the challenges of creating the EU and monetary union.
After all the diplomacy and effort that these epoch-making events required, European policymakers should be able to tackle reform of the IMF, the World Bank, the G-7, and the G-8.
Yet all of these institutions still reflect the post-World War&#160;II status quo, which serves little purpose in today’s world. 
For example, why is there an international economic organization such as the G-7 without China, which is poised to overtake Germany as the world’s third largest economy and since 2000 has contributed almost as much to global economic activity as the entire euro zone?
Most global economic issues today cannot be solved without policy steps in China.
Indeed, how can the G-7 have the audacity to make repeated public comments about the currency of an outside country and hope for a positive response?
It is almost farcical. 
Meanwhile, France, Germany, and Italy are all in the G-7, even though they share the same monetary policy and currency.
It would be better if the ECB and the EU finance ministers adopted a common position ahead of G-7 meetings, then allowed their joint view to be represented by a single Council representative and the ECB’s president.
Because ministers meet before each G-7 meeting, this would be an easy procedure to introduce. 
Indeed, a “financial G-6” may today make more sense than the current G-7, but that may no longer hold true tomorrow.
In another 10 years, India may be in the top echelon of economic powers.
Or Britain might have joined the euro, making its independent role redundant.
Can Canada keep its place while Russia and Brazil are excluded?
And what other economic giants are waiting in the wings?
Clearly, therefore, we need to devise a system of membership for key international organizations that ensures that their structures are relevant but that is also flexible enough to allow members to come and go.
One way forward would be to establish numerical guidelines – along the lines of the Maastricht Treaty – for conferring G-7 membership. 
Europe should lead by example – offering the world the benefit of its deep experience of financial diplomacy and volunteering to take the first steps forward.
Given that Europe managed to construct EMU, the Maastricht Treaty, and the stability and growth pact that underlines the euro, it should be relatively easy for euro-zone experts to help devise a system for judging G-7 type membership.
Unless European countries take the initiative on global financial institutional reform, it will remain a lost cause.
Europe’s Immigration Challenge
LONDON – Europe faces an immigration predicament.
Mainstream politicians, held hostage by xenophobic parties, adopt anti-immigrant rhetoric to win over fearful publics, while the foreign-born are increasingly marginalized in schools, cities, and at the workplace.
Yet, despite high unemployment across much of the continent, too many employers lack the workers they need.
Engineers, doctors, and nurses are in short supply; so, too, are farmhands and health aides.
And Europe can never have enough entrepreneurs, whose ideas drive economies and create jobs.
The prevailing skepticism about immigration is not wholly unfounded.
Many communities are genuinely polarized, which makes Europeans understandably anxious.
But to place the blame for this on immigrants is wrong, and exacerbates the problem.
We are all at fault.
By not taking responsibility, we allowed immigration to become the scapegoat for a host of other, unrelated problems.
The enduring insecurity caused by the global economic crisis, Europe’s existential political debates, and the rise of emerging powers is too often expressed in reactions against migrants.
Not only is this unjust, but it distracts us from crafting solutions to the real problems.
European countries must finally and honestly acknowledge that, like the United States, Canada, and Australia, they are lands of immigrants.
The percentage of foreign-born residents in several European countries – including Spain, the United Kingdom, Germany, the Netherlands, and Greece – is similar to that in the US.
Yet, despite this, we do not make the necessary investments to integrate newcomers into our schools and workplaces.
Nor have we done enough to reshape our public institutions to be inclusive and responsive to our diverse societies.
The issue is not how many new immigrants are accepted into the European Union, but acknowledging the nature and composition of the societies in which we already live.
It is ironic –&#160;and dangerous – that Europe’s anti-immigrant sentiment is peaking just when global structural changes are fundamentally shifting migration flows.
The most important transformation is the emergence of new poles of attraction.
Entrepreneurs, migrants with Ph.Ds, and those simply with a desire to improve their lives are flocking to places like Brazil, South Africa, Indonesia, Mexico, China, and India.
In the coming decade, most of the growth in migration will take place in the global south.
The West is no longer the Promised Land, placing at risk Europe’s ability to compete globally.
The aging of Europe’s population is historically unprecedented.
The number of workers will decline precipitously, and could shrink by almost one-third by mid-century, with immense consequences for Europe’s social model, the vitality of its cities, its ability to innovate and compete, and for relations among generations as the old become heavily reliant on the young.
And, while history suggests that countries that welcome newcomers’ energy and vibrancy compete best internationally, Europe is taking the opposite tack by tightening its borders.
But all is not lost.
Europe got itself into this situation through a combination of inaction and short-sighted policymaking.
This leaves considerable room for improvement.
In fact, there are rays of hope in certain corners of Europe.
Consider Sweden, which has transformed its immigration policy by allowing employers to identify the immigrant workers whom they need (the policy has built-in safeguards to give preference to Swedish and EU citizens).
In more rational times, these reforms would be the envy of Europe, especially given the relative resilience of Sweden’s economy.
They certainly have caught the attention of Australia and Canada, which aim to emulate them.
There have also been innovations in integrating immigrants.
Some initiatives, albeit modest, encourage those with immigrant backgrounds to apply for public-sector jobs in police forces, fire departments, media, and elsewhere.
Such measures also respond to the urgent need for public institutions that look like the populations they serve.
There are many other tools to advance integration.
We understand well the importance of early childhood education, and what kinds of programs can bridge the gap between immigrant and native children. We know as well the importance of finding a job in the integration process.
We know how to recognize immigrants’ skills better, and how to provide the right kind of vocational training. We know how to ward off discrimination in hiring.
But, while we know what to do, we now need to muster the political will to do it.
The good news is that, if we get integration right, we will be far more likely to bring publics along on more open immigration policies.
Equally important is international cooperation on migration.
Last year, during the Arab revolutions, the EU missed a historic opportunity to begin weaving together the two sides of the Mediterranean.
It failed to open its doors to young students, entrepreneurs, and other North Africans.
Today, the EU is making a more serious effort to engage its southern neighborhood.
Among the potential opportunities are free-trade agreements, an easing of visa requirements for university students, temporary work programs, and incentives to attract entrepreneurs.
No country is an island when it comes to migration, and none can address it alone.
We have a long way to go, probably in a climate that will not turn favorable to immigration for many years.
How much progress we can make will hinge on our ability to break through the myths about migration.
Migration is changing in fundamental ways, and we must continue to push ourselves to devise systems and approaches that respond to new realities.
If we succeed, human mobility can become one of the great assets of the twenty-first century.&#160;
Europe’s Inevitable Haircut
BERKELEY – What once could be dismissed as simply a Greek crisis, or simply a Greek and Irish crisis, is now clearly a eurozone crisis.
Resolving that crisis is both easier and more difficult than is commonly supposed.
The economics is really quite simple.
Greece has a budget problem.
Ireland has a banking problem.
Portugal has a private-debt problem.
Spain has a combination of all three.
But, while the specifics differ, the implications are the same: all must now endure excruciatingly painful spending cuts.
The standard way to buffer the effects of austerity is to marry domestic cuts to devaluation of the currency.
Devaluation renders exports more competitive, thus substituting external demand for the domestic demand that is being compressed.
But, since none of these countries has a national currency to devalue, they must substitute internal devaluation for external devaluation.
They have to cut wages, pensions, and other costs in order to achieve the same gain in competitiveness needed to substitute external demand for internal demand.
The crisis countries have, in fact, shown remarkable resolve in implementing painful cuts.
But one economic variable has not adjusted with the others: public and private debt.
The value of inherited government debts remains intact, and, aside from a handful of obligations to so-called junior creditors, bank debts also remain untouched.
This simple fact creates a fundamental contradiction for the internal devaluation strategy: the more that countries reduce wages and costs, the heavier their inherited debt loads become.
And, as debt burdens become heavier, public spending must be cut further and taxes increased to service the government’s debt and that of its wards, like the banks.
This, in turn, creates the need for more internal devaluation, further heightening the debt burden, and so on, in a vicious spiral downward into depression.
So, if internal devaluation is to work, the value of debts, where they already represent a heavy burden, must be reduced.
Government debt must be restructured.
Bank debts have to be converted into equity and, where banks are insolvent, written off.
Mortgage debts, too, must be written down.
Policymakers are understandably reluctant to go down this road.
Contracts are sacrosanct.
Governments fear that they will lose credibility with financial markets.
Where their obligations are held by foreigners, and by foreign banks in particular, writing them down may only destabilize other countries.
These are reasonable objections, but they should not be allowed to lead to unreasonable conclusions.
The alternatives on offer are internal and external devaluation.
European leaders must choose which one it will be.
They are united in ruling out external devaluation.
But internal devaluation requires debt restructuring.
To deny this is both unreasonable and illogical.
The mechanics of debt restructuring are straightforward.
Governments can offer a menu of new bonds worth some fraction of the value of their existing obligations.
Bondholders can be given a choice between par bonds with a face value equal to their existing bonds but a longer maturity and lower interest rate, and discount bonds with a shorter maturity and higher interest rate but a face value that is a fraction of existing bonds’ face value.
This is not rocket science. It has been done before.
But there are three prerequisites for success.
First, bondholders will need to be reassured that their new bonds are secure.
Someone has to guarantee that they are adequately collateralized.
When Latin American debt was restructured in the 1980’s under the Brady Plan, these “sweeteners” were provided by the United States Treasury.
This time around, the International Monetary Fund and the German government should fill that role.
Second, countries must move together.
Otherwise, one country’s restructuring will heighten expectations that others will follow, giving rise to contagion.
Finally, banks that take losses as a result of these restructurings will need to have their balance sheets reinforced.
The banks need real stress tests, not the official confidence game carried out earlier this year.
Where realistic debt-restructuring scenarios indicate capital shortfalls, across-the-board conversion of bank debt into equity will be necessary.
And where this does not suffice, banks will need immediate capital injections by their governments.
Again, making this work requires European countries to move together.
And, with banks’ balance sheets having been strengthened, it will be possible to restructure mortgage debts, bank debts, and other private-sector debts without destabilizing financial systems.
Now we get to the hard part.
All of this requires leadership.
German leaders must acknowledge that their country’s banks are dangerously exposed to the debts of the eurozone periphery.
They must convince their constituents that using public money to provide sweeteners for debt restructuring and to recapitalize the banks is essential to the internal devaluation strategy that they insist their neighbors follow.
In short, Europe’s leaders – and German leaders above all – must make the case that the alternative is too dire to contemplate.
Because it is.
Europe’s Interest in Closing Guantánamo
BRUSSELS – For years, the European Union has called loudly for the closure of the Guantánamo Bay detention center. Now that US President Barack Obama has taken the decision to do so, the EU stands ready to provide political and practical support to the United States to help achieve that goal.
We share President Obama’s assessment that “Guantánamo became a symbol that helped Al Qaeda recruit terrorists to its cause.
Indeed, the existence of Guantánamo likely created more terrorists around the world than it ever detained.”
We in the EU believe that it is our common interest with the US to prevent radicalization and recruitment to terrorism throughout the world.
The primary responsibility for closing Guantánamo and re-settling detainees lies with the US. But Europeans want to help the US turn the page.
That is why EU member states have already received their own nationals and former residents from Guantánamo.
That is why France recently received an Algerian ex-detainee.
And that is why several other EU countries are now considering receiving ex-detainees cleared for release, but who, for compelling reasons, cannot return to their countries of origin.
We in the EU expect the US to do likewise; if it is safe to release these people in Europe, it is safe to do so in the US.
More generally, we agree with Obama that “in the long run we...cannot keep...safe unless we enlist the power of our most fundamental values,” and that “we uphold our most cherished values not only because doing so is right, but because it strengthens [us] and keeps us safe.”
The experience of European democracies confronted with a long-term terrorist threat shows that human rights and the rule of law are our strongest assets. That is why terrorists want to destroy them.
The closure of Guantánamo must be accompanied by a fundamental review of the underlying policies that gave rise to its existence.
Obama’s decisions to ban “enhanced interrogation” and end secret detention are important steps in the right direction.
But more steps are needed.
In particular, indefinite detention without trial needs to be addressed to avoid the recurrence of problems.
Therefore, the review of detention, trial, transfer, and interrogation policies is of utmost importance.
There must be no gaps in protection, whatever law is applicable.
The EU will take up the Obama administration’s invitation to share its views with his Detention Policy Task Force on international law principles relevant to the fight against terrorism.
We hope the US will change its “war on terror” paradigm and re-think its conception of a global armed conflict against Al Qaeda.
No EU member has taken such an approach.
There is an obvious difference between persons engaged in an armed conflict, as in Afghanistan and Iraq, and terrorist suspects arrested outside of armed conflict.
A case-by-case approach is therefore necessary.
We welcome the fact that the first former Guantánamo detainee is facing criminal charges in New York.
The perpetrators of the Madrid and London bombings were prosecuted in ordinary criminal trials.
One plotter in the attack of September 11, 2001, appeared before ordinary courts in Germany.
In many EU member states, criminal law has been strengthened and is being used to prevent attacks.
Membership of a terrorist organization, including those operating on foreign soil, training and recruiting people for terrorism, and promotion of terrorism have been made criminal offenses.
The fight against international terrorism raises important legal questions.
We are looking forward to continuing our productive dialogue with the US State Department Legal Adviser.
The threat from Al Qaeda is global. The EU and US must work together to make Europe and America safe.
By closing Guantánamo and addressing the underlying policy issues, the US is creating a much stronger foundation for close EU-US cooperation in counter-terrorism and the fight against international crime, one based on the rule of law and human rights.
Together, the EU and the US will be in a better position jointly to promote justice, human rights and freedom around the world.
This has been and remains the most sustainable way of preventing radicalization and recruitment to terrorism.
Closing Guantánamo is not a gesture to win applause from Europeans. It is a necessary revision of policy that will make the US, Europe, and the world safer.
Europe’s Last Best Chance
STANFORD – The resignations of Greek Prime Minister George Papandreou and Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi have highlighted how Greece, Italy, and many other countries obscured for too long their bloated public sectors’ long-standing problems with unsustainable social-welfare benefits.
Indeed, for many of these countries, meaningful reform has now become unavoidable.
The social-insurance systems in Europe, as in the United States, Japan, and elsewhere, were designed under vastly different economic and demographic circumstances – more rapid economic growth, rising populations, and lower life expectancy – from those prevailing today.
Governments (the focus is on Greece and Italy at the moment, but they are not alone) have promised too much, to too many, for too long.
My 1986 book Too Many Promises pointed to the same problem with America’s social-welfare system.
This fundamental problem has now manifested itself in these countries’ unsustainable debt dynamics.
Euro membership, which temporarily enabled massive borrowing at low interest rates, merely aggravated it.
Reforming social-welfare benefits is the only permanent solution to Europe’s crisis.
One hopes that, with the help of national governments, the European Central Bank, the International Monetary Fund, and the European Financial Stability Facility, the holes in the sovereign-debt-funding dike will be temporarily plugged, and that European banks will be recapitalized.
But this will work only if structural reforms make these economies far more competitive.
They must both lower the tax burden and reduce bloated transfer payments.
Too many people are collecting benefits relative to those working and paying taxes.
Meanwhile, the bond market’s concern over fiscal deficits and debt dynamics is driving these countries’ borrowing costs higher.
Short-term and long-term policies are therefore closely related; unless temporary stopgaps are combined with fundamental long-term structural reform, another disaster like the current one – or worse – will become inevitable.
There are three fundamental factors that determine the evolution of a country’s sovereign debt: its rate of economic growth; its borrowing costs; and its primary budget position (the budget balance net of interest payments).
A country with a balanced primary budget collects enough revenue to pay its current expenses but not the interest on its outstanding debt.
Higher interest rates, slower growth, and a weaker primary budget position all raise the debt-ratio trajectory.
Italy is now paying 7% interest annually on its sovereign debt, while its economy is growing at only 1%.
Thus, Italy needs sustained, large primary surpluses, much faster growth, and/or far lower interest rates to avoid a debt restructuring.
A credible path to sufficient primary surpluses would lower interest rates.
In the long run, if primary surpluses are achieved by controlling spending, the increase in national saving will promote investment and growth, whereas higher tax rates would work in the opposite direction.
Successful post-World War II fiscal consolidation in OECD countries averaged $5-$6 in spending cuts per $1 of tax hikes.
Some experts, such as former ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet, argue that fiscal consolidation would be expansionary.
Specifically, it would boost confidence, which would lower interest rates and offset any direct effect on demand, as occurred in Ireland and Denmark in the 1980’s.
But that is less likely now, as many countries are undertaking fiscal consolidation simultaneously, non-sovereign interest rates are already low, and monetary union prevents the most troubled countries in the eurozone – Portugal, Italy, Ireland, Greece, and Spain – from devaluing their way to competitiveness.
Substantial primary surpluses will be needed for many years in order to stabilize the debt ratio and gradually reduce it to the economic safety zone of less than 60% of GDP (Italy and Greece are over 100%).
A credible long-term program of reforms must be implemented now, while temporary emergency measures – bond purchases by the EFSF, IMF, and the ECB – provide breathing room.
If the primary surpluses are insufficient, temporary measures will only postpone the inevitable debt debacle.
In Europe’s highly taxed economies, better tax compliance or selective revenue measures can produce only a small amount of additional tax revenue without undermining growth.
Spending cuts are the only way to improve the budget position significantly.
But that course will be difficult.
In many European countries, the government pays benefits to a majority of the population.
A key question is whether incoming Greek Prime Minister Lucas Papademos and his new Italian counterpart, Mario Monti, both highly regarded economists, have the leadership skills to navigate these treacherous waters.
Their examples will test whether other European democracies with heavily benefit-dependent populations can rein in the welfare state’s excesses.
It is not an impossible challenge.
Canada has staged a substantial retreat from the welfare state’s worst excesses, as center-left and center-right governments alike reduced the share of government spending as a proportion of GDP by eight percentage points in recent years.
Several European countries are considering raising their remarkably low retirement ages, or have already done so.
Given demographic trends, this may well be Europe’s last chance to build a firmer foundation for future prosperity.
Winston Churchill once famously said of America that you can count on it to do the right thing once it has exhausted all other alternatives.
Let us hope that his dictum proves correct for Europe as well.
Europe’s Leisure Trap
Black Friday in the United States traditionally is the day after Thanksgiving that signals the start of the holiday season sale.
But not everybody agrees with Blanchard.
Some economists point out that high tax rates in Europe make work less rewarding – and thus leisure more attractive.
Other economists see Europe’s powerful labor unions as an important determinant in European attitudes towards work.
After all, employees do not negotiate individually the length of the workweek.
During past economic downturns, labor unions in Europe negotiated a reduced workweek or more vacation time with no reduction in wages. 
Moreover, Blanchard fails to note that the preference for leisure is not gender-neutral.
The transatlantic difference in hours worked can be explained in part by comparing the labor input of European women to the input of American women.
While American women work 36 hours per week on average, Dutch women put in only 24 hours per week, while German women work 30 hours.
French women with a job work on average 34 hours per week, but the percentage of women who work outside the home in France is almost 20% lower than in the US. 
Are European females that much lazier than American females?
The answer depends on whether one considers the time women in Europe spend on domestic work.
The economists Ronald Schettkat and Richard Freeman have calculated that American women spend ten hours per week less on cooking, cleaning, and childcare than European women do.
Instead of performing these household jobs themselves, Americans pay other people to do them.
Americans eat more often in restaurants, make ample use of laundry, dry-cleaning, and shopping services, and hire nannies to take care of young infants. 
Indeed, in the US, one finds all kinds of personal services that do not exist on a similar scale in Europe.
A manicure, carwash, or a massage is often only a stone’s throw from one’s home.
Doorman buildings provide round-the-clock service to residents and dog-walkers look after pets during the workday.
In New York City, one can get help during the weekends to prepare meals for the coming week, with a culinary expert to advise you on the recipes, buy the groceries, and do part of the cooking.
In other words, American women work more hours and use the money they make to hire people to do the tasks that they can’t do because they’re working.
By contrast, European women work less and have less money to spend on services.
In their “free time,” European women are busy cleaning the house and looking after the children.
On balance, therefore, European and American women work about the same amount of hours.
Meanwhile, more wealth is created in the US than in Europe.
After all, women professionals do not have to choose between a career and children, but can enjoy both.
By spending part of their extra income on household jobs and personal services, American women limit their workload while creating demand for service jobs that wouldn’t exist otherwise.
To put it inelegantly, two birds are killed with one stone.
In Europe, no birds get killed at all.
Highly educated European women who have children either stay at home or work part-time and get stuck in low-end jobs.
They take care of the household and children themselves.
Meanwhile, there are not enough service jobs in Europe to put everybody to work.
The social benefits paid to the out-of-work increase the tax burden on labor income, which in turn discourages women from full-time work.
The leisure trap thus keeps both the best educated and the least educated out of the workplace. 
Europe’s Economic War of Attrition
NEWPORT BEACH – I was nine years old when Egypt entered what became known as its “war of attrition” with Israel.
During this period of “no war and no peace,” underlying tensions festered, and a fragile tranquility was periodically interrupted by armed skirmishes.
The war of attrition followed the June 1967 war, in which Egypt – to the immense surprise of most of its citizens and the outside world – was soundly defeated.
Its air force was crippled and its army was virtually overrun, with Israel capturing the entire Sinai Peninsula.
Positioned on the eastern bank of the Suez Canal, Israel’s army was just over 100 kilometers from Cairo.
And, with Israeli jet fighters still controlling the airspace, Egypt’s capital and its major population centers were greatly exposed.
The official narrative reflected little of this.
Whether on state television or in government-controlled newspapers – at the time, there was no free press, Internet, or cable news – citizens were reassured that Egypt had regained control of its destiny.
But they knew better.
To this day, I remember vividly the sense of general anxiety that prevailed among citizens, accentuated by deep concern about what the future might hold.
People were afraid to invest, and many wondered whether they should emigrate in search of a better future.
With the underlying issues left unaddressed, the war of attrition was followed by another full-scale war in 1973 – one that again surprised most people inside and outside Egypt.
This time, the Egyptian armed forces won a number of early battles and secured a cease-fire that regained part of the Sinai, setting the stage for the 1979 peace agreement with Israel.
I recount this history not to draw a parallel with today’s Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which, just a couple of weeks ago, resulted in many civilian deaths, overwhelmingly in Gaza.
Rather, it is because I see too many&#160;parallels with what is happening in the European debt crisis.
European citizens – particularly in peripheral economies such as Greece, Portugal, and Spain – are anxious.
Unemployment is unacceptably high, and is still rising.
Their economies continue to implode, leading to cumulative contractions that are setting tragic new records.
Poverty is on the rise.
Not surprisingly, increased emigration to the stronger eurozone countries (such as Germany) has been accompanied by higher outflows of financial capital.
Admittedly, and fortunately, the parallels are far from perfect.
Europe does not have armed conflicts.
Feelings of intense insecurity are not related to bombs and sirens.
The threat is economic rather than military.
Yet there is a real sense of “no peace and no war.”
Europe’s economic peace remains elusive for a simple reason: governments have still not found a way to generate the trifecta of growth, employment, and financial stability.
The longer this prevails, the more oxygen is sucked out of sectors that remain relatively healthy – and for three distinct reasons.
First, the eurozone economy is extremely interconnected.
As such, it is only a matter of time until weakness in one part migrates to other parts.
Witness what is happening in Germany, a well-managed country once thought itself immune from the troubles around it.
After a period of record low unemployment, economic growth has slowed markedly, reaching just 0.2% in quarterly terms in July-September.
On current trends, the fourth quarter’s growth rate will turn negative.
Second, the eurozone’s bailout bill continues to rise.
Cyprus is expected to join the other three “program countries” (Greece, Ireland, and Portugal) in requiring considerable official financing; and, of the other three, only Ireland is getting close to regaining normal access to capital markets.
With Spain also requiring billions more to recapitalize its banks, the contingent claims on taxpayers in the core countries continue to mount.