But, while the Republicans would need to gain control over at least three or four more legislatures to make a credible attempt, the possibility that they could pursue such a strategy should worry people more than it does.
Barring an amendment, the US is protected from some of Trump’s most egregious campaign promises.
Proposals like restricting immigration on the basis of religion are unconstitutional.
Other damaging proposals can be filibustered by Democrats in the Senate, where Republicans do not have the 60 votes needed to stop them.
To be sure, filibusters could be abolished at the start of the 2017-2018 Senate session.
But Republican leaders must worry about a future in which they are in opposition and want to use the filibuster themselves.
If they did make such a move, however, they would greatly reduce the Democrats’ oppositional power over the next few years.
In foreign policy, the US has always had few checks on the president, though some external limitations may apply.
For example, Trump cannot fulfill his campaign promise immediately to trash the Paris climate agreement – an international deal that all signatories are legally bound to respect for at least four years.
He could, however, undermine it, such as by indicating to countries like India that the US will not fulfill its commitments.
In domestic policy, however, Trump will have great scope to act.
Most vulnerable is the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare), which has given health-care coverage to 20 million previously uninsured citizens.
The 2010 Dodd-Frank financial reforms, aimed at controlling banks and other financial institutions that are “too big to fail,” is also at risk of being undone.
For concerned citizens who want to reestablish checks and balances in America, there are three urgent tasks.
First, they should start laying the groundwork to win at least three more Senate seats in 2018.
Second, they should act to prevent Republicans from gaining control of three-quarters of state legislatures, thereby opening the way for constitutional amendments.
And, third, they must mobilize more of their fellow citizens to reject authoritarian-style tactics and policies and support more inclusive democratic alternatives.
The existence of compelling alternatives is the most important check on populist politicians with authoritarian tendencies who win power through the vote.
By the next presidential election, US voters, like their British counterparts who voted in favor of Brexit, may be experiencing “buyer’s remorse.”
But this is not enough; attractive and credible alternatives must be forged.
Trump’s Emotional Intelligence Deficit
CAMBRIDGE – Last month, 50 former national security officials who had served at high levels in Republican administrations from Richard Nixon to George W. Bush published a letter saying they would not vote for their party’s presidential nominee, Donald Trump.
In their words, “a President must be disciplined, control emotions, and act only after reflection and careful deliberation.”
Simply put, “Trump lacks the temperament to be President.”
In the terminology of modern leadership theory, Trump is deficient in emotional intelligence – the self-mastery, discipline, and empathic capacity that allows leaders to channel their personal passions and attract others.
Contrary to the view that feelings interfere with thinking, emotional intelligence – which includes two major components, mastery of the self and outreach to others – suggests that the ability to understand and regulate emotions can make overall thinking more effective.
While the concept is modern, the idea is not new.
Practical people have long understood its importance in leadership.
In the 1930s, former Supreme Court Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, a crusty old veteran of the American Civil War, was taken to meet Franklin D. Roosevelt, a fellow Harvard graduate but one who had not been a distinguished student.
Asked later about his impressions of the new president, Holmes famously quipped: “second-class intellect; first-class temperament.”
Most historians would agree that Roosevelt’s success as a leader rested more on his emotional than his analytical IQ.
Psychologists have tried to measure intelligence for more than a century.
General IQ tests measure such dimensions of intelligence as verbal comprehension and perceptual reasoning, but IQ scores predict only about 10-20% of variation in life success. The 80% that remains unexplained is the product of hundreds of factors playing out over time.
Emotional intelligence is one of them.
Some experts argue that emotional intelligence is twice as important as technical or cognitive skills.
Others suggest it plays a more modest role.
Moreover, psychologists differ about how the two dimensions of emotional intelligence – self-control and empathy – relate to each other.
Bill Clinton, for example, scored low on the first but high on the second.
Nonetheless, they agree that emotional intelligence is an important component of leadership.
Richard Nixon probably had a higher IQ than Roosevelt, but much lower emotional intelligence.
Leaders use emotional intelligence to manage their “charisma” or personal magnetism across changing contexts.
We all present ourselves to others in a variety of ways in order to manage the impressions we make: for example, we “dress for success.” Politicians, too, “dress” differently for different audiences.
Ronald Reagan’s staff was famous for its effectiveness in managing impressions.
Even a tough general like George Patton used to practice his scowl in front of a mirror.
Successful management of personal impressions requires some of the same emotional discipline and skill possessed by good actors.
Acting and leadership have a great deal in common. Both combine self-control with the ability to project.
Reagan’s prior experience as a Hollywood actor served him well in this regard, and Roosevelt was a consummate actor as well.
Despite his pain and difficulty in moving on his polio-crippled legs, FDR maintained a smiling exterior, and was careful to avoid being photographed in the wheelchair he used.
Humans, like other primate groups, focus their attention on the leader.
Whether CEOs and presidents realize it or not, the signals they convey are always closely watched.
Emotional intelligence involves awareness and control of such signals, and the self-discipline that prevents personal psychological needs from distorting policy.
Nixon, for example, could strategize effectively on foreign policy; but he was less able to manage the personal insecurities that caused him to create an “enemies list” and eventually led to his downfall.
Trump has some of the skills of emotional intelligence.
He is an actor whose experience hosting a reality-television show enabled him to dominate the crowded Republican primary field and attract considerable media attention.
Dressing for the occasion in his signature red baseball cap with the slogan “Make America Great Again,” he appeared to have gamed the system with a winning strategy of using “politically incorrect” statements to focus attention on himself and gain enormous free publicity.
But Trump has proven deficient in terms of self-control, leaving him unable to move toward the center for the general election.
Likewise, he has failed to display the discipline needed to master the details of foreign policy, with the result that, unlike Nixon, he comes across as naive about world affairs.
Trump has a reputation as a bully in interactions with peers, but that is not bad per se.
As the Stanford psychologist Roderick Kramer has pointed out, President Lyndon Johnson was a bully, and many Silicon Valley entrepreneurs have a bullying style.
But Kramer calls such figures bullies with a vision that inspires others to want to follow them.
And Trump’s narcissism has led him to overreact, often counter-productively, to criticism and affronts.
For example, he became embroiled in a dispute with an American Muslim couple whose son, a US soldier, was killed in Iraq, and in a petty feud with Paul Ryan, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, after Trump felt slighted.
In such cases, Trump stepped on his own message.
It is this deficiency in his emotional intelligence that has cost Trump the support of some of the most distinguished foreign policy experts in his party and in the country.
In their words, “he is unable or unwilling to separate truth from falsehood. He does not encourage conflicting views.
He lacks self-control and acts impetuously. He cannot tolerate criticism.”
Or, as Holmes might say, Trump has been disqualified by his second-class temperament.
The Next World Order
MADRID – The annus horribilis of 2016 is behind us now.
But its low points – the United Kingdom’s vote to leave the European Union, the election of Donald Trump as US president, the ongoing atrocities in Syria – were merely symptoms of a process of dissolution of the liberal rules-based global system that began long before.
Unfortunately, those symptoms are now accelerating the system’s decline.
For years, the liberal order has been under strain.
Perhaps most obvious, there has been a lack of progress in the development of institutions and legal instruments.
In short, we have been trying to fit the round pegs of twenty-first-century global power into the square holes of post-World War II institutions.
Skewed representation reflecting a bygone era, whether on the United Nations Security Council or the International Monetary Fund’s Board, undermines global institutions’ legitimacy and ability to respond to new challenges.
This has spurred a shift toward informal mechanisms like the G-20 and new, untested institutions like the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank.
A better approach would aim to boost the representation of emerging economies in existing institutions.
It would also seek to incorporate more non-state actors, both civil-society organizations and business representatives, into international decision-making processes.
But the challenge extends beyond the institutional mechanics that have preoccupied most commentators, including me.
The liberal international order’s philosophical core has been hollowed out, with fundamental ideas that were once considered staples of the modern world – free trade, democracy, human rights – either in retreat or under threat.
Unless and until we recognize and address this reality, the liberal world order that has brought unprecedented peace and prosperity to the world over the past seven decades will continue to erode.
Liberalism and the international order that it has sustained are a product of the Enlightenment.
They are rooted in a belief in inexorable human progress, in the notion of a universally shared vision and direction – focused on mastering nature – which rational self-interest dictates should be pursued.
In this view, the rule of law, human-rights protections, and trade are mechanisms for propelling humanity forward, even when the road gets bumpy.
Today, our fates are more intertwined than ever, yet the underlying sense that we have a common purpose has been lost, because our ideas about what that purpose should be have been challenged – and even negated.
We now know that the resources that support our progress are not unlimited, and that our planet cannot support an ever-growing number of people with the lifestyles that have historically accompanied prosperity.
Universalist mechanisms cannot function properly without a foundation of universal ethics, objectives, and expectations.
What they can do is fuel discontent and conflict and, as we have learned in 2016, drive people to reject rationality and deny reality.
That is deeply troubling, and it must be addressed.
The first step is a reckoning.
Instead of clinging to Enlightenment rhetoric and dogmas, we must recognize the limits of our world, and shift our attention from conquering it toward preserving it.
That is the shared vision and direction needed to buttress a new, modern global order.
The next step is an assessment of what, exactly, we should expect from this new reality – and the development of new parameters for measuring success.
We cannot suppose that future generations will have more, but we can work for them to have better.
To that end, policy should be based not on blunt indicators of aggregate change, such as GDP and net trade data, but on more nuanced metrics that provide a clearer picture of wealth distribution, education, and quality of life.
The third step is to get everyone on the same page.
In today’s world, common approaches are essential to address challenges and create new opportunities.
No amount of nationalist rhetoric or anti-trade sentiment can change this.
Of course, even without effective international systems underpinned by a universal ethic and purpose, the international community will have to cooperate to tackle challenges as they arise.
But, chances are, such cooperation will come only after a problem has had a sufficiently powerful impact on the perceived interests of individual actors.
The danger here is twofold.
First, the absence of universal norms condemns the world to be perpetually reactive.
The result is an inefficient and destabilizing crisis-response model – and no constructive vision for the future.
Second, and more insidious, the absence of an overarching purpose reinforces a narrow view of self-interest, with decisions made discretely, based on a transactional, rather than a systemic, outlook.
Trump, for one, seems convinced that such an approach is exactly what the world needs.
But we know what such self-interested deal-making really produces.
Indeed, the consequences of a myopic policy unmoored from values can already be seen, most outrageously in Syria.
The brutal siege of Aleppo culminated six years of empty rhetoric and half-measures by Western leaders who seemed to believe that the atrocities of Syria’s civil war did not merit real action.
Syria is an augury of a global dystopia.
But our fate need not be so dark.
Instead of mourning the liberal world order, as so many seem eager to do, we should be seeking to advance a new, shared purpose that can anchor a truly global system – and guarantee a better future for all.
Protecting Europe in the Age of Trump
BRUSSELS – Just like the polls prior to the United Kingdom’s Brexit referendum, the polls in the run-up to the United States’ presidential election were wrong.
And just like Brexit, the unthinkable has happened: Donald Trump is now President-elect of the US, signaling the triumph of nativism over internationalism.
In the contest between open and closed societies, the latter are clearly winning, and liberal democracy is quickly becoming a resistance movement.
With Trump in the White House, the US will become obsessed with itself.
It is safe to say that the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership between the US and the European Union is now a nonstarter.
But a Trump presidency will adversely affect Europe in more ways than that.
The EU’s territorial integrity itself is now at stake.
Trump has made it abundantly clear that his foreign-policy priorities do not include European security.
He doesn’t recognize NATO’s strategic necessity, and he has shown an interest in transatlantic relations only when he has alluded to unpaid bills.
A Trump presidency will lead to an epic geopolitical shift: for the first time since 1941, Europe cannot rely on the US defense umbrella; it now stands alone.
Europe has been only too happy to make life easy for itself.
For the past century, transatlantic relations have adhered to a perverse, unspoken dynamic, whereby the more active the US has been, the more Europe has dozed off.
When the Americans have intervened abroad – as they did in Iraq – Europe has responded with grandstanding lectures about “imperial overstretch.”
And when the Americans have failed to intervene, or intervened late or ineffectively – as in Syria and Libya – Europeans have demanded more American leadership.
That era is now over.
Trump knows that the EU has the money, technology, and know-how to be a global power equal to the US, and it is not his problem that Europe lacks the political will to harness its full potential.
We Europeans have assumed for too long that it is cheaper and safer to let the US solve our problems, even in our own backyard.
With Trump’s election (and given America’s checkered foreign-policy legacy), we must discard this belief.
The EU should treat Trump’s election as a wake-up call to take charge of its own destiny.
Ongoing conflicts, such as Syria’s bloody civil war and Russia’s annexation of Crimea and intervention in Eastern Ukraine, directly affect EU member states’ security, economies, and societies.
Yet Russians and Americans, rather than Europeans, have so far determined Ukraine’s fate, as well as the fate of other European borderlands.
The EU has, as a result, forfeited ultimate control of its own security, trade relations, and migrant flows.
In 2014, a revealing conversation between US Assistant Secretary of State for European and Eurasian Affairs Victoria Nuland and former US Ambassador to Ukraine Geoffrey Pyatt was leaked and posted online.
Discussing the US response in Ukraine – after former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych had fled to Russia – Nuland says, “Fuck the EU.”
This is an attitude that Europe has enabled.
While it was bad enough to hear such sentiments expressed by an Obama administration official, one can only imagine what we will encounter under Trump, who might not even bother to appoint an official for “Europe and Eurasian Affairs.”
This is why the EU can no longer wait to build its own European Defense Community and develop its own security strategy.
It should start by streamlining and expanding bilateral and regional relations, not least among and between the Baltic and Scandinavian countries, as well as between Belgium and the Netherlands, and Germany and France.
All of these disparate relations must be united under a single European command, with common funding and a shared defense-procurement system.
The EU must become independently capable of ensuring its own security. Anything less will be insufficient to secure its territory.
This is a difficult but vital decision that the EU has postponed for too long.
Now that Trump has been elected, it can wait no longer.
Trump’s Extreme Oligarchy
WASHINGTON, DC – US President-elect Donald Trump is filling his cabinet with rich people.
According to the latest count, his nominees include five billionaires and six multimillionaires.
This is what is known as oligarchy: direct control of the state by people with substantial private economic power.
Given that the Republicans also control both houses of Congress – and will soon make many judicial appointments – there is virtually no effective constraint on the executive branch.
In many instances – including the United States today – the initial reaction to such a government includes the hope that perhaps rich people will be good at creating jobs.
They made themselves rich, goes the logic, so maybe they can do the same for the rest of us.
Hope usually dies last, but the incoming administration’s proposed economic policies are not encouraging.
The organizing principle seems to be to discard pragmatism entirely and advance an extreme and discredited ideology.
The central theme of Trumponomics so far has been swift and sharp tax cuts.
But Mick Mulvaney, Trump’s pick to run the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) is a prominent and articulate deficit hawk; he will have a hard time supporting measures that increase the national debt.
To some extent, tax cuts will be justified with overly optimistic projections regarding their impact on economic growth, as was done under President George W. Bush, with generally disastrous effects.
But there is a limit to how much pressure can be put on the Congressional Budget Office, which is responsible for providing credible assessments of the fiscal impact of new policies.
Trump seems determined to lower income taxes for high-income Americans, as well as to reduce capital-gains tax (mostly paid by the well-off) and nearly eliminate corporate taxes (again, disproportionately benefiting the richest).
To do this, his administration will seek to increase taxes on others, and now we are beginning to see what this will look like.
People close to the president-elect are considering an import tariff, set at around 10%.
This tariff will undoubtedly be presented to the public as a move to make American manufacturing great again.
But a tariff is just another name for a tax that increases the costs of all imported goods.
This could help a few firms at the margin – and presumably Trump’s team will highlight news stories (real or fake) about a few hundred or even a few thousand jobs being “saved.”
But the cost per job will be high: all imports will become more expensive, and this increase in the price level will filter through to the cost of everything Americans buy.
In effect, the oligarchs will reduce direct taxation on themselves and increase indirect taxation on everyone – much like increasing the sales tax on all goods.
Under any such proposal, the burden of taxation would be shifted from the better off to those with less income and little or no wealth.
And that may be just the start of the negative impact on most Americans’ wellbeing.
If Trump increases tariffs on imported goods, some or all of America’s trading partners will most likely retaliate, by imposing tariffs on US exports.
As US export-oriented firms – many of which pay high wages – reduce output, relative to what they would have produced otherwise, the effect will presumably be to reduce the number of good jobs.
Some countries – such as China – may deploy other punitive measures against US firms operating on their territory.
The net effect will again be to reduce employment, both worldwide and in the US.
The world has had much experience with “trade wars,” and it has never been positive.
Why would a group of American oligarchs pursue such a disastrous policy?
The Trump administration is taking shape as a coalition of businesspeople who wrongly believe that protectionism is a good way to help the economy and market fundamentalists who now dominate the Republican caucus in the US House of Representatives.
Before Trump’s rise to prominence, the House Republicans were developing a set of policies structured around deep tax cuts, sweeping deregulation (including for finance and the environment), and repeal of President Barack Obama’s signature health-care reform, the Affordable Care Act (“Obamacare”).
They were, however, resolutely in favor of freer trade – and the Obama administration’s plan was to enact the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), a free-trade agreement with 11 other Pacific Rim countries, with substantial Republican support in Congress.
Trump’s election has not changed the core House Republican agenda – in fact, it has brought that agenda’s architects into government, at OMB, at the Department of Health and Human Services, the CIA, and other prominent positions, with more likely to follow.
As my colleague James Kwak explains in his new book Economism, their pro-market thinking has gone too far and is unlikely to lead to good outcomes.
Selling Trump’s signature issue – protectionism – to the House Republicans was not easy.
But now they have started to think about an import tariff as part of their tax “reform” package, they will all start to get on board.
And they will offer various strange justifications that deflect attention from the essentials of their policy: lower taxes for the oligarchs and people like them, and higher taxes – not to mention significant losses of high-paying jobs – for almost everyone else.
Trump’s Italian Prototype
TOKYO – The rise of billionaire Donald Trump in the US presidential race has been met with a mixture of horror and fascination.
As his campaign, once regarded with derision, continues to rack up successes – most recently, in the Michigan and Mississippi primaries and the Hawaii caucus – pundits are scrambling for some historical or foreign analogue that can shed light on the phenomenon.
While no comparison is perfect, the most apt comparison is with Silvio Berlusconi, the Italian media mogul who has served three terms as his country’s prime minister.
It is not a reassuring model.
Of course, Berlusconi and Trump share some superficial similarities, including multiple marriages and a generally vulgar style.
But the most important – and the most worrying – qualities they share is an ability to substitute salesmanship for substance, a willingness to tell bald-faced lies in pursuit of publicity and advantage, and an eagerness to intimidate critics into silence.
Berlusconi’s policy platforms, even his fundamental ideology, have always lacked consistency.
During his successful campaigns, he said whatever it took to win votes; during his three terms in office, he used the same tactic to form coalitions.
His only agenda was to protect or advance his own business interests.
So far, Trump has followed much the same strategy, saying anything to grab another vote.
The question is what this would mean if he were to make it to the White House.
The system of checks and balances established by the US Constitution has an unmatched capacity to prevent any single branch of government from going haywire.
But the manipulation of public opinion is a powerful weapon in any democracy, and it is a weapon that Trump, like Berlusconi, knows how to wield better than most.
Berlusconi’s greatest successes – especially during his 2001-2006 and 2008-2011 terms (he also served in 1994-1995) – lay in the manipulation of media and public opinion.
Though Italy is well known for low trust in government, with citizens largely resigned to the idea that virtually every public figure is self-serving, Berlusconi managed to numb the popular consciousness even further.
He somehow lulled Italians into believing that all was well in their economy and society, even in the wake of the 2008 global economic crisis, when plainly it was not.
Under his leadership, Italy lost many years when its government should have been pursuing critical reforms.
How did Berlusconi achieve this?
For the most part, he used the joke, the lie, and the smile.
When that didn’t work, he resorted to bullying, including through libel suits.
In fact, few media tycoons – Berlusconi owns Italy’s main commercial television channels and several daily newspapers (either directly or through his family) – have ever been as freewheeling in their use of libel litigation to silence journalists and other critics.
The famous Italian anti-mafia writer Roberto Saviano referred to Berlusconi’s “mud machine,” with which he would smear anyone who dared stand in his way.
(Full disclosure: As Editor of The Economist, I was the target of two libel suits by Berlusconi.)
All of these tactics are in Trump’s inventory.
Trump is aggressive with his opponents, especially in the media.
Throughout his business career, he has frequently invoked libel laws.
If he wins the presidency, he has said, he will seek to control media criticism.
And yet his essential message is optimistic, delivered with a joke and a big smile.
As Berlusconi has shown, when the population is feeling grumpy or disillusioned, as much of America is today, this approach can be highly effective – and for a very long time.
Some pundits who have invoked the Berlusconi comparison have highlighted one distinction between the bombastic billionaires: Berlusconi, they say, at least has some charm and much more business acumen.
This assessment is not only far too generous toward Berlusconi; it also risks making it seem that Trump is less dangerous than his Italian counterpart.
The reality is that, while Berlusconi certainly has his charm, Trump’s swelling base of support seems to see a certain charm in him, too, even if it is a less seductive version.
Moreover, while Berlusconi undoubtedly possesses business acumen, he has, like Trump, cut plenty of corners along the way.
The ties of Berlusconi’s close aides and friends to Italy’s various Mafia clans are well documented.
But none of this is particularly important, in terms of its implications for the United States today.
What is important is that both Trump and Berlusconi are ruthless and willing to resort to any means to achieve their (self-serving) ends.
Given this, underestimating Trump would be a huge mistake; he will always prove stronger, more slippery, and more enduring than expected.
The only way to avoid Berlusconi-level disaster – or worse – is to continue criticizing him, exposing his lies, and holding him to account for his words and actions, regardless of the insults or threats he throws at those who do.
Too many Italians shrugged their shoulders at Berlusconi’s lies and failings, figuring that he would soon go away, having done little harm.
But he did not go away, and he did plenty of harm.
The US cannot afford to make the same mistake.
The price of liberty, Americans are fond of saying, is eternal vigilance.
In confronting Trump, there can be no discount.
Trump’s Unrealpolitik
NEW YORK – Some in the United States have praised President-elect Donald Trump for his supposed realism.
He will do what is right for America, they argue, without getting caught up in thorny moral dilemmas, or letting himself be carried away by some grand sense of responsibility for the rest of the world.
By acting with the shrewd pragmatism of a businessman, he will make America stronger and more prosperous.
This view is, to be frank, delusional.
It is certainly true that Trump will not be caught up in questions of morality.
He is precisely what the Greek historian Thucydides defined as an immoral leader: one of “violent character” who “wins over the people by deceiving them” and by exploiting “their angry feelings and emotions.”
But immorality is neither desirable nor a necessary feature of realism.
(Thucydides himself was an ethical realist.)
And there is little to suggest that Trump has any of the other realist qualities that his supporters see.
How could anyone expect the proudly unpredictable and deeply uninformed Trump to execute grand strategic designs, such as the Realpolitik recommended by Harvard’s Niall Ferguson, Henry Kissinger’s biographer, following the election?
Ferguson, like Kissinger, believes that true Realpolitik under Trump should begin with an alliance among the US, China, and Russia, based on a mutual fear of Islamic extremism and a shared desire to exploit lesser powers to boost their own economies.
These countries would agree to prevent Europe from attaining great-power status (by destroying the European Union), and to ensure that populist or authoritarian governments control the United Nations Security Council’s five permanent members.
To this end, Trump could work with Russian President Vladimir Putin to help Marine Le Pen, the leader of France’s anti-EU nationalist right, win April’s presidential election.
Moreover, in order to consolidate a post-EU Anglo-Atlantic sphere, Trump could transform the North American Free-Trade Agreement into a North Atlantic arrangement, replacing Mexico with the United Kingdom.
Finally, he could put pressure on NATO members to pay more for defense – a move that would surely undermine the security of the Baltic states and Ukraine.
Achieving these goals would require more than an ability to avoid moral impediments.
Like all statecraft, it would require an aptitude for careful diplomatic engineering, respect for facts and truth, historical knowledge, and a capacity for cautious examination of complex situations when formulating (or revising) policies.
Yet Trump is the most anarchic, capricious, and inconsistent individual ever to occupy the White House, and all he has to help guide him is a cabinet full of billionaire deal-makers like him, preoccupied with calculable immediate interests.
For them, casting off allies might seem like an easy way to streamline decision-making (and boost share prices).
But repudiating America’s role as a global beacon – and thus the idea of American exceptionalism – is a bad bet for the future.
Scrapping free-trade deals with Asia and Latin America, for example, could provide a short-term gain for the US economy; but doing so would ultimately undercut the projection of American power there, paving the way for penetration by China.
The US should be aiming to curtail China’s influence without incurring its wrath.
Another lesson from Thucydides – reinforced by historical experience – is that rising, not established, powers tend to upset the international order.
Protecting that order requires the main global power to uphold the institutions that underpin it, in order to prevent revolutionary behavior by lesser powers.
Yet Trump has criticized and disregarded international institutions to such an extent that it is now China that is defending global governance – including the Paris agreement on climate change and the nuclear deal with Iran – from a revolutionary US.
Worse, Trump has seemingly abandoned all caution with regard to China.
On the diplomatic front, by speaking directly with the president of Taiwan after the election, he violated a protocol maintained for four decades, by Democratic and Republican presidents alike.
On the economic front, he has leveled reckless (and plainly wrong) accusations that China is manipulating its currency to gain an unfair trade advantage.
Provoking China, doubting NATO, and threatening trade wars is nihilism, not strategy.
At this point, Trump seems set to do on a global scale what former President George W. Bush did to the Middle East – intentionally destabilize the old order, and then fail to create a new one.
The first step would be a deal with Putin on Syria – a move that, like Bush’s defeat of Saddam Hussein in Iraq, would amount to handing a victory to Iran.
This is not to say that none of the Realpolitik envisioned by Ferguson will come to fruition.
But what elements of it do emerge will likely be driven more by Putin than by Trump – with dangerous outcomes.
Already, Putin has begun work on dismantling the EU.
After Le Pen was refused credit from French banks, Russian banks saved her campaign.
And Russian state-sponsored propaganda is helping to drive former Soviet republics away from the EU.
Trump, a vocal Putin fan, is unlikely to redress the tilting balance of power as part of, let alone as a condition for, a diplomatic “reset” with Russia.
What kind of a realist would not use a united Western alliance to limit a Russia that is trying to engineer a return to Cold War spheres of influence?
And, for that matter, what kind of a realist sends to Israel an ambassador whose pro-settlement rhetoric threatens to inflame the entire Muslim world against the US?
What is so realistic about a war of annihilation against the Islamic State that is not backed by a plan for engagement with the broader Middle East?
Trump might have some realistic instincts.
But they will not be enough to ensure measured responses to even the slightest provocation, much less to underpin a sweeping and consistent strategy.
Trump’s Magical Economic Thinking
WASHINGTON, DC – Donald Trump has finally put out a detailed economic plan.
Authored by Peter Navarro (an economist at the University of California-Irvine) and Wilbur Ross (an investor), the plan claims that a President Trump would boost growth and reduce the national debt.
But its projections are based on assumptions so unrealistic that they seem to have come from a different planet.
If the United States really did adopt Trump’s plan, the result would be an immediate and unmitigated disaster.
At the heart of the plan is a very large tax cut.
The authors claim this would boost economic growth, despite the fact that similar cuts in the past (for example, under President George W. Bush) had no such effect.
There is a lot of sensible evidence available on precisely this point, all of which is completely ignored.
The Trump plan concedes that the tax cut per se would reduce revenue by at least $2.6 trillion over ten years – and its authors are willing to cite the non-partisan Tax Foundation on this point.
But the Trump team claims this would be offset by a growth miracle spurred by deregulation.
In fact, their estimates of the benefits of deregulation are completely exaggerated.
Serious independent analysis, for example by the World Bank or the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, finds that the US does not have a high regulatory burden on the non-financial sector.
In the World Bank’s widely used Doing Business indicators, for example, the US ranks seventh in the world – and there is not a lot of realistic room for improvement.
Sure, some companies always like to complain about regulation, and exaggerated numbers regarding the impact of various rules abound.
But do you really want to base a country’s macroeconomic strategy on such meaningless claims?
At the same time, financial deregulation is exactly what led to the 2008 crisis – and to much lower growth, higher unemployment, and bigger deficits.
Trump seems determined to repeat all the big mistakes of the George W. Bush era.
My assessment is that Trump would run up much more than $2.6 trillion in new debt.
With regard to trade, the Trump economic plan makes no sense at all.
The supposed increases in government revenue are based on an analysis that reads like word salad – I don’t recall ever seeing a document from a major party candidate that was so completely incoherent.
As far as I can figure out, the argument is that Trump will magically make the trade deficit go away, and this, in turn, will miraculously boost jobs.
This kind of thinking should be confined to fairy tales; if it were actually tried in the real world, nobody would live happily ever after.
A few years ago, James Kwak and I wrote a history of US fiscal policy and the national debt – and called it White House Burning.
The historical reference was to the moment in 1814 when underinvestment in the federal government's military capability allowed the British to seize Washington, DC, where they burned most official buildings, including the White House (and the Treasury and Congress).
But the broader point we were making is that, since the 1980s, the Republican Party’s approach to federal government finances changed.
Instead of limiting deficits and debt, their top priority became cutting taxes – regardless of the consequences.
Former Vice President Dick Cheney famously remarked, “deficits don’t matter” – meaning that there were no immediate political consequences of running a budget deficit and pushing up the national debt.
Under George W. Bush, US budget deficits and debt ballooned, and extreme financial deregulation created the conditions for the largest financial crisis since the 1930s, which further increased debt.
Trump cannot tell the truth about the implications of his plan for the national debt.
Instead, his team has constructed an elaborate and rather bizarre fantasy – building upon but also going far beyond several decades of Republican fiscal irresponsibility.
What would really happen is this: The big tax cut would help relatively few people, while also cutting federal government revenue sharply.
Higher trade tariffs would raise the cost of imports, which would have a direct negative impact on ordinary Americans.
With trade wars breaking out, growth would decline, not increase – and the federal government deficits would be huge.
At the same time, financial deregulation would allow risks to build up throughout the banking system and more broadly.
According to the Wall Street Journal, no prominent economists have endorsed Donald Trump or lined up behind his economic plan.
That is not a surprise: those economists have reputations to protect.
If they signed on to Trump’s absurd plan, they would expose themselves to the ridicule of their colleagues.
More important, they would risk doing real long-term damage to their country.
Slouching Toward Trump
LONDON – The Republican establishment has gone into overdrive to present President-elect Donald Trump as a guarantor of continuity.
Of course, he is nothing of the sort.
He campaigned against the political establishment, and, as he told a pre-election rally, a victory for him would be a “Brexit plus, plus, plus.”
With two political earthquakes within months of each other, and more sure to follow, we may well agree with the verdict of France’s ambassador to the United States: the world as we know it “is crumbling before our eyes.”
The last time this seemed to be happening was the era of the two world wars, 1914 to 1945.
The sense then of a “crumbling” world was captured by William Butler Yeats’s 1919 poem “The Second Coming”: “Things fall apart; the center cannot hold;/Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world.”
With the traditional institutions of rule thoroughly discredited by the war, the vacuum of legitimacy would be filled by powerful demagogues and populist dictatorships: “The best lack all conviction, while the worst/are full of passionate intensity.”
Oswald Spengler had the same idea in his Decline of the West, published in 1918.
Yeats’s political prognosis was shaped by his religious eschatology.
He believed the world had to wade through “nightmare” for “Bethlehem to be born.”
In his day, he was right.
The nightmare he discerned continued through the Great Depression of 1929-1932, and culminated in World War II.
These were preludes to the “second coming,” not of Christ, but of a liberalism built on firmer social foundations.
But were the nightmares of depression and war necessary preludes?
Is horror the price we must pay for progress?
Evil has indeed often been the agent of good (without Hitler, no United Nations, no Pax Americana, no European Union, no taboo on racism, no decolonization, no Keynesian economics, and much else).
But it does not follow that evil is necessary for good, much less that we should wish it as a means to an end.
We cannot embrace the politics of upheaval, because we cannot be sure that it will produce a Roosevelt rather than a Hitler.
Any decent, rational person hopes for a milder method to achieve progress.
But must the milder method – call it parliamentary or constitutional democracy – break down periodically in disastrous fashion?
The usual explanation is that a system fails because the elites lose touch with the masses.
But while one would expect this disconnect to happen in dictatorships, why does disenchantment with democracy take root in democracies themselves?
One explanation, which goes back to Aristotle, is the perversion of democracy by plutocracy.
The more unequal a society, the more the lifestyles and values of the wealthy diverge from those of “ordinary” people.
They come to inhabit symbolically gated communities in which only one type of public conversation is deemed decent, respectable, and acceptable.
This itself represents a considerable disenfranchisement.
To Trump’s supporters, his gaffes were not gaffes at all, or if they were, his supporters didn’t mind.
But it is economics, not culture, that strikes at the heart of legitimacy.
It is when the rewards of economic progress accrue mainly to the already wealthy that the disjunction between minority and majority cultural values becomes seriously destabilizing.
And this, I think, is what is happening in the democratic world.
The second coming of liberalism represented by Roosevelt, Keynes, and the founders of the European Union has been destroyed by the economics of globalization: the pursuit of an ideal equilibrium through the free movement of goods, capital, and labor, with its conjoined tolerance of financial criminality, obscenely lavish rewards for a few, high levels of unemployment and underemployment, and curtailment of the state’s role in welfare provision.
The resulting inequality of economic outcomes strips away the democratic veil that hides from the majority of citizens the true workings of power.
The “passionate intensity” of the populists conveys a simple, easily grasped, and now resonant message: the elites are selfish, corrupt, and often criminal.
Power must be returned to the people.
It is surely no coincidence that the two biggest political shocks of the year – Brexit and the election of Trump – have come in the two countries that most fervently embraced neoliberal economics.
Trump’s geopolitical and economic views should be judged against this background of disenchantment, not by an ideal moral or economic standard.
In other words, Trumpism could be a solution to the crisis of liberalism, not a portent of its disintegration.
Viewed this way, Trump’s isolationism is a populist way of saying that the US needs to withdraw from commitments which it has neither the power nor the will to honor.
The promise to work with Russia to end the savage conflict in Syria is sensible, even though it implies the victory of Bashar al-Assad’s regime.
Disengaging peacefully from exposed global responsibilities will be Trump’s biggest challenge.
Trump’s protectionism harks back to an older American tradition.
The US economy of high-wage, job-rich manufacturing has foundered with globalization.
But what would a feasible form of protectionism look like?
The challenge will be to achieve stricter controls without beggaring the world economy or inflaming national rivalries and racist sentiment.
Trump has also promised an $800 billion-$1 trillion program of infrastructure investment, to be financed by bonds, as well as a massive corporate-tax cut, both aimed at creating 25 million new jobs and boosting growth.
This, together with a pledge to maintain welfare entitlements, amounts to a modern form of Keynesian fiscal policy (though of course not identified as such).
Its merit is its head-on challenge to the neoliberal obsession with deficits and debt reduction, and to reliance on quantitative easing as the sole – and now exhausted – demand-management tool.
As Trump moves from populism to policy, liberals should not turn away in disgust and despair, but rather engage with Trumpism’s positive potential.
His proposals need to be interrogated and refined, not dismissed as ignorant ravings.
The task of liberals is to ensure that a third coming of liberalism arrives with the least cost to liberal values.
And there will be some cost.
That is the meaning of Brexit, Trump’s victory, and any populist victories to come.
«Бірінші кезекте Америка», ал келесіде жаһандық жанжал
НЬЮ-ЙОРК – Америка Құрама Штаттары Президенті ретінде Дональд Трамптың сайлануы жай ғана жаһандануға қарсы ашынып келе жатқан популистік көтерілісті көрсетпейді. Ол сондай-ақ Pax Americana (“Американдық бейбітшілік”) соңын білдіреді - бұл АҚШ пен оның одақтастары екінші дүниежүзілік соғыстан кейін негізін салған еркін халықаралық алмасу және ортақ қауіпсіздік тәртібі.
Бұл АҚШ бастаған әлемдік тәртіп, 70 жыл бойы гүлдену мен өркендеуге мүмкіндік берді.
Ол сауданы ырықтандыруға негізделген нарықтық режимдер, капитал жұмылғыштығының өсуі және тиісті әлеуметтік қамсыздандыру саясаты,  Еуропа, Таяу Шығыс және Азиядағы НАТО және басқа да түрлі одақтар арқылы жүзеге асқан американдық қауіпсіздік кепілдігінің арқасында орын алды.
Трамп, алайда, саудаға кедергі жасайтын популистік, жаһандануға қарсы және протекционистік саясатты жүргізіп, еңбек және капиталдың қозғалысын шектеуі мүмкін.
Ал оның өз қорғанысы үшін Американың одақтастарын одан да көбірек төлеуге мәжбүр етемін деп ұсынуы оның қазіргі АҚШ қауіпсіздік кепілдіктеріне күмән келтіруін көрсетеді. Егер Трамптың «Американы бірінші кезекке» қоюы шын болса, оның әкімшілігі АҚШ геосаяси стратегиясын отанының ғана ұлттық мүдделерін қамтамасыз етуге бағытталған, изоляционизм және біржақтылыққа қарай ауыстырады.
АҚШ 1920 және 1930 жылдары осыған ұқсас саясатын жүргізген кезде, бұл екінші дүниежүзілік соғыстың “дәндерін отырғызуға” көмектесті.
Протекционизм - мыңдаған импортталған тауарларға әсер еткен Смут-Хоули тарифінен бастап - Ұлы депрессияны одан әрі нашарлатып, сауда және валюталық соғыстарды тудырды.
Ең маңыздысы, АҚШ екі мұхиттармен қауіпсіз қорғалған деген жалған нанымға негізделген американдық изоляционизм нацистік Германия мен империялық Жапонияның  агрессивті соғысты бастап, бүкіл әлемге қауіп төндіруіне мүмкіндік берді. 1941 жылдың желтоқсан айында болған Перл Харбор шабуылынан соң, АҚШ, тығып отырған құм астынан басын шығаруға мәжбүр болды.
Бүгін де, АҚШ-тың изоляционизмге бет бұрып, тек АҚШ ұлттық мүдделерін ғана ойлауы, сайып келгенде, жаһандық жанжалға әкелуі мүмкін. Тіпті Американың Еуропадан ажырауы жақын жоспарда болмаса да, Еуропалық Одақ және Еуроаймақ казірдің өзінде ыдырауда, әсіресе Біріккен Патшалықтың маусымдағы Brexit-ке дауыс беруі және желтоқсан айында конституциялық реформаларға байланысты Италияның сәтсіз референдумы туралы ескере отырсақ.
Сонымен қатар, 2017 жылы экстремалды, Еуропаға қарсы сол немесе оңшыл популистік партиялар Франция мен Италияда және Еуропаның басқа бөліктерінде де билікке келуі мүмкін.
Еуропада АҚШ-тың белсенді қатысуынсыз, агрессивті кек алушы Ресей алға басатын болады.
Ресей қазірдің өзінде АҚШ пен ЕО-ны Украина, Сирия, Балтық және Балқан мәселелері бойынша қиын сынауда, және ол бұрынғы кеңестік блок елдерінде өз ықпалын қайта орнатып, сондай-ақ Еуропада ресейшіл қозғалыстарды қолдау арқылы ЕО-ның алдағы ыдырауынан пайда алуы мүмкін.
Еуропа АҚШ қауіпсіздік қолшатырын біртіндеп жоғалтатын болса, Ресей президенті Владимир Путин ең үлкен ұтысқа жетейін деп тұр.
Трамптың ұсыныстары, сондай-ақ Таяу Шығыстағы жағдайды ушықтыра алады.  Ол Американы энергетикалық тұрғыдан тәуелсіз жасаймын деп мәлімдеді, бұл АҚШ-тың аймақтағы мүдделерінен бас тартуын және жылыжайлық газдарды шығаратын отандық отын көздеріне тәуелді болуына әкеп соғады.
Және тек радикалды қарулы ислам ғана емес, тап исламның өзі де қауіпті деген өз ұстанымын Трамп сақтап қалды.
Трамптың бұл ойын Ұлттық қауіпсіздік кеңесшісі, генерал Майкл Флинн де қолдайды, бұл исламшыл активистердің өркениеттер қақтығысы туралы ойларына жайлы болып тұр.
Сонымен қатар, Трамптың «Америка бірінші» тәсілі Сауд Арабиясы мен Иран арасындағы ежелден сүннит-шиит соғыстарын нашарлата түседі.
АҚШ бұдан былай оның сүннит одақтастарының қауіпсіздігіне кепілдік бермесе, барлық аймақтық күштілер- Иран, Сауд Арабиясы, Түркия, Египет - олар тек ядролық қаруды сатып алу арқылы өздерін қорғай алады деп шешуі мүмкін, және одан да көп өлімге апаратын қақтығыс туындайтын болады.
Азияда, АҚШ-тың экономикалық және әскери басымдылығы ондаған жылдар бойы тұрақтылық кепілі болды; бірақ өсіп  келе жатқан Қытай енді мұндай статус-квоны сынауда.
АҚШ президенті Барак Обаманың Азияға қатысты стратегиясының «негізі» ең алдымен 12-елді қамтитын Транс-Тынықмұхиттық серіктестікпен байланысты еді, ал Трамп болса өзінің кеңсесіндегі бірінші күні-ақ оның көзін жоямын деп уәде берген.
Сонымен қатар, Қытай оның «бір белдеу, бір жол» саясаты, Азиялық инфрақұрылымдық инвестициялар банкі, Жаңа Даму банкі (бұрынғы БРИКС банкі) арқылы және ЖЭО-мен бәсекелестікке түсе алатын өзінің өңірлік еркін сауда туралы ұсынысымен Азия, Тынық мұхит аймағы мен Латын Америкасында өз экономикалық байланыстарын тез нығайтып жатыр.
Тарихқа көз жүгіртсек, анығы- протекционизм, изоляционизм,  және «Америка бірінші кезекте» деген саясат экономикалық және әскери апаттарға апаратын жол болып табылады.
Трамптың тегеурініне төтеп беру
ЛОНДОН – Америкадағы президент сайлауында Дональд Трамптың жеңіске жетуі әлемнің басым бөлігін таңқалдырды.
Бірақ сайланған президент халықты таңқалдыруын тоқтатар емес.
Көп сарапшылардың болжамы орындалмай, ол жеңіске жете салысымен қор нарығы күшейіп,  АҚШ-тың негізгі үш индексі рекордты деңгейге қымбаттап, доллардың бағасы өсті. Бұл күтпеген нәтижелердің себебін түсіндіре алсақ, алдағы бірнеше айда нарықта қандай өзгерістер болатынын шамалаймыз.
Сайлаудың алдында сарапшылардың көбі Трамп жеңген жағдайда құнды қағаздар жаппай сатылып, жұрттың бәрі тәуекелі аз мемлекеттік облигацияларға көшеді деп болжаған. Сайлау нәтижелері шыға бастағанда солай болды да, әсіресе Трамптың Флоридадағы ерекше жеңісінен соң оның Сайлаушылар алқасында алға шыққаны айқындалып, нарық құлдырай түсті.
Оның жеңілмейтіні анық болғанда Dow Jones индексі 800 пунктқа, S&amp;P 500 бірден тәуліктегі ең төменгі шекке дейін құлдырады.
Оның үстіне доллар да төмен сырғып, АҚШ Қазынашылығы нарығындағы сапаға деген сенім азайып, облигациялар табысын жоғалта бастады.
Бірақ нарықтағы пессимизм ұзаққа созылған жоқ.
Жаңа сайланған президент билікті қабылдайтынын айтып Нью-Йоркте сөз сөйлей салысымен, Шығыс стандарт уақытымен түскі 3-тер шамасында акциялар күрт қымбаттай бастады, баға содан бері өсіп жатыр, ал бұл әлемдегі қауіпті активтерді көбейтін жіберді.
Капитал АҚШ-қа ағыла бастағандықтан, доллар 13 жыл��ан бері болмаған деңгейде нығая түсті.
Бұған қоса, көп инвесторлар мемлекеттік облигациялардың «қауіпсіз шекпенінен» шығып, пайыздық үстемелер күрт қымбаттай бастады, ал бұл өнімділікті қолдауды доғаратындарын айтқан Федералдық резерв басшысы Бен Бернанкенің мәлімдемесінен кейін басталған 2013 жылғы «ханталапайдан» да асып түсті.
Дәл қазір нарық Федералдық резерв келесі айда да пайыздық үстемелерді өсіре түседі деген сенімде отыр.
Бұл бетбұрыстың себебін түсіндіру үшін Трамптың сайлаудан кейінгі мәлімдемелеріне көңіл аудару керек.
Экономикалық салада ол қайта реттеу, корпоративтік салықты реформалау, инфрақұрылым шығындары сияқты дамуға бағытталған шаралар туралы айтты.
Сайлаудан кейін Трамп Қытай мен Мексика тауарларына «жазалау» тарифтерін енгізу, Солтүстік Америка еркін сауда келісімін (NAFTA) бұзу, Оңтүстік Корея мен АҚШ арасындағы сауда келісімінің күшін жою сияқты протекционистік уәделерін айтпайтын болды. Дегенмен, ол Транс-Тынық мұхиттық әріптестік келісімінен шығатынын тағы қайталады, бірақ бұл келісім әлі ратификацияланбаған.
Ол, сондай-ақ, Федералдық резерв пен оның басшылығын да сынамайтын болды.
Трамп фокусын өзгерту арқылы нарықты сайлауалды компаниясы кезінде айтқан экономикалық өсімге кесірін тигізетін шараларды қолға алмайтынына сендірді.
Бұған қоса ол Клинтон әулетіне қысастық жасау үшін арнайы прокурор тағайындап, олардың ісін тергету туралы ойынан да бас тартып, ымырашылдыққа ұмтылатынын New York Times газетінеайтып берді.
Дәл сол сияқты, жылдар бойы Президент Барак Обаманы сынап келген Трамп тіпті оны асыра мақтап сөйлей бастады.
Оның Республикалық партия ішіндегі қарсыластарымен, соның ішінде Өкілдер палатасының спикері Пол Райанмен және әсіресе партиядағы ең басты бақталастарының бірі – Массачусетстен сайланған губернатор Митт Ромнимен қарым-қатынасынан да сондай тенденцияны байқауға болады.
Конгрестің екі палатасында да республикашылдардың жеңіске жеткенін, штаттарда да олардың күші басым екенін ескерсек, партия басшылығымен татуласса, Трамптың өсімге бағытталған саясатты жүзеге асыруға жолы ашылады.
Әрине, жедел әрі инклюзивті дамуды шынайылыққа айналдырып, шылқыған бай нарықты нығайта түсу үшін көп нәрсе, соның ішінде мұқият әзірленген жоспар, ауқымды саяси сауда және оны тұрақты түрде орындау қажет болады.
Оның үстіне, бұл процесті бақылайтын команда әлі жасақталған жоқ; басқа жаңа қызметкерлер сияқты оның мүшелері де ұзақ тексеру процесінен өтуі керек, кейбіреулерін бекітуде Сенат тегеурінді қарсылық көрсетуі мүмкін.
Команда қызметіне кіріскен соң оның мүшелері Трамптың жоспарын өз таңдауымен емес, қажеттіліктен дәстүрлі емес қаржылық саясатқа көбірек тәуелді болып қалған экономикаға бейімдеудің жолдарын іздеуі керек болады.
Бұл жоспар осы бір ұзаққа созылған қаржылық экспансия кезінде қаржы нарығы мен ресурсты бөлісу тәртібі бұзылып, мұның соңы байлықты бөлісудегі теңсіздікке әкеліп соққанын мойындауы тиіс.
Бір жағымды жаңалық: жаңа келетін әкімшілік Обаманың кезінде негізі қаланған, бірақ ол билікте болған сегіз жылдың ішінде Конгрестегі тым бөлшектеніп, функционалдығы төмендеген саясаттың кесірінен орнынан жылжымай тұрған шараларға иек арта алады.
Бұл шаралар инфрақұрылымға инвестиция салу, салықты реформалау және жұмыс орындарын ашу сияқты императивтерді орындауға бағытталған.
Бірақ, АҚШ-тың вакуумда орналаспағаны белгілі.
Сыртқы сын-қатерлерден де өту керек, немесе сайланған президент нарықтың дегенін орындай алатын болса, оларды өз жағына тартып алуы тиіс.
Алдағы бірнеше айдың ішінде тұрақсыздық тудыратын бірқанша саяси оқиғаны бастан кешіргелі отырған Еуропадағы өзгерістердің салдары әсіресе ауыр болмақ.
Италия конституцияға қатысты референдум өткізгелі жатыр, ал бұл премьер-министр Маттео Ренци үкіметінің отставкасына әкелуі мүмкін.
Ұлыбритания Еуроодақтан нық сеніммен әрі қатаң тәртіппен шығудың жоспарын ұсынуы керек.
Францияда «Ұлттық майданның» өкілі Марин Ле Пен алдағы болатын президент сайлауында истеблишменттің көңілін түсіруге тырыспақ.
Ал, Германияда канцлер Ангела Меркель дәстүрлі саясаткерлер жеңіліске ұшырап жатқан тұста, келесі жылы күзде келесі мерзімге сайлануға күш салмақ.
Еуропадағы тұрақсыздық қаупіне қарамастан, Трамп АҚШ-тағы өсімге әсер етіп қана қоймай, оны барынша инклюзивті ете алатын жағдайда тұр. Конгресс қолдаған жан-жақты экономикалық саясат ұстанымын жақтау арқылы оның әкімшілігі жеке секторды қолындағы ірі қаражатты қысқа мерзімді қаржылық инжинирингке емес, зауыттарға, құрал-жабдықтарға және адамдарға инвестиция салу сияқты дамуды тездететін жобаларға салуға көндіруі мүмкін.
Америкалықтардың көпшілігін Трампқа дауыс беруге итермелеген экономикалық уайымның бұлты сейілсе және нарық көп пайда тауып, күшейе түсетін болса, бұл болжамның шындыққа айналары анық.  
America’s Failures of Representation and Prospects for Democracy
NEW YORK – As the inauguration of US President-elect Donald Trump approaches, the best way to assess the incoming administration may be to focus on the ultimate factors that led to his victory.
Trump was not elected in a vacuum, and, as his agenda takes shape, we can start to gauge its impact on the political economy whence his candidacy emerged.
Trump won by challenging the credibility of both the political and academic establishments, relentlessly highlighting discrepancies between their depiction of the United States’ political economy and the reality that many voters experienced.
Like Bernie Sanders in the Democratic primary, he started drawing large crowds by breaking ranks with his party’s mainstream.
While Hillary Clinton and Republican rivals such as Jeb Bush and Marco Rubio tried to build coalitions based on cultural issues and partisan traditions, Trump and Sanders set their sights squarely on what mattered most to voters: a political economy in which elected officials strongly promoted a broad-based prosperity that included them.
How did the other candidates miss this central theme?
My sense is that they didn’t; rather, their efforts to attract a broad spectrum of voters were constrained by a system that makes it extremely difficult to fund a credible political campaign without catering slavishly to the wealthiest sliver of American society.
That system invited rebellion, and Trump and Sanders – by self-financing and grassroots fundraising, respectively – were ideally positioned to lead one.
The other candidates were also constrained by party orthodoxy, which has long kept Democrats and Republicans alike from willingly addressing the structural inequities in the American economy head-on.
Doing so would require candor about such hard issues as technological disruption and globalization. It would also require confronting the legacy of decades of lobbyist-written free-trade agreements, regulations, bailouts, and tax policies that have been funneling economic gains up the income ladder, while imposing budget austerity in response to the needs of most Americans.
The story Trump told of a “rigged” system resonated with voters more than anything they had heard from their political leaders in quite some time.
This points to a second, closely related misrepresentation: for many voters, the “expert” consensus about globalization does not ring true.
Economists, in particular, have touted free trade and global markets as an unalloyed good.
With few exceptions, such as Harvard’s Dani Rodrik and the Nobel laureate Michael Spence, none pointed out that many workers would be displaced and receive little or no compensation, and that rapid globalization can thus stretch a country’s social fabric beyond its elastic limit.
But any real expert on American political economy could see plain as day that the US would provide inadequate compensation to those disrupted by foreign competition.
Much of that disruption has come from America’s free-trade relationship with China, a very large country which has a far lower per capita income.
In fact, a recent paper by MIT’s David Autor and others shows that the social distress caused by US-China trade has polarized American politics, and probably increased certain voting cohorts’ support for “nativist politicians” such as Trump.
In his 1922 essay “The Dismal Science,” H.L. Mencken suggested why economists would ignore the negative social effects that globalization can have on an advanced economy such as the US.
Such misrepresentations, Mencken argued, reinforce the power of those who already hold it.
Wittingly or not, experts know that they can curry favor and stay out of trouble by either keeping silent or affirming the policies that make the powerful better off.
But, eventually, something has to give.
As wealth becomes ever more concentrated, a body politic suffering from widespread economic insecurity will begin to search for scapegoats – and the experts and pundits themselves were an ideal target this time around.
This dual crisis of representation – political and intellectual – has become a toxic brew.
Critiques of Trump’s policies gain no purchase with his supporters, because they come from experts who have lost their trust.
This credibility deficit gives Trump latitude, but it also poses a challenge for him as he moves from campaigning to governing.
As president, Trump will need to devise remedies to the social, economic, and political problems that he has described.
But to do that, he will have to work within the same “rigged” system that he ran against, and he will have to craft policies that are actually feasible and will have a positive effect on Americans’ lives.
To be sure, the Republican-controlled Congress might work with Trump to implement a mini variant of Franklin D. Roosevelt’s New Deal of the 1930s.
But, without reform of the “rigged” system, it is likely that Trump’s proposed fiscal expansion will again disproportionately benefit the wealthy, without “trickling down” to the rest of Americans.
“Public-private partnerships” have been championed as a means to direct capital toward a national rebuilding effort; but such measures can be manipulated, and often lead to “heads, I win; tails, the taxpayer loses” outcomes of the type that have benefited Wall Street and Silicon Valley in recent years.
Surely this is not what Trump supporters were attracted to when Trump declared he would “Make America great again.”
Twenty-three Democratic US senators (plus two independents who caucus with the Democrats), and only eight Republican senators, are up for reelection in 2018.
If the Republicans pass a Keynesian growth package in the next two years that tightens labor markets and raises wages, they could secure their grip on power for many years to come.
This, in turn, would enable them to appoint new Supreme Court justices willing to ignore or undercut women’s and workers’ rights, environmental protection, and public education.
Such an outcome, given Trump’s campaign rhetoric, would be farcical, if it were not so tragic.
Trump, a child of inherited wealth, now has a chance to define his place in history.
Let us hope that he can rise to the challenge, imagine his role as one of repairing the flaws of American democracy, and not settle for presiding over a set of “deals” with, and for, the powerful.
An America that broadens economic prosperity and makes its political system more democratic will require reforms that reduce the power of money and increase responsiveness to citizens.
Anything less would constitute a failure by Trump to honor those who brought him to power.
A failure to live up to America’s founding principles has long created a tension that provides impetus for the country’s political, economic, and social progress.
If Trump refutes those principles – and if, in the despondency that follows, invoking them comes to be seen as a sentimental, romantic act – the price of the failures of representation that led to his election will be high indeed.
Trump and the Middle East Cauldron
DENVER – One of the hallmarks of a presidential transition in the United States is a comprehensive policy review, aimed at determining which policies to retain and which to eliminate or change.
As President-elect Donald Trump moves toward taking office, he seems eager to make plenty of changes – some more positive than others.
The Obama administration, in particular, often hesitated to expand its role, anticipating a time when the US would not be absorbed in a region that, to paraphrase Winston Churchill’s line about the Balkans, had produced more history than it has consumed.
Nonetheless, Obama understood the value of maintaining a consistent stance in Iraq – something that his critics often fail to recognize.
The truth is that it was Bush who, having plunged the US into war in Afghanistan and Iraq, in 2008 signed the Status of Forces Agreement that allotted three years to withdraw all US troops from Iraqi territory.
And Iraqi politicians would not agree to postpone that deadline on terms that could be justified to the American people.
One can only imagine the reaction of the US Congress, including those who wanted to keep US troops in Iraq as long as they have been in Germany or Japan, had the Obama administration agreed to Iraqi demands that US troops be subject to the Iraqi judicial system.
All of this left the Obama administration with little choice but to withdraw US forces – and take the associated blame.
Indeed, since that withdrawal was completed, the region’s struggles have only escalated, plunging an ever-larger area into conflict.
Trump and his team must now think carefully about what has happened in the Middle East, and what to do about it.
This will require not just an investigation into region-wide challenges, such as Sunni radicalism, but also a careful consideration of bilateral policies.
Start with the continued export of Sunni radicalism from the Arabian Peninsula, a complex issue that involves Saudi Arabia and other Gulf States.
While extremist groups have traditionally received funding from the Peninsula, it is not sound policy simply to accuse the Saudis of incubating all that is bad in the Middle East, and punish them accordingly.
While the US now enjoys greater energy self-sufficiency, thanks to shale oil and gas, that is not true of its allies in Europe.
Would a tougher position toward Saudi Arabia really be in America’s interest?
Nor is it wise to blame the Shia – who are, in many ways, the victims – for the onslaught of Sunni radicalism.
The tough-minded Iraqi leader, Nouri al-Maliki, who won three terms as prime minister, may not have engaged in sufficient outreach to the country’s Sunnis, but that is only one reason why Sunni radicalism persists in Iraq.
Another is that some elements of Iraq’s Sunni minority have refused to accept their status as the only Sunnis in the Arab Middle East to live under a Shia majority.
Then there is Syria, now the main flashpoint of the region’s complex social and political dynamics.
The civil war there is not just a matter of a ruthless dictator quelling the aspirations of a democratic-minded opposition.
Rather, it is a multi-sided conflict, in which identifying the “good guys” is no easy feat.
The Islamic State (ISIS) is, to be sure, public enemy number one, and Trump has already recognized it as such.
But how to eliminate ISIS not just from Mosul, but from the entire world, will require a thoughtful, subtle, and nuanced approach.
Trump’s emerging national security team does not seem to understand this.
Moreover, defeating ISIS is just the first step.
The Trump administration will also have to deal with the external actors involved in Syria.
For example, it will need to devise an effective policy toward Turkey, a NATO member with strong interests in Syria – interests that, at times, conflict with America’s.
At a time when Turkish democracy is wobbling, and its leaders are less interested in Euro-Atlanticism than in reasserting century-old claims in the Middle East, the US will, again, need to adopt a tactful approach.
Then there is Iran.
Is walking away from the Iran nuclear deal, as many supporters of the new US administration are demanding, conducive to easing the crisis in the Middle East?
Iran may not offer much in the way of solutions; but, if the US abandoned the nuclear deal, the country could easily exacerbate the region’s turmoil.
As if that were not enough, the US will also need to rethink its policy toward Egypt, which, until recently, often made important contributions to diplomatic efforts in the region.
Much of Israel’s security is based on an Egypt that supports the peace process with Palestine.
As tattered as that process may look, there is still plenty of room for further deterioration.
Trump’s administration has often emphasized its plans to look inward, focusing on domestic policy and putting America first in foreign policy.
But Trump will not be able to avoid playing a role in the Middle East.
One hopes that it is a constructive one.
Трамптың жоспары АҚШ-та сұранысты арттыра ала ма?
КЕМБРИДЖ – Дональд Трамп АҚШ-тағы президент сайлауында жеңіске жеткелі баспасөз бен қаржы нарығы оның салықты азайту және алдағы он жылда инфрақұрылымға 1 триллион доллар қаржы жұмсау туралы ұсыныстарына ерекше көңіл бөліп келеді.