Aid for education remains too low and too fragmented.
In advance of adopting the SDGs, at the Conference on Financing for Development in July, the world has the chance to put real resources behind the Education SDG.
The three major types of partners convening in Addis Ababa – governments, philanthropists, and top companies – should pool resources to enable impoverished countries to scale up education, especially at the pre-K and secondary levels.
The time has come to create a Global Fund for Education to ensure that even the world’s poorest children have the chance to receive a quality education at least through secondary school.
This is how malaria, AIDS, and vaccine-preventable diseases have been battled successfully in the past 15 years.
The United States, the United Kingdom, Norway, Sweden, and other governments teamed up with the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, private companies like Novartis, GlaxoSmithKline, Ericsson, Sumitomo Chemical, and others to ensure that life-saving vaccines, medicines, and diagnostics could reach the poorest of the poor.
The results have been remarkable: millions of lives have been saved, and economic growth has been boosted.
We must now do the same for education.
Though access to primary schooling has expanded dramatically over the past two decades, a transformative breakthrough in quality learning and secondary education has remained out of reach – until now.
The spread of computers, mobile phones, and broadband coverage to the poorest regions of the world could – and should – ensure that every child in low-income countries has access to the same trove of online information and quality learning materials as children in high-income countries.
Scaling up the use of information and communications technology (ICT), together with improved access to educational innovations, trained teachers and village education workers, and better measurement of learning outcomes, would enable low- and middle-income countries to create high-quality education systems within the next 15 years.
In the meantime, students in impoverished rural schools that currently lack books, electricity, and trained teachers would be connected online – via solar panels and wireless broadband – to quality educational materials, free online courses, and other schools, thereby closing a resource gap that, until recently, seemed insurmountable.
The world even has the organizational leadership to make this possible.
The Global Partnership for Education is a worldwide coalition of governments and NGOs that has been working for more than a decade with the world’s poorest countries to help them scale up quality education.
Yet, despite the GPE’s tremendous success in encouraging poor countries to mobilize their own budget resources to expand the reach and quality of their educational programs, rich countries have not adequately supported this effort by closing the financing gap these countries face.
The GPE should be supported to help build a true Global Fund for Education to ensure that every low-income country that puts in place an effective national strategy and domestic financing would have international support to accomplish its goals.
The additional financing required is modest.
UNESCO recently estimated the annual education “financing gap” of low- and lower-middle-income countries – to cover education up through lower secondary school – to be around $22 billion.
Ensuring the scale-up of upper-secondary school and ICT access might raise the needed annual sum to around $40 billion, with detailed cost estimates still to be made.
Such aid would be needed only until today’s poor countries achieve enough economic progress to cover the education bill on their own.
That $40 billion might seem like a lot of money, but consider this: The world’s richest 80 people have an estimated net worth of around $2 trillion dollars.
If they would devote just 1% of their net worth each year, they would cover half the global financial need.
Facebook, Google, Ericsson, Huawei, Samsung, Microsoft, Cisco, and other ICT giants could cover at least another $10 billion per year, in cash and in kind.
A few forward-looking governments could then close the remaining $10 billion gap.
As we have seen with immunization, this is the kind of partnership that is needed to take the SDGs from rhetoric to reality.
The beauty of a new Global Fund for Education is that, once it got underway, it would quickly attract supporters from around the world.
Arab governments would want to ensure that all Arabic-speaking children receive a decent ICT-backed education; Brazil and Portugal would surely contribute to ensure that Africa’s many Portuguese speakers benefit from scaled-up education systems.
Innovative high-tech companies would scramble to put their learning tools in front of the world’s children.
Local universities would train teachers and villagers on how to maximize the potential of these new technologies.
The stars – the SDGs, the ICT giants, mobile broadband, online learning, and philanthropists – are aligning for such a scenario.
A Global Fund for Education, announced at the Conference on Financing for Development, would be the best news possible for today’s children everywhere and a dazzling inauguration for the SDGs.
Europe’s Dysfunctional Growth Compact
BRUSSELS – Recently, a €10 billion ($13 billion) shortfall in this year’s European Union budget came to light.
As a result, the EU cannot reimburse member states for recent unexpected expenditures, including emergency outlays, such as aid to Italian earthquake victims, and spending aimed at boosting economic growth and employment, such as the accelerated absorption of unused Structural and Cohesion Funds.
Member states have refused the European Commission’s request for extra contributions to cover the shortfall, causing talks over next year’s budget to collapse.
Meanwhile, negotiations over the 2014-2020 Multiannual Financial Framework (MFF), the central-planning instrument for the use of EU funds, have broken down, owing to disagreement over key issues, including the size of the budget and the composition of expenditure.
The decision has been postponed until early next year.
The situation has highlighted the ambiguity surrounding the EU budget’s role in European integration.
While all EU leaders have advocated using the budget to stimulate economic growth, little action is being taken.
This raises doubts about the so-called “growth compact” launched by the European Council in June, particularly about the political commitment to mobilize €120 billion quickly by reallocating unused Structural and Cohesion Funds and increasing the European Investment Bank’s lending capacity.
Indeed, although European governments have agreed to encourage faster absorption of EU funds in crisis countries, they have refused to pay into the EU budget to enable the funds’ disbursement.
This contradiction signals that national interests continue to prevail in EU budget negotiations, which are often exploited for domestic political gain in member states.
Unless a mechanism is introduced that facilitates the rapid disbursement of EU funds, thus insulating the budget from destructive politicization, these funds cannot be used to stimulate growth in times of crisis.
Not all member states contribute equally to the EU budget; some are net contributors, while others are net beneficiaries.
At the end of EU-financed investment projects – payments for which are agreed and executed in the annual budget framework – the money is transferred to the beneficiary.
Cash to net beneficiaries is paid in by net contributors.
One country’s inflow of EU money is thus another country’s outflow – and these are grants, not loans.
As a result, agreement every seven years on overall expenditures is inadequate to preclude conflict on annual budgets.
Nonetheless, steps can be taken to prevent political deadlock in budget negotiations, while increasing the budget’s flexibility so that it can be used to stimulate growth.
For example, some leveraging of the budget could be allowed, although this would spark controversy, given that EU treaties require that the budget remains balanced at all times.
But the EU budget has already enabled an indirect form of leveraging: the European Commission’s use of implicit budget guarantees to raise capital on financial markets.
These funds are used to provide financial assistance to non-eurozone EU countries through the Medium-Term Financial Assistance Facility, to eurozone countries through the now-expired European Financial Stabilization Mechanism, and to partner third countries.
Between the MTFA, the EFSM, and payments to third countries, the total exposure this year is €70.5 billion.
Some borrowing over the seven-year MFF period may be possible, while upholding the medium-term objective of a balanced budget.
Such leveraging of the EU budget would complement the recently established European Stabilization Mechanism (the successor to the EFSM) and the MTFA.
Countries receiving assistance should be given the option of applying for an anticipated disbursement of EU funds.
Following a request by a member state, the Commission would be entitled to borrow on capital markets under the implicit EU budget guarantee, with the maximum amount determined by the size of the country’s unused (pre-allocated) Structural and Cohesion Funds.
The capital would be repaid in annual installments as the funds become available through the EU budget, while the national co-financing rate would apply to interest payments.
This framework would reduce incentives for using annual EU budget negotiations to advance political agendas.
Net contributors would be locked into a relationship with the markets – a convincing creditor.
At the same time, imposing conditionality on this kind of disbursement would enhance legitimacy, as opposed to the current framework, in which beneficiaries seek entitlements.
Indeed, all EU countries – not just eurozone members – would benefit from such a framework.
Such an initiative could co-exist with European Council President Herman Van Rompuy’s proposal to create a risk-sharing mechanism only for eurozone countries.
The revamped growth compact would more effectively allocate European resources and increase the flexibility of permanent transfers from rich to poor countries – provided that the money is used for productive investment.
Van Rompuy’s budget would also help to stabilize the eurozone in the event that asymmetric shocks require temporary transfers from unaffected to crisis-stricken countries.
In fact, the two instruments may well be complementary in eurozone countries.
Crises are typically associated with a drop not only in actual growth, but also in a country’s growth potential, owing to deferred investment.
A risk-sharing facility could limit the decline in actual growth after a crisis, while prompt EU-financed investment would prevent a country from shifting to a lower growth path.
Financing the Green Economy
The 21-member group included heads of state and ministers from both developed and developing countries, representatives from international organizations, experts on public finance and development, and leaders from the private sector.
Admittedly, the current global economic environment has placed public finances in many developed countries under extreme pressure.
Nevertheless, the AGF’s report concludes that reaching the goal of raising $100 billion a year by 2020, while challenging, is feasible.
It will require a mix of new public sources, a scaling-up of existing public sources, and increased private flows.
Among the AGF’s conclusions, which we have presented to the UN Secretary-General, there are some important messages:
First, a carbon price in the range of $20-25 per ton of CO2 by 2020 is key to mobilizing climate finance at this level.
Carbon prices expand the potential for both public and private financing by raising public revenue and creating private-sector demand for emission reductions.
Second, new public mechanisms can mobilize tens of billions of dollars annually, an important step towards the $100-billion goal.
Examples include the auctioning of emissions allowances, carbon taxes, and the pricing of emissions from international transport.
Policy instruments based on carbon pricing are particularly attractive, because they raise revenue for adaptation to climate change in developing countries while creating incentives for mitigation in developed countries.
Third, international private investment flows are essential. It is the private sector that will finance most low-carbon, sustainable growth.
Public funding should help leverage climate-friendly private investments. The multilateral development banks, in close collaboration with the UN system, can play a significant multiplier role in this regard.
Several sources of financing for adaptation and mitigation efforts in developing countries could be made operational relatively quickly.
We need to make progress on establishing the Copenhagen Green Climate Fund, including, possibly, regional and thematic vehicles, such as an Africa Green Fund.
Ensuring economic growth and addressing climate change do not have to be opposing goals.
They can and should go hand in hand; what we need is climate-resilient, low-carbon growth.
It is now up to governments, international institutions, and the private sector to draw on our analysis in support of climate action.
Financing Health and Education for All
NEW YORK – In 2015, around 5.9 million children under the age of five, almost all in developing countries, died from easily preventable or treatable causes.
And up to 200 million young children and adolescents do not attend primary or secondary school, owing to poverty, including 110 million through the lower-secondary level, according to a recent estimate.
In both cases, massive suffering could be ended with a modest amount of global funding.
Children in poor countries die from causes – such as unsafe childbirth, vaccine-preventable diseases, infections such as malaria for which low-cost treatments exist, and nutritional deficiencies – that have been almost totally eliminated in the rich countries.
In a moral world, we would devote our utmost effort to end such deaths.
In fact, the world has made a half-hearted effort.
Deaths of young children have fallen to slightly under half the 12.7 million recorded in 1990, thanks to additional global funding for disease control, channeled through new institutions such as the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria.
When I first recommended such a fund in 2000, skeptics said that more money would not save lives.
Yet the Global Fund proved the doubters wrong: More money prevented millions of deaths from AIDS, TB, and malaria.
It was well used.
The reason that child deaths fell to 5.9 million, rather to near zero, is that the world gave only about half the funding necessary.
While most countries can cover their health needs with their own budgets, the poorest countries cannot.
They need about $50 billion per year of global help to close the financing gap.
Current global aid for health runs at about $25 billion per year.
While these numbers are only approximate, we need roughly an additional $25 billion per year to help prevent up to six million deaths per year.
It’s hard to imagine a better bargain.
Similar calculations help us to estimate the global funding needed to enable all children to complete at least a high-school education.
UNESCO recently calculated the global education “financing gap” to cover the incremental costs – of classrooms, teachers, and supplies – of universal completion of secondary school at roughly $39 billion.
With current global funding for education at around $10-15 billion per year, the gap is again roughly $25 billion, similar to health care.
And, as with health care, such increased global funding could effectively flow through a new Global Fund for Education.
Thus, an extra $50 billion or so per year could help ensure that children everywhere have access to basic health care and schooling.
The world’s governments have already adopted these two objectives – universal health care and universal quality education – in the new Sustainable Development Goals.
If it did, that extra 0.53% of GNI would add roughly $90 billion per year of global funding.
The US currently spends around 5% of GDP, or roughly $900 billion per year, on military-related spending (for the Pentagon, the CIA, veterans, and others).
It could and should transfer at least $90 billion of that to development aid.
Such a shift in focus from war to development would greatly bolster US and global security; the recent US wars in North Africa and the Middle East have cost trillions of dollars and yet have weakened, not strengthened, national security.
A second option would tax the global rich, who often hide their money in tax havens in the Caribbean and elsewhere.
Many of these tax havens are UK overseas territories.
Most are closely connected with Wall Street and the City of London.
The US and British governments have protected the tax havens mainly because the rich people who put their money there also put their money into campaign contributions or into hiring politicians’ family members.
The tax havens should be called upon to impose a small tax on their deposits, which total at least $21 trillion.
The rich countries could enforce such a tax by threatening to cut off noncompliant havens’ access to global financial markets.
Of course, the havens should also ensure transparency and crack down on tax evasion and corporate secrecy.
Even a deposit tax as low as 0.25% per year on $21 trillion of deposits would raise around $50 billion per year.
Both solutions would be feasible and relatively straightforward to implement.
They would underpin the new global commitments contained in the SDGs.
At the recent Astana Economic Forum, Kazakhstan’s President Nursultan Nazarbayev wisely called for some way to tax offshore deposits to fund global health and education.
Other world leaders should rally to his call to action.
Our world is immensely wealthy and could easily finance a healthy start in life for every child on the planet through global funds for health and education.
A small shift of funds from wasteful US military spending, or a very small levy on tax havens’ deposits – or similar measures to make the super-rich pay their way – could quickly and dramatically improve poor children’s life chances and make the world vastly fairer, safer, and more productive.
There is no excuse for delay.
Finding the Keys to National Prosperity
Today, too, there are some great opportunities for this kind of “policy arbitrage,” if more countries would only take the time to learn from other countries’ successes.
For example, while many countries are facing a jobs crisis, one part of the capitalist world is doing just fine: northern Europe, including Germany, the Netherlands, and Scandinavia.
Germany’s unemployment rate this past summer was around 5.5%, and its youth unemployment rate was around 8% – remarkably low compared with many other high-income economies.
How do northern Europeans do it?
All of them use active labor market policies, including flex time, school-to-work apprenticeships (especially Germany), and extensive job training and matching.&#160;
Likewise, in an age of chronic budget crises, Germany, Sweden, and Switzerland run near-balanced budgets.
All three rely on budget rules that call for cyclically adjusted budget balance.
And all three take a basic precaution to keep their entitlement spending under control: a retirement age of at least 65.
This keeps costs much lower than in France, and Greece, for example, where the retirement age is 60 or below, and where pension outlays are soaring as a result.
In an age of rising health-care costs, most high-income countries – Canada, the European Union’s Western economies, and Japan – manage to keep their total health-care costs below 12% of GDP, with excellent health outcomes, while the US spends nearly 18% of GDP, yet with decidedly mediocre health outcomes.
And, America’s is the only for-profit health system of the entire bunch.
A new report by the US Institute of Medicine has found that America’s for-profit system squanders around $750 billion, or 5% of GDP, on waste, fraud, duplication, and bureaucracy.&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;
In an age of soaring oil costs, a few countries have made a real difference in energy efficiency.
The OECD countries, on average, use 160 kilograms of oil-equivalent energy for every $1,000 of GDP (measured at purchasing power parity).
But, in energy-efficient Switzerland, energy use is just 100 kg per $1,000 of GDP, and in Demark it is just 110 kg, compared with 190 kg in the US.
In an age of climate change, several countries are demonstrating how to move to a low-carbon economy.
On average, the rich countries emit 2.3 kg of CO2 for every kg of oil-equivalent unit of energy.
But France emits just 1.4 kg, owing to its enormous success in deploying safe, low-cost nuclear energy.
Sweden, with its hydropower, is even lower, at 0.9 kg.
And, while Germany is abandoning domestic production of nuclear energy for political reasons, we can bet that it will nonetheless continue to import electricity from France’s nuclear plants.
In an age of intense technological competition, countries that combine public and private research and development (R&amp;D) financing are outpacing the rest.
The US continues to excel, with huge recent breakthroughs in Mars exploration and genomics, though it is now imperiling that excellence through budget cuts.
Meanwhile, Sweden and South Korea are now excelling economically on the basis of R&amp;D spending of around 3.5% of GDP, while Israel’s R&amp;D outlays stand at a remarkable 4.7% of GDP.
In an age of rising inequality, at least some countries have narrowed their wealth and income gaps.
Brazil is the recent pacesetter, markedly expanding public education and systematically attacking remaining pockets of poverty through targeted transfer programs.
As a result, income inequality in Brazil is declining.
And, in an age of pervasive anxiety, Bhutan is asking deep questions about the meaning and nature of happiness itself.
In search of a more balanced society that combines economic prosperity, social cohesion, and environmental sustainability, Bhutan famously pursues Gross National Happiness rather than Gross National Product.
Many other countries – including the United Kingdom – are now following Bhutan’s lead in surveying their citizenry about life satisfaction.
The countries highest on the ladder of life satisfaction are Denmark, Finland, and Norway.
Yet there is hope for those at lower latitudes as well.
Tropical Costa Rica also ranks near the top of the happiness league.
What we can say is that all of the happiest countries emphasize equality, solidarity, democratic accountability, environmental sustainability, and strong public institutions.
So here is one model economy: German labor-market policies, Swedish pensions, French low-carbon energy, Canadian health care, Swiss energy efficiency, American scientific curiosity, Brazilian anti-poverty programs, and Costa Rican tropical happiness.
Of course, back in the real world, most countries will not achieve such bliss anytime soon.
But, by opening our eyes to policy successes abroad, we would surely speed the path to national improvement in countries around the world.
The Globalization Disconnect
NEW HAVEN – While seemingly elegant in theory, globalization suffers in practice.
That is the lesson of Brexit and of the rise of Donald Trump in the United States.
And it also underpins the increasingly virulent anti-China backlash now sweeping the world.
Those who worship at the altar of free trade – including me – must come to grips with this glaring disconnect.
Truth be known, there is no rigorous theory of globalization.
The best that economists can offer is David Ricardo’s early nineteenth-century framework: if a country simply produces in accordance with its comparative advantage (in terms of resource endowments and workers’ skills), presto, it will gain through increased cross-border trade.
Trade liberalization – the elixir of globalization – promises benefits for all.
That promise arguably holds in the long run, but a far tougher reality check invariably occurs in the short run.
Brexit – the United Kingdom’s withdrawal from the European Union – is just the latest case in point.
Voters in the UK objected to several of the key premises of regional integration: free labor mobility and seemingly open-ended immigration, regulation by supranational authorities in Brussels, and currency union (which has serious flaws, such as the lack of a fiscal transfer mechanism among member states).
Economic integration and globalization are not exactly the same thing, but they rest on the same Ricardian principles of trade liberalization – principles that are falling on deaf ears in the political arena.
In the US, Trump’s ascendancy and the political traction gained by Senator Bernie Sanders’s primary campaign reflect many of the same sentiments that led to Brexit.
From immigration to trade liberalization, economic pressures on a beleaguered middle class contradict the core promises of globalization.
As is often the case – and particularly in a presidential election year – America’s politicians resort to the blame game in confronting these tough issues.
Trump has singled out China and Mexico, and Sanders’s opposition to the Trans-Pacific Partnership – the proposed trade deal between the US and 11 Pacific Rim countries – has pushed Hillary Clinton, the Democratic Party’s nominee, to adopt a similar stance.
In short, globalization has lost its political support – unsurprising in a world that bears little resemblance to the one inhabited by Ricardo two centuries ago.
Ricardo’s arguments, couched in terms of England’s and Portugal’s comparative advantages in cloth and wine, respectively, hardly seem relevant for today’s hyper-connected, knowledge-based world.
The Nobel laureate Paul Samuelson, who led the way in translating Ricardian foundations into modern economics, reached a similar conclusion late in his life, when he pointed out how a disruptive low-wage technology imitator like China could turn the theory of comparative advantage inside out.
Nor is it just a problem with an antiquated theory.
Recent trends in global trade are also flashing warning signs.
According to the International Monetary Fund, annual growth in the volume of world trade has averaged just 3% over the 2009-2016 period – half the 6% rate from 1980 to 2008.
This reflects not only the Great Recession, but also an unusually anemic recovery.
With world trade shifting to a decidedly lower trajectory, political resistance to globalization has only intensified.
Of course, this isn’t the first time that globalization has run into trouble.
Globalization 1.0 – the surge in global trade and international capital flows that occurred in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries – met its demise between World War I and the Great Depression.
Global trade fell by some 60% from 1929 to 1932, as major economies turned inward and embraced protectionist trade policies, such as America’s infamous Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act of 1930.
But the stakes may be greater if today’s more powerful globalization were to meet a similar fate.
In contrast to Globalization 1.0, which was largely confined to the cross-border exchange of tangible (manufactured) goods, the scope of Globalization 2.0 is far broader, including growing trade in many so-called intangibles – once nontradable services.
Similarly, the means of Globalization 2.0 are far more sophisticated than those of its antecedent.
The connectivity of Globalization 1.0 occurred via ships and eventually railroads and motor vehicles.
Today, these transportation systems are far more advanced – augmented by the Internet and its enhancement of global supply chains.
The Internet has also enabled instantaneous cross-border dissemination of knowledge-based services such as software programming, engineering and design, medical screening, and accounting, legal, and consulting work.
The sharpest contrast between the two waves of globalization is in the speed of technology absorption and disruption.
New information technologies have been adopted at an unusually rapid rate.
It took only five years for 50 million US households to begin surfing the Internet, whereas it took 38 years for a similar number to gain access to radios.
Sadly, the economics profession has failed to grasp the inherent problems with globalization.
In fixating on an antiquated theory, they have all but ignored the here and now of a mounting worker backlash.
Yet the breadth and speed of Globalization 2.0 demand new approaches to cushion the blows of this disruption.
Unfortunately, safety-net programs to help trade-displaced or trade-pressured workers are just as obsolete as theories of comparative advantage.
America’s Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) program, for example, was enacted in 1962 for the manufacturing-based economy of yesteryear.
According to a report published by the Peterson Institute, only two million US workers have benefited from TAA since 1974.
The design of more enlightened policies must account for the powerful pressures now bearing down on a much broader array of workers.
The hyper-speed of Globalization 2.0 suggests the need for quicker triggers and wider coverage for worker retraining, relocation allowances, job-search assistance, wage insurance for older workers, and longer-duration unemployment benefits.
As history cautions, the alternative – whether it is Brexit or America’s new isolationism – is an accident waiting to happen.
It is up to those of us who defend free trade and globalization to prevent that, by offering concrete solutions that address the very real problems that now afflict so many workers.
Firebombing the Messenger in Armenia
Late last month, while putting the finishing touches on the next edition of our newspaper, Haykakan Zhamanak (The Armenian Times), we heard an explosion outside our office.
Staff members rushed to find my car on fire.
That explosion was not unanticipated – nor was the announcement by Armenia’s police that the car had caught fire due to technical problems.
But the real problem is censorship, for the explosion was but the latest offensive in Armenia’s hidden war against the press.
For us the battle for press freedom began in 1999, soon after founding our newspaper, then named Oragir (Diary).
It made an instant impact, but not in the way we hoped.
Throughout 1999 there were more court cases against Oragir than against all other Armenian media combined since independence in 1991.
In one case, the prosecutor’s office brought criminal charges against me as editor-in-chief: I was accused of slandering an Armenian political figure and of insulting a state official. As a result, the court sentenced me to one year in prison.
By a lucky twist, however, on the day the court ruled, Lord Russell Johnston, Chairman of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, was in Armenia.
Lord Johnston expressed his opinion about my case in his talks with the authorities, which then decided not to send me to prison.
I remained free, only to be monitored by the police.
A second trial against our newspaper had worse consequences: a $25,000 fine (a huge sum here) based on allegations that we had damaged the reputation of the Mika Armenia Company, controlled by the so-called Karabakh clan that helps rule Armenia.
The court’s verdict was based on falsified documents.
Following the verdict, bailiffs confiscated our equipment, prohibited the publishing house from printing our newspaper, and, most importantly, seized our business bank accounts, rendering us unable to pay the fine.
These events were initiated by a court wrangle with Serzh Sargsyan, then the Minister of National Security and Internal Affairs.
We demanded an apology for his impugning our paper’s reputation; he accused of us of libel.
These manipulations worked: Oragir was closed down, which forced us to appear under the name Haykakan Zhamanak .
When my time under police supervision ended, the prosecutor’s office quickly brought a new criminal case of slander against me.
This time, Armenia’s chief of civil aviation had sued me.
Investigations lasted several months, before pressure from international organizations and public opinion forced the prosecutor to drop the charges.
Later, after his dismissal from his post, that same civil aviation chief confessed that Armenian President Robert Kocharyan had advised him to file his lawsuit.
At a press conference just hours after my car exploded, I announced my suspicion that the explosion had been organized by Gagik Tsarukyan, an MP nicknamed “Dodi Gago” (“dod” means stupid in Armenian) and one of the country’s richest men and a close friend of the president’s family.
Many Armenians believe that Tsarukyan has carte blanche to do whatever he wants, when he wants.
Indeed, he even gets to write his own history.
For although Gagik Tsarukyan was convicted of a sexual crime in the Soviet era, two years ago Armenia’s courts exonerated him by vacating the decision of the Soviet court.
Indeed, there is something of a taboo on writing about Tsarukyan, and with good reason: not only is he rich, but also he controls an army of obedient skinheads.
Armenia frequently sees skinheads attacking reporters covering opposition rallies and once severely beating a leading opposition politician.
Five years ago, Tsarukyan himself led his thugs in a break-in at our office, taking my staff hostage for several hours.
Recently, after reading some unflattering articles about him in our paper, Tsarukyan tried to invite me to a meeting.
I refused. Armenia’s paramount oligarch fumed.
He promised to punish me, and that he would act the next time Haykakan Zhamanak criticized any well-known person.
The car explosion occurred the day after we rebuked Armenia’s Police Chief.
None of us are surprised that the police are unwilling to investigate my car’s explosion.
They began to do so only ten days later, when the fire brigade stated that the fire was likely the result of an explosion incited by “outside interference.”
Such harassment is the everyday stuff of journalism in what Vladimir Putin calls the “post-Soviet space.”
Armenia may have adopted in 1995 a new Constitution with fine phrases about freedom of speech, but both the petty harassments and the mortal threats of the Soviet era remain.
Of course, we never believed that press freedom would come easily. We understood from the start that we would have to fight for it everyday.
But we never imagined the terrifying lengths to which the state – working hand-in-hand with the new oligarchic rich – would go to defeat our cause.
We will not be defeated.
An incinerated car is a small price to pay in the battle for freedom.
Firewalls to Freedom
NEW YORK – Even the most cold-hearted realists would agree that the failure of Communist censorship played a role in the collapse of the Iron Curtain: Voice of America, the fax machine, rock ‘n’ roll, and the lure of Western capitalism helped to win over the people of the Soviet Bloc.
Today, similar hopes are often vested in the Internet, with high expectations that the wealth of online information might trigger the same kind of censorship failure in contemporary authoritarian states that we saw in Eastern Europe – and with the same results.
Such expectations are not entirely unfounded, because most Internet censorship systems are not perfect.
But, while anybody with a little know-how can figure out how to circumvent, say, the “Great Firewall of China,” Internet filtering is only one layer of Chinese Internet censorship.
It is also supplemented by an increasingly sophisticated system of manipulation and spin.
While the blocking of foreign Web sites was eased during the Olympics, deletion of politically sensitive content from Chinese blogs and chat rooms continued unabated throughout 2008.
Now, a new crackdown against “vulgar” Internet content is being used to clean up politically sensitive writings – including discussion of Charter 08 , a pro-democracy treatise signed by thousands of Chinese who discovered it online.
Contrary to Western expectations, most of this domestic Internet censorship is carried out not by the government's Internet police, but by Chinese Web hosting companies, which are being held legally responsible for what their users publish.
Indeed, the Chinese Internet is evolving and adapting in ways that shore up the regime’s legitimacy.
Hundreds of thousands of people are employed as freelance Web commentators, working to spin discussions in chat rooms and on blogs in a more patriotic, pro-government direction.
Nationalistic young people, proud of China’s newfound global economic and political power, gladly volunteer their time to show off their patriotism on the Internet.
Meanwhile, China is looking to Russia, which may have invented an entirely new model of controlling the Internet without recourse to censorship.
Having established full control of traditional media, the Kremlin is now moving full-speed into the virtual world.
The authorities’ strategy is not new: establish tight control over the leading publishing platforms and fill them with propaganda and spin to shape online public opinion.
This is what happened to a Georgian (known by the screen name cyxymu) who used his blog on LiveJournal to criticize how both governments handled last summer’s war.
A series of cyber-attacks followed, and was so devastating that the entire service – with its millions of other blogs – crashed, forcing LiveJournal administrators to delete his account temporarily.
As contemporary authoritarian regimes learn how to manage and engineer information flows, we must understand that promoting and protecting free speech in places like China and Russia is not a simple matter of “tearing down the wall.”
Given these governments’ complex strategies for regulating what their citizens do online – ranging from establishing effective control of private media and telecoms businesses to allowing people to blow off steam without going too far – we should be more realistic about the true extent of the Internet’s transformational potential.
An Agenda for Global Fiscal Activism
LONDON – Two important events loom on the calendar this month: the United States’ presidential election on November 8, and British Chancellor of the Exchequer Philip Hammond’s first Autumn Statement on November 23.
Obviously, the latter will not be as significant an event as the former, but it nonetheless will have important consequences beyond the United Kingdom.
So far this year, economics has had to compete with more emotional issues, such as personal attacks in the US election, and UK voters’ decision to leave the European Union.
But in both the US and the UK – and not only there – we can expect to hear more about active fiscal policies, especially with respect to infrastructure.
In the communiqué released after September’s G20 summit, the group’s leaders repeatedly mentioned steps to boost world growth through infrastructure investment, and argued for more coordination among monetary, fiscal, and structural policies.
Although recent data from the US and China – and surprisingly also from the eurozone and the UK – suggest that GDP growth in the fourth quarter could improve upon the sluggish performance earlier in the year, a strong case can still be made for fresh policies to strengthen the world economy.
After recently leading the UK’s Review on Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR), and having thought long and hard about educational initiatives, I believe that it is time for a more adventurous response to both long-term and cyclical challenges, especially for developing countries.
And reading Jeffrey D. Sachs’s recent commentary, “The Case for Sustainable Investment,” only strengthens my conviction that policymakers and key development-finance institutions have a huge opportunity.
Fiscal activism need not stop at infrastructure.
In the Review on AMR, we showed that global GDP could suffer a $100 trillion loss over the next 34 years if we do not make certain public-health interventions between now and 2050.
Those interventions would cost around $40 billion over a decade, which is to say that the investment needed to prevent $100 trillion in lost growth costs less than 0.1% of current global GDP.
As an astute investor friend pointed out to me, this would be the equivalent of a 2,500% return.
Investments in health and education are crucial for the developing world’s long-term prospects.
As someone closely associated with the BRICS countries (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa), it seems obvious to me that the New Development Bank (NDB) – or the BRICS Development Bank, as it was formerly known – can and should help these and other emerging economies cooperate in both areas.
The Review on AMR concluded that ten million annual deaths will be attributable to drug-resistant infections by 2050, and that drug-resistant strains of tuberculosis could cause one-quarter of them.
It seems only reasonable that the NDB should announce steps to support pharmaceutical research into new TB treatments and vaccines, particularly for drug-resistant strains, given that TB is especially prevalent in the BRICS.
And, beyond the BRICS, the other low-income countries that the NDB is trying to help will suffer even more without a proactive approach.
Similarly, many people in the BRICS and low-income countries do not have access to quality primary education, so the case for a major spending boost in this area should be clear.
Sachs makes the same point, and former British Prime Minister Gordon Brown, who is now United Nations Special Envoy for Global Education, has called for more creative financing methods and social enterprise in this sector.
The NDB, the World Bank, the International Finance Corporation, and the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank should all be considering the activist fiscal-policy course developed countries are now charting for themselves.
And they should take it further, because the policy imperatives they face are ultimately all interrelated.
In the West, the turn toward fiscal activism reflects widespread recognition that monetary activism has outlived its usefulness, at least at the margin.
To be sure, central banks technically should do whatever it takes to meet their inflation targets; but excessive quantitative easing has imposed high costs, and seems to have favored the few at the expense of the many.
With monetary activism past its sell-by date, an active fiscal policy that includes stronger infrastructure spending is one of the only remaining options.
But it is not a free lunch, as many of its promoters often suggest, because policymakers cannot ignore the high levels of government debt across much of the developed world.
It will be interesting to see how Hammond navigates the path toward higher infrastructure spending, while sticking to the Conservative Party’s platform of fiscal responsibility.
And in the US, if we look beyond the fog of election-season opprobrium, it appears that both sides are in favor of more infrastructure spending.
That being the case, the next US administration (regardless of who wins), together with a new UK leadership struggling to demonstrate its post-Brexit “openness,” should extend fiscal activism beyond domestic infrastructure to global development more generally.
For example, with proper support, the World Bank could create new investment vehicles such as AMR or global-education bonds, which would support future development and salvage future global growth that may otherwise be lost.
The US and the UK both need to show that they can move beyond their highly sensitive – and, frankly, narrow-minded – domestic political issues.
And they should remember that without the export markets that the BRICS and other emerging countries represent, all attempts to rebalance their economies will be in vain.
Fiscal Apocalypse Now
As support for President George W. Bush in the United States has crumbled over the past year, perhaps the most surprising element is the revolt of economists and observers of economic policy.
Last week, Peggy Noonan, a speechwriter for both President Reagan and the first President Bush declared in the Wall Street Journal that had she known what George W. Bush’s fiscal policy would be, she would have voted for Al Gore in the 2000 presidential election.
“If I’d thought [that George W. Bush] was a big-spending Rockefeller Republican.... I wouldn’t have voted for him...,” Noonan wrote.
Bush “did present himself as a conservative...[and] conservatism is hostile, for reasons ranging from the abstract and philosophical to the concrete and practical, to high spending and high taxing....” And then she falls into near-complete despair: “Mr. Bush will never have to run again, and he is in a position to come forward and make the case, even if only rhetorically, to slow and cut spending.
He has not. And there’s no sign he will...”
Noonan is not quite correct.
George W. Bush presented himself not as a normal conservative, but as something he called a “compassionate conservative,” thus preserving a certain amount of ambiguity.
Some focused on the “conservative”: they expected the Bush administration’s fiscal policy to keep a tight rein on spending and to eliminate many programs in order to finance significant tax cuts.
Others focused on the “compassionate”: they expected Bush’s fiscal policy largely to eschew tax cuts and to adopt largely Democratic spending priorities, including expanded federal aid to education and a prescription drug benefit, thereby showing that Republicans could run a more cost-effective version of the social-welfare state.
Still others interpreted “compassionate conservatism,” as the commentator Andrew Sullivan put it, as a “smokescreen...necessary for any vaguely successful retrenchment of government power in an insatiable entitlement state.”
They expected tax cuts to be followed by a fangs-bared attack on social-welfare spending once deficits reemerged.
As a result, in 2000 and 2001 nobody was really sure of the Bush administration’s policy direction.
Was it traditional fiscal conservativism?
Was it to do what Democrats do, but do it better?
Was it to “starve the beast” by pumping up government debt to the point that social programs would have to be cut?
The first two priorities, if well designed and well implemented, are certainly honorable goals for a government to pursue.
The third is less honorable, and likely to fail: it relies on the dangerously weak premise that the party in power’s political adversaries will be more public-spirited and less ruthless when they return to government.
Of course, conservatives and Republicans could hope that their own favorite policy priorities would emerge as the administration’s preferred strategy.
Or they could be content with whichever of the three strategies that they expected to see, agreeing that, in any case, fiscal policy was always going to be much better than it would have been under Democratic rule.
But then a strange thing happened: the Bush administration did not order any of the three options that were thought to be on the menu. It chose something different entirely: big tax cuts, yes, but tax cuts that were badly designed from a genuine supply-side perspective aimed at boosting growth, as well as Democratic domestic spending priorities, but very badly implemented.
Moreover, the Bush administration combined its policies with an extraordinary reluctance to veto anything coming out of Congress, and, after the year or two that it took for this to become obvious, an inability to restrain Congress at all.
What emerged was neither traditional fiscal conservatism nor Democratic policies without Democrats nor starve-the–beast populism, but something that has no name.
An exchange between two characters in a scene from the movie “Apocalypse Now” captures an anti-ethic that characterizes the Bush administration’s policies as well:
Willard: “They told me that you had gone totally insane, and that your methods were unsound.”
Kurtz: “Are my methods unsound?”
Willard: “I don’t see any method at all, sir.”
It is not that Republicans and conservatives think that the Bush administration has adopted the wrong method, but that they don’t see any method at all that has driven them into their (late) fiscal-policy revolt.
And that is why so many of them now wish that they had had a different candidate to vote for back in 2000.
Fiscal Fibs and Follies
BERKELEY – Across the globe, the debate over fiscal consolidation has the distinct sound of two sides talking past one another.
On one side are those who insist that governments must move now, at all cost, to rein in budget deficits.
Putting public finances on a sustainable footing, they argue, is essential to reassure financial markets.
If concerted efforts are taken to balance budgets, confidence will be bolstered.
And if confidence is bolstered, consumption and investment will rise.
In this view, cutting deficits will be expansionary.
As evidence that this is not merely a hypothetical possibility, advocates of fiscal consolidation point to cases like Denmark in the early 1980’s, Ireland in the late 1980’s, and Finland in the 1990’s.
On the other side are those who insist that additional public spending is still needed to support demand.
Private spending remains weak, not least where continued high unemployment has led consumers, concerned about future prospects, to pocket their wallets.
Moreover, the critics object, the evidence in support of expansionary fiscal consolidations is flawed.
In each case where fiscal consolidation supposedly was expansionary, the economy grew because of some third factor.
Denmark grew, despite fiscal cuts, because interest rates, initially in the double digits, came down.
Ireland and Finland grew, despite fiscal cuts, because the exchange rate fell sharply, boosting exports.
The world economy today, desperate for demand, can’t count on either mechanism.
Interest rates in many countries are already near zero.
And all countries can’t depreciate their exchange rates at the same time.
So who is right?
Consider the following image: consumers and investors as passengers in a car hurtling directly toward a brick wall. In this case, the driver stepping on the brake will give the passengers more confidence.
Here, the plausible passengers are southern European firms. They understand that their countries’ fiscal positions are unsustainable.
They know that debt default would be disruptive.
Seeing the economy hurtling toward a brick wall, they are holding their collective breath, while evidence that the government is serious about stepping on the brake can induce them to exhale.
In this case, fiscal consolidation is likely to affect their investment spending positively.
This does not mean that Greece, Portugal, and Spain will expand as robustly as Denmark, Ireland, and Finland did in the 1980’s and 1990’s.
They can’t lower the exchange rate to aid exports.
But they can reduce interest rates by eliminating the perceived risk of sovereign default.  Banks will be able to borrow from one another for less, and thus able to lend to firms for less.
This suggests that investment may respond better than the pessimists fear.
But what might work in southern Europe has no chance of working elsewhere.
In other G-20 economies, including the United States, Germany, China, and Japan, the car is still cruising down an open road.
Fiscal velocity may be considerable – that is, deficits may be large – but there is no sign of a brick wall ahead.
Interest rates on government debt are still low.
If the passengers were growing restive, they would rise. At this point, they have not.
In these countries, there is therefore no reason to think that fiscal consolidation would have a strong positive effect on confidence.
That possibility could arise sometime in the future, when the proverbial brick wall comes into view.
But it is not on the horizon yet, which means that there would be no positive private-spending response to buffer public-spending cuts.
As a result, budget cuts would be strongly contractionary.
Finally there are borderline cases, like Britain.
Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne insists that his country’s fiscal trajectory is dangerously unsustainable, and he has proposed draconian cuts.
Others strongly disagree, noting the continued low level of interest rates, and that even under the previous government’s plan, net borrowing costs were already scheduled to fall by nearly two-thirds between 2010-11 and 2014-15.
It is almost as if governments like Britain’s are attempting to manipulate the private sector into believing that the dire conditions required for an expansionary fiscal consolidation have already been met.
It as if they are trying to terrorize the private sector, so that when the fiscal ax actually falls, consumers and investors will be sufficiently relieved that disaster has been averted that they will increase spending.
If so, leaders are playing a dangerous game that depends on encouraging more future spending by exciting consumers and investors now, while depressing actual spending just when it is most urgently needed.
Or maybe politicians don’t believe any of this and are simply intent on cutting spending for ideological reasons, irrespective of the economic consequences.
But who would be so cynical as to believe that?
Fiscal Follies in America and Beyond
Those of us who know that long-run fiscal imbalances are likely to end in disaster – high inflation, deep recession, financial crisis, or all three – scratch our heads in bemusement at the priorities of George W. Bush and his administration.
The Social Security “crisis” that he wants to spend his political capital on “resolving” ranks no higher than third among America’s fiscal problems in urgency and seriousness – and at a time when these problems have grown into a profound threat to global economic stability.
America’s gravest fiscal problem is the short- and medium-run deficit between tax revenues and spending.
This deficit is entirely of Bush’s own creation, having enacted – and now seeking to extend – tax cuts that are not cuts at all, because they merely shift the burden of fiscal consolidation onto future generations.
The second most serious problem is the looming long-term explosion in the costs of America’s health care programs.
This is also partly Bush’s doing, or, rather, not doing, as his first-term policy on health spending was to do virtually nothing to encourage efficiency and cost containment.
Instead, he enacted a Medicare drug benefit that promises to spend enormous amounts of money for surprisingly little in the way of better health care.
Surely a more competent administration would be worried about addressing these more severe and urgent fiscal problems.
Let’s pretend that the United States had such a government. What would it do?
Dealing with the short- and medium-run deficit would be fairly straightforward: decide how large a share of GDP the federal government should take up, set spending at that level, and set taxes so that the budget is balanced (or so that the debt-to-GDP ratio is not growing) over the business cycle.
Determine whether, overall, you would rather have in the medium term a federal government that spends, say, 16%, 20%, or 24% of GDP – and on what.
What is not straightforward is how to address the imminent explosion of health-care costs.
In fact, projections of rapidly rising Medicare and Medicaid spending in the US – and similarly rapidly-rising governmental health care expenditures elsewhere in the developed world – are not so such a problem to be solved as the side effects of an opportunity to be grasped.
The opportunity stems from the fact that our doctors and nurses, our pharmacists and drug researchers, our biologists and biochemists are learning to do wonderful things.
Many of these things are, and will be, expensive.
Many of them will also be desirable: longer, healthier, and higher quality lives as we learn more about the details of human biology.
Federal health-care spending will grow very rapidly over the next two generations because the things that health care money will be spent on will be increasingly wonderful, and increasingly valued.
But it will be difficult to grasp fully this opportunity.
It is highly likely that desired health expenditures will be enormous for some things and trivial for others.
This calls for insurance.
The problem is that private insurance markets do not work well when the buyer knows much more about what is being insured than the seller.
Obviously, one’s health is an area in which private information can be very private indeed.
This is, of course, why state-run health-care systems came into being.
But replacing private insurance with public insurance has its own problems: consider the parlous circumstances in which Britain’s National Health System finds itself, the result of generations of politically driven underinvestment in health care.
Moreover, the overall level of spending is likely to be large.
That means that without (and even with) state-run health-care systems, the rich will be able to afford more and better care than the poor.
To what extent do we accept a world where the non-rich die in situations in which the rich would live?
To what extent do we hold on to our belief that when it comes to saving lives, medical care should be distributed on the basis of patients’ needs, not their wealth?
Where and how would we tax the resources to put real weight behind egalitarian principles?
Sharply rising health-care costs will probably confront governments throughout the developed world with the biggest economic policy issues they will face over the next two generations.
The Bush administration has yet to realize this, but other governments are not thinking hard enough, either.
At best, they are seeking ways to keep health-care spending from rising, as though the genie of medical progress can be forced back into the bottle.
Instead, governments should embrace the promise of wonderful innovations in health care, and ask how fast spending should rise, and how that rise should be financed.
Fiscal Follies
NEW YORK – The fiscal stimulus that most advanced economies and emerging markets implemented during the 2008-2009 global recession – together with monetary easing and the backstopping of the financial system – prevented the Great Recession from turning into another Great Depression in 2010.
At a time when every component of private demand was collapsing, the boost from higher government spending and lower taxes stopped the global economy’s free-fall and created the basis for recovery.
Unfortunately, stimulus spending and the related bailout of the financial system, together with the recession’s effect on revenues, contributed to fiscal deficits on the order of 10% of GDP in most advanced economies.
According to the International Monetary Fund and others, these economies’ ratio of public debt to GDP will surpass 110% by 2015, compared to 70% before the crisis.
Aging populations in most advanced economies imply additional public debt in the long term, owing to non-fully-funded pension schemes and rising health-care costs.
Thus, in most advanced economies, deficits need to be reduced to avoid a fiscal train wreck down the line.
But much research, including a recent study by the IMF, suggests that raising taxes and reducing government spending has a negative short-term effect on aggregate demand, thereby reinforcing deflationary and recessionary trends – and undermining fiscal consolidation.
In an ideal world, where policymakers could credibly commit to medium- to long-term fiscal adjustment, the optimal and desirable path would be to commit today to a schedule of spending reductions and tax increases, phased in gradually over the next decade as the economy recovers.
That way, if the economy needed another targeted fiscal stimulus in the short run, financial markets would not respond by driving up borrowing costs.
Unfortunately, the fiscal policy currently adopted by various advanced economies deviates sharply from this path of credible medium-term consolidation combined with short-term additional stimulus.
In the US, we have the worst of all possible worlds.
On one hand, stimulus had become a dirty word – even within the Obama administration – well before the Republicans’ mid-term election victory ruled out another round altogether.
On the other hand, medium-term consolidation will be all but impossible in America’s current atmosphere of hyper-partisanship, with Republicans blocking any tax increase and Democrats resisting reforms of entitlement spending.
Nor is there any pressure from bond markets to concentrate the minds of policymakers.
In the periphery of the eurozone, the problem is the opposite: bond vigilantes are demanding that Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Spain, and Italy front-load fiscal consolidation or watch their borrowing costs go through the roof, risking them their market access and triggering a public-debt crisis.
Markets don’t care that front-loaded fiscal consolidation is exacerbating recession and thus making the goal of reducing debt and deficits as a share of GDP near-impossible to achieve.
To avoid a persistent and destructive recession, the fiscal and structural reforms imposed by the bond vigilantes should be accompanied by other euro-zone policies that restore growth and prevent vicious debt dynamics.
The European Central Bank should ease monetary policy in order to weaken the value of the euro and bootstrap the periphery’s growth.
And Germany should cut taxes temporarily – rather than raising taxes, as planned – in order to increase disposable income and stimulate German demand for the periphery’s goods and services.
Alas, neither of the two biggest players in the euro zone is pursuing policies consistent with restoring sustained growth in the euro zone’s periphery.
The ECB’s monetary policy is too tight; and Germany is front-loading fiscal austerity.
Thus, the periphery is destined to a destructive deflationary and recessionary adjustment that will exacerbate the risks of recession, insolvency, eventual defaults and, possibly, exit from the euro.
In the United Kingdom, the new government gave several reasons for front-loading fiscal consolidation.
The bond vigilantes might have woken up if early austerity was not implemented; the deficit was very large and the public sector bloated; and it is always politically easier to implement tough measures early in an administration, when popular support is still high and the next election is far off.
Certainly, the UK was playing with fiscal fire and needed some commitment to earlier austerity.
But phasing in austerity more gradually, and thus back-loading the adjustment, would have posed less risk to the economy’s anemic recovery while maintaining a credible commitment to fiscal consolidation.
Instead, the government could well end up with no plan B in case plan A – massively front-loaded austerity – leads to a double-dip recession.
In short, an optimal path of fiscal austerity would, in most countries, imply a back-loaded but credible commitment to medium-term consolidation, together with short-term additional stimulus when necessary and allowed by market conditions, thereby avoiding the prospect of a deflationary and recessionary spiral.
Unfortunately, the main advanced economies are following a divergent path – which, in some cases, will lead them in the opposite direction in 2011.
As a result, the risks of debt deflation and eventual disorderly sovereign and private-sector defaults are rising.
Europe’s Fiscal Wormhole
BRUSSELS – The International Monetary Fund now estimates a 30% risk of deflation in the eurozone, and growth figures within the monetary union continue to disappoint.
But policymakers seem trapped in a cat’s cradle of economic, political, and legal constraints that is preventing effective action.
The fulfillment of policy rules appears to be impossible without growth, but growth appears to be impossible without breaking the rules.
German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble is politically committed to outdoing his country’s tough domestic fiscal framework to secure what he calls a “black zero” budget.
The French government is working to regain credibility on reform promises made in exchange for delays on fiscal adjustment, and Italy, with one of the highest debt burdens in the eurozone, has little room to use fiscal policy.
Meanwhile, the European Central Bank is constrained by doubts about the legality of its “outright monetary transactions” (OMT) scheme – sovereign-bond purchases that could result in a redistributive fiscal policy.
With all of the rules pointing toward recession, how can Europe boost recovery?
A two-year €400 billion ($510 billion) public-investment program, financed with European Investment Bank bonds, would be the best way to overcome Europe’s current impasse.
Borrowing by the EIB has no implications in terms of European fiscal rules.
It is recorded neither as new debt nor as a deficit for any of the member states, which means that new government spending could be funded without affecting national fiscal performance.
Thus, some of the investment spending currently planned at the national level could be financed via European borrowing to relieve national budgets.
Such an indirect way of dealing with strict rules would also be easier than starting long and wearying negotiations on changes to the fiscal framework.
The EIB is worried that such a scheme could come at the cost of its triple-A rating.
Indeed, though it can currently borrow at 1.6% on a long maturity, it has used its recent capital-raising exercise to reduce leverage rather than substantially increase its loan portfolio, as would be warranted at a time of retrenchment in private lending.
In any case, a rating change would hardly affect funding costs in the current low-yield environment, as lower-rated sovereigns have demonstrated.
In addition, the ECB could purchase EIB bonds on secondary markets, which would help to keep funding costs low – or even reduce them.
More important, purchases of EIB bonds would enable the ECB to undertake quantitative easing without triggering the degree of controversy implied by intervening in 18 separate sovereign-bond markets, where concerns that ECB purchases would affect the relative pricing of sovereigns are very real.
Already, €200 billion of EIB bonds are available.
Adding €400 billion would increase the pool substantially.
Together with asset-backed securities, covered bonds, and corporate bonds, €1 trillion of assets – the threshold widely thought to make quantitative easing by the ECB credible – would be available for purchase.
A central question, of course, concerns the type of government spending that should qualify as investment spending, and which European investment projects should be supported.
It will be impossible to define new and sensible European projects worth €200 billion per year.
Common projects such as the European energy union will need more time to be precisely defined.
As a result, the bulk of investment now will have to come from national policymakers.
In part, this means that existing infrastructure projects that are supposed to be financed from national budgets could be funded by the EIB.
By removing some of the burden from national budgets, the current decline in public investment could be reversed.
Some of the new resources could also be used to allow for budget consolidation in France without pro-cyclical cuts.
France could get this helping hand in complying with the fiscal rules in exchange for serious and necessary structural reforms, as could Italy, where EIB-funded bonds would provide a much-needed growth stimulus without new government commitments.
In Germany, the freed-up resources could be used to accelerate existing investment projects while still meeting its black-zero pledge.
Similar arrangements could be found for the other eurozone countries.
To prevent the misuse of money, the European Commission should vet all national investment projects.
More broadly, the program would be an important step toward establishing the eurozone’s missing fiscal union.
That goal will be reached more quickly once the benefits of achieving it are apparent to all.
A Balance-Sheet Approach to Fiscal Policy
WASHINGTON, DC – Everyone is talking about debt, citing huge nominal figures that strongly affect public-policy debates worldwide.
But all debt is not created equal.
For starters, when it comes to public debt, there is a big difference between the gross and net figures.
While Japan’s gross public debt, for example, is a massive 246% of GDP, the net figure, accounting for intra-government debts, is 127% of GDP.
Moreover, what should really matter about a country’s public-debt burden is the expected annual cost of servicing it.
As Daniel Gros recently pointed out, debt that can be rolled over indefinitely at zero interest rates is no debt at all.
This is an extreme example; but the closer a fixed interest rate gets to zero, and the longer the maturity becomes, the lower the burden of the stock of debt.
Although Greece’s public debt amounts to about 175% of GDP, low interest rates – which are fixed for a large proportion of it – and long maturities mean that it may be more manageable than it seems.
Greece’s ratio of public-debt service to GDP is similar to that of Portugal, or even Italy.
Indeed, that is why the latest deal with Greece, which entails even more bailout funds, could work, as long as the country is accorded the debt reprofiling that it needs to reverse the decline of its GDP, reduces its primary surpluses, and pursues balance-sheet-strengthening reforms.
Such considerations underscore why it is a mistake to focus only on annual budgets, without adequate regard for the long-term balance-sheet implications of how borrowed money is used.
This narrow, short-term focus differs from the approach taken for publicly traded companies, for which the strength of the balance sheet and the economy’s potential are emphasized, alongside annual income statements.
Imagine, for example, that Germany borrows at a 1% fixed real interest rate with a ten-year maturity and invests the proceeds in repairing domestic transport infrastructure.
These investments bring a modest real financial rate of return of 4% through fees, tolls, and, in the longer run, tax revenues (stemming from an increase in GDP).
Such investments would directly strengthen Germany’s public-sector balance sheet.
This does not even take into account social returns, accrued through reduced traffic congestion and cleaner air.
Beyond infrastructure, spending to improve education – specifically to ensure that the next generation receives the skills they need to contribute to the twenty-first-century economy – would also result in faster GDP growth. And it, too, would likely yield significant social returns.
For governments with access to today’s extremely low – and often negative – real interest rates, it may seem like a no-brainer to borrow and invest more in projects with long-term benefits.
Doing so would strengthen their balance sheets, crowd in the private sector, and generate employment.
But balance-sheet calculations are rarely at the center of political debate.
To be sure, some progress is being made toward bringing longer-term considerations into annual budget rules.
Bodies like the European Commission increasingly distinguish between the structural and cyclical components of a budget deficit, and thus consider potential output, which increases with investment, in their calculations.
But this is only a small step in the right direction.
For a long-term balance-sheet approach to gain traction, politicians will have to drop the ideological biases that are distorting fiscal policy.