True, China cannot entirely overlook US pressure and the staunch opposition of its top oil supplier, Saudi Arabia, to Iran’s nuclear program.
But, while China has supported the mandatory sanctions set by the United Nations Security Council, it has rejected the West’s unilateral measures.
With bilateral trade worth only about $5 billion annually, Russia’s economic interests in Iran are fairly modest.
But it fears Iran’s ability to cause trouble, particularly by stirring up unrest among Russia’s Muslim citizens.
Moreover, America has refused to pay the Kremlin’s high price – curtailment of congressional human-rights legislation, repeal of Cold-War-era restrictions on Russian-US trade, and abandonment of plans for ballistic missile defense in Europe – for Russian support on Iran (or, for that matter, on any other trouble spot, such as Syria).
The problem with the US drive to have key stakeholders join its anti-Iran crusade is that some of them live in neighborhoods where Iran is an important factor.
India is a case in point.
India is certainly alarmed at the possibility of Iran developing nuclear weapons, not to mention its concern at the possible effects of Iran’s Islamist fundamentalism on Kashmiri Muslims.
But its $14 billion in annual bilateral trade, and dependence on Iranian oil – many of India’s refineries have been built to run solely on Iranian crude – are key strategic considerations.
Moreover, India needs Iran as an alternative trade and energy conduit to Central Asia, bypassing rival Pakistan, and also as a hedge against an uncertain future in Afghanistan after America’s withdrawal in 2014.
As a result, India’s policy mirrors China’s: it has aligned itself with mandatory international sanctions, but has abjured voluntary Western financial restrictions.
The best one can expect is that India continues to act at the margin –&#160;for example, by reducing dependence on Iranian oil while increasing imports from Saudi Arabia, already its largest supplier of crude.
The equivocal nature of Iran’s alliances, however, can be a mixed blessing.
Yes, a harsh sanctions regime might still gain additional supporters, but an Iran with its back against the wall would probably be even more obstinate in its nuclear drive.
After all, Iraq was an easy target in the first Gulf War precisely because it had abandoned its nuclear program, and possessed no weapons of mass destruction.
Similarly, Libya’s Muammar el-Qaddafi exposed himself to a NATO onslaught by relinquishing his WMDs.
By contrast, North Korea shows that defiance, rather than accommodation, is a strategy that works.
That is why Syria, with North Korean assistance, tried to develop a nuclear program (presumably destroyed by Israel’s officially unacknowledged “Operation Orchard” in 2007).Iran will not consider abandoning its nuclear insurance policy unless a broad agenda is agreed upon that addresses Iran’s concerns as a regional power and secures the immunity of its Islamist regime from American actions.
Albert Einstein’s definition of insanity as “doing the same thing over and over again and expecting different results” could be applied to America’s Iran policy.
The diplomacy of sanctions, ostracism, and brinkmanship has failed resoundingly.
As Iran’s uranium-enrichment and other weapons-development activities continue unabated, the US needs to make a break with the old rules of engagement.
America’s Misplaced Deficit Complacency
CAMBRIDGE – The United States still faces a dangerous fiscal deficit, but one might not know it from the complacency that dominates budget discussions in Washington.
Regarded as an urgent problem until recently, the federal deficit is now being placed on the back burner of American politics.
The shift in thinking was triggered by the revised deficit forecasts recently published by the Congressional Budget Office, the independent technical agency responsible for advising Congress on budget issues.
According to the CBO’s report, the US fiscal deficit will decline from 7% of GDP in 2012 to 4% in 2013.
This reduction reflects the cuts in government spending on defense and non-defense programs mandated by the budget “sequester” that took effect in March, as well as the rise in revenue caused by higher rates for income and payroll taxes since the end of 2012.
More striking is the CBO’s projection that the deficit will continue to decline rapidly, reaching just 2.1% of GDP in 2015, before rising gradually to just 3.5% of GDP in 2023, the end of the CBO’s official forecast period.
That path of deficits implies that the government debt/GDP ratio will remain at about the current level of 75% for the next ten years.
Unfortunately, these headline-grabbing numbers are not likely to be borne out in reality; indeed, even the CBO does not believe that they represent what will occur.
Instead, these official forecasts represent a “baseline” scenario that the CBO is required to present.
The CBO’s “baseline budget” assumes that all of the deficit-reducing features in current law will remain unchanged.
These include, for example, an old legislative requirement that payments to physicians in the government’s Medicare program be reduced sharply in future years, a requirement that Congress has voted each year to “postpone.”
In order to provide better guidance, the CBO presents an “alternative fiscal scenario,” in which such very unlikely features are removed from the forecast.
The alternative forecast implies that the annual budget deficit at the end of ten years will be back up to 4.7% of GDP, with the debt/GDP ratio at 83% and rising.
And those estimates are based on the optimistic assumption that the economy will have returned gradually to full employment with low inflation and moderate interest rates.
Officials and others who favor stimulating growth through increased government spending ignore the CBO’s more realistic alternative scenario.
They buttress their argument that the deficit is not an immediate problem by pointing to very low interest rates on long-term government debt, with a 2% yield on the ten-year Treasury bond and a negative real interest rate on Treasury inflation-protected bonds (TIPS).
But such low rates do not reflect ordinary market sentiment; rather, they stem from the fact that the Federal Reserve is now buying more long-term securities than the government is issuing to finance the budget deficit.
Looking further ahead, the CBO warns that the combination of a rapidly aging population and the increase in medical costs will cause the deficit to rise rapidly, driven by the higher costs of pension and health-care benefits for middle-income retirees.
According to the CBO, without legislative changes, the fiscal deficit in 2037 will be 17% of GDP, while the national debt will increase to more than 195% of GDP.
A large and rising national debt is a serious danger to an economy’s health.
Higher debt-service costs require higher tax rates, which in turn weaken incentives and reduce economic growth.
By the end of the decade, the US will have to pay an amount equivalent to more than one-third of the revenue from personal-income taxes just to pay the interest on the national debt.
Foreign investors now hold more than half of that debt.
Paying interest to them requires sending more goods and services to the rest of the world than the US receives from the rest of the world.
That requires a weaker dollar to make US goods more attractive to foreign buyers and to make foreign goods more expensive to American consumers.
The weaker dollar reduces the US standard of living.
A large national debt also limits the government’s ability to respond to emergencies, including both military threats and economic downturns.
And it makes the US vulnerable to changes in financial-market sentiment, as the European experience has shown.
Reducing future deficits and reversing the rise in the national debt require raising tax revenue and slowing the growth of government pension and health-care programs.
Tax revenue can be raised without increasing marginal tax rates by limiting the tax subsidies that are built into the current tax code.
Those subsidies are a hidden form of government spending on everything from home mortgages and health insurance to the purchase of hybrid cars and residential solar panels.
Slowing the growth of the pension and health-care programs for middle-class retirees cannot be done abruptly.
It must begin by giving notice to those who are now a decade away from retirement – which is why it is important to launch such reforms now.
Unfortunately, the new complacency about future deficits makes it difficult, if not impossible, to enact the legislation needed to begin the process of trimming America’s long-term fiscal deficit.
It is important for policymakers and the public alike to understand the real fiscal outlook and the damage that high deficits will cause if prompt action is not taken.
Merely moving the problem to the back burner will not prevent it from boiling over.
Meeting America’s Growth Challenge
BERKELEY – The United States continues to recover from its deepest economic slump since the Great Depression, but the pace of recovery remains frustratingly slow.
There are several reasons to anticipate modest improvement in 2013, although, as usual, there are downside risks.
Prolonged recession or a financial crisis in Europe and slower growth in emerging markets are the main external sources of potential danger.
At home, political infighting underlies the two greatest risks: failure to reach a deal to raise the debt ceiling and an additional round of fiscal contraction that stymies economic growth.
Since 2010, tepid average annual GDP growth of 2.1% has meant weak job creation.
In both this recovery and the previous two, the rebound in employment growth has been weaker and later than the rebound in GDP growth.
But the loss of jobs in the most recent recession was more than twice as large as in previous recessions, so a slow recovery has meant a much higher unemployment rate for a much longer period.
Weak aggregate demand is the primary culprit for subdued GDP and employment growth.
The 2008 recession was triggered by a financial crisis that erupted after the collapse of a credit-fueled asset bubble decimated the housing market.
Private-sector demand contracts sharply and recovers only slowly after such crises.
The private-sector financial balance swung from a deficit of 3.7% of GDP in 2006, at the height of the boom, to a surplus of about 6.8% of GDP in 2010 and about 5% today.
This represents the sharpest contraction and weakest recovery in private-sector demand since the end of World War II.
Growth in two components of private demand, residential investment and consumption, which account for more than 75% of total spending in the US economy, has been especially slow.
Both sources of demand are likely to strengthen in 2013.
Residential investment is still at an historic low as a share of GDP as a result of overbuilding during the 2003-2008 housing boom and the tsunami of foreclosures that followed.
But the headwinds in the housing market are dissipating.
Home sales, prices, and construction all rose last year, while foreclosures declined.
Residential investment should be a source of output and job growth this year.
Large losses in household wealth, deleveraging from unsustainable debt, weak wage growth, and a decline in labor’s share of national income to a historic low have combined to constrain consumption growth.
Real median household income is still nearly 7% below its 2007 peak, real median household net worth dropped by 35% between 2005 and 2010 (and remains significantly below its pre-recession peak), and about 90% of the income gains during the recovery have gone to the top 1%.
To be sure, the balance-sheet headwinds holding back consumption have eased.
Households have slashed their debt – often through painful foreclosures and bankruptcies – and their debt relative to income has sunk to its 2005 level, significantly below its 2008 peak. &#160;Helped by low interest rates, debt service relative to household income has fallen back to levels not seen since the early 1980’s.
But consumption will be hit by the expiration of the payroll tax cut, which will reduce household income by about $125 billion this year.
Another factor holding back recovery has been weak growth in spending on goods and services by both state and local governments, and more recently by the federal government.
Indeed, since the recession’s onset, state and local governments have cut nearly 600,000 jobs and reduced spending for infrastructure projects by 20%.
The fiscal trends for 2013 are mixed, but negative overall.
While state and local government cutbacks in spending and employment are ending as the recovery boosts their tax revenues, the fiscal drag at the federal level is strengthening.
The American Taxpayer Relief Act – the tax deal reached in early January to avoid the “fiscal cliff” – shaves about $750 billion from the deficit over the next ten years and could take a percentage point off the 2013 growth rate.
In addition, although less widely appreciated, significant reductions in federal spending are already under way, with more likely to come.
Spending cuts and revenue increases that have been legislated since 2011 will reduce the projected deficit by $2.4 trillion over the next decade, with three-quarters coming from spending cuts, almost exclusively in non-defense discretionary programs.
Based on current economic assumptions, the US needs about $4 trillion in savings to stabilize the debt/GDP ratio over the next decade.
It is already three-fifths of the way there.
The so-called sequester (the across-the-board spending cuts scheduled to begin in March), would slash another $100 billion this year and $1.2 trillion over the next decade.
Although it could stabilize the debt/GDP ratio, the sequester would be a mistake: it fails to distinguish among spending priorities, would undermine essential programs, and would mean another significant dent in growth this year.
Moreover, despite the warnings of deficit alarmists, the US does not face an imminent debt crisis.
Currently, the federal debt held by the public is just over 70% of GDP, a level not seen since the early 1950’s.
However, government debt soars by an average of 86% after severe financial crises, so the increase in the federal debt by 70% between 2008 and 2012 is not surprising.
Nor is it alarming.
The US economy grew rapidly for several years after WWII with a higher debt/GDP ratio, and today’s ratio is lower than in all other major industrial countries (and roughly half that of Greece, analogies to which are absurd and misleading).
During the last two years, Washington has been obsessed with the need to cut the deficit and put the debt/GDP ratio on a “sustainable” path, even as global investors have flocked to US government debt, driving interest rates to historic lows.
The considerable progress that has been made on deficit reduction over the next ten years has been overlooked.
Also overlooked have been the immediate challenges of low growth, weak investment, and high unemployment.
It is time to refocus.
The US needs a plan for faster growth, not more deficit reduction.
Evsey Domar, a legendary growth economist (and one of my MIT professors) counseled that the problem of alleviating the debt burden is essentially a problem of achieving growth in national income.
We should heed his wisdom.
America’s New Progressive Era?
NEW YORK – In 1981, US President Ronald Reagan came to office famously declaring that, “Government is not the solution to our problem.
Government is the problem.”
Thirty-two years and four presidents later, Barack Obama’s recent inaugural address, with its ringing endorsement of a larger role for government in addressing America’s – and the world’s – most urgent challenges, looks like it may bring down the curtain on that era.
Reagan’s statement in 1981 was extraordinary.
It signaled that America’s new president was less interested in using government to solve society’s problems than he was in cutting taxes, mainly for the benefit of the wealthy.
They demanded tax cuts, and got them; they demanded a rollback of environmental protection, and got it; they demanded, and received, the right to attack unions; and they demanded lucrative government contracts, even for paramilitary operations, and got those, too.
For more than three decades, no one really challenged the consequences of turning political power over to the highest bidders.
In the meantime, America went from being a middle-class society to one increasingly divided between rich and poor.
CEOs who were once paid around 30 times what their average workers earned now make around 230 times that amount.
Once a world leader in the fight against environmental degradation, America was the last major economy to acknowledge the reality of climate change.
Financial deregulation enriched Wall Street, but ended up creating a global economic crisis through fraud, excessive risk-taking, incompetence, and insider dealing.
Maybe, just maybe, Obama’s recent address marks not only the end of this destructive agenda, but also the start of a new era.
Indeed, he devoted almost the entire speech to the positive role of government in providing education, fighting climate change, rebuilding infrastructure, taking care of the poor and disabled, and generally investing in the future.
It was the first inaugural address of its kind since Reagan turned America away from government in 1981.
If Obama’s speech turns out to mark the start of a new era of progressive politics in America, it would fit a pattern explored by one of America’s great historians, Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., who documented roughly 30-year intervals between periods of what he called “private interest” and “public purpose.”
In the late 1800’s, America had its Gilded Age, with the creation of large new industries by the era’s “robber barons” accompanied by massive inequality and corruption.
The subsequent Progressive Era was followed by a temporary return to plutocracy in the 1920’s.
Then came the Great Depression, Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal, and another 30 years of progressive politics, from the 1930’s to the 1960’s.
The 1970’s were a transition period to the Age of Reagan – 30 years of conservative politics led by powerful corporate interests.
It is certainly time for a rebirth of public purpose and government leadership in the US to fight climate change, help the poor, promote sustainable technologies, and modernize America’s infrastructure.
If America realizes these bold steps through purposeful public policies, as Obama outlined, the innovative science, new technology, and powerful demonstration effects that result will benefit countries around the world.
It is certainly too early to declare a new Progressive Era in America.
Vested interests remain powerful, certainly in Congress – and even within the White House.
These wealthy groups and individuals gave billions of dollars to the candidates in the recent election campaign, and they expect their contributions to yield benefits.
Moreover, 30 years of tax cutting has left the US government without the financial resources needed to carry out effective programs in key areas such as the transition to low-carbon energy.
Still, Obama has wisely thrown down the gauntlet, calling for a new era of government activism.
He is right to do so, because many of today’s crucial challenges – saving the planet from our own excesses; ensuring that technological advances benefit all members of society; and building the new infrastructure that we need nationally and globally for a sustainable future – demand collective solutions.
Implementation of public policy is just as important to good governance as the vision that underlies it.
So the next task is to design wise, innovative, and cost-effective programs to address these challenges.
Unfortunately, when it comes to bold and innovative programs to meet critical human needs, America is out of practice.
It is time to begin anew, and Obama’s full-throated defense of a progressive vision points the US in the right direction.
America’s New Trade Hypocrisy
As the current “development round” of trade talks moves into its final stages, it is becoming increasingly clear that the goal of promoting development will not be served, and that the multilateral trade system will be undermined.
Nowhere is this clearer than in a provision that is supposed to give the least developed countries almost duty-free access to developed countries’ markets.
A year ago, the leaders of the world’s richest countries committed themselves to alleviating the plight of the poorest.
At Doha in November 2001, they pledged to give something more valuable than money: the opportunity for poor countries to sell their goods and earn their way out of poverty.
With great fanfare, developed countries seemed for a while to be making good on their promise, as Europe extended the “Everything but Arms” initiative (EBA), under which it was unilaterally to open its markets to the poorest countries of the world.
The opening was less than it seemed.
The devil is in the details, as many less developed countries discovered that EBA’s complicated rules of origin, together with supply-side constraints, meant that there was little chance for poor countries to export their newly liberalized products.
But the coup de grace was delivered by the world’s richest country, the United States, which once again decided to demonstrate its hypocrisy.
The US ostensibly agreed to a 97% opening of its markets to the poorest countries.
The developing countries were disappointed with the results of Europe’s EBA initiative, and Europe has responded by committing itself to dealing with at least part of the problem that arises from the rules of origin tests.
America’s intention was, to the contrary, to seem to be opening up its markets, while doing nothing of the sort, for it appears to allow the US to select a different 3% for each country.
The result is what is mockingly coming to be called the EBP initiative: developing countries will be allowed freely to export everything but what they produce .
They can export jet engines, supercomputers, airplanes, computer chips of all kinds—just not textiles, agricultural products, or processed foods, the goods they can and do produce.
Consider Bangladesh.
If we go by the most widely used six-digit tariff lines, Bangladesh exported 409 tariff lines to the US in 2004, from which it earned about $2.3 billion.
But its top 12 tariff lines – 3% of all tariff lines – accounted for 59.7% of the total value of its exports to the US.
This means that the US could erect barriers to almost three-fifths of Bangladeshi exports.
For Cambodia, the figure would be about 62%.
The situation is no better if the 3% rule applies to the tariff lines that the US imports from the rest of the world (rather than to the lines individual poor countries export to the US), for then the US can exclude roughly 300 tariff lines from duty-free and quota-free treatment.
For Bangladesh, this implies that 75% of the tariff lines, accounting for more than 90% of the value of its exports to the US, could be excluded from duty-free treatment.
Exclusion from duty-free treatment could reach 100% for Cambodia, which exported only 277 tariff lines to the US in 2004.
The official argument for the 3% exclusion is that it affects “sensitive products.”
In other words, while the US lectures developing countries on the need to face the pain of rapid adjustment to liberalization, it refuses to do the same.
(Indeed, it has already had more than 11 years to adjust to liberalization of textiles.)
But the real problem is far worse because the 3% exclusion raises the specter of an odious policy of divide and conquer, as developing countries are invited to vie with each other to make sure that America does not exclude
Indeed, there may be a further hidden agenda behind the 97% proposal.
At the World Trade Organization’s meeting Cancun in 2003, the developing countries stood together and blocked efforts to forge a trade agreement that was almost as unfair as the previous Uruguay round, under which the poorest countries actually became worse off.
It was imperative that such unity be destroyed.
America’s strategy of bilateral trade agreements was aimed at precisely that, but it enlisted only a few countries, representing a fraction of global trade.
The 97% formula holds open the possibility of extending that fragmentation
AGOA had a sunset clause, but if the duty-free access becomes permanent for less developed countries in Africa – as stipulated in Hong Kong – then poor countries in Asia will continue to lose US market share.
The WTO is supposed to prevent these trade-diversionary agreements, but so far no case has been successfully brought.
Even if America succeeds in dividing the developing countries, however, it may inspire a degree of unity elsewhere.
Both those committed to trade liberalization within a multilateral system and those committed to helping developing countries will look at America’s new strategy with abhorrence.
Game Changers for Growth
BERKELEY – The recent G-20 meeting of finance ministers in Saint Petersburg confirmed that the debate between growth and austerity is over – at least for now.
With protracted recession in Europe and slowdowns in emerging markets, concern about budget deficits has given way to apprehension about growth.
In July, the International Monetary Fund revised its global growth forecast downward for the second time this year.
Both Japan and the United States stand out as bright spots in the subdued global outlook, but for different reasons.
In Japan, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has unleashed a combination of aggressive monetary and fiscal expansion along with promised reforms of the labor market, corporate governance, regulation, and trade.
In response to rapid and bold stimulus measures, Japan’s economy is expected to grow at a rate of around 3% this year – one of the highest rates among advanced economies – and the Nikkei index rose 80% in the six-month period ending in May of this year.
Now Abe has signaled his intention to move forward with tough structural reforms.
If he delivers, his policies will be game changers for Japan.
In the US, the story is one of continued recovery as the headwinds slowing growth dissipate.
State- and local-government budgets are improving, the housing market is strengthening, and households are deleveraging and repairing their balance sheets.
Counterproductive and excessive fiscal austerity at the federal level has dampened growth this year, but the private sector has proved more resilient than expected.
Under current law, fiscal contraction is slated to ease next year and monetary policy is likely to remain supportive, so most forecasters predict an acceleration of growth.
But growth prospects could be undermined by another bruising political battle over the federal budget, resulting in deep spending cuts.
The current Republican rhetoric in the House of Representatives portends additional fiscal austerity.
Earlier this year, the Congressional Budget Office warned that the potential US growth rate has declined as a result of years of subpar investment rates, the aging of the population, and smaller productivity gains.
Every year of below-capacity growth means lower growth capacity in the future, owing to lost investment, erosion of worker skills and experience, and diminished risk-taking.
Still, there are often-overlooked reasons for optimism about America’s future potential growth.
A recent McKinsey Global Institute study identifies five mutually reinforcing “game changers” that could have a significant effect on GDP growth, productivity, and employment in the US by 2020: shale energy, big-data analytics, exports in knowledge-intensive industries, infrastructure investment, and talent development.
Two of these – shale energy and big-data analytics – build on ongoing technological breakthroughs in which the US has a strong lead and depend primarily on private-sector action, not macroeconomic or structural policies.
US production of shale gas and oil has been growing by more than 50% annually over the last five years.
As a result of increasing supplies, US natural-gas prices have declined by two-thirds since 2008 and are likely to remain significantly lower than prices in the rest of the world at least through 2020.
This price advantage will enhance America’s competitiveness as a manufacturing location, particularly for energy-intensive activities.
The US has the largest recoverable shale-gas reserves and the second-largest recoverable shale-oil reserves in the world.
It also enjoys a technological lead in shale-energy technologies, and it already has a vast network of pipelines, refineries, and ports in the energy sector that can be repurposed for shale gas and oil (though much more investment will be needed).
Growth in shale energy will mean more investment, production, and jobs in the energy sector itself.
Lower gas prices will boost manufacturing production, particularly in downstream industries like petrochemicals and primary metals that use natural gas as fuel and feedstock.
Growth in energy and energy-intensive industries will fuel additional demand, output, and employment across a wide swath of supporting activities, including transportation, construction, and professional services.
Overall, McKinsey estimates that growth in shale energy could add 2-4% to annual GDP and create up to 1.7 million jobs by 2020.
But extracting shale energy involves environmental risks and uncertainties, among them groundwater contamination, higher methane emissions, and potential seismic effects.
And shale gas emits CO2 when burned, even though it has half the carbon content of coal and has played a significant role in cutting US carbon emissions to mid-1990’s levels. &#160;
Not surprisingly, the President of the Natural Resources Defense Council, an admired environmental group, recently remarked that “fracking is about the most complicated thing I have encountered.”
More research on the environmental risks and benefits of shale energy, and the development of new standards and regulations to control these risks are required.
Big data and advanced analytics are another technology-driven game changer for US growth.
As more data are generated, stored, and transmitted in digital form, new data sets relevant to personal and business decisions are growing exponentially.
As a result of advances in computing power, the advent of cloud computing, and new software tools, more of these data sets can be quickly analyzed and used by businesses to reduce costs, boost productivity, and create new products and services.
Big data and advanced analytics can also reduce costs and enhance efficiency in health care and government, and can create value for consumers through greater product variety and quality, as well as enhanced convenience – benefits that are not captured in GDP statistics.
McKinsey estimates that big-data analytics could add about $325 billion, or 1.7% to annual GDP in the retail and manufacturing sectors, while generating up to $285 billion in productivity gains and cost savings in health care and government by 2020.
The potential savings in health-care costs would ease pressures on government budgets and release resources to boost growth in the rest of the economy.
New information and communications technologies were game changers that boosted the potential growth rate of the US economy in the 1990’s.
McKinsey’s research suggests that shale energy and big-data technologies will be game changers with similar benefits for the economy’s potential growth over the next several years.
America’s Opposing Futures
I recently learned something interesting: American international finance economists and American domestically oriented macroeconomists have very different – indeed, opposing – views of the likely consequences of America’s huge current-account deficit.
International finance economists see a financial crisis as likely, followed by a painful and perhaps prolonged recession in the United States.
Domestically oriented macroeconomists, by contrast, see a forthcoming fall in the value of the dollar not as a crisis, but as an opportunity to accelerate growth.
Domestically oriented macroeconomists look at the situation roughly like this: at some point in the future, foreign central banks will become less willing to continue buying massive amounts of dollar-denominated securities in order to prop up the greenback.
When they cease their large-scale dollar-purchase programs, the value of the dollar will fall – and it will fall hard.
But, according to this view, as the dollar’s value declines, US exports will become more attractive to foreigners and American employment will rise, with labor re-allocated to the newly-vibrant export sector.
It will be like what happened in Britain after it abandoned its exchange-rate peg and allowed the pound to depreciate relative to the Deutschmark , or what happened in the US in the late 1980’s, when the dollar depreciated against the pound, the Deutschmark , and – most importantly – the Japanese yen.
International finance economists see a far bleaker future.
They see the end of large-scale dollar-purchase programs by central banks leading not only to a decline in the dollar, but also to a spike in US long-term interest rates, which will curb consumption spending immediately and throttle investment spending after only a short lag.
To be sure, international finance economists also see US exports benefiting as the value of the dollar declines, but the lags in demand are such that the export boost will come a year or two after the decline in consumption and investment spending.
Eight to ten million people will have to shift employment from services and construction into exports and import-competing goods, implying that structural unemployment will rise.
Moreover, there may be a financial panic: large financial institutions with short-term liabilities and long-term assets will have a difficult time weathering a large rise in long-term dollar-denominated interest rates.
This mismatch can cause financial stress and bankruptcy just as easily as banks’ local-currency assets and dollar liabilities caused stress and bankruptcy in the Mexican and East Asian crises of the 1990’s and in the Argentinean crisis of this decade.
When international finance economists sketch this scenario, domestically oriented macroeconomists respond that it sounds like a case of incompetent monetary policy.
Why should the Federal Reserve allow long-term interest rates to spike just because other central banks have ceased their dollar-purchase programs?
Should not the Fed step in and replace them with its own purchases of long-term US Treasury bonds, thereby keeping long-term interest rates at a level conducive to full employment?
To this, international finance economists respond that the Fed does not have the power to do so.
When forced to choose between full employment and price stability, the international finance economists say that the Fed will choose price stability, because its institutional memory of the 1970’s, when inflation ran rampant, remains very strong.
Therefore, since a fall in the value of the dollar raises import prices, and thus functions as a negative shock to the supply side of the economy, the Fed will have to raise, not lower, interest rates, and sell, not buy, bonds.
Serious economists whom I respect enormously find themselves taking strong positions on opposite sides of this debate.
I’m not wise enough to say which side is right, but I certainly know which side I hope is wrong.
America’s Other 30%
NEW HAVEN – The American consumer is but a shadow of its former almighty self.
Personal consumption in the United States expanded at only a 1.5% annual rate in real (inflation-adjusted) terms in the second quarter of 2012 – and that was no aberration.
Unfortunately, it continues a pattern of weakness that has been evident since early 2008.
Over the last 18 quarters, annualized growth in real consumer demand has averaged a mere 0.7%, compared to a 3.6% growth trend in the decade before the crisis erupted.
Never before has the American consumer been this weak for this long.
The cause is no secret.
Consumers made huge bets on two bubbles – housing and credit.
Reckless monetary and regulatory policies turned the humble abode into an ATM, allowing families to extract dollars from bubbles and live beyond their means.
Both bubbles have long since burst, and US households are now dealing with post-bubble financial devastation – namely, underwater assets, record-high debt, and profound shortages of savings.
At the same time, sharply elevated unemployment and subpar income growth have combined to tighten the noose on over-extended consumers.
As a result, American households have hunkered down as never before.
Consumers are diverting what little income they earn away from spending toward paying down debt and rebuilding savings.
That is both logical and rational – and thus not something that the US Federal Reserve can offset with unconventional monetary easing.
American consumers’ unprecedented retrenchment has turned the US economy’s growth calculus inside out.
Consumption typically accounts for 70% of GDP (71% in the second quarter, to be precise).
But the 70% is barely growing, and is unlikely to expand strongly at any point in the foreseeable future.
That puts an enormous burden on the other 30% of the US economy to generate any sort of recovery.
In fact, the other 30% has not done a bad job, especially considering the severe headwinds coming from consumers’ 70%.
The 30% mainly consists of four components – capital spending by firms, net exports (exports less imports), residential construction, and government purchases.
(Technically, the pace of inventory investment should be included, but this is a cyclical buffer between production and sales rather than a source of final demand.)
Given the 0.7% trend in real consumption growth over the past four and a half years, the US economy’s anemic 2.2% annualized recovery in the aftermath of the Great Recession is almost miraculous.
Credit that mainly to the other 30%, especially to strong exports and a rebound in business capital spending.
By contrast, the government sector has been moving in the opposite direction, as state and local governments retrench and federal purchases top out after post-crisis deficit explosions.
The housing sector has started to recover over the past five quarters, but from such a severely depressed level that its growth has had little impact on the overall economy.
Given the strong likelihood that consumers will remain weak for years to come, America’s growth agenda needs to focus on getting more out of the other 30%.
Of the four growth components that fall into this category, two have the greatest potential to make a difference – capital spending and exports.
Prospects for these two sources of growth will not only influence the vigor, or lack thereof, of any recovery; they could well be decisive in bringing about an important shift in the US growth model.
The 70/30 split underscores the challenge: the US must face up to a fundamental rebalancing – weaning itself from excessive reliance on internal demand and drawing greater support from external demand.
Capital spending and exports, which together account for about 24% of GDP, hold the key to this shift.
At just over 10% of GDP, the share of capital spending is well below the peak of nearly 13% in 2000.
But capital spending must exceed that peak if US businesses are to be equipped with state-of-the-art capacity, technology, and private infrastructure that will enable them to recapture market share at home and abroad.
Only then could export growth, impressive since mid-2009, sustain further increases.
And only then could the US stem the rising tide of import penetration by foreign producers.
The other 30% is also emblematic of a deeper strategic issue that America faces – a profound competitive challenge.
A shift to external demand is not there for the asking. It must be earned by hard work, sheer determination, and a long overdue competitive revival.
On that front, too, America has been falling behind.
According to the World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Index, the US slipped to fifth place in 2011-2012, from fourth place the previous year, continuing a general downward trend evident since 2005.
The erosion is traceable to several factors, including deficiencies in primary and secondary education as well as poor macroeconomic management.
But the US also has disturbingly low rankings in the quality of its infrastructure (#24), technology availability and absorption (#18), and the sophistication and breadth of its supply-chain production processes (#14).
Improvement on all counts is vital for America’s competitive revival.
But meeting the challenge will require vigorous growth from America’s other 30% – especially private capital spending.
With the American consumer likely to remain on ice, the same 30% must also continue to shoulder the burden of a sluggish economic recovery.
None of this can occur in a vacuum.
The investment required for competitive revival and sustained recovery cannot be funded without a long-overdue improvement in US saving.
In an era of outsize government deficits and subpar household saving, that may be America’s toughest challenge of all.
America\u0027s Other 87 Deficits
NEW HAVEN – The United States has a classic multilateral trade imbalance.
While it runs a large trade deficit with China, it also runs deficits with 87 other countries.
A multilateral deficit cannot be fixed by putting pressure on one of its bilateral components.
But try telling that to America’s growing chorus of China bashers.
America’s massive trade deficit is a direct consequence of an unprecedented shortfall of domestic saving.
The broadest and most meaningful measure of a country’s saving capacity is what economists call the “net national saving rate” – the combined saving of individuals, businesses, and the government.
It is measured in “net” terms to strip out the depreciation associated with aging or obsolescent capacity.
It provides a measure of the saving that is available to fund expansion of a country’s capital stock, and thus to sustain its economic growth.
In the US, there simply is no net saving any more.
Since the fourth quarter of 2008, America’s net national saving rate has been negative – in sharp contrast to the 6.4%-of-GDP averaged over the last three decades of the twentieth century.
Never before in modern history has the world’s leading economic power experienced a saving shortfall of such epic proportions.
Yet the US found a way to finesse this problem.
Exploiting what&#160;Valéry Giscard d’Estaing called the “exorbitant privilege” of the world’s reserve currency, the US borrowed surplus savings from abroad on very attractive terms, running massive balance-of-payments, or current-account, deficits to attract foreign capital.
The US current account, which was last in balance in 1991, hit a record deficit of $801 billion (6% of GDP) in 2006.
This gap has narrowed in the past couple of years, but much of the improvement probably reflects little more than the temporary impact of an unusually tough business cycle.
This is where America’s multilateral trade deficit enters the equation, for it has long accounted for the bulk of America’s balance-of-payments gap.
Since 2000, it has made up fully 96% of the cumulative current-account shortfall.
And that is what ultimately makes the China-centric blame game so absurd.
Without addressing the root of the problem – America’s chronic saving shortfall – it is ludicrous to believe that there can be a bilateral solution for a multilateral problem.
Yet that is exactly what US officials, together with many prominent economists, believe America needs.
Since the trade deficit is widely thought to put pressure on US jobs and real wages, the US-China trade imbalance has come under special scrutiny in these days of great angst.
Yes, China does account for the largest component of America’s multilateral trade deficit – making up 42% of the total trade gap in 2010.
Conscious outsourcing and supply-chain management decisions by US multinationals play an important role in exaggerating China’s share.
But that does little to let China off the hook in the eyes of Washington.
Long-standing charges of currency manipulation provide the proverbial smoking gun that US politicians – of both parties –&#160;believe justifies the imposition of steep tariffs on China’s exports to the US (which totaled $365 billion in 2010).
That was precisely the argument behind the US Senate’s recent overwhelming approval of a “currency bill” that took dead aim on China.
While it may be convenient to hold others accountable for America’s problems, this is bad economics driving bad politics.
In an era of open-ended US government budget deficits and chronic shortfalls in personal saving, America is doomed to suffer subpar savings and massive multilateral trade deficits for as far as the eye can see.
In that vein, closing down trade with China, while failing to address the saving shortfall, is like putting pressure on one end of a water balloon.
The Chinese component of America’s multilateral trade deficit will simply migrate somewhere else – most likely to a higher-cost producer.
That would be the functional equivalent of a tax hike on beleaguered American families – hardly the solution that US politicians are promising.
This is not to ignore important US-China trade issues that need to be addressed.
Market access should be high on the agenda – especially for a sluggish US economy that needs new sources of growth, like exports.
With China now America’s third largest – and by far its most rapidly growing – export market, the US should push hard to expand business opportunities in China, especially as the Chinese economy tilts increasingly toward internal demand.
China should be viewed as an opportunity, not a threat.
At the same time, the US government should come clean with the American public about charges of Chinese currency manipulation and unfair trade practices.
The renminbi has, in fact, appreciated by 30% relative to the US dollar since mid-2005.
In broad multilateral terms – a far more meaningful gauge because it measures a currency’s value against a broad cross-section of a country’s trading partners – the “real effective” renminbi currently stands about 8% above its most recent 12-year average (1998-2010).
Yes, China continues to accumulate a vast fund of foreign-exchange reserves.
But this is as much the result of speculators’ “hot money” plays as it is a conscious and perfectly reasonable effort by Chinese policymakers to remain focused on financial stability and manage currency appreciation in a gradual, disciplined, and orderly fashion.
China-bashing in the US speaks to a corrosive shift in the American psyche.
It deflects attention away from those truly responsible for perpetuating the greatest saving shortfall in history.
Washington has been seduced by the political economy of false prosperity.
That seduction has encouraged America to squander its savings and live beyond its means for nearly two decades.
Now the game is up.
The ultimate test of any nation’s character is to look inside itself at moments of great challenge. Swept up in the blame game, the US is doing the opposite.
And that could well be the greatest tragedy of all.
After all, America’s 88 deficits did not arise of thin air.
The American Consumer is Not Okay
NEW HAVEN – The spin-doctors are hard at work talking up America’s subpar economic recovery.
All eyes are on households.
Thanks to falling unemployment, rising home values, and record stock prices, an emerging consensus of forecasters, market participants, and policymakers has now concluded that the American consumer is finally back.
Don’t believe it.
First, consider the facts: Over the 21 quarters since the beginning of 2008, real (inflation-adjusted) personal consumption has risen at an average annual rate of just 0.9%.
That is by far the most protracted period of weakness in real US consumer demand since the end of World War II – and a massive slowdown from the pre-crisis pace of 3.6% annual real consumption growth from 1996 to 2007.
With household consumption accounting for about 70% of the US economy, that 2.7-percentage-point gap between pre-crisis and post-crisis trends has been enough to knock 1.9 percentage points off the post-crisis trend in real GDP growth.
Look no further for the cause of unacceptably high US unemployment.
To appreciate fully the unique character of this consumer-demand shortfall, trends over the past 21 quarters need to be broken down into two distinct sub-periods.
First, there was a 2.2% annualized decline from the first quarter of 2008 through the second quarter of 2009.
This was crisis-driven carnage, highlighted by a 4.5% annualized collapse in the final two quarters of 2008.
Second, this six-quarter plunge was followed, from mid-2009 through early 2013, by 15 quarters of annualized consumption growth averaging just 2% – an upturn that pales in comparison with what would have been expected based on past consumer-spending cycles.
That key point appears all but lost on the consumer-recovery crowd.
In recent speeches and discussions with current and former central bankers, I have been criticized for focusing too much on the 0.9% trend of the past 21 quarters and paying too little attention to the 2% recovery phase of the post-crisis period.
At least it’s a recovery, they claim, and a sign of healing that can be attributed mainly to the heroic, unconventional efforts of the US Federal Reserve.
This brings us to the second part of the argument against optimism: analytics.
One of the first concepts to which an economics student is exposed in a basic macro course is “pent-up” consumer demand.
Discretionary consumption is typically deferred during recessions, especially for long-lasting durable goods such as motor vehicles, furniture, and appliances.
Once the recession ends and recovery begins, a “stock-adjustment” response takes hold, as households compensate for foregone replacement and update their aging durable goods.
Over most of the postwar period, this post-recession release of pent-up consumer demand has been a powerful source of support for economic recovery.
In the eight recoveries since the early 1950’s (excluding the brief pop following the credit-controls-induced slump in the 1980’s), the stock-adjustment response lifted real consumption growth by 6.1%, on average, for five quarters following business-cycle downturns; spurts of 7-8% growth were not uncommon for a quarter or two.
By contrast, the release of pent-up demand in the current cycle amounted to just 3% annualized growth in the five quarters from early 2010 to early 2011.
Moreover, the strongest quarterly gain was a 4.1% increase in the fourth quarter of 2010.
This is a stunning result.
The worst consumer recession in modern history, featuring a record collapse in durable-goods expenditures in 2008-2009, should have triggered an outsize surge of pent-up demand.
Yet it did anything but that.
Instead, the release of pent-up consumer demand was literally half that of previous business cycles.
The third point is more diagnostic: The shockingly anemic pattern of post-crisis US consumer demand has resulted from a deep Japan-like balance-sheet recession.
With the benefit of hindsight, we now know that the 12-year pre-crisis US consumer-spending binge was built on a precarious foundation of asset and credit bubbles.
When those bubbles burst, consumers were left with a massive overhang of excess debt and subpar saving.
The post-bubble aversion to spending, and the related focus on balance-sheet repair, reflects what Nomura Research Institute economist Richard Koo has called a powerful “debt rejection” syndrome.
While Koo applied this framework to Japanese firms in Japan’s first lost decade of the 1990’s, it rings true for America’s crisis-battered consumers, who are still struggling with the lingering pressures of excessive debt loads, underwater mortgages, and woefully inadequate personal saving.
Through its unconventional monetary easing, the Fed is attempting to create a shortcut around the imperative of household sector balance-sheet repair.
This is where the wealth effects of now-rebounding housing prices and a surging stock market come into play.
But are these newfound wealth effects really all that they are made out to be?
Yes, the stock market is now at an all-time high – but only in current dollars.
In real terms, the S&amp;P 500 is still 20% below its January 2000 peak.
Similarly, while the Case-Shiller index of US home prices is now up 10.2% over the year ending March 2013, it remains 28% below its 2006 peak.
Wealth creation matters, but not until it recoups the wealth destruction that preceded it.
Sadly, most American households are still far from recovery on the asset side of their balance sheets.
Moreover, though the US unemployment rate has fallen, this largely reflects an alarming decline in labor-force participation, with more than 6.5 million Americans since 2006 having given up looking for work.
At the same time, while consumer confidence is on the mend, it remains well below pre-crisis readings.
In short, the American consumer’s nightmare is far from over.
Spin and frothy markets aside, the healing has only just begun.
America’s Political Recession
BERKELEY – The odds are now about 36% that the United States will be in a recession next year.
The reason is entirely political: partisan polarization has reached levels never before seen, threatening to send the US economy tumbling over the “fiscal cliff” – the automatic tax increases and spending cuts that will take effect at the beginning of 2013 unless Democrats and Republicans agree otherwise.
More than a century ago, during the first Gilded Age, American politics was sharply polarized as well.
In 1896, future President Theodore Roosevelt was a Republican attack dog.
He denounced Democratic presidential candidate William Jennings Bryan as a mere puppet of the sinister governor of Illinois, John Peter Altgeld.
Bryan, Roosevelt said, “would be as clay in the hands of the potter under the astute control of the ambitious and unscrupulous Illinois communist.”
The “free coinage of silver” would be “but a step towards the general socialism which is the fundamental doctrine of his political belief.”
He and Altgeld “seek to overturn the...essential policies which have controlled the government since its foundation.”
Such language is as extreme as any we hear today – and from a man who was shortly to become Vice President (and later President, following the assassination of William McKinley).
We have heard Texas Governor Rick Perry call obliquely for the lynching of his fellow Republican, Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke, should he come to the Lone Star State.
And we have seen Kansas Secretary of State Kris Kobach explore the possibility of removing President Barack Obama from the ballot in Kansas, because, Kobach suggested, Obama is “not a natural-born citizen.”
But neither Perry nor Kobach is likely ever to be a US president, whereas Theodore Roosevelt was more than a partisan.
He was happy to make deals with Democrats – to put himself at the head not just of the Republican Party but of the bipartisan Progressive coalition, trying either to yoke the two forces together or to tack back and forth between them to achieve legislative and policy goals.
Obama broadly follows Ronald Reagan’s (second-term) security policy, George H.W. Bush’s spending policy, Bill Clinton’s tax policy, the bipartisan Squam Lake Group’s financial-regulatory policy, Perry’s immigration policy, John McCain’s climate-change policy, and Mitt Romney’s health-care policy (at least when Romney was governor of Massachusetts).
And yet he has gotten next to no Republicans to support their own policies.
Indeed, like Clinton before him, Obama has been unable to get Republican senators like Susan Collins to vote for her own campaign-finance policies, McCain to vote for his own climate-change policy, and – most laughably – Romney to support his own health-care plan.
Likewise, he has been unable to get Republican Vice-Presidential candidate Paul Ryan to endorse his own Medicare cost-control proposals.
There are obvious reasons for this.
A large chunk of the Republican base, including many of the party’s largest donors, believes that any Democratic president is an illegitimate enemy of America, so that whatever such an incumbent proposes must be wrong and thus should be thwarted.
And the Republican cadres believe this of Obama even more than they believed it of Clinton.
This view clearly influences Republican office-holders, who fear the partisan beast that mans their campaigns’ phone banks and holds the purse strings.
Moreover, ever since Clinton’s election in 1992, those at the head of the Republican Party have believed that creating gridlock whenever a Democrat is in the White House, and thus demonstrating the government’s incapacity to act, is their best path to electoral success.
That was the Republicans’ calculation in 2011-2012.
And November’s election did not change the balance of power anywhere in the American government: Obama remains President, the Republicans remain in control of the House of Representatives, and the Democrats control the Senate.
Now, it is possible that Republican legislators may rebel against their leaders, arguing that they ran for office to govern, not to paralyze the government in the hope that doing so will give the party power to reign as it wishes after the next election.
It is possible that Republican leaders like Representatives John Boehner and Eric Cantor and Senator Mitch McConnell will conclude that their policy of obstruction has been a failure.
They might note that, although the economy remains deeply troubled and depressed in the aftermath of a financial crisis for which they set the stage, Obama’s policies have been by far the most successful of those in any major advanced country, and conclude that he has been a relatively good president, and one worth supporting.
But don’t count on it.
Right now, every senior politician in America is telling their favorites in the press that they are confident that compromise on the “fiscal cliff” will be reached before the end of December.
But they are telling their favorites this because they think that pessimism now will lead to their being blamed for gridlock later.
It seems to me that the odds are around 60% that real negotiation will not begin until tax rates go up on January 1.
And it seems to me that, if gridlock continues into 2013, the odds are 60% that it will tip the US back into recession.
Let us hope that it will be short and shallow.
Bye-Bye, Middle East?
PARIS – For some time now, a certain strategic vision has been gaining traction: the United States is becoming energy-independent, paving the way for its political retreat from the Middle East and justifying its strategic “pivot” toward Asia.
This view seems intuitively correct, but is it?
Energy-hungry America has long depended on the global market to meet domestic demand.
In 2005, the US imported 60% of the energy that it consumed.
Since then, however, the share of imports has decreased, and it should continue to do so.
The US is expected to become energy self-sufficient in 2020, and to become an oil exporter by 2030.
This scenario would grant the US three enormous advantages.
It would enhance US economic competitiveness, especially relative to Europe, given the lower costs involved in the extraction of shale gas.
It would also reduce America’s exposure to growing unrest in the Arab world.
Finally, it would increase the relative vulnerability of America’s main strategic rival, China, which is becoming increasingly dependent on Middle East energy supplies.
These facts obviously need to be taken seriously, but their implications for US foreign policy in the Middle East should not be too hastily drawn.
Above all, though energy dependence is a key element of US policy in the region, it is far from being the only factor.
Israel’s security and the desire to contain Iran are equally important.
Moreover, the Middle East’s role in the global geopolitics of energy will grow in the coming decades, making it difficult to see how a superpower like the US could simply walk away from the region.
Within the next 15 years, OPEC countries will account for 50% of global oil production, compared to only 42% today.
Furthermore, the country on which this increase will most likely hinge is Iraq.
Could the US ignore a country that in roughly ten years will become the world’s second-largest oil exporter, generating more than $200 billion annually in revenue, while increasingly being dominated by an authoritarian Shia regime that is close to Iran?
Would it withdraw in the face of the consequent strategic threat to its three allies – Saudi Arabia, Turkey, and Israel – in the region?
Such a possibility seems even more far-fetched as long as the Iranian nuclear crisis remains unresolved and the Syrian crisis continues to widen the region’s Shia-Sunni divide (reflected in increased tension between Turkey and Iran).
Even as US President Barack Obama was visiting Asia in November – a trip meant to underscore America’s “pivot” – he was forced to devote considerable time and attention to mediating a cease-fire between Israel and Hamas in Gaza.
Indeed, if oil were truly America’s only or paramount interest in the Middle East, its special relationship with Israel would be mystifying, given the harm that it implies for US interests among Arab oil exporters.
Even when its energy dependence on the Middle East was at its peak, the US rarely altered its policy of support for Israel.
It is also important to bear in mind that in 1973, the US suffered less from the OPEC oil embargo than Europe did, even though America, which had resupplied Israel in its war with Egypt and Syria in October of that year, was the primary target.
In the end, America’s position in the region strengthened after Egypt became a US ally and made peace with Israel.
China’s growing interest in the Middle East also decreases the likelihood of an American withdrawal.
The US will remain concerned about ensuring the security of energy supplies for its Asian allies, which, like China, are increasingly dependent on the region’s oil exporters.
Nevertheless, while an American withdrawal from the Middle East seems highly unlikely, US exposure to the region will indeed decline; as that happens, America’s role there will probably become more subdued – and perhaps more cynical.
Its involvement in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict will likely be limited to maintaining the status quo rather than seeking a comprehensive settlement.
This stance – suggested by America’s opposition to granting Palestine observer-state status at the United Nations – would amount to an admission by the US that it has given up on the creation of two states in the Middle East.
That would certainly satisfy Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu and the Palestinian fringe seeking to weaken the Palestinian Authority.
But it would fully vindicate those who believe that Obama is more a man of good will than a visionary.
America’s Perpetual Christmas
Has the United States transcended the laws of economics?
As the New Year begins, the US continues to race ahead of its rich-country counterparts.
The gargantuan US trade deficit?
No problem.
In 2005, it widened further, and the dollar only strengthened.
Low investment and a deteriorating primary education system?
Not to worry.
The super-flexible US economy keeps managing to produce more with less.
Nor are there any signs of America’s economic hegemony starting to fold under the weight of maintaining its unilateral military dominance.
Instead of feeling the pinch of wartime privations, like in any ordinary country, American consumers are binging as if it were Christmas all year round.
There are those who truly believe in the idea that America is exceptional.
Those true believers argue that America’s consumers can long pursue their spendthrift ways because their country’s economy is better than everyone else’s.
The US labor market is more flexible than Europe’s, enabling it to react more nimbly to the ever shifting sands of globalization.
And, unlike most countries, especially in Latin America and Asia, the US system ruthlessly prunes weak corporate leadership.
Moreover, the true believers cite America’s better-funded and hyper-competitive university system, which sucks in a disproportionate share of the world’s top students and researchers.
Many ultimately choose to immigrate to America permanently, and it is relatively easy for them to do so, thanks to a society that still welcomes outsiders with open arms (even if things have become more difficult since 2001).
On top of all this, the US military, rather than being a burden, feeds the country’s technological superiority by subsidizing basic research.
By contrast, skeptics hold that the US economy already contains the seeds of its own socio-economic decline.
They point to worsening income inequality, as images beamed worldwide from post-hurricane New Orleans illustrated all too clearly.
Poor children do not have reasonable access to health care.
Nor are the non-poor faring particularly well, as wage growth has remained virtually flat for a very long time, even as corporate profits are booming.
Indeed, this disconnect may explain why polls do not give President Bush the credit for economic management that his strong record would seem to merit. Nor does it help Americans’ mood that they spend far more of their lives working than do citizens in Europe or, these days, even Japan.
All of these factors place deep stresses on the social fabric which, so the skeptics argue, will ultimately play out in the political arena.
Interestingly, both sides cite America’s gaping trade deficit – believe it or not, the US is soaking up two-thirds of global excess saving – to support their arguments.
The true believers view the deficits as evidence that the world recognizes how special the US is and wants to buy in. Skeptics see an empire living on borrowed money and borrowed time.
So which is it?
In my view, those who think that America is about to collapse are likely to be disappointed.
Nevertheless, I suspect that the age of American exceptionalism is near an end, and soon per capita income in Europe and Japan will approach that of the US, rather than falling farther behind.
Though the next few years are likely to underscore some of the weaknesses that the skeptics highlight, the end will come mainly because other countries will find creative ways to mimic the most effective US institutions, albeit within their own legal, political, and social frameworks.
We would do well to recall how, at the beginning of the 1990’s, book after book was still being written urging US and European corporations to imitate Japan or face certain doom.
The last 15 years have of course revealed deep flaws in Japan’s financial system.
But another major factor contributing to Japan’s decline was that firms elsewhere began adopting Japanese methods, such as just-in-time supply chains.
Surely, imitation will someday impinge on superior US growth performance as well.
Perhaps the biggest weakness in the true believers’ argument is the trade deficit.
For the moment, America’s ability to borrow vast sums at low interest rates acts like a huge dose of steroids on the economy. It artificially props up consumption growth and allows the government to defer hard choices between taxes and military expenditures.
At some point, the party is going to end.
The unwinding of the US economy might even begin in 2006, particularly if Japan continues to grow out of its doldrums, the US housing market softens dramatically, and Europe’s economic recovery accelerates.
Individually, these are each highly plausible scenarios, and collectively they would hit the US trade deficit like a perfect storm.
Perhaps the end will come in a different way, but it is difficult to imagine the age of US exceptionalism lasting indefinitely.
Can the end come abruptly in 2006?
This is not the most likely scenario, but it is not unthinkable.
America’s Strategy Vacuum
NEW HAVEN – Apparently, policymakers at the Federal Reserve are having second thoughts about the wisdom of open-ended quantitative easing (QE).
They should.
Not only has this untested policy experiment failed to deliver an acceptable economic recovery; it has also heightened the risk of another crisis.
The minutes of the January 29-30 meeting of the Fed’s Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) speak to a simmering discontent: “[M]any participants…expressed some concerns about potential costs and risks arising from further asset purchases.”
The concerns range from worries about the destabilizing ramifications of an exit strategy from QE to apprehension about capital losses on the Fed’s rapidly ballooning portfolio of securities (currently $3 trillion, and on its way to $4 trillion by the end of this year).
As serious as these concerns may be, they overlook what could well be the greatest flaw in the Fed’s unprecedented gambit: an emphasis on short-term tactics over longer-term strategy.
Blindsided by the crisis of 2007-2008, the Fed has compounded its original misdiagnosis of the problem by repeatedly doubling down on tactical responses, with two rounds of QE preceding the current, open-ended iteration.
The FOMC, drawing a false sense of comfort from the success of QE1 – a massive liquidity injection in the depths of a horrific crisis – mistakenly came to believe that it had found the right template for subsequent policy actions.
That approach might have worked had the US economy been afflicted by a cyclical disease – a temporary shortfall of aggregate demand.
In that case, countercyclical policies – both fiscal and monetary – could eventually be expected to plug the demand hole and get the economy going again, just as Keynesians argue.
But the US is not suffering from a temporary, cyclical malady. It is afflicted by a very different disease: a protracted balance-sheet recession that continues to hobble American households, whose consumption accounts for roughly 70% of GDP.
Gains in inflation-adjusted personal-consumption expenditure have averaged a mere 0.8% over the past five years – the most severe and protracted slowdown in consumer demand growth in the post-World War II era.
The brute force of massive monetary and fiscal stimulus rings hollow as a cyclical remedy to this problem.
Another approach is needed.
The focus, instead, should be on accelerating the process of balance-sheet repair, while at the same time returning monetary and fiscal policy levers to more normal settings.
Forgiveness of “underwater” mortgages (where the outstanding loan exceeds the home’s current market value), as well as reducing the foreclosure overhang of some 1.5 million homes, must be part of that solution.