We now stand at the end of the peace process as we have known it.
From now on, our options will be a violent and unilateral disengagement, such as the one that ushered in the current war in Gaza, and a comprehensive peace plan that will have to be annexed to the road map and validated by an international peace conference.
Only such “reverse engineering,” starting at the end and working backward – and legitimized and monitored by strict international mechanisms – might yet save the prospects for an Israeli/Palestinian peace from ruin.
As the launch of the peace process at the 1991 Madrid International Peace Conference demonstrated, the prospects for peace in the Middle East always needed a concerted international push to exploit windows of opportunity.
Wars in the Middle East, especially those , such as Israel’s recent war against Hezbollah, that ended inconclusively, have almost invariably created the conditions for major political breakthroughs, because they taught the warring parties the limits of power.
Trapped in a momentous struggle between the forces of peaceful change and those committed to Doomsday, the Middle East is once again calling for a major international effort at peacemaking.
The initiators of the 2002 Arab peace initiative likewise understood that a strictly bilateral approach might be inadequate, and instead called to regionalize the solution to the conflict.
Loss of mutual trust between the parties, and their total incapacity to take even the smallest step towards each other, let alone to observe their commitments without prodding by third parties, made (and still makes) an international framework for peace the only way out of the dangerous impasse.
The end of bilateralism stems also from the dysfunctional political systems of both Palestine and Israel.
Today, Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas is gasping for political air under the smothering control of Hamas.
On her recent trip to Israel, Rice had to listen to four different peace plans from the prime minister, the foreign minister, the minister for strategic threats, and the defense minister.
For both Israelis and Palestinians, achieving internal peace might prove as formidable a challenge as establishing peace with each other.
Any reformed peace process is doomed if it is guided by a road map within which, on the core issues, the parties have diametrically opposed views.
But there is no need to reinvent the wheel, because the solution to the Arab-Israeli conflict is embodied in the main peace plans that are already on the table: the Clinton peace parameters, and the all-Arab peace initiative.
Fifteen years after the Madrid Conference began a formal peace process between Israelis and Palestinians, the parties are wiser as to what is inevitable if this tortuous process is to lead to a permanent settlement.
In 1991, they convened on a platform of “land for peace.”
But the Israelis never believed they would have to give back all the land, while the Arabs did not think they might have to offer “all the peace.”
Today, at long last, everyone knows what is meant by “land,” and everyone knows what is meant by “peace.”
Bush’s Second Gulf Disaster
President Bush has asked that Americans not “play politics” at this moment of terrible national disaster.
But asking hard questions of our nation’s leaders is exactly what democracy demands when the government’s response to Hurricane Katrina is widely viewed as “a national disgrace.”
Katrina came with at least two days’ warning, but authorities waited to issue an evacuation order.
There was no transportation for people without cars or money, facilities to house and care for refugees were insufficient, there were no forces in place to deliver desperately needed supplies or to secure order, and there was nowhere near the number of boats, helicopters, and other craft necessary to rescue the stranded.
Hampered by a National Guard with 40% of its people in Iraq, the pace of getting military personnel to the hardest hit areas was inordinately slow.
For four days, there was simply no clear center of command and control. As a result, countless people suffered and died.
Much of this failure is the result of the Bush administration’s policies, which effectively eroded the capacities of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), the government agency primarily responsible for dealing with disasters.
Obsessed with the war on terror as well as an ideology of privatizing the functions of government, the administration systematically sapped FEMA’s long-term ability to prevent disaster or at least cushion the blows when prevention is not possible.
FEMA was downsized and downgraded from a cabinet position, then placed under the Department of Homeland Security.
Its mission of disaster planning and preparation was dropped entirely, and its focus was altered to fight terrorists.
Its leadership had no experience in disaster management.
The past director was one of Bush’s Texas political cronies, and the current director’s qualifications include a stint as commissioner for judges and stewards with the International Arabian Horse Association, where he was asked to resign for “supervision failures.”
Since 2001, billions of dollars were shifted from disaster relief to homeland security and the war in Iraq.
Key disaster mitigation programs were slashed and federal funding for post-disaster relief was cut in half.
The Army Corps of Engineers’ budget for levee construction in New Orleans was gutted, including funds specifically aimed at the Southeast Louisiana Urban Flood Control Project.
Preventive measures to protect people and property were not carried out despite FEMA’s own conclusion in 2001 that a major hurricane hitting New Orleans was one of the three “likeliest, most catastrophic disasters facing this country.”
Believing FEMA to be an “oversized entitlement program” and that the “business of government is not to provide services,” Bush’s first FEMA director instituted new outsourcing requirements as part of a major privatization effort.
This provoked a brain drain as experienced FEMA personnel moved into the private sector
Privatization also left poorer states and poorer communities especially vulnerable.
As money dried up and federal programs were contracted out to private firms at higher rates, only the richest and politically most important states and communities could compete successfully for the scarce federal grants necessary to pay for services.
For example, Florida (with 16 more electoral votes than Louisiana and where the president’s brother governs) received its requested funding to protect its wetlands.
By contrast, a more needy Louisiana (with its staggering 24% poverty rate) was denied its request for flood-mitigation funds in 2004.
With Louisiana’s ability to protect itself weakened and the center of disaster relief badly undermined, an inadequate government response and unnecessary destruction were almost inevitable – with the poor paying the price.
But the failure of this administration runs deeper than its chronic and intentional diversion of resources away from the types of policies that keep people safe from disaster.
Despite scientific evidence demonstrating that the increased intensity and frequency of hurricanes is related to climate change, the Bush administration systematically rejects participation in international climate-protection regimes.
Rather than continue a ban on wetlands development instituted by previous administrations, the Bush administration overturned it.
Because development-provoked erosion has brought the Gulf of Mexico 20 miles closer to land than it was in 1965, hurricanes are able to retain more strength, and their winds and waves pack more speed and destructive power.
Similarly, loss of wetlands threatened New Orleans’ levees, which were built on the assumption that they would have 40 to 50 miles of protective swamp as buffer between the city and the Gulf of Mexico.
Despite every major study showing that a massive coastal restoration program and higher levees were needed to protect New Orleans, the administration permitted federal agencies to stop protecting 20 million acres of wetlands, allowed developers to drain thousands of acres and in 2004 cut funding for holding back the waters of Lake Pontchartrain by more than 80%.
New Orleans is America’s canary in the mineshaft.
Ideologies of privatization that incapacitate effective government, permitting the privileged to save themselves while leaving the poor clinging to roofs, must now be challenged.
This disaster is a chilling reminder of what happens when government fails to protect its citizens, and it is imperative that Americans demand accountability.
Officials who did not do their jobs must be dismissed, and elected officials whose policies aggravated the devastation wrought by Katrina must be removed from office.
We owe this to the dead and to the survivors.
Business as Usual with Russia?
BERLIN – Despite continuing tensions over Russia’s invasion of Georgia this August, the European Union will reopen talks with Russia on a new Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA).
A PCA establishes a legal framework for negotiating specific agreements in such areas as trade, justice, and human rights.
The current talks aim to replace the expired 1997 PCA, which remains in force by mutual consent pending a new accord.
At an emergency meeting on September 1, EU leaders refused to continue the PCA talks until Russia removed its combat units from the Georgian separatist regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia.
The heads of the 27 EU governments also characterized the Kremlin’s decision to recognize the independence of the two breakaway regions as “unacceptable.”
Since then, EU governments have moderated their conditions, describing a simple Russian military withdrawal from Georgian territories outside the two regions as sufficient to resume a dialogue on the PCA, energy security, and other issues.
The EU decision comes at a time when NATO has also sought to renew its engagement with Russia after the Georgia conflict led both parties to suspend many joint programs.
In a speech on September 18 at the Royal United Services Institute in London, NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer argued that, despite differences over Georgia, Russia and the alliance should cooperate “wherever our interests converge.”
He specifically cited continued cooperation in Afghanistan, where Russia is providing logistical support for the NATO-led International Security Assistance Force, as “a clear indication that common interests can transcend disagreements in other areas.”
In order not to appear intimidated by Russia’s forceful dismemberment of Georgia, NATO governments have publicly reaffirmed their support for Georgia’s territorial integrity and the country’s desire to join NATO eventually.
In private, however, many allied officials have told the media that they are even less inclined than they previously were to deepen NATO’s ties with Georgia, given the risks of becoming entrapped in another Russian-Georgian war.
At present, it seems most Western governments have decided to concentrate on helping Georgia recover economically from the war rather than on punishing Russia directly.
At last month’s International Donors’ Conference in Brussels, they pledged billions of dollars of reconstruction aid.
The EU is also considering negotiating a free-trade area with Georgia and relaxing visa rules for Georgian citizens.
NATO has established a special NATO-Georgian Commission to help coordinate allied support for Georgia’s post-conflict reconstruction.
Even so, Russian and Western officials continue to spar over American plans to deploy ballistic missile defense systems in Poland and the Czech Republic.
In his speech in November to the Russian parliament on the state of nation, President Dmitry Medvedev warned that Russia would deploy short-range Iskander missiles in the Baltic Sea port of Kaliningrad “to neutralize if necessary the anti-ballistic missile system in Europe.”
Medvedev added that Russian electronic equipment would jam the American systems and that the Russian military was preparing additional countermeasures.
NATO and EU leaders denounced the threats, which seemed especially gratuitous coming one day after the American people had elected a new President who has expressed interest in improving relations with Russia.
Russia’s government has also sought to showcase its growing military potential.
In September and October, the country’s strategic forces engaged in their largest nuclear weapons-related exercises since the Soviet Union’s demise.
On October 12, the Russian Navy joined with the Strategic Rocket Forces to conduct a well-integrated exercise involving near-simultaneous testing of three long-range ballistic missiles from separate ground and submarine launch platforms.
Last month, Prime Minister Vladimir Putin also announced yet another increase in Russian defense spending.
Russian military expenditures have increased by double-digit figures in recent years.
This year, the Russian military will spend over $40 billion.
The figure for 2009 could exceed $50 billion.
Although superficially impressive, this surge obscures several key issues.
Much of the growth merely compensates for the exceptionally high inflationary pressures in Russia’s defense sector.
In addition, it will take years for the recent budget increases to translate into new equipment.
Although Russian designers can still develop first-class weapons, Russia’s defense companies, which have yet to recover from the traumatic disintegration of the Soviet military-industrial complex, remain unable to manufacture large numbers of the most advanced systems.
Russia’s military also must compete with foreign customers for those few warplanes, tanks, and other sophisticated weapons that are produced.
The long-term sustainability of Russia’s military revival is also unclear.
Russia’s government remains dependent on oil and gas exports for revenue, but the prices of these commodities are falling sharply.
Unlike the Soviet Union, Russia is tightly integrated into the world economy, rendering the country vulnerable to the current global financial crisis.
Medvedev recently warned that Russia’s “military-industrial complex is starting to be affected by credit problems,” stoking fears of a return to the paralyzing payment crises that plagued the defense sector during the 1990’s.
Russia’s continuing demographic problems will also make it difficult for the armed forces to become a fully professional military, one that does not depend on poorly motivated conscripts.
Although Medvedev and Putin have apparently adopted a viable power-sharing arrangement, Russia’s stunted political institutions lack the capacity to root out corruption and other inefficiencies.
Comprehensive security-sector reform remains off the political agenda.
Even in the high-priority defense sector, perhaps one-third of government spending is wasted or stolen – a condition that is not conducive to realizing Russia’s great power ambitions.
The Business Case for Sustainability
BERKELEY – Investors worldwide are increasingly seeking investment opportunities that promise to bring environmental and social benefits, in addition to market rates of return.
If this trend continues, with the advancement of environmental or social objectives enhancing an investment’s value, it will strengthen the commitment to sustainability that is already gaining momentum among businesses around the world.
Last year, one out of every six dollars of assets under professional management in the United States – a total of $6.6 trillion – was allocated toward some form of sustainable investment, especially public equities.
Some 1,260 companies, managing $45 trillion worth of assets, are signatories of the United Nations’ “principles for responsible investment,” which recognize environmental, social, and governance (ESG) factors – and thus the long-term health and stability of companies and markets – as critical to investors.
One signatory, CalPERS, one of the world’s largest institutional investors, has gone a step further: it will require all of its investment managers to identify and integrate ESG factors into their decisions – a bold move that could transform capital markets.
The number of companies issuing sustainability reports has grown from fewer than 30 in the early 1990s to more than 7,000 in 2014.
And, in a recent Morgan Stanley survey, 71% of respondents stated that they are interested in sustainable investing.
To be sure, a major barrier to incorporating ESG criteria into investment decisions remains: many investors – including 54% of the respondents in the Morgan Stanley survey – believe that doing so could lower the financial rate of return.
But there is mounting evidence that this is not the case, with several recent studies indicating that sustainable investments do as well as – or even outperform – traditional investments.
A seminal 2012 study that analyzed two groups of companies – similar in terms of industry, size, financial performance, and growth prospects – found that those in the “high sustainability group” had superior share-price performance.
And a new study by Morgan Stanley’s Institute for Sustainable Investing, which analyzed the performance of 10,228 open-ended mutual funds and 2,874 separately managed accounts in the US, found that sustainable investments usually met – and often exceeded – the median returns of comparable traditional investments for the periods examined.
Many ESG factors come into play when evaluating sustainable investment options.
For example, the Generation Foundation – the think tank of Generation Investment Management (on whose advisory board I serve) – identifies 17 environmental factors, 16 social factors, and 12 governance factors relevant to sustainability.
The challenge is to distinguish between the ESG factors that have a material influence on company performance and those that do not.
But the data that companies currently report are inadequate to enable investors to make this distinction.
The non-profit Sustainability Accounting Standards Board (SASB) is attempting to change that by developing material sustainability accounting standards for 80 industries, consistent with the US Security and Exchange Commission’s compliance regulations.
More than 2,800 participants – including companies with market capitalization totaling $11 trillion and investors with $23.4 trillion in assets under management – have been involved in the SASB process.
Using the SASB’s proposed standards for 45 industries, as well as other metrics, a new study – the most definitive so far – has found that companies that perform well on material sustainability factors have better operational performance, are less risky, and earn significantly higher shareholder returns than companies that perform poorly.
Similarly, a new framework recently proposed by Morgan Stanley for valuations of companies in 29 industries includes ESG factors that pose material risks or opportunities.
Whereas a company is traditionally valued based exclusively on how it deploys financial capital to generate returns, the new framework incorporates how it deploys natural, human, and social capital, as well as the transparency of its governance practices.
Decisions about data-center specifications are important for managing costs, obtaining a reliable supply of energy and water, and lowering reputational risks, particularly given the increasing global regulatory focus on climate change.
Google’s construction of data centers that use 50% of the energy of an average data center has brought it considerable savings.
Similar success stories have played out across sectors.
Since 2011, the US chemical company DuPont has invested $879 million in research and development of products with quantifiable environmental benefits; it has recorded $2 billion in annual revenue from products that reduce greenhouse-gas emissions, and an additional $11.8 billion in revenue from renewable resources like wind and solar power.
Likewise, the multinational consumer goods company Procter and Gamble reported $52 billion in sales of “sustainable innovation products” from 2007 to 2012.
That is roughly 11% of the company’s total sales over that period.
There are good reasons to believe that, by investing in improving material sustainability, companies can increase shareholder value.
In fact, if a company is to fulfill its fiduciary responsibility to its investors, it has little choice but to go beyond financial returns to incorporate ESG factors that are likely to have a material impact on its performance over time.
This is precisely the kind of incentive that could propel the world toward a more sustainable future.
The Business of Improving Global Health
ZURICH – The dramatic success of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) in driving advances in human health will be a hard act to follow.
In just 15 years, child mortality was nearly halved, and malaria deaths declined by 60%.
Today nearly 15 million people worldwide receive treatment for AIDS, helping them continue to be productive members of society, compared to only about 10,000 people in 2000, when the MDGs were launched.
Can the new Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), just adopted by the United Nations to guide global development efforts for the next 15 years, replicate the MDGs’ success?
The strong track record of the MDGs certainly provides grounds for hope.
But the new health-related goals are broader and more ambitious than before.
And the public-health situation is in many ways more challenging than in 2000.
The new SDGs set a lofty goal: for the first time, world leaders have vowed to reduce premature deaths caused by chronic illnesses such as cancer, heart disease, and diabetes.
This is a tall order at a time of rapid population growth and rapid aging.
Chronic diseases are the main – and growing – cause of death in developed and developing countries alike.
And more than two billion people still lack access to essential medicines.
To achieve the new targets, we must find creative new ways to address the world’s biggest health challenges.
Above all, we must develop new business models that allow society to better harness the know-how, creativity, and drive of private enterprises to help improve public health.
Companies share the responsibility for meeting these new goals, but they also need support from governments and other organizations to ensure the greatest positive impact.
The demographic challenge is daunting.
A billion people joined the human race in just the last 12 years.
Another billion or so will join by 2030, bringing the world’s population to 8.5 billion, according to UN estimates.
The fastest-growing segment of the population is people over 60, a group that is expected to grow by 500 million people, to 1.4 billion, in 2030.
Older people are more likely to develop chronic illnesses, which now account for 63% of all deaths worldwide.
The World Health Organization predicts that the proportion will reach 70% in the next ten years, with most of the deaths occurring in developing countries.
Some 28 million people die from chronic diseases in low- and middle-income countries each year, accounting for roughly three-quarters of all deaths caused by chronic disease globally.
Developing countries’ health systems are already stretched.
They often lack medicines, resources, and know-how to treat chronically ill patients, who may require years or decades of treatment.
For example, there are only four oncologists in Ethiopia, a country of some 97 million people.
Moreover, many developing countries face a double disease burden and must wage a simultaneous battle against infectious diseases such as malaria, tuberculosis, and HIV/AIDS.
Clearly, more resources will be needed to tackle these challenges.
But in the wake of the global financial crisis, development assistance for health from governments and private donors has plateaued at about $35 billion annually, after growing more than 11% per year from 2000-2010.
And less than 2% of that money was directed at combatting chronic diseases.
The long-term nature of chronic diseases, and the complexity of providing better treatment for patients in the developing world, calls for innovative solutions.
Companies possess the capabilities and the global scale to play a stronger future role in addressing public-health challenges and achieving the objectives of the SDGs.
Some corporations are beginning to explore new “social business” approaches that will allow them to meet the needs of people and society in the developing world, while at the same time covering their costs, or even making a small profit.
Moneymaking social ventures are self-sustaining and have the potential to grow, bringing benefits to more and more people.
They are a potentially powerful complement to philanthropy, which has underpinned much recent progress in public health.
My company, for example, is launching a portfolio of 15 essential medicines to treat diseases including diabetes, respiratory illnesses, and breast cancer.
The aim is to make these medicines available to people of modest means in developing countries at a cost to local health systems of $1 per treatment per month.
We will start in Kenya, Vietnam, and Ethiopia.
It is a small first step, and we will learn as we go, with a goal of expanding to 30 countries in a few years.
To overcome the many hurdles to success in low- and middle-income countries, these new types of business ventures will likely need to explore innovative forms of collaboration with governments, non-governmental organizations, and other companies.
Such collaboration has already shown that working across traditional boundaries, making creative use of technology, and developing pragmatic solutions can yield impressive results.
Bringing health care to everyone on the planet is a great challenge.
It will take imagination, cooperation, and hard work.
Greater involvement by business could increase the likelihood of getting there by 2030.
Safe Driving for Fast Companies
MONTREAL – In a car, blind spots are the areas of the road that the rearview and side-view mirrors do not show.
A driver must constantly be aware of them – and of the potentially deadly perils they can conceal.
Businesses can have blind spots, too – and they can be equally costly, causing companies to overinvest in risky ventures or fail to take advantage of emerging opportunities.
Successful leaders are careful to identify their company’s blind spots and introduce mechanisms to ensure that no harm will come from them.
One common source of businesses’ blind spots is judgment bias.
This arises when executives have overly narrow views of their industry, underestimate their competitors’ capabilities, or fail to see how the competitive landscape is changing.
A good example of a company that suffered from this kind of blind spot is Nestlé.
For decades, the Swiss multinational defined itself strictly as one the world’s leading food companies.
The label created a self-imposed restriction, constraining Nestlé to sell a relatively narrow range of products.
In 2010, however, the company’s CEO, Paul Bulcke, redefined Nestlé as a “nutrition, health, and wellness” company.
It was a brilliant strategic decision, allowing the firm to offer dozens of new product lines and services.
Many executive teams are overconfident about their company’s competitive strength.
In front of their board, they rattle off exaggerated claims about where the company stands; some 80% of annual reports claim that their company is “the leader in the market.”
Unfortunately, this kind of arrogance can lead to complacency and competitive failure.
Many financial institutions, for example, are inadequately prepared to confront the new players entering their markets.
Google, which is quietly testing the car-insurance waters, holds a banking license.
Meanwhile, Square, Paypal, and the start-up company Affirm are already processing a large share of online payments.
In today’s fast-paced world, it takes only a single technological improvement, price advantage, or great viral advertising campaign for a competitor to leap ahead.
New players can materialize seemingly out of nowhere.
The taxi company Uber did not exist five years ago; it is now valued at more than $40 billion.
The rapid expansion of Alibaba threatens Western retailers who never expected to face a Chinese competitor.
Driverless cars and pilotless planes will soon transform many industries.
Another frequent cause of companies’ blind spots is historic bias, or what psychologists call an “anchoring bias” – the assumption that something that was true in the past will continue to be true in the future.
A long track record of success can warp executives’ analysis, distort their decision-making, and leave them blind to incipient paradigm shifts or rapid changes in a market.
When the American retailer Target opened its first store in Canada in March 2013, its management assumed that the recipe of its success in the United States could be replicated north of the border.
Instead, just 22 months later, the company announced that it would close all of its 133 Canadian stores and lay off 17,000 people.
Target’s American experience turned out to be a bad predictor of what it could expect in Canada.
Overcoming historic biases requires questioning an industry’s taboos.
For example, if the creators of television series like Game of Thrones, the most pirated show in history, stopped fighting copyright infringement, they could seize an opportunity.
Advertisements directly embedded in the show would reach five million additional – illegal – viewers, in effect doubling their audience.
The television industry is not alone in failing to question and revise its traditional models, methods, and operations.
The postal industry, for example, could learn a lesson from airlines, train companies, travel agencies, and hotels, all of which increase their prices during periods of high demand.
The assumption that the price of mailing a letter or shipping a package should remain constant throughout the year is ripe to be challenged.
Guarding against blind spots takes careful thought, but executives and boards can put processes in place to protect against them.
For starters, companies should diversify their talent pool.
Managers should ensure that they have access to people who think differently from them.
Iconoclasts and outside experts should be invited to share their views.
At least 20% of a company’s board should be composed of individuals from outside the industry.
Views from other generations and other parts of the world should be sought and solicited.
Executives should make special efforts to break taboos, examine unchallenged assumptions, and question their businesses’ most sacred rules.
Even simple methods, like writing down and challenging every assumption on which a company has based its strategy, can yield valuable insights.
Every company should assign someone to play the role of “dissenter.”
Sometimes called the “China breaker,” this person should be given time during board meetings to throw the good dishware against the wall and see what can be made of the pieces.
Industries are becoming increasingly complex and global competition is mounting.
The companies that will be best placed to survive will be those that took the proper precautions to avoid being run off the road.
Busted Bailout
CAMBRIDGE – Spend in haste; repent at leisure.
With minds concentrated by fears of another 1930’s-style Great Depression, America’s political leaders developed, virtually overnight, a $700 billion bailout plan to resuscitate the country’s rapidly deflating financial sector.
But, just as stunningly, rank-and-file members of the US House of Representatives have rejected it – at least for now.
Perhaps they were right to be skeptical.
The plan’s central conceit is that government ingenuity can disentangle the trillion-dollar “sub-prime” mortgage loan market, even though Wall Street’s own rocket scientists have utterly failed to do so.
To boot, we have been told that government is so clever that it might even make money on the whole affair.
Perhaps, but let’s not forget that a lot of very smart people in the financial industry thought the same thing until quite recently.
Just a year ago, the United States had five major freestanding investment banks that stood atop its mighty financial sector.
Collectively, their employees shared more than $36 billion dollars in bonuses last year, thanks to the huge profits these institutions “earned” on their risky and aggressive business strategies.
These strategies typically involve far more risk – and sophistication – than the activities of traditional commercial banks.
In mid-August, I had the temerity to predict that risks had come home to roost, and that a large US investment bank might soon fail or be forced into a highly distressed merger.
Little did I imagine that today, there would be no freestanding investment bank left on Wall Street.
Indeed, after years of attracting many of the world’s best and brightest into ultra-high paying jobs, collapsing investment banks are now throwing them out left and right.
One such victim, a former student, called me the other day and asked, “What am I supposed to do now, get a real job?”
This brings us back to the US Treasury’s plan to spend hundreds of billions of dollars to unclog the sub-prime mortgage market.
The idea is that the US government would serve as buyer of last resort for the junk debt that the private sector has not been able to price.
Who, exactly, would the Treasury employ to figure all this out?
Why, unemployed investment bankers, of course!
Let’s ponder this.
Investment bankers have been losing their cushy jobs because they could not figure out any convincing way to price distressed mortgage debt.
Otherwise, their firms would have been able to tap the trillions of dollars now sitting on the sidelines, held by sovereign wealth funds, private equity groups, hedge funds, and others.
Now, working for the taxpayer, these same investment bankers will suddenly come up with the magic pricing formula that has eluded them until now. 
Little wonder that academics across the political spectrum have expressed considerable skepticism.
True, the Treasury would take equity stakes in some firms, so there would be some upside potential.
But the main concern centers around the Treasury’s apparent intention to pay more than double the current market price (20-30 cents on the dollar) on the premise that its success in untangling the mortgage market would make any discount seem like a bargain.
Does such nitpicking fail to recognize the urgency of fixing the financial system?
Isn’t any plan better than none?
I, for one, am not convinced.
Efficient financial systems are supposed to promote growth in the real economy, not impose a huge tax burden.
And the US financial sector, in greasing the wheels of the real economy, has been soaking up an astounding 30% of corporate profits and 10% of wages.
Thus, unlike in the 1930’s, the US faces a hypertrophied financial system.
Isn’t it possible, then, that rather than causing a Great Depression, significant shrinkage of the financial sector, particularly if facilitated by an improved regulatory structure, might actually enhance efficiency and growth?
I am not suggesting that the government should sit on its hands.
It needs to provide an expanded form of deposit insurance during this time of turmoil, so that there are no more Northern Rock-style bank runs.
That was a big lesson of the 1930’s.
The government may also need to consider injecting funds more directly into the mortgage sector while the private sector reconstitutes itself.
Certainly, the government must also find better ways to help homeowners and their lenders work out efficient bankruptcy proceedings.
It makes no sense for banks to foreclose on homes when there are workout options whereby people could stay in their homes and banks could recover far more money.
Eventually, after further twists, turns, and huge expenditures, the US will emerge from its epic financial crisis.
The proposal that was defeated was not sufficiently targeted at pruning back insolvent banks, but it will almost certainly not be the last word, regardless of how Congress now proceeds.
Butlers, Bakers, and Capitalists?
The communist revolution that spanned the nineteenth and twentieth centuries was about concentrating government ownership of capital.
Then, in the closing decades of the twentieth century, a counter-revolution swept the world, pushing for just the opposite: disperse capital as widely as possible by getting everybody involved as owners.
Now the counter-revolution is being carried to its logical extreme: if everyone can be an owner, then everyone can be a capitalist, down to the barber, the waiter, and the trash collector. A specter is haunting us again; this time it is the dream of truly democratizing capitalism.
But turning everyone into a capitalist may be as impossible as the communist dream of turning everyone into an inspired socialist worker.
Interest in the arcane principles of finance has always been an inclination particular to people who love to pore over numerical tables and study mathematical formulas.
These people sometimes make themselves rich, and it would seem nice if everyone could do that.
But the varying talents, foibles, and psychological predilections of men and women make this impossible.
The new spirit of democratic capitalism goes by different names and mobilizes a variety of symbols.
But, however we describe it, the idea that the masses should be owners is growing everywhere.
In Britain, for example, Tony Blair articulates a vision of “a nation of savers and asset-holders.”
His plans have been called “asset-based policies,” a term that has grown in popularity since Michael Sherraden’s 1991 book Assets and the Poor: A New American Welfare Policy .
In the United States, President George W. Bush calls his dream the “ownership society.”
In China, the National People’s Congress in 2004 re-defined entrepreneurs and individual proprietors as “builders of the socialist cause,” and included them in the Patriotic United Front.
Governments around the world are spending money on regulating and monitoring their stock markets so that they are safer for individual investors, and so that investor interest in these markets will grow.
They are also trying to develop their housing finance in order to expand homeownership.
Some are talking about letting people own their social security contributions, in the form of personal retirement accounts, their health care through health savings accounts, and their education through educational savings accounts and school vouchers.
This is an attempt at a real revolution, not a return to an earlier capitalist past. It is about experimenting with creative new economic institutions that have never been seen before.
The general concept of “ownership” is not by itself a roadmap to a successful new economy, and there are myriad interpretations of how to carry out the revolution.
Revolutions are always experiments, and they are always an adventure.
Some of the new policies seem exemplary.
Tony Blair’s Labor government is implementing a plan that, beginning in April, will establish a personal Child Trust Fund of £250 to £500 for every newborn.
Parents can then make contributions to their child’s trust fund which can grow tax-free, and can choose how to allocate the Fund among investments.
The purpose of the gifts is to “encourage parents and children to develop the saving habit and engage with financial institutions.”
This is a well-designed, small-scale plan that will cost the government fairly little: £500, even invested for twenty years, will not be enough to lift someone out of poverty.
The trust funds’ real promise will consist in educating citizens about investments.
That’s a good start, particularly if Blair’s policy is copied elsewhere.
But other proposals carry bigger risks, notably the privatization of retirement pensions, which is talked about in many countries, and that some – including Great Britain, Chile, Sweden, and Mexico – have already put in place, at least partly.
Bush’s plan to reform Social Security in the US – at least what is known of it – represents the ownership revolution’s cutting edge.
Young people in the US who opt for it would see most of the traditional pension benefit replaced when they retire decades from now with proceeds from personal accounts that they would be free to allocate among a range of investments, including stocks.
Whatever traditional benefit remains would not be enough to live on; retirees would be at the mercy of the markets for the bulk of their income.
The outcome of any such experiment is impossible to foresee, because other countries’ experience can never be a perfect guide to a new system – the situation is never exactly the same in a different environment.
A privatized social security system like the one Bush proposes might turn out very well, assuming that people behave sensibly and/or the stock market keeps going up.
But there is also a higher risk of disaster, owing to a seemingly inborn human tendency to extrapolate past returns.
Investors could create a stock-market bubble, encouraging even more naïve investors to concentrate their personal retirement accounts in the stock market – and leaving them dangerously exposed when it crashes.
There is also a related risk that private accounts would cause a further drop in the personal saving rate.
The saving rate is the lifeblood of any economy, because foreigners cannot be expected to finance capital investment forever.
But all the talk of wondrous returns could spur what psychologists call “wishful thinking bias,” leading people to believe that their personal accounts will be so valuable in the future that outside saving is unnecessary.
Encouraging widespread capital ownership could potentially give rise to good policies.
But do we really want to extend such policies to areas like pensions, health care, and education?
After all, owning capital – whether it is stocks or real estate – entails risks, and the need to insure against these risks is why capitalist countries built traditional safety nets in the first place. Revolutions are exciting, but we must make sure that we still have a home to return to when the barricades come down and the dust settles.
Korean Unification and Global Peace
SEOUL – While the United Nations celebrates its 70th anniversary in 2015, Koreans will lament 70 years of national division.
Considering all of the challenges and opportunities that the divided peninsula faces – and will continue to confront in the coming years – unification remains an important goal that we must continue to pursue.
Founded formally in 1948 under UN auspices, the then-fledgling Republic of Korea immediately became engulfed in Cold War power politics, which hampered its efforts to join the UN – a goal not achieved until 1991.
Since then, however, the Republic has more than made up for its late arrival.
It is playing an active role in the UN – the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council, and the Human Rights Council – and it is participating in numerous initiatives related to peacekeeping, development cooperation, climate change, non-proliferation, and human rights.
During this time, the international community has also dramatically changed.
Globalization and technological transformation have deepened interdependence, and yet insecurity, inequality, injustice, and intolerance remain undiminished worldwide.
Two decades after the Rwandan genocide, we continue to bear witness to human cruelty and horror – in Syria, South Sudan, and the Central African Republic, for example.
Meanwhile, a billion or so of the world’s poorest people, including women and children, are barely surviving.
Northeast Asia has its share of trouble.
A rising China, a resurgent Japan, an assertive Russia, and an anachronistic North Korea have added new complexities and uncertainties to the region.
The latter’s pursuit of nuclear arms is particularly worrying.
On its part, the United States is now “rebalancing” toward Asia.
Growing conflicts over history, territory, and maritime security, combined with an ugly resurgence of nationalism, risk triggering military confrontation, quite possibly through political miscalculation.
Left unattended by policymakers and peacemakers, Northeast Asia’s tensions could undermine the region’s flourishing economy.
It is in this challenging environment that the Republic of Korea’s president, Park Geun-hye, took office in 2013.
Her foreign policy – called “Trustpolitik” – aims to transform this atmosphere of suspicion and conflict into one of confidence and cooperation, and to build “a new Korean Peninsula, a new Northeast Asia, and a new world.”
The greatest obstacle to achieving this transformation is the North Korean nuclear question.
Over the last couple of months, North Korea has threatened to carry out yet another nuclear test.
Today’s most urgent task therefore must be to prevent this from happening, and then to check further advances in the North’s nuclear weapons and delivery capabilities.
The semblance of peace on the Korean Peninsula remains fragile, and South Korea’s government has engaged in intensive diplomatic efforts to rally friends and partners in the region and worldwide to deter the North.
The UN Security Council has adopted a series of resolutions to impose extensive sanctions, following the North’s three previous nuclear tests.
Any further provocation will bring the full force of the organization’s sanctions to bear.
Under these circumstances – in addition to the dire human rights and humanitarian situation in North Korea – Park laid out her vision for a unified Korea.
In a recent speech in Dresden, she proposed three concrete and action-oriented proposals to the North that would address its humanitarian problems, build infrastructure for the common welfare and prosperity of the two Koreas, and promote integration of the Korean people.
The humanitarian component of this strategy could be implemented regardless of political and security considerations.
For example, it would involve implementing the UN’s 1,000-day project for maternal health and infant nutrition, aimed at ending the North’s chronically high rate of infant malnutrition.
We can only hope that North Korea will respond positively to our proposal.
It would be an important first step on a much longer journey.
Korea’s road to unification will undoubtedly be difficult, and will require the international community’s support.
In return, the new, unified country that we aspire to build will serve the interests of its neighbors and those of the wider international community in promoting global peace and prosperity.
There is a recent precedent for this vision, and thus reason to be hopeful.
Some 23 years ago, the geopolitical context that sustained the division of the two Germanys changed radically.
Similarly, the day will come when Korea’s two UN nameplates will be replaced with one.
Calderon’s Cauldron
Under dramatically inauspicious circumstances, Mexico has finally got itself a new president last Friday.
Felipe Calderón has taken the oath of office, braving the wrath of his left-wing opposition, out-smarting the Partido de la Revolución Democrática (PRD) and its leader, Andrés Manuel López Obrador, but nonetheless paying a high price.
Every TV news show and front-page headline in the world ran the same headline: “New Mexican President inaugurated in chaos and fisticuffs.”
Mexico’s institutions withstood – just barely – the onslaught of a virtually insurrectional left-wing opposition, bent in vain on stopping Calderón’s inauguration, and of a resentful Partido Revolucionario Institucional (PRI), increasingly dedicated to allowing Calderón to take office, and then fail miserably.
Calderón impressively overcame apparently insurmountable obstacles on the way to the presidency, yet the struggle to govern and transform Mexico has just begun.
Most Mexican commentators believe that it should be relatively easy for Calderón to improve on the largely self-inflicted failure of outgoing President Vicente Fox’s term.
Mexico needs to grow at roughly twice the rate that it did under Fox (a meager 2% per year).
If Calderón can strengthen law and order, and use his considerable political skills to reach agreement with the PRI on structural economic reforms, he will succeed.
But this view is simplistic.
Fox’s term, along with the four last years of former President Ernesto Zedillo’s mandate, were hardly a failure.
Not since the 1960’s had Mexico undergone ten consecutive years of economic stability, low inflation, low interest rates, a stable currency, and constant, though mediocre growth.
For the first time ever, mortgages, automobile loans, and consumer credit became available to the lower middle class: this year more homes were built and sold, and more cars were bought, than ever before.
Likewise, while Fox can be criticized for not clamping down on protesters and a disruptive, extremist opposition, he never resorted to the bloody repression for which most of his predecessors came to be known.
Moreover, he dragged Mexico out of its archaic foreign policy cocoon, and placed immigration and human rights at the heart of Mexico’s new international agenda.
Nor is Calderón finding it easy to negotiate with the PRI, failing to build a coalition government, which he has repeatedly proclaimed as the solution to the gridlock that has cursed Mexico since 1997.
Whatever the advantages of a cabinet comprising solely members of his Partido Acción Nacional (PAN), this is not what Calderón sought.
Similarly, no deal with the opposition was possible regarding the inauguration ceremony – thus the chaotic, depressing scenes of congressmen fighting it out in their chamber, while Calderón was ushered in through the back door for a rushed ceremony.
Mexico’s economic problems might be similarly more intractable than many commentators seem to believe.
Mexico experienced a “cold-turkey” economic opening under former President Carlos Salinas in 1988-1994; a belated but successful political opening under former President Zedillo in 1994-2000; and, at long last, a true rotation in power thanks to Fox.
But the foundations of the old PRI-corporativist system created in the 1930’s remain untouched, and represent the main and most formidable obstacles to Mexico’s growth and success.
The first pillar of this system is the public and private economic monopolies that dominate the country.
The state-owned oil (Pemex) and electric power (Federal Electricity Commission) companies face no competition.
The private virtual monopolies in telecommunications (Telmex), television (Televisa), cement (Cemex), bread and tortilla manufacturing (Bimbo and Maseca, respectively), banking (Banamex/Citigroup and Bancomer/Banco de Bilbao) may face competition abroad, but not at home.
These monopolies are stronger than ever, and prices, supply, service, and quality all suffer.
The second pillar is formed by the unions that have controlled the Mexican labor movement since the 1930’s.
They enjoy “closed shop” hiring and firing prerogatives, leadership elections by acclamation, mandatory dues without transparency, and immense political power.
The teachers’ union is the largest in Latin America, the oil workers’ union is the richest in Latin America, and the social security employees union has thwarted any attempt at pension or health reform for years.
The third pillar of the system is political monopoly.
For 70 years, the PRI had a complete lock on Mexican politics; now three parties do, and no one else can enter the political arena or gain access to the enormous public subsidies – more than $500 million last year – handed out to these parties without their consent.
The main parties write their own anti-trust legislation, vote their own subsidies, and choose their own elected officials.
The absence of consecutive re-election at any level reinforces the party machines’ power: they pick candidates, whom voters merely ratify at the polls.
So Mexico’s challenges boil down to liberating the labor movement, breaking up the private monopolies and opening the public monopolies to competition, and lowering entry barriers that restrict access to the political arena.
These may not be sufficient conditions for success, but they are certainly necessary ones.
Calderón must strengthen his presidency from the outset.
Taking on the powers that be is perhaps the only way to achieve this, however risky it might appear.
Elected with only 35% of the vote, lacking a majority in Congress, and taking office on the eve of an economic slowdown in the United States, things would be difficult anyway.
Given that roughly a third of the electorate does not think he won fairly, and in view of the precariousness of the rule of law in the country, Calderón’s position is even less enviable.
Caution and patience might not be his best advisors.
Our Cosmic Context
NEW YORK – We have always lived on a changing planet, but many of today’s variations in climatic and ecological states are taking place exceptionally fast, and are directly attributable to our behavior.
Slowing the rate of alteration is the only rational course of action, given the potential outcomes.
But we also need to examine our responses closely, or risk repeating our shortsighted behavior.
Unexpectedly, the search for life elsewhere in the universe may provide a critical new perspective.
Our technologically advanced civilization – replete with remarkable tools and notable headaches – owes everything to a tapestry of cosmic and planetary history.
Consider, for example, oil, gas, and coal.
These substances comprise a complex package of carbon chemistry, produced by biology and geophysics operating within a deep rhythm of variation and evolution originating far from our own epoch.
The minerals and rare-earth elements that we exploit to build ingenious devices – extending our bodies and minds – are also a part of this rhythm, and are accessible only because of a great chain of circumstances, from planetary origins to plate tectonics and asteroid impacts.
Our trajectory as a species is hardwired to this four-billion-year-old bio-geo-chemical system that has profoundly worked and reworked the planetary environment, all the way from bacteria to city planners, atmospheric oxygen to paper mills.
In addition to our own genes, each of us carries the genes of tens of trillions of microbial passengers.
These tiny organisms harbor codes for metabolic processes that have been preserved across eons – the same processes responsible for shaping the world.
It is a plausible blueprint for successful life anywhere, even if the biochemical details differ.
Our daily business usually ignores this existential backdrop.
The struggle to mold our future, to stave off the humanitarian disasters of war, disease, and starvation leaves little room to be philosophical about our place on this crumb of cosmic dust.
But many scientists, including me, have a sense that the universe might be about to reach in and give us a metaphorical slap in the face.
For the last few decades, the modern scientific endeavor known as astrobiology has been seeking to determine whether or not all of this – life, death, and evolution – has happened elsewhere in the cosmos.
Humans have long asked this question, but the evidence – the raw data – was lacking.
Now, astronomers have discovered a remarkable abundance of planets orbiting other stars.
The numbers tell us that 15-20 percent of Sun-like stars harbor worlds similar in size to the Earth, orbiting stellar parents at distances implying that their surfaces might be temperate.
We have not found the nearest such world yet, but statistically it should be within about 15 light years of us – a stone’s throw in cosmic terms.
There is an excellent chance that we will find it and its brethren within a decade, and search for signs of an alien biosphere in these worlds’ atmospheric compositions or climates.
In the Solar System, NASA’s Curiosity rover has discovered what may be organic carbon in the fossil mud of an ancient Martian lakebed.
Europa, Jupiter’s icy moon, has been spotted spewing water into space from a hidden ocean that could hold twice the volume of all of Earth’s oceans.
Serendipity is providing us with access to an abyssal realm that could conceivably harbor life.
We just have to go smell the salty spray.
Even finding nothing in such places is important, because these new data have predictive power, narrowing the field of planets, or moons, that might harbor life.
Nature has the critical experimental data that we need to finally place Earth in context, within a zoo of worlds emerging from ice ages, worlds descending into greenhouse hells, young worlds, old worlds, barren worlds, and possibly worlds teeming with life.
And that means that we will have new data to steer decisions about planetary stewardship.
In other words, the cosmic sprawl can help us disentangle the complex terrestrial systems and histories of which we are a part.
This is not a frivolous exercise. On the contrary, it could be the key to overcoming our scientific ignorance.
We might guess the general consequences of global warming in the next couple of decades, but the details remain hard to predict, as does the distant future.
Biological networks change, chemical balances change, species go extinct, ecosystems unravel, and new ones emerge.
Cosmic context would go a long way in sorting this out.
For many people, the idea of spending time and resources on such otherworldly pursuits is difficult to swallow.
But if we are to sustain our species into the distant future, we need to make big decisions correctly.
It is time to take the long view seriously, because we have tried the short view, and it has not worked.
California Bad Dreaming
STANFORD – While central governments’ fiscal problems plague many economies, a parallel crisis is enveloping many subnational governments around the world.
From Spain to China to the United States to Italy, these governments – regions, states, provinces, cities, and towns – face immense fiscal challenges.
Higher levels of government are “on the hook” to bail out local insolvent governments, and may even suffer bond downgrades as a result; in Spain, Italy, and China, that role falls to the national government, and for US cities and towns, to their states.
There are many similarities within and among countries in terms of the nature and causes of these local fiscal calamities.
Local officials used growing revenues during the boom to fund pet projects or boost pay and benefits, with little regard to future costs.
In the downturn, revenues and subsidies from the central government collapsed and the bills came due.
Creative accounting gimmicks masked the full extent of the problem. Now comes the reckoning.
To finance local businesses, Chinese local governments use local-government financing vehicles (LGFVs) to circumvent bans on direct borrowing.
In Spain, housing and employment collapses have hammered revenue.
Rumors of an imminent default swirl around Sicily, whose governor has resigned as borrowing soared after cutbacks from Rome.
A new report from a task force co-chaired by former Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker indicates that unfunded pension and health-care costs make many American states’ medium- and longer-run fiscal prospects bleak.
California’s fiscal crises may also provide lessons for subnational governments around the world.
Three California cities have recently declared bankruptcy: Stockton, the largest American city ever to do so; San Bernardino, the second-largest bankrupt city; and Mammoth Lakes.
Compton is rumored to be next; most observers expect more to follow.
The state faces another large budget deficit, yet Governor Jerry Brown’s budget this year includes a substantial spending increase.
Brown’s ballot initiative this November would raise California’s top personal income-tax rate to 13.3%, the nation’s highest.
According to Brown, the tax hike would be temporary, yet it would last seven years.
Meanwhile, he claims to be tough on California’s notoriously well-paid and powerful public-employee unions by negotiating a 5% pay cut.
But the details reveal a net 1.6% pay cut in exchange for a 5% reduction in work hours.
Cities are declaring bankruptcy to escape the pressure of exponentially rising pension and health costs.
In contrast to the state, cities have even cut back essential services, including 20% reductions in police and fire personnel.
Bankruptcy should allow local governments to renegotiate their bond debt and, perhaps, their retired employees’ pension and health-care costs (that’s up to a bankruptcy judge).
The state would be expected to take over essential public services from bankrupt local governments.
But the state itself is in dire financial straits; one of the cities’ problems is the sharp curtailment of state funds to localities.
Despite these problems, Brown has committed California to a San Francisco-to-Los Angeles high-speed rail boondoggle.
To get the cost projections down to $68 billion from a $100 billion estimate, some existing low-speed rail will be used, likely doubling the time it takes to travel from Los Angeles to San Francisco to 5-6 hours.
California will most likely be unable to pay for the entire project, leaving little use for the first segment in the sparsely populated Central Valley.
And, if the project somehow is completed, it will be a not-so-high-speed rail that will drain badly needed resources from other essential government services for many decades.
These sorry episodes reveal some important lessons.
One-party government weakens accountability and breeds hubris.
The California legislature has been controlled by the Democratic Party for decades, and it takes its cue from its party’s most powerful special interests: public-employee unions, environmentalists, trial lawyers, and teachers’ unions.
They have concocted an extremely progressive social experiment: with 12% of the US population, California has more than 30% of its welfare dependents.
From the mid-1980’s to 2005, California's population grew by 10 million, while Medicaid recipients soared by seven million; tax filers paying income taxes rose by just 150,000; and the prison population swelled by 115,000.
The state income tax is not only uncompetitively high, but the revenues are volatile.
In the economic and stock-market upswing, revenues roll in far more rapidly than incomes rise, owing to the extremely progressive income tax (in good years, the top 1% pays about half the state’s income taxes).
The legislature spends it as if the elevated revenues will continue forever.
Then the inevitable recession and stock-market collapse plunges the state into crisis.
The progressive social experiment has gone so severely off-track that the state cannot even dependably provide essential services, from courts to education, for the most needy.
Not surprisingly, California’s economy, which used to outperform the rest of the US, now substantially underperforms.
The unemployment rate, at 10.8%, is almost one-third higher than the national average, and higher than every other state except Nevada and Rhode Island.
California still has great strengths in technology, entertainment, and agriculture.
But citizens and politicians alike must agree to target services far more carefully; reform the tax system with lower rates on a broader base of economic activity and people (almost half pay no state income tax); and modernize inefficient state programs to spend less and produce far better outcomes.
Not coincidentally, that’s a perfect prescription for bloated, debt-ridden central and subnational governments worldwide.
California Dying
Berkeley – While the new Obama administration is commanding global attention, America’s future may be written – as so many times before – in and by its largest state.
Once the lodestar for American optimism and achievement, California now illustrates the difficulties confronting the United States – and how much more can still go wrong domestically.
The most populous and wealthiest of America’s 50 states, California has long been a beacon of opportunity for talented and enterprising people from all over the world.
One in every four California residents was born in a foreign country.
California’s two most famous industries, Silicon Valley and Hollywood, depend on infusions of talent from abroad.
Its robust agricultural sector is a massive exporter of food, benefiting from the growing appetites of consumers in developing countries.
Yet California’s technological and entrepreneurial might – standing alone, the state would be the world’s eighth largest economy – coexists with a dysfunctional political system that has brought it to the edge of fiscal bankruptcy.
On May 19, the state’s voters, in a special election, rejected an array of tax increases and spending cuts required to balance its budget.
Now, California faces either an embarrassing federal bailout or a prolonged period of rule by judges, who under California law have the power to vacate labor agreements, abrogate contracts, and generally restructure the state’s financial commitments.
For President Barack Obama, California’s crisis imperils his own reform agenda.
Because other American states also face tough fiscal conditions, the political price of bailing out California may be bailing out dozens of other states too.
A massive state bailout, while adding enormously to pressure on Obama’s government, would expose the weak link in the US system of governance.
So-called “unitary” nations such as Britain, France, China, or Kenya, essentially have a single set of government obligations: one national police force, one employer for all public school teachers, one overall pension system, etc.
By contrast, the US has an “asymmetric” form of government, which allows many overlapping government entities – 7,000 in California alone – to incur debts, hire and fire employees, and impose taxes.
Making sense of these asymmetries is difficult.
When financial markets concentrate on the fiscal health of the federal government, they miss the extent of government obligations as a whole.
The complexity of American governance threatens the benefits of Obama’s decision to stimulate the economy through deficit spending.
While the national government expands, state governments, such as California’s, contract.
Moreover, California’s crisis is more than an economic one.
California is the most diverse US state; more than half of its 37 million people are non-white.
For believers in the benefits of diversity, California represents the largest social experiment in human history, bringing people of different backgrounds together in a way unimaginable in, say, Germany, China, or Brazil.
California’s governor, Arnold Schwarzenegger, was an immigrant (from Austria) before he was a movie star.
In his six years in office, he has repeatedly tried to bypass a polarized state legislature – even the annual budget requires a two-thirds majority – by appealing directly to voters.
Ballot initiatives were created 100 years ago to empower ordinary citizens, but in recent decades the process has been captured by self-serving elites.
Even as California’s roads fall apart and public institutions decline – the result of too little spending and public workers who are too expensive – the state continues to operate the finest set of public universities in the US.
But the secret of the University of California’s success is its ability to obtain ever-higher amounts of funding from private sources and the federal government.
Disengagement from the California polity also is true of the state’s economic engines.
Intel, the world’s biggest chip maker and a Silicon Valley mainstay, hasn’t built a factory in California for more than 20 years.
Hollywood shoots an increasing number of films elsewhere.
Agriculture relies heavily on illegal workers from Mexico, who live temporarily near the fields and take their earnings back home.
How to forge a single community out of a state so diverse remains an elusive challenge.
Some influential people, including Schwarzenegger, say the state needs a new constitution that would restrict ballot initiatives and make budgets easier to pass.
More radical thinkers insist that California is ungovernable and should be broken into two or even three states.
Creating more Californias would of course require the approval of the federal government in Washington, where elected representatives from California – mainly from Obama’s Democratic Party – have more power today than at perhaps any time in US history.
Nancy Pelosi, the House majority leader, is from San Francisco.
Californians run the two most powerful House committees, Energy and Commerce and Education and Labor.
Two of the most influential senators also come from California.
Why these Washington politicians are idle while their state slides towards ruin says much about what’s broken in American politics.
Schwarzenegger is a Republican, so Democrats privately wish him to fail.
There’s a deeper problem: politicians across the spectrum, beholden to special interests, are habituated to denying serious problems.
Obama will be forced to help craft a compromise to keep the state financially afloat.
Yet as a condition, he may insist that Californians, who are already among the most heavily taxed Americans, pay more.
If Californians refuse, Obama could face a widening revolt – against the idea of expanded government as the chief response to what ails America at home.
Calling the Big Banks’ Bluff
BERLIN – The G-20’s decision in November 2008 not to let any systemically relevant bank perish may have seemed wise at the time, given the threat of a global financial meltdown.
But that decision, and bad policies by central banks and governments since then, has given over-indebted major banks the power to blackmail their rescuers – a power that they have used to create a financial system in which they are effectively exempt from liability.
Big banks’ ability to extort such an arrangement stems from an implicit threat: the financial sector – and with it the economy’s payment system – would collapse if a systemically important bank were ever pushed into insolvency.
But it is time to call the bankers’ bluff: maintaining the payment system can and should be separated from the problem of bank insolvency.
Above all, the G-20’s decision to prop up systemically relevant banks must be revisited.
And governments must respond to the banks’ threats by declaring their willingness to let insolvent banks be judged accordingly.