But an equally fundamental division – one that has contributed as much to the ongoing insurrection as sectarian strife and opposition to the American-led military occupation – is the widening gap between Iraq’s rich and poor.
When Iraq was liberated, most people, especially the poor, began to hope for a charismatic leader who would save them from the bitter reality of daily life.
Raised in fear, they had no idea how democracy could apply to their society, or how human-rights groups and other civic organizations could help shape the future.
Soon enough, Iraq was faced with a new social divide.
On one side stood people who understood how to operate in a democracy, attain power, and realize their ambitions.
They learned to speak the language of democracy, gaining money and influence in the process and enlisting independent organizations to defend their rights and privileges.
On the other side, however, remains the vast population of powerless Iraqis, including widows and divorced or abandoned women with no one to provide for them and their children.
For these people, democracy and human rights mean nothing.
They are ignorant, poor, and sick.
Victimized by an educational system that collapsed over a decade ago, they have few skills that can help them find employment in Iraq’s blighted economy.
During Saddam’s reign, no effort was made to raise living standards for the poor.
I have visited the huge slums of Iraq and found families living in homes with barely a roof to cover them, with infestations of insects everywhere, and with raw sewage seeping under their doors.
Day or night, they live in darkness.
Needing nothing more than food, decent housing, and the possibility of a job, these families wait for death, dreading the cries of their starving children.
When I met the women who live in those houses, they showered me with questions: will democracy give us food and houses?
Will democracy stop men from beating their wives?
Will it give citizenship to our children?
Will it give us the right to divorce the husbands who abandon us?
My answer to all of these questions was “yes.”
Yes, democracy will give you the right to live in a decent house, the right to learn and work, and it will give citizenship to your children and make you equal with your men.
But you have to work hard and make every possible effort in demanding your rights.
They replied: “Saddam taught us for 35 years how to be jobless, silent, and fearful.
What can we do now?”
In these destitute areas, where most Iraqis live, people are prey to bitter temptations.
Many are beyond the reach of political or government leaders.
They fall easily into violence, theft, and sabotage.
Poverty drives some to take money in exchange for acts of violence, abetted by the lure of a false heroism that they were not able to act upon during Saddam’s long reign.
Poverty has exacerbated the trauma of Iraq’s violent history of wars and atrocities, which has desensitized people to killing.
Though conditions in Iraq today are drawing many young men toward violence, I am convinced that we need only to provide decent jobs and housing to save them.
Jobs, in particular, will help young people to create new lives through serious work.
We must not use no-work jobs to disguise an army of unemployed.
We must give people jobs that allow them to make a contribution to rebuilding the country.
By nature, every individual seeks to prove himself as a useful person in his or her society.
But the culture that Saddam created convinced Iraqis that political connections are the only way to gain authority, money, and knowledge.
Overcoming such sentiments will take time and a vibrant economy, which means that a new Iraqi government must have limited power, allowing the private sector to grow while encouraging widespread understanding of democracy and human rights.
Religious groups are ready to contribute to this process.
We can also rehabilitate the technocrats who served under Saddam, so that they, too, have a chance to serve their country.
Last but not least, we must provide loans to poor families to help them build a respectable life.
Above all, the government must spare no effort in convincing poor Iraqis of the value of democracy and freedom, and how important the constitution is in realizing their aspirations for a better life.
This will not be easy to achieve in a country where many people consider breaking the law an act of heroism.
But we Iraqis have also learned that power should not be concentrated in a few hands, and that establishing justice requires fighting all forms of corruption.
If the constitution is to operate as the guarantee of democracy, freedom, and security, poor Iraqis must learn to make that fight their own.
Defending a Divided Iraq
OXFORD – The United States and its allies are facing another major policy challenge in Iraq.
Airstrikes against the Islamic State might unseat the group’s fighters in critical areas; but, as things stand, troops will be needed to hold and govern liberated territory.
Securing Iraq therefore requires a formidable force to be in place, which is why US President Barack Obama’s strategy includes rebuilding the Iraqi army.
But doing so will require overcoming three related obstacles: Iraqi leaders’ military inexperience; corruption and cronyism; and ambiguity regarding the extent of external support.
When states collapse, their constituent parts sometimes inherit armed forces that are competent enough to maintain minimal levels of governance.
This is more often the case when a state breaks up as a result of armed conflict, in which case stability depends on whether the best military leaders are allowed to remain in place.
But states often collapse as an unintended consequence of the presence of a supporting external force.
For example, following Vietnam’s partition in the wake of France’s defeat at Dien Bien Phu in 1954, Ngo Dinh Diem, Vietnam’s last non-Communist president, was able to turn to the US military for support.
However, staggering levels of corruption under Diem and his US-backed successors, and the replacement of the military’s most competent commanders with Diem’s cronies, ultimately led to the rout of the South Vietnamese Army.
A similar situation is evident in Iraq today.
Divided by sectarianism, Iraq’s armed forces have become unable and unwilling to fight.
In the two years following the withdrawal of US troops, then-Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki, like Diem four decades earlier, set about consolidating political power through patronage.
Al-Maliki sought to protect the interests of Iraq’s Shia at the expense of its Sunni citizens, appointing military leaders based on their tribal and sectarian affiliations rather than their merit.
One might expect a leader who faces internal armed opposition to avoid doing anything that might weaken the military.
But al-Maliki seems to have assumed that external forces would simply come to his aid should he run into trouble.
With his lack of a military background, he seems not to have understood that external forces need to work closely with the local army, and that a sophisticated support network must be in place to avoid logistical disruptions resulting from enemy action or corruption.
Viewing the situation from the ground – which is essential if security is to be restored and economic recovery is to be achieved – local militias must be able to defend themselves against rivals or criminal gangs.
This means that the central government’s role should be to provide more advanced security assets such as fixed or rotary air support, intelligence, and logistical and communications support.
Yet the top priority for the leader of a fragmented state is to gain and consolidate a monopoly on the legitimate use of lethal force.
And donor countries tend to support the leader, because doing so allows them to standardize and simplify assistance.
Unfortunately, this approach seldom works.
Instead, security experts should consider how best to manage the potential for violence among and within the various factions vying for local control.
Strikingly, the reconfiguration of the security forces is usually ignored in post-war political settlements (though this has been changing since Iraq’s implosion).
Indeed, though ethnic divisions can undermine military cohesion, a full appreciation of them can lead to a more robust and stable security environment.
Kurds in Iraq’s autonomous Kurdish region, for example, certainly feel more secure having their own soldiers, the Peshmerga, and have proven to be a better fighting force as a result.
By contrast, the weak national Iraqi defense forces are believed to be doing the bidding of the Shia majority.
Contested state breakups create tough policy problems, and there are no ideal outcomes.
But if foreign powers wish to engage constructively, they must understand a country’s internal politics and demographics, and address all affected groups’ security concerns equally and fairly.
Failure to do so leaves everyone weak and vulnerable.
Iraq’s Half Step
The relatively successful election in Iraq is a major victory for democracy, but not necessarily for liberal reform in the Middle East.
This is an important distinction.
The anti-democratic forces who tried to stop people from voting there were Sunni Muslim Arab terror groups, ranging from supporters of Saddam Hussein’s deposed dictatorship to followers of Osama bin Ladin’s extremist Islamism.
Because Sunni Arabs, comprising less than 25% of the population, knew that they could not win a democratic election, many of their leaders urged a boycott.
By contrast, 75% of Iraq’s population is composed of Shi’a Muslim Arabs, who know that they will control the new regime, and Kurds, who want local autonomy.
Thus, a vast majority of the population were sure that a democratically elected government would serve their interests and eagerly participated at the polls.
Indeed, Shi’a Muslim clerics ordered their people – including women – to vote, warning that to stay home on Election Day was a sin.
But if high turnout, albeit based more on communal self-interest than belief in democracy, was the good news from Iraq’s election, the bad news is the leadership they chose, which is not democratically minded.
Liberal reform parties that tried to transcend communal identities and appeal to all Iraqis did not do well.
The victorious coalition follows Ayatollah Ali Sistani, who can be described as a moderate Islamist, but many of its members are extreme.
In the future, especially without Sistani, who is 74 years old, the new regime could turn into a dictatorship.
This ambiguity in Iraq is a good example of the problem faced by Arab democratic reformers elsewhere.
They have compelling arguments, but they lack large numbers of followers.
Already, the reform movement has changed the debate in the Arab world, but it still faces a long road ahead.
For a half-century, reformers explain, Arab nationalist regimes have been a disaster, creating societies and economies that rank low by every statistical measure of development, while leading their countries into countless costly but fruitless wars and crises.
At a time when democracy is spreading, they remain dictatorships.
But the most powerful alternative to the status quo are powerful Islamist opposition movements that have no real answers for these ailments and merely seek to impose another flavor of dictatorship.
The terrorism generated by many of these groups is an increasingly large domestic threat that only further disrupts society.
Besides battling these more powerful Arab nationalists and Islamists, Arab liberals must deal with a wide range of issues, including the modernization or moderation of Islam, relations with the United States, the Arab-Israeli conflict, and women’s rights.
In each case, they must decide whether to confront or endorse the sacred cows of nationalist and Islamist ideology.
There are no easy answers.
Consider Islam. Proposing secularism – the historic approach of Western liberals – is political suicide.
Calling for the modernization of Islam by permitting clerics to reinterpret its laws in light of contemporary conditions is more acceptable.
But this also has a potentially dangerous drawback, too.
After all, this is precisely what the radical Islamists have done by, for example, reversing the traditional Islamic opposition to suicide bombing.
The easiest strategy for liberals is to side with conservative Muslims who reject not only radical Islamism, but also political reform.
In addition, many liberals, notably in Saudi Arabia, offer to work with the current regimes against the radical Islamist revolutionaries – an understandable response, but one that strengthens the authoritarian status quo.
There are few role models for a more moderate, contemporary-minded interpretation of Islam.
Perhaps the most important is Tunisia’s educational system.
There, students in the Islamic university also study the Bible, and the curriculum puts an emphasis on the most tolerant interpretation of Islam.
For example, one final exam is built around having students use Islamic texts to write an essay showing that non-Muslims living under Muslim rule should be treated fairly.
In promoting democracy, liberals reject the argument used by today’s rulers that the first free election would be the last, because Islamists would win and establish theocratic regimes.
Reformers insist that the vast majority of people support moderate solutions, or at least that radical Islamist groups would have to become pragmatic in order to compete for power and govern.
That case is not yet proven.
January’s Palestinian elections were won by a relatively moderate leader because he was put forward by the ruling Fatah movement and Islamists boycotted the election.
But in the Gaza Strip local elections soon afterward, radical Islamists who use terrorism won seven of the ten municipal councils.
What happens in Iraq will show how an elected Islamist-type government wields power.
But the new liberal wave in the Arab world is reflected in media coverage that praised Iraq’s election and suggested that it might make a good model for other Arab countries.
There are many other small signs that change might be possible.
All the Arab entries in an annual essay contest run by a Western agency used to focus on Israel’s alleged responsibility for all the region’s problems.
This year, the writers unanimously made their theme the need to reform their own societies.
The liberal, democratic reformist movement among Arabs is here to stay.
The battle will be long and difficult, and victory is not assured.
But these groups have already become a major contender in the Arab world’s battle of ideas.
Now they hope to become a factor in bringing about real change.
The Iraqi election was an important half-step in that direction.
Iraq’s Jobs-for-Peace Mirage
As the wisdom of President Bush’s proposed “surge” of US troops is debated across the US and around the world, another question about the US President’s new policy to avert all-out civil war there is coming to the fore.
Can using US funding to reopen Iraqi state-owned enterprises get young men to abandon the insurgency and sectarian militias?
The idea sounds logical: a man with a good job that enables him to build a decent life won’t want to fight Americans or his fellow Iraqis, right?
Unfortunately, that jobs strategy is unlikely to reduce the violence.
Iraq’s state-owned enterprises were the cornerstone of Saddam Hussein’s economic policy.
But, propped up by military contracts, those state companies were never well run or efficient; greatly overstaffed, they produced little, similar to the failed state-owned enterprises of the old Soviet Union.
Moreover, outside of the oil and electric power sectors, state-owned enterprises in Iraq have never been major employers.
For example, the roughly 180 enterprises in the Ministry of Industry and Minerals, which controls all state-owned manufacturing companies, never employed much more than 100,000 workers in a nation of roughly 27 million people.
The employees of the state-owned enterprises still receive paychecks, even though about a third of their workplaces have been destroyed.
For example, the Sulaymaniyah Sugar Mill was bombed during the Iran-Iraq war in the 1980’s, but its employees have been paid ever since, though only rats and pigeons now report for work there.
Indeed, many employees of state-owned enterprises show little interest in returning to work.
When the Coalition Provisional Authority asked the employees of the Mishraq Sulfur Company to go back on the job in 2004, some of the workers lit $40 million worth of sulfur on fire and destroyed the facility.
They preferred to be paid without working.
There is little to resuscitate among the state-owned enterprises.
A third are damaged beyond repair, another third are hopelessly unprofitable, and the rest are a mismanaged assortment of plants, a few of which could potentially produce something of value, but only with proper management and incentives.
Trying to give these hopelessly inefficient enterprises a new lease on life would make Iraqis poorer without reducing the violence.
Yet beneath Iraq’s chaos and the rubble, a rough and tumble private sector has been expanding since the US invasion, benefiting from higher oil revenues and more liberal economic policies.
As a result, government expenditures and household incomes are up substantially since Saddam Hussein’s last years in power.
Despite the violence, commercial activity has also risen, because Iraqis are now free to import the equipment and goods they need to build homes, run stores, and operate trucking companies.
If the US wants to increase jobs, it should intensify efforts to work with these private Iraqi companies to bid on contracts.
State-owned enterprises should also be free to bid, but they should receive no favors.
The fundamental problem in Iraq is not jobs.
In contrast to the Mexican, Chinese, or Russian revolutions, economic disenfranchisement is not driving the current conflict.
This is a struggle for power, not for economic justice or a better life.
The root causes are political, sectarian, and personal.
Suicide bombers and death squads are not seeking shorter working hours, higher salaries, or better pension plans.
All credible economic indicators show employment prospects in Iraq improving since the end of the invasion.
They can earn more hanging around with a gun in their hands than by working in construction or trade.
Supporters of the insurgency are happy to plant a roadside bomb in exchange for extra cash.
Instead of focusing on a large jobs program, the US could do more to bring peace to Iraq by reducing the money from Iraqi government coffers and smuggling activities that funds the payrolls of the insurgents and militias.
How then should foreign assistance to Iraq be spent?
The US should increase spending on programs to improve the police.
Currently, many police devote their energies to shaking down citizens for bribes, and some moonlight in death squads.
As long as Iraqis face daily threats of larceny, kidnapping, and murder – particularly from those who are supposed to protect them – they will seek security from neighborhood gangs and militias.
The key to improving police operations is to embed more US and allied police officers in the police force to mentor Iraqi officers.
Mentors provide on-the-job training.
They also identify good officers and those who are corrupt or participating in death squads or sectarian militias.
More funds for equipment, improved facilities, and training would also help.
Funding and support to assist Iraqi courts and prisons to function more effectively and in accordance with international standards is also essential.
Without progress in this area, improvements in the Iraqi police will have little effect.
Throwing more money at Iraq won’t buy peace.
Iraq is already one of the largest recipients of US assistance ever.
But a targeted assistance designed to improve the operations of Iraq’s police and government could help reduce violence.
Iraq’s Potemkin Government
With the votes in Iraq’s election in December now counted, attempts to form a new government are set to move into high gear.
Encouragingly, all sides appear to accept the results.
But the key question concerning the future of the country remains: will Shia, Sunnis, and Kurds will unite behind a functioning central authority?
In the short term, there are good reasons to believe that the most powerful among Iraq’s three main groups will do so.
But can any such government administer the country as a whole?
The answer to that question is likely to be no, which is why Iraq probably will be a much less stable place a year from now.
The new Iraqi government, when it is formed, will have at least the appearance of viability for the immediate future.
Shia have an interest in supporting the central government because they believe that their demographic weight (60% of Iraq’s population) means that representative democracy will guarantee them the right to rule and protect them from Sunni demands and attacks.
Sunnis also will support the government, at least initially, because it represents their only opportunity to win what they consider their share of power, resources, and revenues.
Kurds will accept the arrangement because they believe that the new constitution guarantees their right to control most of the oil wealth that lies beneath their territory, and because they don’t want the blame should Baghdad descend into chaos.
There is another reason Shia, Sunnis, and Kurds won’t move immediately to undermine federal authority: the central government in Baghdad won’t have the legal or economic means to challenge their local power.
In essence, while all of Iraq’s factions have a strong interest in promoting a central government that appears fully functional, that government’s powers will in fact be limited.
But, in the longer term, those limits on federal power will push Iraq toward a sectarian scramble for power and revenue.
Article 11 of the new constitution declares that “All that is not written in the exclusive powers of the federal authorities is in the authority of the regions.”
That formulation all but pits the central government and regions against one another in a battle for political supremacy.
Similarly, under current law, soldiers will answer not to Baghdad but to regional powerbrokers, while the Iraqi constitution guarantees local governments the right to pocket the revenue that flows from new oil fields within their jurisdiction.
In fact, although the central government has the authority to collect the revenues generated by existing fields, there is no law to prevent local officials from modernizing old sites and claiming that they are new.
The impact of this state of affairs can hardly be overestimated.
Oil accounts for about 98% of Iraq’s current export revenue. It is the lifeblood of Iraq's economy and the source of the money that the central government will need to build durable institutions.
Although inflows of international financial assistance remain substantial, reconstruction money from abroad will begin to dry up as Iraq puts its central government in place.
In sum, the national government will lack both the authority and the means to govern Iraq.
Indeed, with Shiite-Sunni violence already intensifying, the Iraqi government may not be able to maintain even the appearance of effectiveness for very long.
Moreover, the Kurds are the proverbial dog that hasn’t yet barked.
They enjoy relative economic prosperity, and their political institutions are growing more effective and efficient.
Thus, for the moment, they have no reason to challenge the status quo.
But this stability will face new challenges in 2006.
Gubernatorial elections this November will force Kurdish political contenders to offer opposing programs, and some candidates will seek electoral advantage via populist calls for independence.
At the same time, cooler heads will struggle to postpone a potentially divisive 2007 referendum on the final status of the oil-rich city of Kirkuk.
In fact, the friction generated by electoral politics is likely to stoke resentments within Shia and Sunni communities as well.
There is a great danger that the new Iraq’s sectarian politics will benefit those who promise their constituents the most – at the expense of the central government and the country’s other factions.
Debates over possible constitutional amendments intended to pacify angry Sunnis and to de-fang the insurgency are likely to incite factional hostility as well.
More worryingly, when Shia, Sunnis, and/or Kurds decide that their elected officials are not delivering the promised perks and protections, they are likely to look beyond politics to advance their individual interests.
Some Shia may turn to militia leaders, Sunnis to insurgents, and Kurds to leaders demanding independence.
At that point, the future of an independent Iraq itself will be called into question.
Any separatist moves by Kurdish leaders would bring Turkey into Iraqi politics.
At the same time, the protection that American forces offer Iraqi officials will diminish as troops are gradually withdrawn, and Iran will race to fill the security vacuum.
In sum, the Iraqi government may appear effective for much of 2006, but it will be committed to trying to serve the competing interests of sharply divided constituencies.
The central government’s weakness, continued insurgent violence, growing Iranian influence in Baghdad and with Shiite powerbrokers in the south, and the natural progression of sectarian politics suggest that the new Iraq will be markedly less stable as the year draws to a close.
Iraq’s Refugee Crisis
Among the many humanitarian disasters produced by the civil war now raging in Iraq is one that is almost invisible.
Only rarely do scenes of massive displacement of the civilian population make it onto our television screens, because, unlike bombs and suicide attacks, displacement does not generate the blood, fire, or screams that constitutes compelling footage.
Yet the numbers are staggering: each month, some 40,000 Iraqis flee their homes because of the war.
Half of them go to other parts of Iraq; the rest go abroad.
Iraq’s population, frankly, is bleeding away.
This devastation is even more dramatic because, since the invasion four years ago, only 3,183 Iraqis have been resettled in third countries.
According to the UN High Commission for Refugees, all countries combined have offered a chance to start a new life to approximately the same number of Iraqi refugees as flee the country in just five days.
This exodus is not new, but since the increased violence that followed the bombing of the Shiite Golden mosque in Samarra in February 2006, the pace of the displacement has accelerated.
Indeed, this is the largest population displacement in the Middle East since 1948.
Two million Iraqi refugees are scattered around the region, the great majority of them in Jordan and Syria, with smaller numbers in Turkey, Lebanon, and Egypt.
Because they are urban refugees – not housed in tents, but rather blending in with the local population in the host countries – they are easily ignored.
For Iraq, this is a brain drain that will be hard to repair.
The country had a total population of 26.8 million, and now nearly 13% of them are displaced; many may never return.
But what happens to them?
Last month, I traveled to four countries in the Middle East to meet refugees and learn about their stories and options.
In Amman, Damascus, Istanbul, and Beirut I met dozens of people who have a well-founded fear of persecution in their home country.
I spoke to a hairdresser who was raped because she is Christian.
I heard the story of a liquor store owner whose one-year old son was kidnapped and beheaded.
I met with a Shiite taxi driver whose father was killed in Najaf just a few days before.
I listened to a Sunni engineer whose association with an American construction company makes him a target for extremists, and to a translator of the Christian Mandaean minority who narrowly escaped death when the United Nations headquarters in Baghdad was bombed in August 2003.
Most of those to whom I spoke were poor and without hope for the future.
None wanted me to use their names.
Refugees who are in the country of first asylum usually face three possible choices: return to their homeland, try to integrate in the host country, or be resettled to a third country.
But do the Iraqis really have these three choices?
Can anyone watching reports of the daily carnage in Iraq envision Iraqis going back?
The answer is no.
If the Parliament in Baghdad, one of the best protected buildings in the country, can be attacked from within, then no Zone in Iraq is Green; they are all Red.
Repatriation of Iraqis is unrealistic and definitely out of question for any foreseeable future.
Most Iraqis cannot opt for local integration, either.
True, Jordan and Syria let most Iraqis in, but they do not offer a possibility of durable local absorption.
Iraqis cannot become permanent residents, and they do not have work permits or access to public health services.
In Jordan, Iraqi children cannot go to public schools.
It is not a matter of ill will on the part of these countries; they simply cannot afford to extend these services.
Helping them to cope with the influx of refugees is necessary, but it is not a durable solution.
This leaves the third possibility – that of resettlement.
But for this to happen, countries with traditionally generous refugee programs should come forward and offer more places to receive Iraqis.
The United States is a bad example: only 692 refugees have been accepted since the invasion – roughly the number of Iraqis who are killed every week.
In February, the Bush administration announced that it will offer resettlement this year to 7,000 Iraqi refugees.
If America makes good on this promise, it would be a big step forward, but the US, which led the intervention in Iraq, should now lead in attending to the victims.
Should the US not take the lead, the only hope is that other countries will be more generous.
The Iraqi refugees are a crisis that cannot be ignored: the international community must alleviate the burden on the countries in the region, while offering resettlement opportunities to many more of the most vulnerable Iraqis.
Iraq’s Silent Dead
Evidence is mounting that America’s war in Iraq has killed tens of thousands of civilian Iraqis, and perhaps well over one hundred thousand.
Yet this carnage is systematically ignored in the United States, where the media and government portray a war in which there are no civilian deaths, because there are no Iraqi civilians, only insurgents.
American behavior and self-perceptions reveal the ease with which a civilized country can engage in large-scale killing of civilians without public discussion.
In late October, the British medical journal Lancet published a study of civilian deaths in Iraq since the US-led invasion began.
The sample survey documented an extra 100,000 Iraqi civilian deaths compared to the death rate in the preceding year, when Saddam Hussein was still in power – and this estimate did not even count excess deaths in Falluja, which was deemed too dangerous to include.
The study also noted that the majority of deaths resulted from violence, and that a high proportion of the violent deaths were due to US aerial bombing.
The epidemiologists acknowledged the uncertainties of these estimates, but presented enough data to warrant an urgent follow-up investigation and reconsideration by the Bush administration and the US military of aerial bombing of Iraq’s urban areas.
America’s public reaction has been as remarkable as the Lancet study, for the reaction has been no reaction.
The vaunted New York Times ran a single story of 770 words on page 8 of the paper (October 29). The Times reporter apparently did not interview a single Bush administration or US military official.
No follow-up stories or editorials appeared, and no New York Times reporters assessed the story on the ground.
Coverage in other US papers was similarly frivolous. The Washington Post (October 29) carried a single 758-word story on page 16.
Recent reporting on the bombing of Falluja has also been an exercise in self-denial. The New York Times (November 6) wrote that “warplanes pounded rebel positions” in Falluja, without noting that “rebel positions” are actually in civilian neighborhoods.
Another New York Times story (November 12), citing “military officials,” dutifully reported that, “Since the assault began on Monday, about 600 rebels have been killed, along with 18 American and 5 Iraqi soldiers.”
The issue of civilian deaths was not even raised.
Violence is only one reason for the increase in civilian deaths in Iraq.
Children in urban war zones die in vast numbers from diarrhea, respiratory infections, and other causes, owing to unsafe drinking water, lack of refrigerated foods, and acute shortages of blood and basic medicines at clinics and hospitals (that is, if civilians even dare to leave their houses for medical care). Yet the Red Crescent and other relief agencies have been unable to relieve Falluja’s civilian population.
On November 14, the front page of The New York Times led with the following description: “Army tanks and fighting vehicles blasted their way into the last main rebel stronghold in Falluja at sundown on Saturday after American warplanes and artillery prepared the way with a savage barrage on the district.
Earlier in the afternoon, 10 separate plumes of smoke rose from Southern Falluja, as it etched against the desert sky, and probably exclaimed catastrophe for the insurgents.”
There is, once again, virtually no mention of the catastrophe for civilians etched against that desert sky.
There is a hint, though, in a brief mention in the middle of the story of a father looking over his wounded sons in a hospital and declaring that, “Now Americans are shooting randomly at anything that moves.”
A few days later, a US television film crew was in a bombed-out mosque with US troops. While the cameras were rolling, a US marine turned to an unarmed and wounded Iraqi lying on the ground and murdered the man with gunshots to the head.
(Reportedly, there were a few other such cases of outright murder.)
But the American media more or less brushed aside this shocking incident, too. The Wall Street Journal actually wrote an editorial on November 18 that criticized the critics, noting as usual that whatever the US does, its enemies in Iraq do worse, as if this excuses American abuses.
It does not.
The US is killing massive numbers of Iraqi civilians, embittering the population and the Islamic world, and laying the ground for escalating violence and death.
No number of slaughtered Iraqis will bring peace.
The American fantasy of a final battle, in Falluja or elsewhere, or the capture of some terrorist mastermind, perpetuates a cycle of bloodletting that puts the world in peril.
Worse still, America’s public opinion, media, and election results have left the world’s most powerful military without practical restraint.
Apple, Brussels, and Ireland’s Bruised Sovereignty
ATHENS – Despite their unequivocal Europeanism, the Irish have been serially mistreated by the European Union.
When Irish voters rejected the Treaty of Lisbon in 2008, the EU forced them to vote again until they delivered the “right” outcome.
A year later, when private Irish banks imploded, threatening their (mainly) German private creditors with severe losses, Jean-Claude Trichet, the European Central Bank’s then-president, immediately “informed” the Irish government that the ECB would shut down ATMs across the Emerald Isle unless Ireland’s unsuspecting taxpayers made the German banks whole.
Ireland acquiesced, its public debt ballooned, emigration returned, and the country remains bruised and despondent.
With the EU still refusing meaningful reduction of a debt burden unfairly borne by the younger generation, the Irish remain convinced, correctly, that the EU violated their sovereignty on behalf of foreign bankers.
Ireland’s greatest weapon against the ensuing debt deflation was its ability to attract US-based tech giants, by offering them a combination of EU law, a well-trained English-speaking workforce, and a 12.5% corporate-tax rate.
Though the shell-like subsidiaries of global tech conglomerates have little positive impact on most households’ income, Ireland’s establishment is proud of its links with the likes of Apple.
Now, the European Commission is jeopardizing the government’s special relationship with Apple by demanding that it claw back €13 billion ($14.6 billion) in taxes from the company.
Is the Commission’s latest intervention another example of EU bullying, in violation of Ireland’s sovereignty?
Comparing Trichet’s 2009 intervention and the current standoff over Apple holds important lessons beyond Ireland and, indeed, Europe.
In the eurozone’s early years, German financial institutions channeled a torrent of capital into Ireland’s commercial banks, which then lent it to real-estate developers.
The ensuing property bubble resulted in white elephants in Dublin’s financial district, row upon row of new blocks of flats in the middle of nowhere, and a mountain of mortgage debt.
When the bubble burst after 2008, land prices collapsed, debts went bad, and Ireland’s private banks failed.
The ECB, in an affront comparable to British behavior during the 1845-52 Potato Famine, instructed the government to invoke “financial stability” to force Ireland’s weakest citizens to repay every euro the defunct private banks owed to German creditors.
Financial stability was obviously a smokescreen: taxpayers were forced to repay even the debts of a bank that had already been closed (and thus systemically irrelevant).
The roots of the Apple deal are older than the ECB.
In 1980, a young Steve Jobs visited an Ireland eager to escape underdevelopment. Apple eventually created 6,000 jobs in the country, in exchange for a sweetheart tax deal allowing it to shield its European revenues from taxation by recording them there.
To this day, the proceeds of every iPhone sold in Paris or in Stockholm (net of its Chinese assemblers’ production costs) go to Apple’s Irish subsidiary Apple Sales International.
As a result of the original Apple-Ireland deal, ASI pays a miniscule tax on these earnings, effectively exempt from the ultra-low 12.5% corporate-tax rate.
This arrangement also required the usually vigilant US Internal Revenue Service to play along.
ASI’s profits stem from Apple’s intellectual property (IP) rights, which are based on research and development conducted exclusively in the US (most of it underpinned by federal government funding). These profits should, therefore, be taxed in the US.
Curiously, the IRS is choosing not to enforce Apple’s obligation to pay tax on its profits from US-sourced IP returns.
Instead, Apple charges ASI a symbolic fee for allowing it to profit from Apple’s IP rights, for which it pays a tiny tax to the IRS.
Meanwhile, ASI is allowed to keep, in Ireland, profits representing close to two-thirds of the revenue from the sale of every Apple product sold outside the US.
As a result, Apple has amassed untaxed cash reserves of up to $230 billion.
Unlike in 2009, the Irish government is protesting the EU authorities’ recent Apple ruling, pointing out that tax policy is in the purview of national governments, not the Union.
And, in a recent joint letter to German Chancellor Angela Merkel and the EU’s other 27 national governments, 185 American CEOs alleged that the EU had over-reached yet again, resulting in a “self-inflicted wound” for Ireland’s and Europe’s economy.
But they are wrong: Ireland’s sovereignty is not an issue here.
Apple would not have based itself in Ireland were it not for the EU’s single market, a commons that requires common rules.
One of these rules is that governments cannot offer aid to some companies that is not available to others.
Suppose, for example, that the Greek government, seeking to attract 6,000 jobs to its ravaged economy, offered Apple a subsidy of €110,000 per job per year, or €660 million.
Over two decades, the total subsidy would come to slightly more than €13 billion.
Were the EU to permit Greece to offer Apple such a deal, the other EU member states, including Ireland, would revolt.
Suppose further that the Greek government proposed waiving corporate tax for 20 years on all revenue Apple earned in the rest of the EU but booked in Athens – say, €13 billion.
The European Commission would then have a duty of care to the European commons to demand that Greece immediately recoup that €13 billion – exactly as it is telling Ireland to do today.
Every time the EU acts as a colonial usurper, as it did in 2009, it undermines the legitimacy of its good and proper actions and strengthens the xenophobic, anti-European “Nationalist International.”
Europe’s only beneficiaries, much to the delight of Vladimir Putin and Donald Trump, are isolationist Brexiteers, the far-right Alternative for Germany, France’s National Front, and illiberal governments in Poland, Hungary, Croatia, and elsewhere.
The lesson to be learned from comparing Trichet’s 2009 intervention with the European Commission’s current stance on Apple is simple: Europeans’ real enemy is free riding by the few on the backs of the many.
Without common institutions, Europeans cannot be defended from the exploitation and anti-social practices that big business and its political agents portray as economic common sense.
Trichet compromised Ireland’s sovereignty to facilitate German bankers’ free ride on the shoulders of Ireland’s taxpayers.
As restitution, the ECB should take on its books part of Ireland’s public debt.
But the EU must not allow Ireland to abuse the European commons by offering Apple a deal that no other member state could.
The right response to past injustices is to recover sovereignty in a Europe where the powerful – whether German bankers or American smartphone makers – are prevented from preying on the weak.
Ireland Decides, Again
Maynooth, Ireland – On October 2, Irish voters go to the polls for a second time to decide whether to adopt the European Union’s Lisbon Treaty.
The mood in EU capitals is one of nervousness as polling day looms, with the future of the EU in the hands of Ireland’s unpredictable voters.
On two of the last three occasions that the Irish have been asked to vote on an EU Treaty, they have rejected the proposal.
For the EU, the stakes could not be higher.
The Lisbon Treaty was the compromise agreed by EU leaders in the aftermath of the rejection of the Constitutional Treaty in popular referendums in France and the Netherlands in 2005.
Much negotiating blood has been spilled on the Treaty, and its rejection a second time by Irish voters would leave the Union unable to ratify and implement its provisions; this would inevitably lead to policy paralysis and institutional decay.
The referendum campaign in Ireland has seen a resurgence of conflict between a familiar constellation of forces.
On the Yes side are all of the main political parties, trade unions, the business community, and a broad network of civil-society groups.
Their campaign has been more coordinated and intense than last time, with the aim of mobilizing the maximum number of supporters and ensuring a high turnout, which most commentators assume will assist the Yes side.
On the No side: a disparate coalition drawn from both the far right and the far left, including ultra-Catholics and unreconstructed Marxists, has sought to whip up hysteria about supposed threats ranging from military conscription to euthanasia and abortion.
But the No side has struggled to find a coherent point of reference and seems to have none of the dynamism and vigor that it projected last time.
The main reason for this is that Ireland has been traumatized by economic misfortune over the past year.
The hubris of the Celtic Tiger years is a distant memory, owing to the worst recession in Ireland’s history as an independent state.
In 2009, economists expect growth to contract by up to 8%, with a further steep decline likely next year.
The budget deficit is now the largest in the EU, and public debt has ballooned, as the government has struggled to compensate for the steep drop in revenues.
The Irish banking system approached total collapse in September 2008, and was only saved by a €400 billion government guarantee of all bank deposits.
More recently, the state assumed the liabilities of rogue property developers by setting up a “bad bank” which could potentially saddle Irish taxpayers with a mountain of debt for decades to come.
The depth of the economy’s plunge has helped the Irish government in its effort to secure a Yes vote.
The European Central Bank has provided a monetary lifeline that has provided much needed liquidity within the financial system and helped the government to stem the crisis of confidence created by the banking collapse.
Government ministers and EU representatives repeatedly cite the example of Iceland in pointing out what might have happened to Ireland if it had been outside the EU.
Thus, the second referendum campaign has brought back into play the economic dimension of Ireland’s EU membership, which was largely absent from the 2008 debate on the Treaty.
Ireland has benefited disproportionately from EU largesse during its 35 years of membership, and, in 2008, was still receiving a net sum of €500 million from the EU budget.
When voters are reminded of the potentially catastrophic cost of being excluded, not just from the Single Market area, but from the decision-making structures in the Council of Ministers and the European Central Bank, what is at stake in the referendum becomes clear.
In addition, the Irish government secured legal guarantees from its EU partners on the issues that most concerned voters who voted No or abstained in the first referendum.
These compromises state that nothing in the treaties will affect Irish prerogatives on abortion, military neutrality, and taxation.
The government also secured EU-wide agreement that, rather than reducing the size of the European Commission, Ireland will be allowed to retain a permanent place at the Commission table.
This negotiating success has provided the government with considerable breathing space in which to conduct a more effective referendum campaign.
This combination of legal guarantees and changed economic circumstances is helping to mobilize a majority in favor of the Treaty.
Opinion polls conducted in recent weeks indicate that the Yes side commands a strong majority of 62% to 23%, with 15% of the electorate undecided.
But the picture is far from clear-cut.
Surveys indicate that the Irish are strong supporters of EU membership and the integration process.
The problem is that these favorable attitudes vary considerably in intensity and constitute a “soft bloc” of support for the EU; in the 2008 referendum, this soft bloc crumbled in the final week of the campaign.
It seems clear that a second rejection of the Lisbon Treaty by the Irish electorate would plunge the EU into a renewed crisis and threaten to derail the considerable gains in both democratic legitimacy and collective decision-making capacity deriving from the new Treaty.  Everything indicates that voters now look set to approve the Treaty.
But nobody should take Irish voters for granted in the final days of the campaign.
The Return of Ireland’s Housing Bubble
ZURICH – After having endured the collapse of its housing market less than a decade ago, Ireland has lately been experiencing a blistering recovery in prices, which already have risen in Dublin by some 50% from the trough in 2010.
Is Ireland setting itself up for another devastating crash?
It’s no secret that the collapse of asset bubbles carries massive financial and social costs.
With construction activity and investment spending grinding to a halt, sharp recessions – which cause tax revenues to fall, even as surging unemployment demands increased social spending – are unavoidable.
Taxpayers may even be asked to shore up financial institutions’ capital base.
The last time that happened in Ireland, it cost more than €60 billion ($67 billion), or about 40% of GDP.
Housing bubbles are not difficult to spot; on the contrary, they typically make headlines long before they pop.
Yet they are far from rare.
Bubbles in Ireland, Spain, the United Kingdom, and the United States collapsed after the financial crisis that erupted in 2008.
After the Asian financial crisis erupted in 1997, property prices in Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, South Korea, and Thailand sank by 20-60%.
And a decade earlier, Sweden, Norway, and Finland experienced property-price declines of 30-50%.
The obvious question is why nobody stepped in before it was too late.
The answer is simple: while the bubbles are inflating, many people benefit.
With the construction sector thriving, unemployment falling, and banks lending freely, people are happy – and politicians like it that way.
The process is simple.
Rising prices trigger a surge in building activity, which creates job opportunities for young, low-skill workers, whose employment options are otherwise limited, and generates large profits for property developers and builders.
In fact, a telltale sign of a bubble is that second-rate developers suddenly are able to earn billions.
Banks’ profits rise too, because there is plenty of demand for mortgage lending, which is viewed as almost risk-free.
After all, steadily rising property prices mean that, if a borrower defaults, the property can be resold at a profit.
(The inevitable market correction remains too remote to be taken seriously at the height of the boom.)
Taking advantage of this lending, ordinary people, from taxi drivers to hairdressers, can become millionaires by playing the market on the side.
All of this benefits elected leaders, who win the support of voters who feel wealthier, the formerly unemployed who find jobs, and the homeowners whose houses are rising in value.
Endearing politicians to voters further are new spending increases and tax cuts that can be undertaken, as accelerating economic growth causes the debt-to-GDP ratio to fall.
Because bubbles tend to inflate gradually over a number of years before their abrupt collapse, letting them run a little further seems politically astute.
No one wants to be the one to stop the party – especially if their job is at stake.
But the partygoers of the private sector cannot be counted on to stop themselves.
In particular, banks, for which maintaining market share is crucial, cannot be expected to constrain risky lending, especially given the expectation that, if things do go wrong, the taxpayers will fund a bailout.
This leaves only the financial regulator or the central bank, which can use macroprudential tools – such as loan-to-value and debt-to-income ratios on new mortgage lending – to limit the deterioration of banks’ balance sheets during boom times.
But this approach isn’t perfect, either, because the risky borrowers to whom lending is restricted tend to be first-time or low-income buyers.
This may not be a problem in countries with well-developed housing markets, where there are plenty of rental properties available from professional landlords.
After all, in such markets, renters can find housing with security of tenure at price levels that are predictable, even as they evolve gradually over time according to market conditions, thereby ensuring that landlords have incentives to maintain the properties.
But in countries where rental markets are small and function poorly – often a result of a widely held belief that all families should own their homes – financial stability and access to mortgage financing are closely linked.
By limiting the riskiest borrowers’ access to finance, rules on mortgage lending can trigger a fierce political backlash.
Ireland is a case in point.
In January 2015, the central bank sought to protect financial institutions from another catastrophic bubble by restricting their lending to high-risk borrowers.
As a result, annual growth in property prices fell from a little over 20% to just below 5%.
But the construction industry, worried about its profits, has been harshly critical of the rules, as have ordinary people who have been denied credit, and thus must struggle to find suitable housing in a small rental market.
Politicians, no surprise, have jumped on the bandwagon, to capitalize on the popular mood.
As the pressure on Irish regulators to relax lending rules intensifies, so do concerns that they will succumb to it.
One hopes that they will continue to resist.
Would-be borrowers do indeed face genuine challenges as a result of these regulations; but that is nothing compared to the pain that a collapsing bubble would cause.
In any case, Ireland’s experience with housing bubbles carries a deeper lesson – one that virtually everyone has missed.
A housing system that can so easily produce such large and damaging bubbles is fundamentally flawed.
While restrictions on lending may be useful, they are not enough to bring about an efficient and stable housing system.
Many in Ireland might find that conclusion overly pessimistic.
Maybe they are simply hoping that, this time, the luck of the Irish will hold.
Perhaps it will, and this time really is different.
But there isn’t much evidence of that.
Philosopher Kings Versus Philosopher Presidents
LONDON – When I recently met Irish President Michael Higgins – sharing a platform for a speech in which he connected his newly launched “ethics initiative” to a book I co-wrote with my son, How Much is Enough?
Money and the Good Life – I was struck by his devotion to thought.
Indeed, engaging with ideas is a passion for Ireland’s poet-president – one that more heads of states should take up.
Last May, Higgins told economics students at the University of Chicago that they were studying a deformed discipline, torn from its ethical and philosophical roots.
“The recent economic and financial upheavals,” he declared, “have thrown a glaring light on the shortcomings of the intellectual tools provided by mainstream economics and its key assumptions regarding the sustainability of self-regulating markets,” especially “largely unregulated global financial markets.”
He then proposed a “critical examination of some of the core assumptions that underpin economics as it is currently taught in university departments across the world.”
What other head of state would be able to pinpoint the deficiencies of economics so accurately, buttressing his arguments with quotations not just from Adam Smith, but also from Max Weber, Thorstein Veblen, and Jürgen Habermas?
Higgins’ experience as an academic and his status as an acclaimed poet undoubtedly give him an advantage over other heads of state, enabling him to hold his own with top thinkers in a way that few others can.
More important, however, is his recognition that a political leader should also be a leader of thought and culture for his or her country – and the world.
Such intellectual leadership should be a major function of all titular (non-executive) heads of state, an important way for them to “earn their keep.”
Of course, the head of state – whether the president or the monarch – has other critical duties as well, including acting as guarantor of the constitution and a symbol of national unity.
Moreover, in proportional voting systems like Italy’s, where no single political party normally wins a majority of seats in parliament, the president often plays a key role in appointing the prime minister.
The Italian president can also compel parliamentary deputies to rethink their decisions (in the United Kingdom, the monarch has outsourced this authority to the House of Lords).
But there is also considerable scope for heads of state to behave in accordance with Ecclesiasticus 44:4: “Leaders of the people by their counsels, and by their knowledge of learning meet for the people, wise and eloquent are their instructions.”
This is particularly important today, when public discourse in democracies is relentlessly demotic and academic work is increasingly specialized.
Though some scholars and thinkers are fit to be “leaders of the people,” a favorable environment is needed to coax them out of their ivory towers.
To this end, an open-minded, culturally literate, and ideas-oriented head of state could play a pivotal role.
Ideally, that head of state would be an elected president, rather than a hereditary monarch.
Indeed, anything worthwhile that a monarch can do, an elected non-executive president can do better – not least because an elected official is much less likely to be undermined by the scandals of pampered offspring or degraded by the inevitable hypocrisy and servility of a royal court.
More important, an elected president has much greater legitimacy than a hereditary monarch, whose claim to authority depends exclusively on tradition and ceremony.
With a king or queen unable to say or do anything that may cause a whiff of controversy, the monarchy has been stripped of its power of action or reflection.
To be sure, monarchs – and especially their spouses, heirs, and relations – often carve out niches for themselves, from wildlife protection to sports and charities.
(Architecture has proved distinctly risky, as Prince Charles learned after launching jeremiads against modernism.)
Monarchs and their courts can, to some extent, still act as leaders of art, music, and fashion, as they did in the eighteenth century.
But this role has atrophied with the rising expectation that they should be “normal,” representing their populations’ habits and tastes as closely as possible.
An elected president has a stronger mandate to be controversial, especially in areas of thought and culture that lie beyond the domain of quotidian politics but shape the quality of the public space in which politics plays out.
It would be inconceivable for a reigning monarch to attack the financial oligarchy, as Higgins did in his speech in Chicago.
Even in 1936, when King Edward VIII of Britain declared that “something must be done” about unemployment, he was criticized for overstepping his brief.
Yet, in May, Higgins declared that his position as head of state compelled him “to represent the experience and hardships of the Irish people” in the years since economic crisis befell them.
But the most important reason why an elected president is better equipped than a monarch to catalyze a public conversation about a society’s values and priorities is that he or she is more likely to be a person of superior ability.
Indeed, that is why, on balance, a meritocratic system will always produce better results than a hereditary one.
Monarchs today are reared to be ordinary, as suits their diminished role in national life.
But democratic countries need symbols of the extraordinary if they are not to sink into permanent mediocrity.
Ireland’s Moment of Fiscal Decision
DUBLIN – “The construction of Europe is an art,” former French President Jacques Chirac once said.
“It is the art of the possible.” If so, then Europe’s deconstruction – or, worse, its collapse – would be a shockingly fearful and painful business.
That was the situation faced by European leaders last autumn.
The euro was in serious trouble, buffeted by rumors of imminent banking collapses.
Bond yields in southern Europe were rising, and a pervasive sense of apprehension and fear cloaked governments in European capitals.
But political leadership was sorely lacking.
Finally, in December, decisive action was taken.
There would be a “fiscal treaty,” which would reinforce the Stability and Growth Pact and, importantly, entail automatic sanctions to ensure that eurozone members stick to those rules.
At the same time, the European Central Bank unleashed its €1 trillion ($1.3 trillion) long-term refinancing operation, which pulled the European banking system back from the brink.
These two measures were both timely and vital, creating a much-needed period of calm.
In March, having agreed on the fiscal treaty, the European Council turned its attention to reviving economic growth, which will be the key to long-term fiscal sustainability.
In Ireland, our attorney-general advised on the need to hold a referendum on the fiscal treaty, and we are now in the midst of the campaign.
The government parties, Fine Gael and Labour, as well as the largest opposition party, Fianna Fáil, are campaigning tirelessly for a yes vote.
The reasons we are backing the fiscal treaty are simple.
The treaty would promote stability in the Irish economy and contribute to stabilizing the euro, our currency.
It would increase confidence in Ireland and allow us to increase the existing flow of inward foreign direct investment.
Ratification would also give us guaranteed access to funding from the European Stability Mechanism (ESM), should we ever need it.
The ESM is Ireland’s insurance policy as we work our way out of the bailout program with the “troika” (the European Commission, the ECB, and the International Monetary Fund) and return to the markets.
Most importantly, the fiscal treaty promises to ensure responsible budgeting throughout the eurozone.
For us, that means that the economic mismanagement that caused the Irish economy’s collapse would never recur.
It would also mean stable European economies to which we can export.
For Ireland to continue on the path of economic recovery, it needs to be seen as part of the solution, not part of the problem.
We are making progress, and we need to continue doing so.
Ireland’s government has exceeded its targets under the troika program, and the economy returned to growth last year.
International investors are increasingly looking at Ireland as a smart place to do business.
They recognize the dynamic, transparent, and competitive fundamentals of the Irish economy.
We are highly regarded around the world as an excellent export base.
Global companies recognize that, as the only English-speaking member of the eurozone, Ireland is ideally placed as a gateway to Europe.
Indeed, Ireland is ranked as the best place in Europe to do business, the easiest in Europe for paying taxes, and number one in Europe for completion of tertiary education.
We are an open, transparent economy with a highly skilled workforce and a market of 500 million people on our doorstep.
Crucially, we are also a member of the second-largest currency area in the world.
Foreign direct investment accounts by more than 1,000 overseas companies translates into 145,000 jobs in Ireland, 70% of total exports, and €2.8 billion in corporate-tax receipts.
These companies spend €16 billion per year on goods, services, and wages in Ireland.
The latest figures show that 2011 was a very strong year for attracting investment into the Irish economy, with a record 148 new projects – a 30% increase in companies investing in Ireland for the first time – implying an additional 13,000 jobs.
Investors come here because they link Ireland’s eurozone membership to our long-term economic stability and access to outside support if necessary.
By voting for the fiscal treaty, we can guarantee that stability and support – and thus guarantee continued confidence and investment in the Irish economy.
The new treaty reflects clear recognition that the euro’s initial design was flawed.
We spoke about European Monetary Union, but we didn’t have it.
The Stability and Growth Pact, contained in the Maastricht Treaty, laid down strict rules of budgetary discipline, which were immediately violated – and not by small countries, but by both France and Germany.
Irish recovery cannot occur without European recovery.
We must stand together or fall together, because our economies are so interconnected.
This involves putting our public finances in order, which the fiscal treaty allows.
We have begun that process; the next stage will be an unwavering focus on growth and economic renewal throughout the European Union.
Ireland Votes, Europe Waits
MAYNOOTH, IRELAND – On June 12, Irish voters will vote on the European Union’s Lisbon Treaty, the instrument designed to improve the efficiency and legitimacy of the now 27-member bloc.
Ireland is the only country to put the Treaty to a referendum – all the other member states have chosen to ratify the Treaty by parliamentary means – and everything indicates that the result will be close.
For Prime Minister Brian Cowen’s new government, the risk is that a “No” to the Lisbon Treaty would cripple his administration in its infancy.
For the EU, Irish rejection of the Treaty would probably trigger a lengthy period of instability, and perhaps even an end to the European integration process as it is now constituted.
In 2001, Irish voters rejected the Nice Treaty, which threw the EU into a protracted period of crisis and introspection, which ended only with agreement on the so-called Constitutional Treaty in 2005.
Almost immediately, however, French and Dutch voters rejected that Treaty, bringing the negotiations back to square one.
Now, after a lengthy and difficult period of reflection and bargaining, those efforts may be in jeopardy again.
The “No” campaign has been vigorous, comprising a motley crew of aging Marxists, anti-globalization protestors, traditional euroskeptics, and obsessive “sovereigntists.”
They have sought to capitalize on the vacuum of knowledge in Ireland regarding EU affairs and the “Yes” side’s relative lateness to mobilize.
Voters have been subjected to a barrage of outlandish claims: the Treaty would supposedly introduce abortion into Ireland (it is outlawed under Ireland’s constitution), abolish Ireland’s low corporate-tax rate, and introduce a European army that would soon be sending Irish boys home from distant battlefields in body bags.
Even Ireland’s dismal performance at the recent Eurovision Song Contest has been used to bolster the message: “They didn’t vote for us; why should we vote for them?”
Though these claims are easily discredited, the “Yes” side has been unable to provide voters with sufficient reasons to vote for the Treaty.
If that wasn’t enough, the “No” side has also been able to associate the EU with rising fuel and food prices as the campaign draws to a close.
Two factors that are likely to decide the referendum’s outcome can be singled out: turnout and how the farming community votes.
Opinion polls currently show the “Yes” side leading by two to one (35% to 18%).
But there is little comfort in these figures for pro-Europeans: polls prior to the failed referendum on the Nice treaty in 2001 demonstrated an even larger “Yes” majority at the same stage.
Now as then, “No” voters seem more committed.
The percentage of “Don’t knows” remains high, at about 47%, so there is everything to play for in the campaign’s final days.
The crucial issue will be turnout.
In 2001 the ‘Yes’ side lost because it failed to convince enough voters to turn out – almost two thirds of the electorate failed to vote.