One of the great transformational leaders in history, Otto von Bismarck, became largely incremental and status quo-oriented after achieving the unification of Germany under Prussian direction.
Likewise, Franklin Delano Roosevelt’s foreign-policy objectives and style were modest and incremental in his first presidential term, but became transformational in 1938 when he decided that Adolf Hitler represented an existential threat.
Transactional leadership is more effective in stable and predictable environments, whereas an inspirational style is more likely to appear in periods of rapid and discontinuous social and political change.
The transformational objectives and inspirational style of a leader like Mahatma Gandhi in India or Nelson Mandela in South Africa can significantly influence outcomes in fluid political contexts, particularly in developing countries with weakly structured institutional constraints.
By contrast, American foreign-policy formation is highly constrained by institutions like Congress, the courts, and the constitution.
Thus, we would expect less opportunity for transformational leadership.
But even the US Constitution is ambiguous about the powers of Congress and the president in foreign policy.
At best, it creates what one constitutional expert called “an invitation to struggle.”
Moreover, much depends on external conditions.
Woodrow Wilson, Franklin Roosevelt, and Harry Truman developed transformational objectives only in response to external events after they entered office.
Crisis conditions can liberate a gifted leader from the accumulated constraints of vested interests and bureaucratic inertia that normally inhibit action in the American system.
Bill Clinton, caught up in the complacent 1990’s, is said to have envied Franklin Roosevelt’s crisis conditions of the 1930’s.
In such situations, action becomes more fluid.
A leader with transformational objectives faces better odds, and an inspirational style is more likely to find responsive followers and to make their role more relevant.
For example, George W. Bush used the crisis conditions after September 11, 2001, in the service of an assertion of executive power, as well as to invade Iraq.
But, while turbulent times may set the stage for transformational leaders, it does not follow that bold and risk-loving leaders are always best suited to address the crises that define such periods.
President George H. W. Bush, unlike his son, was transactional, but implemented a very successful foreign policy.
Whether they are transformational or incremental in their objectives, leaders need certain soft- and hard-power skills to be effective.
Among the soft-power skills are emotional intelligence (self-control and the ability to use emotional cues to attract others); vision (an attractive portrait of the future that balances ideals, objectives, and capabilities); and communication (the ability to use words and symbols to persuade both an inner circle and a broader audience).
For the use of hard-power resources, two skills are particularly important: organizational capacity and a Machiavellian proficiency in bullying, buying, and bargaining to form winning coalitions.
Above all, effective leadership requires contextual intelligence and an intuitive diagnostic ability that helps a leader understand change, set objectives, and align strategies and tactics accordingly.
As Lee Kuan Yew, the founding father of modern Singapore, once told me, a leader must be a quick learner, test reality, be prepared to change his mind as conditions change, and act calmly in a crisis.
Contextual intelligence implies both a capability to discern trends in the face of complexity and adaptability while trying to shape events.
Bismarck once referred to this skill as the ability to intuit God’s movements in history, and seize the hem of His garment as He sweeps past.
More prosaically, leaders with contextual intelligence, like surfers, have the ability to judge and adjust to new waves and ride them successfully.
Leaders of this type not only adapt their style to the situation and to their followers’ needs; they also create flows of information that “educate their hunches.”
This involves the ability to size up group politics and understand the positions and strengths of various stakeholders in order to decide when and how to use transactional and inspirational skills.
It is the self-made part of luck.
This skill is crucial in unstructured situations, when it is often more difficult to ask the right questions than it is to get the right answers.
Leaders with contextual intelligence are good at providing meaning or a road map by defining the problem that a group confronts.
They understand the tension between the different values involved in an issue, and how to balance the desirable with the feasible.
In particular, contextual intelligence requires an understanding of groups’ cultures; the distribution of power resources; followers’ needs and demands; information flows; and timing.
Contextual intelligence is particularly important in foreign policy, because an effective leader must understand the culture and power structure of other societies, and how they interact as an international system.
With years of experience in foreign affairs, George H. W. Bush had excellent contextual intelligence.
With almost no experience in foreign affairs, “W” did not.
That gap proved the difference between the success of the father and the failure of the son.
Controlling Chinese Television
The 2003 World Press Freedom report put out by the group Reporters without Borders ranks China 161st among 166 nations, somewhere between Iran and North Korea.
But Chinese television fare, at least, no longer consists of the prudish melodramas and clumsy indoctrination programs of the Maoist past.
Casual observers of today's freewheeling offerings of sex, crime, drugs, violence, and banal game shows on Chinese TV might come away with the impression that most of the shackles have been removed from televised content.
To be sure, this impression disappears if one focuses on explicit political content.
Viewpoints that deviate in the slightest from Party doctrine are still absent from Chinese TV.
Despite the surface diversity of programming, the monolithic control of political discourse has changed little since the 1950's.
But the sheer volume of China's TV programming makes maintaining such control difficult.
China Central Television (CCTV) alone has 12 channels (many broadcasting 24 hours a day), and employs about 3,000 people.
CCTV falls under the control of the Propaganda Department and the Ministry of Radio, Film, and Television.
Numerous provincial and municipal TV stations are also required to carry some CCTV programming.
This combination represents a vast administrative undertaking.
Given the staggering amount of programming needed to fill the time slots, content monitoring must be implemented with maximum efficiency.
Censorship has been made easier, not more difficult, by the government's decision in the 1990's to shift to a free-market strategy for entertainment products.
Big subsidies to TV stations were mostly discontinued, and the new "sink or swim" approach forced TV outlets to compete for advertising revenues, resulting in programming with greater mass appeal.
Thus, in a strategy mirrored elsewhere in the cultural sphere, the government simply relinquished much control over the moral component of TV content.
The anti-pornography saohuang campaigns carried out in the 1980's and early 1990's are a thing of the past.
Perhaps realizing that an entertained and distracted populace is less likely to complain about public policy, the Party has allowed entertainment programming to follow the Western model, lessening the need for micro-managed censorship.
The result is a de facto separation between news and everything else.
This conveniently allows the authorities to control news programming with an iron hand while relegating the bulk of programming to a looser and less labor-intensive monitoring system.
Of course, given China's highly politicized atmosphere, politics can leak into even the most innocuous areas of discourse, and the many talk shows and audience participation formats necessitate a less intrusive but nonetheless effective system of content regulation.
The first surprise I encountered while working for CCTV as a program planner was how minimal this system is.
Top-down directives and outright censorship are rare.
Few written guidelines outlining forbidden or sensitive topics exist.
No constant memoranda dictate content.
Party officials don't hover over each step of the process, and virtually no cutting of completed products is carried out on Party orders.
On the surface, writers, directors, and performers seem free to plan and produce their shows with little or no supervision or monitoring.
So how does such a system block offending content?
First and foremost, the system is largely reactive.
The department heads and oversight committees that meet to evaluate programming seldom dictate content, but merely pass their complaints and recommendations down to programming heads.
The top-down hierarchy is autocratic and arbitrary; lower levels have little collaborative input and no right of appeal.
Serious breaches can result in reprimands or dismissals.
In effect, the system has become largely self-regulating.
In my experience, 99% of all censorship occurs with the writers and producers themselves.
Sporadic complaints and warnings from above enable them to develop an intuitive sense for the boundaries of acceptable content, so they create shows that are free from offending material from the outset.
The lack of explicit guidelines also keeps content more conservative than it need be, because producers tend to err on the safe side.
Vague but pervasive intimidation is the main factor keeping TV personnel in line.
But another force serves the Party's interests as well: the deep-seated Chinese cultural inertia that stresses collectivist, group-oriented behavior.
In such an atmosphere, inclusion of politically incorrect content is not merely a risky move, but constitutes a breach of social decorum.
Indeed, working daily with Chinese TV creators, I noticed a subtle, almost instinctive tendency to avoid any content or format that is unusual, novel, or unorthodox, never mind subversive.
The exceptions to this state of affairs are when the Party initiates a propaganda campaign, such as the one associated with the turnover of Hong Kong in 1997, or the more recent anti-Falun Gong blitzkrieg.
At such times, directives are issued to produce programming with specific ideological content, and such shows - dubbed renwu (duties) - are perfunctorily overseen by TV producers, after which the more bottom-up mode returns.
Many TV producers have internalized these controls so well that they are an unconscious fact of life, and audiences now entertained by endless costume dramas and soap operas are not clamoring for freer political content.
Barring some catastrophic change, this method of information control can be expected to continue well into the 21st century.
Kembalinya Penyakit Demam Kuning
SEATTLE – Sebelum horor akibat wabah Ebola di Afrika Barat terhapus dari pikiran kita, virus Zika muncul sebagai risiko besar bagi kesehatan global, dan kini menyibukkan para peneliti dan dokter di Amerika Selatan, Amerika Tengah, dan Kepulauan Karibia.
Akan tetapi, angka kematian akibat virus lain terus meningkat tajam: demam kuning (yellow fever).
Di Afrika barat daya, Angola menghadapi epidemi serius akibat penyakit demam kuning – wabah pertama dalam kurun 30 tahun.
Sejak muncul di Luanda, ibukota dan kota terpadat penduduknya di Angola, pada bulan Desember lalu, virus tersebut telah menewaskan 293 orang dan menginfeksi sekitar 2.267 orang.
Virus tersebut sudah menyebar ke enam dari total 18 provinsi di Angola.
Kasus demam kuning dilaporkan di Cina, Kongo, dan Kenya yang dibawa oleh orang-orang yang datang dari Angola.
Kini Nambia dan Zambia masuk daftar negara yang perlu diwaspadai.
Virus penyakit demam kuning ditularkan oleh gigitan nyamuk Aedes aegypti – jenis nyamuk yang juga menyebarkan virus Zika.
Gejalanya termasuk demam, nyeri pada otot, sakit kepala, mual, muntah-muntah, dan kelelahan.
Hampir setengah pasien yang tidak diobati meninggal dunia dalam waktu 10-14 hari akibat penyakit demam kuning yang parah.
Berita bagusnya adalah, berbeda dengan Zika atau Ebola, demam kuning bisa dikendalikan dengan vaksin yang efektif, yang memberikan imunitas bersifat seumur hidup dalam kurun satu bulan sejak pemberiannya.
Sesungguhnya, vaksinasi menjadi inti dari Rencana Respon Nasional di Angola yang diresmikan awal tahun ini dengan tujuan memberikan vaksin demam kuning kepada lebih dari 6,4 juta penduduk di provinsi Luanda.
Sejauh ini, hampir 90% populasi target sudah mendapatkan vaksin berkat Organisasi Kesehatan Dunia (WHO), International Coordinating Group for Vaccine Provision, dan negara-negara lainnya seperti Sudan Selatan dan Brasil, yang secara keseluruhan berhasil menyediakan 7,35 juta dosis vaksin.
Upaya vaksinasi massal telah menghambat penyebaran demam kuning.
Akan tetapi, untuk mengakhiri wabah tersebut, vaksinasi harus dilanjutkan tidak hanya di Luanda, kota dimana sekitar 1,5 juta penduduk lainnya berisiko terinfeksi, namun juga di provinsi-provinsi lain yang terjangkit virus.
Ini merupakan tantangan besar.
Salah satu permasalahan utama adalah biaya.
Pada tahun 2013, harga satu dosis vaksin demam kuning di Afrika adalah $0.82 – harga yang tidak sanggup dibayar mayoritas negara-negara berkembang.
Pada tahun 2015 sebuah laporan oleh Médecins Sans Frontières menunjukkan bahwa vaksin tersebut sekarang hampir 70 kali lebih mahal dibandingkan harga tahun 2011.
Lebih buruknya lagi, walaupun negara mempunyai dana, tetap saja ada persoalan keterbatasan pasokan yang serius.
Pasteur Institute of Dakar di Senegal, salah satu dari empat fasilitas produksi vaksin deman kuning di dunia, menghasilkan sekitar 10 juta dosis per tahun, dan proses produksinya sangat sulit untuk ditingkatkan.
Selain itu, Pasteur Institute akan menghentikan kegiatan untuk renovasi selama lima bulan sehingga tidak bisa memproduksi lebih banyak vaksin.
Untungnya, situasi akan segera membaik.
Pasteur Institute tengah membangun fasilitas baru sekitar 30 km dari Dakar, yakni di Diamniadio, yang diperkirakan akan menaikkan produksi hingga tiga kali lipat pada tahun 2019.
Produsen vaksin demam kuning lainnya, yaitu Sanofi Pasteur di Perancis, juga menambah kapasitas produksinya.
(Dua produsen lainnya berkedudukan di Brasil dan Rusia).
Namun sekarang suplai masih terbatas.
Salah satu cara untuk menghemat pasokan sekarang adalah memberikan dosis secara fraksional (seperlima dosis biasa), yang juga terbukti melindungi dari penyakit demam kuning.
Namun itu saja tidak cukup jika virus semakin menyebar.
Dan sayangnya, tingginya jumlah nyamuk Aedes aegyptii  di kawasan yang terinfeksi virus menunjukkan bahwa risiko penyebarannya masih tinggi.
Sebuah wabah di kawasan seperti Asia, yang tidak berpengalaman menghadapi wabah demam kuning dan tidak mempunyai kapasitas produksi vaksin, akan sangat sulit dikendalikan.
Menurut John P. Woodall, pendiri ProMED (pemantau wabah penyakit di seluruh dunia), jika demam kuning menyebar ke Asia melalui iklim dan jenis nyamuk yang cocok, ratusan ribu jiwa akan terinfeksi (dan mungkin meninggal dunia) sebelum stok vaksin bisa dikirimkan.
Virus tersebut juga berpotensi menyebar ke benua Amerika, kawasan yang menjadi rumah bagi nyamuk Aedes sebagai vektor yang tidak hanya menyebarkan demam kuning, tapi juga dengue, Zika, dan chikungunya.
Organisasi Kesehatan Pan Amerika telah mengeluarkan peringatan kewaspadaan dini akan virus demam kuning di Amerika Latin.
Untuk membantu mengurangi penyebaran demam kuning, peraturan kesehatan dunia mewajibkan agar semua pelawat ke 34 negara endemik demam kuning memiliki sertifikat vaksinasi.
Namun penerapan aturan-aturan tersebut tergantung pada kapasitas masing-masing negara dan jauh dari sempurna.
Sejauh ini, total sembilan kasus demam kuning yang dikonfirmasi oleh laboratorium yang berasal dari Angola telah dilaporkan oleh Cina melalui National IHR Focal Point.
Laporan tentang infeksi demam kuning yang diderita pelawat yang tidak mendapat imunisasi kembali dari negara dimana vaksinasi bersifat wajib tentu menyoroti pentingnya untuk menegaskan kembali pelaksanaan kewajiban vaksinasi.
WHO tengah bekerja sama secara erat dengan sejumlah mitra dan pemerintah Angola untuk melawan wabah penyakit ini.
Namun, sebagaimana dikemukakan oleh beberapa pakar kesehatan, masih diperlukan upaya-upaya lain untuk mengatasinya.
WHO harus membentuk komite darurat untuk mengkoordinasikan respon internasional lebih luas, memobilisasi anggaran, dan memelopori penambahan produksi vaksin secara cepat, serta sebuah “standing emergency committee” (komite tetap) yang berkemampuan memecahkan krisis-krisis kesehatan masyarakat di masa mendatang dengan cepat dan efektif.
Converting Syria
An Arab-Israeli peace requires a comprehensive approach, because the problems at stake are intertwined.
Not only are key issues such as Jerusalem and Palestinian refugees insoluble without an all-Arab consensus, but any country that is left out of the peace process is bound to persist in its role as a revolutionary power bent on regional destabilization.
Admittedly, Israeli governments have never liked the idea of negotiating peace with all enemies simultaneously, if only because the political costs of the required concessions would be unbearable.
The Israeli strategy of peacemaking therefore oscillates between two visions: while the Israeli left gives priority to the Palestinian problem, the Israeli right prefers pursuing a settlement with the big Arab powers.
The current Israeli-Palestinian peace talks and the American veto on negotiations with Syria indicate that we have returned to the “Palestine first” concept.
But the prospects of success are desperately dim.
With the Americans still refraining from engaging in a Clinton-like level of committed mediation, the parties look to be incapable of meeting each other’s minimal requirements for a settlement.
Their failure would have dire consequences for the entire region.
The Syria-Iran-Hamas-Hezbollah axis would be emboldened in its challenge to American leadership in the region, and, with Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas humbled and defeated, a third Intifada would be a likely scenario.
It is therefore vitally important to take Syria, an ally of Iran and the patron of spoilers such as Hamas and Hezbollah, out of the war equation.
But this requires that both Israel and the United States change course.
Syria has a keen interest in being invited into an US-led settlement with Israel.
The muted response of the Arab states to Israel’s recent mysterious air raid on its territory reflects its isolation within the Arab world – an isolation with which the Syrians are extremely uncomfortable.
The Ba’athist regime in Damascus is marked by two major formative experiences: Hafez al-Assad’s loss of the Golan Heights to Israel, and his son Bashar’s loss of Lebanon.
Recovering the Golan, gaining recognition of Syria’s special interests in Lebanon, and reconciling with America are thus vital objectives for the regime and the best way that Bashar al-Assad can boost his legitimacy at home.
Syria’s readmission into the Arab consensus and financial support from the Gulf monarchies for abandoning the Shi’a alliance with Iran and Hezbollah would also be significant gains.
Bashar may lack his father’s acumen, but he, too, knows a simple truth: peace with Israel is the price to pay.
The question remains whether Bashar understands that peace is not only about regaining the Golan, but also about normalization of relations with Israel, which his father was reluctant to allow.
The old Assad feared that open borders and the end of the politics of conflict might erode his one-party system.
Peace thus requires a degree of political and socioeconomic change to diminish the appetite for military adventurism.
A Damascene conversion is not only possible, but is also vital for regional peace.
The most realistic scenario is now a three-front war pitting Israel against Syria, Hamas, and Hezbollah.
But a Syrian-Israeli peace would drive a wedge between Syria and Iran, thereby cutting off Hezbollah’s lines of arms supply while allowing the vital task of stabilizing Lebanon to succeed.
The only way to extricate Syria from the fatal Iranian embrace is to draw it into a regional scheme for peace.
Alas, precisely because of their isolation and the Ba’athist regime’s paranoiac nature, the Syrians are unlikely to meet the US condition for peace talks: abandoning their current rogue alliances and their marriage with terror.
But a Damascene conversion can only be the outcome of negotiations, not a prerequisite for them.
The idea that the Arab-Israeli peace process requires choosing between a Syrian or a Palestinian track has proved to be a dangerous fallacy.
Neither the Palestinians nor the Syrians will acquiesce to their exclusion.
A revolutionary force in international relations is one whose level of dissatisfaction with the status quo is such that it works to undermine it at any price.
In addition to reviewing the state of the Israeli-Palestinian negotiations, the November Middle East conference that President George W. Bush has called should begin to build a platform for an Israeli-Syrian negotiating track and a region-wide forum where clear rules of conduct and engagement are agreed by all.
Of course, this conference will not bring an end to the Damascus-Tehran axis.
But if the US exercises a brand of statesmanship different from the one that has so far put it on the defensive on almost every front, it could start to eat away at the foundations of that axis.
Convicts for Export
NEW DELHI – China has devised a novel strategy to relieve pressure on its overcrowded prisons: employ convicts as laborers on overseas projects in the developing world.
The practice has exposed another facet of China’s egregious human-rights record, which, when it comes to the overseas operations of Chinese companies, includes the government’s failure to enforce its own regulations.
China executes three times as many people every year as the rest of the world combined.
Amnesty International has estimated that, in 2007, China secretly executed on average “around 22 prisoners every day.”
In addition to being the world’s leading executioner, China has one of its largest prison populations.
The 2009 “World Prison Population List” compiled by the International Center for Prison Studies at King’s College, London, put the total number of inmates in Chinese jails at 1.57 million – larger than the population of Estonia, Guinea-Bissau, Mauritius, Swaziland, Trinidad &amp; Tobago, Fiji, or Qatar.
The forced dispatch of prisoners to work on overseas infrastructure projects raises new issues regarding China’s human-rights record.
It also adds a new element — the dumping of convicts — to its trade and investment policy, which has been much criticized for dumping goods.
Thousands of Chinese convicts, for example, have been pressed into service on projects undertaken by state-run Chinese companies in Sri Lanka, a strategically important country for China as it seeks to enhance its regional position in the Indian Ocean.
After providing Sri Lanka’s government with offensive weapon systems that helped end the country’s decades-long civil war, China has been rewarded with port-building, railroad, and other infrastructure projects.
Chinese convicts also have been dispatched to the Maldives, where the Chinese government is building 4,000 houses on several different islands as a government-to-government “gift” to win influence.
So far, however, China has failed to persuade the country’s president to lease it one of the 700 uninhabited Maldivian islands for use as a small base for the Chinese navy.
Chinese companies’ operating practice for overseas projects, including in Africa, is to keep the number of local workers to a bare minimum and to bring in much of the workforce from China, some of which comprises convicts “freed” on parole for project-related overseas work.
Convict laborers, like the rest of the Chinese workforce on such projects, are housed near the project site.
That way, if any convict worker escaped, he would be easy to find in an alien setting.
In theory, such practices run counter to regulations promulgated by the Chinese commerce ministry in August 2006, in response to a backlash against Chinese businesses in Zambia following the death of 51 Zambian workers in an explosion at a Chinese-owned copper mine.
These regulations called for “local­ization,” including hiring local workers, respecting local customs, and adhering to safety norms.
During an eight-nation 2007 African tour, Chinese President Hu Jintao made a point of meeting with Chinese businesses to stress the importance of corporate responsibility in their local dealings.
Moreover, in October 2006, the State Council – China’s cabinet – issued nine directives ordering that Chinese overseas businesses, among other things, “pay attention to environmental protection,” “support local community and people’s livelihood cause,” and “preserve China’s good image and its good corporate reputation.”
But Chinese regulations are sometimes promulgated simply to blunt external criticism, and thus are seldom enforced, except when a case attracts international attention.
For example, in 2003 China enacted a law on environmental-impact assessments, which was followed in 2008 by “provisional measures” to permit public participation in such assessments.
Yet Chinese leaders remain more zealous about promoting exports and economic growth than in protecting the country’s air and water.
Similarly, the State Council’s 2006 nine directives to Chinese overseas companies have been subordinated to the drive for exports and growth, even when it imposes environmental and social costs on local communities abroad.
Indeed, as part of the government’s “going global” policy, Chinese companies are offered major incentives and rewards for bagging overseas contracts and boosting exports.
The use of convict laborers adds a disturbing new dimension to this strategy.
But even before convicts became part of China’s overseas development effort, some Chinese projects, especially dam-building schemes, were embroiled in disputes with local communities in Botswana, Burma, Pakistan, Ghana, and Sudan.
In fact, several small bombs exploded less than three months ago at the site of Burma’s Myitsone Dam, whose construction by a Chinese company in insurgency-torn Kachin State is displacing thousands of subsistence farmers and fishermen by flooding a wide swath of land.
Chinese companies cannot get thousands of prisoners released on their own, let alone secure passports and exit permits for them.
It is obvious that the practice of pressing convicts into service on overseas projects has been instituted at the instance of the Chinese government.
Until the Chinese government’s treatment of its own citizens and those of other countries is guided by respect for basic human rights and the rule of law, China is unlikely to command the respect that it seeks on the world stage.
Taking the BRICS Seriously
BEIJING – Sailing down the Moscow River on a cool evening earlier this month, I found myself in intense conversation with the chair of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the Chinese National People’s Congress (NPC).
Meanwhile, South African and Brazilian parliamentarians were swaying to Russian music and a guide pointed out the sights.
The first parliamentary forum of the BRICS countries – Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa – had come to a convivial conclusion.
Before the meeting opened, many wondered whether the five parliaments could possibly find common ground.
What on earth could India’s fractious and rumbustious Lok Sabha, with its impassioned debates and disruptions, have in common with China’s decorous NPC, a rigorously controlled echo chamber for Communist Party decisions?
Membership in the new BRICS grouping, many believed, did not provide a strong enough basis for cooperation.
Such skepticism has been leveled at the BRICS grouping itself from its inception, with some dismissing it as the only international organization invented by an investment bank.
Specifically, the term BRIC was coined more than a decade ago by then-Goldman Sachs analyst Jim O’Neill, who did not initially count South Africa among the ranks of the major emerging economies.
But Russian President Vladimir Putin liked the idea from the start, and suggested in 2006 that the four countries should meet regularly.
The grouping was soon formalized, with annual summits planned.
South Africa joined in 2011, solidifying the BRICS’ presence across the global South, with only Russia in the North.
In fact, this is why Russia’s centrality to the enterprise is so intriguing.
Given that Russia was, until recently, a member of the G-8 – the northern hemisphere’s most important economic grouping – it would seem to have little affinity with the other four BRICS members, which have traditionally been viewed as the leading developing-country voices in global forums.
But, by seizing on the idea of the BRICS, Putin revealed his desire to build an alternative global platform – and advance an alternative worldview.
The continual deepening of the BRICS enterprise has caught many international observers by surprise.
In addition to their annual summits – which have produced joint declarations covering every major global issue, from questions of peace and security to United Nations reform – the BRICS have conducted foreign ministers’ meetings and engaged in think-tank consultations.
Moreover, the BRICS have created the New Development Bank, headquartered in Shanghai and headed by one of India’s most respected private-sector bankers.
Seen against this background, the recent parliamentary forum is just the newest in an expanding array of institutions and mechanisms that are establishing the BRICS as an international grouping that cannot be ignored.
The BRICS are emerging at a time when the future of the international system that arose in the immediate aftermath of World War II is increasingly being called into question.
After two world wars, numerous civil wars, colonial oppression, and the horrors of the Holocaust and Hiroshima, the far-sighted statesmen of the time decided that liberal internationalism, based on the UN charter and allied institutions, was the only way to prevent more carnage.
And, indeed, for seven decades, that system has largely achieved its goals.
It has broadly ensured global peace, although at the cost of shifting many conflicts to the periphery.
And it did not benefit only the developed world; it also ensured decolonization, promoted development, and found ways to accommodate the voices of newly emerging countries.
But it seems that existing arrangements are no longer adequate.
China and India are seeking global influence commensurate with their economic weight; Brazil and South Africa are emerging as continental powerhouses, and hydrocarbon-fueled Russia is chafing at its status on the margins of the Western system.
Not surprisingly, many think that the current system is ready for a makeover.
The existing world powers, however, will not cede their influence so easily.
It is absurd that China’s voting power in the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund is the same as Belgium’s.
But the G-20’s effort to create parity in these institutions between the advanced economies and the emerging and transition countries has ground to a halt.
Indeed, although US leaders technically agreed to IMF voting reforms, the US Congress has so far refused to ratify them.
It is important to note that countries like India and Brazil – unlike, say, Germany and Japan a century ago – are not seeking to overturn the world order.
All they want is a place at the high table.
Barring that, they have little choice but to build their own – though India, Brazil, and South Africa have reason to wonder if a Chinese-led world order would be an improvement on the current one.
The BRICS’ response is both understandable and disquieting.
As countries acquire economic and military power, they start exercising their geopolitical muscle, too.
The challenge for advocates of world order is to accommodate emerging powers within a framework of universal, predictable rules and global structures that ensure everyone a fair deal, appropriate for their size, capabilities, and contributions to the international system.
Today’s world leaders appear to lack the statesmanship, the breadth of vision, and the generosity of spirit of those who created the post-1945 world order.
By clinging stubbornly to the system they dominate and barring the door to new entrants, they have left those outside little choice.
What the BRICS countries have in common is their exclusion from the places they believe they deserve in the current world order.
That may not look like enough of a basis for a credible new international system.
But, with their economies on course to overtake those of the G-7 before 2050, looks can be deceiving.
The fact is that, if the BRICS are not allowed to help lead within the existing global system, they will inevitably create their own.
What that might mean for the world order established in 1945 is anybody’s guess.
The Human City
SINGAPORE – The tangled web of international organizations that constitutes global governance has become so remote and ineffective that few count on it to deliver results anymore.
Now, after decades of turf wars and self-marginalization, international organizations must rally around an increasingly pressing global priority: sustainable urbanization.
The world is undergoing an unprecedented and irreversible wave of urbanization, with the share of the global population living in cities set to reach 60% by 2030.
But rapid urbanization is driving up industrial fossil-fuel consumption and household water consumption, and is increasing demand for food in areas where arable land is scarce.
In short, the current urbanization trajectory is not sustainable.
But existing efforts to alter the situation remain woefully inadequate.
While the United Nations General Assembly has tasked its agency for human settlements, UN-HABITAT, with promoting sustainable urbanization, the agency lacks the influence to ensure that this vital issue makes it onto the global agenda.
Moreover, international development players – including UN agencies, NGOs, corporate citizenship programs, and other charitable organizations – rarely coordinate their activities, even though their interventions are increasingly concentrated in densely populated cities.
Given that promoting sustainable urbanization and improving coordination would bolster progress in other priority areas (including women’s rights, climate change, youth unemployment, and literacy), sustainable urbanization must become a bureaucratic priority.
And it must be complemented by a technological disruption, with investments channeled toward developing and distributing innovations that would make cities more livable, efficient, and sustainable.
In fact, many useful innovations, such as energy-generating building materials and zero-emissions transportation, already exist; they simply need to be made accessible to those who need them most.
Devices like small-scale water-filtration systems, portable heart monitors, and low-cost tablet computers are already dramatically improving the lives of the world’s poorest citizens and helping to level the economic playing field.
The future impact of global governance rests on forging new alignments that facilitate the flow of vital knowledge and technologies from an increasingly diverse array of sources to urban populations worldwide.
The tools needed to make urban life more sustainable are no longer flowing only from North to South and West to East.
China has taken the lead in exporting solar photovoltaic cells, while clean-tech parks are arising even in the Arab world.
Governments, companies, supply-chain managers, corporate-citizenship strategists, NGOs, and others should commit to reducing their carbon footprints and to leveraging their resources to contribute to sustainable urbanization.
Opportunities to make such contributions are appearing constantly – and across all sectors.
In construction, for example, contractors are forming partnerships with labs to test materials that better reflect heat while absorbing energy to power cooling systems, and utility companies are leveraging new software tools to deploy smart meters in homes and offices.
Two US cities – New York and Seattle – have raised efficiency standards for new construction to record levels.
Similarly, automobile manufacturers, mobility-services companies, and local governments are working together to advance sustainable transportation by providing incentives for efficient non-ownership of vehicles.
As a result, carpooling is gaining prevalence in cities like Berlin.
Furthermore, MIT has developed the foldable electric CityCar, four of which can fit into a conventional parking space.
At last year’s Rio+20 conference, the eight largest multilateral development banks pledged $175 billion to develop sustainable transportation.
Information technology can also reduce stress on the transportation system.
For example, Singapore is harnessing its near-complete fiber-optic network to reduce urban congestion by introducing a spate of measures encouraging workers to telecommute.
As these measures take effect, self-sufficient satellite towns will likely develop, reducing transportation-related energy consumption further, while fostering a more active civil society.
Singapore is leading the way in another area as well: production and distribution of potable recycled water.
Many cities worldwide are following its example, expanding their water catchment and treatment programs.
Meanwhile, vertical farm experiments – which aim to augment urban food supplies by cultivating crops in skyscraper greenhouses – are proliferating from the American Midwest to Osaka, Japan.
And India has become a leader in converting biomass and food waste into energy.
Of course, the billions of farmers and villagers worldwide should not be forgotten.
Interventions like rural electrification, the provision of drought-resistant seeds and agricultural technology, and the expansion of micro-insurance are vital not only to rural populations’ welfare, but also to catalyze a new “Green Revolution,” without which city dwellers will face severe food shortages.
With new, innovative solutions appearing every day, the real challenge lies in bringing them to scale – and that requires international cooperation.
But the “smartest” cities are not necessarily the most technologically advanced. Rather, they are the places where technology and public policy support citizens’ welfare and aspirations.
This crucial fact will guide discussion at the New Cities Foundation’s second annual summit in June – the theme of which is “The Human City” – and should be at the heart of sustainable urbanization initiatives.
Making sustainable urbanization a strategic priority might be the only way to overcome the interrelated crises of jobless growth, youth unemployment, and income inequality.
While some factory jobs can be outsourced or automated, robots cannot yet retrofit buildings, install solar PV cells on rooftops, or construct vertical farms.
Even the movement in some cities, such as Singapore and Tokyo, toward driverless subways or cars will demand substantial labor to build and manage the relevant systems.
In the future, as in the past, the most labor-intensive jobs will involve building homes, production facilities, and, in turn, communities.
Time for Helicopter Money?
WASHINGTON, DC – “Out of ammo?” The Economist recently asked of monetary policymakers.
Stephen Roach has called the move by major central banks – including the Bank of Japan, the European Central Bank, and the Bank of Sweden – to negative real (and, in some cases, even nominal) interest rates a “futile” effort that merely sets “the stage for the next crisis.”
And, at the February G-20 finance ministers meeting, Bank of England Governor Mark Carney reportedly called these policies “ultimately a zero-sum game.”
Have the major advanced economies’ central banks – which have borne the burden of sustaining anemic post-2008 recoveries – really run out of options?
It certainly seems so.
Central-bank balance sheets have swelled, and policy rates have reached their “near zero” lower bounds.
There is plenty of cheap water, it seems, but the horse refuses to drink.
With no signs of inflation, and growth still tepid and fragile, many anticipate chronic slow growth, with some even fearing another global recession.
But policymakers have one more option: a shift to “purer” fiscal policy, in which they directly finance government spending by printing money – a so-called “helicopter drop.”
The new money would bypass the financial and corporate sectors and go straight to the thirstiest horses: middle- and lower-income consumers.
The money could go to them directly, and through investment in job-creating, productivity-increasing infrastructure.
By placing purchasing power in the hands of those who need it most, direct monetary financing of public spending would also help to improve inclusiveness in economies where inequality is rising fast.
Helicopter drops are currently proposed by both leftist and centrist economists.
In a sense, even some “conservatives” – who support more public infrastructure spending, but also want tax cuts and oppose more borrowing – de facto support helicopter drops.
Recently, more radical proposals have surfaced, reflecting a sense of urgency and widespread disappointment with the impact of current monetary policy.
Beyond advocating higher minimum wages, some are calling for “reverse income policies,” with governments imposing across-the-board wage increases on private employers – a move that would drive up prices and defeat deflationary expectations.
The fact that economists whose views typically fall nowhere near those of the far left are even thinking about such interventionism shows just how extreme circumstances have become.
I favor all of these proposals, in some form.
The details of their implementation would obviously have to vary, depending on each economy’s circumstances.
Germany, for example, is in a strong position to implement a reverse income policy, given its huge current-account surplus, though there would undoubtedly be major political barriers.
More spending on education, skills upgrading, and infrastructure, however, is a no-brainer almost everywhere, and is politically more feasible.
But there is another dimension of the challenge that has so far not been emphasized nearly enough, despite the warnings of Carney, Roach, and others.
Zero or negative real interest rates, when they become quasi-permanent, undermine the efficient allocation of capital and set the stage for bubbles, busts, and crises.
They also contribute to further income concentration at the top by hurting small savers, while creating opportunities for large financial players to benefit from access to savings at negative real cost.
As unorthodox as it may sound, it is likely that the world economy would benefit from somewhat higher interest rates.
Raising interest rates cannot, however, be a stand-alone policy.
Instead, small policy-rate increases must be incorporated into a broader fiscal and distributional strategy, implemented alongside more public spending on infrastructure and skills upgrading, as well as some gentle forms of income policies, employing, for example, “moral suasion.”
Even with such an approach, however, major central banks would have to coordinate their policies.
If a single major central bank attempted to introduce higher interest rates, its economy would immediately be “punished” through currency appreciation, declining competitiveness, and falling exports, all of which would undermine aggregate demand and employment.
If the major central banks decided to increase their policy rates simultaneously, these spillover effects would cancel one another out.
A coordinated move, perhaps raising rates in two modest 25 or 30 basis-point increments, would be neutral in terms of exchange rates and short-term competitiveness, even as it moved real interest rates back into positive territory.
If successful, this effort could eventually be followed by further small increases, creating space for more traditional monetary-policy “ammunition” to be deployed in the future.
Success also hinges on the simultaneous pursuit of fiscal expansion worldwide, with each country’s efforts calibrated according to its fiscal space and current-account position.
The expansion should finance a global program of investment in physical and human infrastructure, focusing on the two key challenges of our time: cleaner energy and skills for the digital age.
A coordinated and well-timed policy package could boost global growth, improve capital allocation, support a more equitable income distribution, and reduce the danger of speculative bubbles.
The various meetings in the run-up to the G-20 summit in China, including the spring meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, would be ideal forums for designing such a package, and advancing its implementation.
Economic orthodoxy and independent actions have clearly failed.
It is time for policymakers to recognize that innovative international policy cooperation is not a luxury; sometimes – like today – it is a necessity.
Coping with Catastrophic Risks
One year after the Indian Ocean tsunami, what are the lessons?
The biggest one is that it was the type of disaster to which policymakers pay too little attention – one that has a very low or unknown probability of occurring, but that creates enormous losses if it does occur.
Great as the death toll, physical and emotional suffering of survivors, and property damage caused by the tsunami were, even greater losses could be inflicted by other disasters of low (but not negligible), or unknown, probability.
For example, the asteroid that exploded above Siberia in 1908 with the force of a hydrogen bomb might have killed millions of people had it exploded above a major city.
Yet that asteroid was only about 200 feet in diameter.
A much larger one (among the thousands of dangerously large asteroids in orbits that intersect the earth’s) could strike the earth and cause the total extinction of the human race through a combination of shock waves, fire, tsunamis, and blockage of sunlight, wherever it struck.
Other catastrophic risks include natural epidemics (the 1918-1919 Spanish influenza killed between 20 million and 40 million people), nuclear or biological attacks by terrorists, certain types of lab accidents, and abrupt global warming.
The probability of catastrophes, whether intentional or not, resulting from human activity appears to be increasing because of the rapidity and direction of technological advances.
The fact that a catastrophe is unlikely to occur is not a rational justification for ignoring the risk of its occurrence.
Suppose that a tsunami as destructive as the one in the Indian Ocean last year occurs on average once a century and kills 250,000 people.
That is an average of 2,500 deaths per year.
If such a toll could be substantially reduced at moderate cost, the investment would be worthwhile.
Educating residents of low-lying coastal areas about the warning signs of a tsunami (tremors and a sudden recession in the ocean), establishing a warning system involving emergency broadcasts, telephoned warnings, and air-raid-type sirens, and improving emergency response systems would have saved many who were killed by the Indian Ocean tsunami.
At the same time, the cost would have been well below any reasonable estimate of the average losses that can be expected from tsunamis.
There are several reasons why such measures weren’t taken in anticipation of a tsunami on the scale that occurred.
First, although a once-in-a-century event is as likely to occur at the beginning of the century as at any other time, it is much less likely to occur in the first decade of the century than later.
Politicians with limited terms of office and thus foreshortened political horizons are likely to discount low-risk disaster possibilities, since the risk of damage to their careers from failing to take precautionary measures is truncated.
Second, to the extent that effective precautions require governmental action, the fact that government is a centralized system of control makes it difficult for officials to respond to the full spectrum of possible risks against which cost-justified measures might be taken.
Given the variety of matters to which they must attend, officials are likely to have a high threshold of attention below which risks are ignored.
Third, where risks are regional or global rather than local, many national governments, especially in poorer and smaller countries, may drag their heels in the hope that larger and richer countries will bear the costs of addressing them.
Knowing this, larger and richer countries may be reluctant to take precautionary measures, as this would reward and thus encourage “free riding.”
Fourth, countries are poor often because of weak, inefficient, or corrupt government, characteristics that may disable them from taking cost-justified precautions.
And the difficulty people everywhere have in thinking in terms of probabilities – especially low probabilities, which they tend to write off – weakens political support for incurring the costs of taking precautionary measures.
An even more dramatic example of neglect of low-probability/high-cost risks is the danger of an asteroid strike, which is analytically similar to the menace of tsunamis.
Indeed, in part because tsunamis are one of the risks of an asteroid collision, the Indian Ocean disaster has stimulated new interest in asteroid defense.
Deflecting an asteroid from its orbit when it is still hundreds of millions of miles from Earth is a feasible undertaking.
Nevertheless, in the United States, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) spends only $4 million of its annual budget of more than $10 billion on mapping dangerously close large asteroids.
At the current rate, NASA may not complete the task for another decade, even though such mapping is the key to an asteroid defense because it may give us years of warning.
The fact that a disaster of a particular type has not occurred recently or even within human memory (or even ever) is a bad reason to ignore it.
The risk may be slight, but if the consequences should it materialize are great enough, the expected cost of disaster may be sufficient to warrant defensive measures.
The Dead-End of Corbynismo
SANTIAGO – Latin America has a new export: populist backlash.
It first landed on the warm and receptive shores of the Mediterranean, nurturing support for Greece’s Syriza and Spain’s Podemos.
Now it has reached the United Kingdom.
Corbynismo, the ideology of the long-marginalized British MP Jeremy Corbyn – who admired Venezuela’s late president, Hugo Chávez, thinks Vladimir Putin was justified in invading Ukraine, and now heads Britain’s venerable Labour Party – sounds familiar to anyone acquainted with Latin America.
It calls for monetary financing of fiscal deficits (now called “people’s quantitative easing”), nationalization of industry (beginning with the railroads), and an end to competition and the private provision of public services.
This is the stuff that former Prime Minister Tony Blair and his supporters thought – wrongly, it seems – they had consigned to the dustbin of history.
Of course, this new populism (Hillary Clinton’s Democratic rival Bernie Sanders is also a card-carrying member) has much fodder.
As Martin Wolf has emphasized, the 2008-2009 financial crisis made voters understandably angry at “greedy plutocrats and their lackeys in politics and media.”
Nobel Laureate Paul Krugman (who sometimes sounds like a Corbynista, but isn’t one) and Wolfgang Munchau stress that Europe’s moderate left lost popular support by being too ready to embrace the extreme version of fiscal austerity demanded by Germany and its orthodox allies.
But being mad is not the same as being right.
The new European populists are parlaying legitimate frustration into a misguided set of policies that can only produce more of the same.
Latin Americans learned this the hard way in decades past.
Europeans (and perhaps Americans) may be about to as well.
Three conceptual confusions cause Corbynismo to get crucial matters completely wrong.
The market for potatoes is not like the market for loans.
Yes, bankers are greedy.
And, yes, financial markets require close supervision and regulation.
But what is true of financial markets need not be true of other markets.
A transaction involving potatoes happens at one point in time only: the buyer parts with her money, the seller parts with his tubers, and that is it.
A financial transaction, by contrast, happens over time: the borrower gets the money today and promises to repay in a month, year, or decade.
This makes finance especially susceptible to crooks and con men.
And because expectations and confidence about future events are crucial, governments must, like European Central Bank President Mario Draghi, stand ready to do “whatever it takes” to stabilize financial markets.
As the great Cuban-Argentine-American economist Carlos Díaz-Alejandro pointed out long ago, financial markets are not disciplined by the threat of bankruptcy.
When banks get into trouble, governments always save them or wish they had (think Lehman Brothers).
Regulation needs to provide the discipline that markets cannot.
But followers of Corbynismo are wrong to infer that the ills of financial markets infect all other markets, all the time.
Countries, whether rich or poor, do not need a Potato Supervisory Board with new and enhanced regulatory powers.
It is great to be Keynesian – but during both halves of the cycle.
Yes, orthodox economists of (mostly) Teutonic origin peddle a lethal fiscal-policy prescription.
When the economy is booming, they claim, expenditure must be cut (or, if all else fails, taxes raised) in order to reduce demand.
When the economy is tanking, expenditure also has to be cut in order to restore confidence and revive investment.
For some European economies, this prescription has caused a needlessly long recession.
But it does not follow that, as Corbynistas believe, large budget deficits and debts are harmless.
On the contrary, when debts become unsustainable and governments have no option but to close hospitals and slash pensions, it is the poor and vulnerable who suffer most.
The way to render an aggressively counter-cyclical fiscal policy feasible is by relying on modern budget rules.
A modern Keynesian government does not hesitate to increase spending in the face of a recession.
But, in order to do that, it needs the high credibility and low debt that follow from having saved and repaid debt during the upswing.
We did this in Chile during the copper price boom of 2006-2008, running budget surpluses of up to eight percentage points of GDP.
When Wall Street melted down, we had the fiscal room to apply one of the most aggressive anti-crisis plans anywhere.
A rigorous fiscal rule, designed and applied by center-left governments, made it all possible.
Progressive ends are not the same as statist means.
There is nothing inevitable or God-given about suffering, injustice, and inequality.
That is why modern social democrats and progressive liberals are eager to right social wrongs.
But effectiveness requires agnosticism about the policies required to achieve lofty ends.
Consider health care.
Different things work differently in different places.
Britain has a single payer and a single service provider: the National Health Service.
Canada has a single public payer but mostly private providers.
Obamacare establishes a public mandate to buy private insurance (with public subsidies for the poor) to finance services provided by (mostly) private hospitals and clinics.
The same is true in education, pensions, or housing for the poor.
States are right to spend generously on education; but, of the world’s top ten universities listed by the Shanghai ranking, seven are private.
Successful pension systems often have a solidarity pillar (public) and a contributory pillar (private).
And so on.
This is old hat to students of modern public policy.
Yet the Corbynistas seem to have assimilated none of it.
That is the bad news.
The good news is that the ideas already exist to provide a progressive alternative to 1960s-vintage Corbynismo.
Some were developed in the rich world; others in emerging countries.
Political leadership – Italy’s prime minister, Matteo Renzi, is one example – is now required to push those ideas forward.
Back to Socialism
LONDON – The remarkable thing about Jeremy Corbyn, the hard-left outsider who stunned the British establishment by capturing the leadership of the Labour Party, is not his alleged lack of patriotism.
Whether he wishes to sing God Save the Queen at public events seems a rather trivial matter.
The remarkable thing about his brand of leftism is how reactionary it is.
Corbyn is an old-fashioned socialist who would like to soak the rich and put transport and utilities back under state control.
His rhetoric of class war suggests a complete break with mainstream social democracy.
Postwar European social democracy was always a compromise with capitalism.
Left-wing ideology, especially in Britain, owed more to certain Christian moral traditions (“more Methodist than Marx”) than to any political dogma.
Labour leaders like Clement Attlee, the first prime minister after World War II, were not opposed to a market economy; they just wanted to regulate markets in such a way that might best serve working-class interests.
During the Cold War, social democracy was Western Europe’s egalitarian alternative to communism.
Attlee, for one, was ferociously anti-communist.
Lip service was paid at Labour Party conferences to the old symbols of socialism.
Party leaders sang the Internationale with teary-eyed nostalgia.
And, until Tony Blair struck it out in 1995, Clause 4 of the party’s constitution still promised “common ownership of the means of production” and “popular control” of industry.
(Corbyn might well try to restore it.)
But when it came to national government, ideological socialists were swiftly shunted aside to make way for more pragmatic operators.
By the time Blair, following the example of his friend US President Bill Clinton, became Prime Minister by promoting the “third way,” socialism seemed to be dead and buried.
Clinton and Blair – who came to power after that other odd Anglo-American couple, Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher, had started to tear at the fabric of social democracy – made compromises of which Attlee would not have dreamed.
The genius of Clinton and Blair was to combine genuine concern for the underprivileged with an unseemly devotion to the fat cats of Wall Street, the City of London, and some murkier places, too.
Blair vacationed with Silvio Berlusconi, Italy’s plutocrat prime minister.
Clinton used his presidential pardon to allow wealthy cronies to elude justice.
And after leaving office, both men swiftly put their reputations in the service of their bank accounts.
One might say that by compromising with capitalism too much, the third-way leaders compromised themselves.
This is one reason why, under Corbyn, the hard left struck back and finally managed to wrest power from the compromisers.
Especially to many young people, Corbyn is the longed-for man of conviction, the “authentic” voice of the people.
Never having had much of an ideology in the first place, the soft-left social democrats, faced with a real socialist, ended up having nothing much to say.
Could Hillary Clinton be similarly punished in her quest to be the Democratic Party’s nominee in next year’s US presidential election?
Could the center left, which she represents, lose control of the party?
In recent opinion polls, her main opponent, Bernie Sanders, who proudly calls himself a socialist, is edging ever closer to Clinton – and is actually leading her in some states.
Like Corbyn, he has the air of authenticity – a politician who says what he thinks, unlike the scripted professionals of mainstream Washington.
And yet there is no Democratic left, including Sanders, that is remotely as hard as the Corbynites.
Compared to Corbyn, Sanders is a moderate.
More important, what a militant faction did to the Labour Party is being done now not to the Democrats, but to the Republicans.
Indeed, the Republican rebels look far more extreme than Corbyn, let alone Sanders.
The Republican Party is in danger of being taken over by fanatics who see compromise in government as a form of villainous treachery.
Forcing the archconservative John Boehner to quit as Speaker of the House for being too soft was an act of war by Republicans against their own party.
Most aspiring Republican presidential candidates are not only extreme, but also more reactionary than Corbyn.
Their favored slogans – “Take back our country” or “Make America great again” – invoke a past when neither the New Deal nor the expansion of civil rights disturbed the peace of upstanding white Christians.
These hard-right Republicans, too, prize “authenticity” – indeed, they prize it above anything else (hence the appeal of Donald Trump).
And they, too, are in angry revolt against party leaders, who are believed to have compromised themselves simply by trying to govern.
It is too soon to predict who will win the Republican nomination.
It is unlikely, but possible, that a hardliner like Ted Cruz, or a rank amateur with deep religious convictions, such as the neurosurgeon Ben Carson, will capture the party.
But capturing the leadership of a political party is still easier than being elected US President.
Few people expect Corbyn to win a national election in Britain, either; that is why his parliamentary party is in such despair.
So Clinton, despite her so far lackluster campaign, and despite a popular perception of inauthenticity, even outright shiftiness, will probably hang on to her party and scrape through in the end.
She will prevail not because her views look any more convincing than those of the center-left professional pols of the Labour Party, but because her opponents look so much worse.
Coronary Capitalism
FRANKFURT – A systematic and broad failure of regulation is the elephant in the room when it comes to reforming today’s Western capitalism.
Yes, much has been said about the unhealthy political-regulatory-financial dynamic that led to the global economy’s heart attack in 2008 (initiating what Carmen Reinhart and I call “The Second Great Contraction”).
But is the problem unique to the financial industry, or does it exemplify a deeper flaw in Western capitalism?
Consider the food industry, particularly its sometimes-malign influence on nutrition and health.
Obesity rates are soaring around the entire world, though, among large countries, the problem is perhaps most severe in the United States.
According the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, roughly one-third of US adults are obese (indicated by a body mass index above 30).
Here, though, I want to focus on the food industry’s link to broader problems with contemporary capitalism (which has certainly facilitated the worldwide obesity explosion), and on why the US political system has devoted remarkably little attention to the issue (though First Lady Michelle Obama has made important efforts to raise awareness).
Obesity affects life expectancy in numerous ways, ranging from cardiovascular disease to some types of cancer.
Moreover, obesity – certainly in its morbid manifestations – can affect quality of life.
The costs are borne not only by the individual, but also by society – directly, through the health-care system, and indirectly, through lost productivity, for example, and higher transport costs (more jet fuel, larger seats, etc.).
But the obesity epidemic hardly looks like a growth killer.
Highly processed corn-based food products, with lots of chemical additives, are well known to be a major driver of weight gain, but, from a conventional growth-accounting perspective, they are great stuff.
Big agriculture gets paid for growing the corn (often subsidized by the government), and the food processors get paid for adding tons of chemicals to create a habit-forming – and thus irresistible – product.
Along the way, scientists get paid for finding just the right mix of salt, sugar, and chemicals to make the latest instant food maximally addictive; advertisers get paid for peddling it; and, in the end, the health-care industry makes a fortune treating the disease that inevitably results.
Coronary capitalism is fantastic for the stock market, which includes companies in all of these industries.
Highly processed food is also good for jobs, including high-end employment in research, advertising, and health care.
So, who could complain?
Certainly not politicians, who get re-elected when jobs are plentiful and stock prices are up – and get donations from all of the industries that participate in the production of processed food.
Indeed, in the US, politicians who dared to talk about the health, environmental, or sustainability implications of processed food would in many cases find themselves starved of campaign funds.
True, market forces have spurred innovation, which has continually driven down the price of processed food, even as the price of plain old fruits and vegetables has gone up.
That is a fair point, but it overlooks the huge market failure here.
Consumers are provided with precious little information through schools, libraries, or health campaigns; instead, they are swamped with disinformation through advertising.
Conditions for children are particularly alarming.
With few resources for high-quality public television in most countries, children are co-opted by channels paid for by advertisements, including by food industry.
Beyond disinformation, producers have few incentives to internalize the costs of the environmental damage that they cause.
Likewise, consumers have little incentive to internalize the health-care costs of their food choices.
If our only problems were the food industry causing physical heart attacks and the financial industry facilitating their economic equivalent, that would be bad enough.
But the pathological regulatory-political-economic dynamic that characterizes these industries is far broader.
We need to develop new and much better institutions to protect society’s long-run interests.
Of course, the balance between consumer sovereignty and paternalism is always delicate.
But we could certainly begin to strike a healthier balance than the one we have by giving the public far better information across a range of platforms, so that people could begin to make more informed consumption choices and political decisions.
The Better Corporation
LONDON – Around the world, the corporate governance landscape is shifting, as efforts to improve business practices and policies gain support and momentum.
The wave of reform has become visible everywhere – from tough new regulations in Japan to sovereign wealth funds like Norway’s Norges Bank Investment Management taking a more active approach to their investments – and it is certain to continue to rise.
Three factors are driving these developments.
First, today’s deep economic uncertainty has broadened ordinary people’s awareness of the influence that companies have on politics, policy, and their own daily lives.
And, as I have noted previously, people are not only paying greater attention; they also have more power than ever before to make their voices heard.
Second, there has been a burgeoning awareness among governments that economic growth requires a proactive regulatory approach.
Robust and resilient economies need strong businesses, and to build strong businesses, governments must play a role in ensuring high-integrity oversight of business activity.
Company stewardship and country stewardship are increasingly linked, and authorities now recognize that paying to ensure good governance now is far less costly (both financially and politically) than paying for the consequences of bad governance later.
In Japan, the Financial Services Agency enacted a Stewardship Code in 2014, with a Corporate Governance Code from the Tokyo Stock Exchange entering into force this June.
By creating a more equal environment among shareholders, ensuring more disclosure and transparency, specifying the responsibilities of company boards, and requiring outside independent directors on company boards, the codes enshrine changes that make Japan more attractive for foreign investors.
Toshiba CEO Hisao Tanaka and other senior executives have had to resign; the interim CEO apologized to Abe’s office; Norio Sasaki, the company’s vice chairman and former CEO, has quit his posts on government panels; and the former chairman of Toshiba’s audit committee has stepped down from the government accounting panel.
In the United States, the Securities and Exchange Commission enacted a rule at the beginning of August requiring public companies to disclose the pay gap between workers and CEOs.
Corporate behavior and governance has emerged as a campaign issue for US presidential candidates.
Hillary Clinton gave a speech at the end of July decrying “quarterly capitalism” that chases short-term growth at the expense of sustainable business development, as well as addressing the exponential growth of CEO pay, and the need for a minimum-wage increase.
The European Union and its member states are also taking an increasingly active approach to corporate governance, including regulations concerning boardroom diversity.
Italy, France, Spain, Norway, and others have all enacted boardroom gender quotas, with companies required to fill 30-40% of independent board seats with women.
The latest example can be found in Germany, where, after much debate, new quotas require that from 2016 large companies fill 30% of non-executive board seats with women.
The third, and perhaps most important, factor underpinning recent changes in corporate governance has been the sharp rise in cross-border investing.
Sovereign wealth funds, pension funds, global investment banks, and hedge funds do not invest only in their own backyard.
They scour the planet looking for places to put their money, and they expect companies that receive it to play by rational rules.
The Olympus scandal of 2011-2012 – when investigations in Japan, the United Kingdom, and the US revealed that company executives falsified accounts to hide losses of ¥117.7 billion – is a watershed example of a traditional closed corporate culture coming up against international scrutiny.