The Bush administration is fiercely opposed to lifting the embargo, pointing out that in the event of a military clash over Taiwan, US troops would face weapons provided to China by America’s own allies.
In fact, European assurances that arms sales to China could be controlled and threats to an ally avoided do appear unconvincing.
On the other hand, economic interdependence between Taiwan and mainland China has grown to such an extent that an armed conflict is increasingly unlikely.
Of course, this would change were Taiwan to push for independence, but it would hardly do so without a nod from Washington.
In short, on many of the most important current international issues, Americans and Europeans share the same objectives and basic goals.
Where they often diverge is in the means to achieve them.
Political wisdom would demand that the two sides pool their considerable resources and march together whenever possible.
This, however, requires a change of attitudes both in America and in Europe.
Bush must be willing to accept Europeans as genuine partners and stop treating them like recalcitrant vassals.
European leaders must overcome any latent Anti-Americanism and be prepared to make the kind of contributions to common endeavors that would entitle them to equal partnership with the US.
Will Europe’s Fiscal Compact Work?
CAMBRIDGE – At the start of 2013, the eurozone’s “fiscal compact” entered into force, owing to its ratification on December 21 by a 12th country, Finland, a year after German Chancellor Angela Merkel prodded eurozone leaders into agreement.
The compact – technically called the Treaty on Stability, Coordination, and Governance in the Economic and Monetary Union – requires member countries to introduce laws limiting their structural government budget deficits to less than 0.5 % of GDP (or less than 1% of GDP if their debt/GDP ratio is “significantly below 60%”).
So, will this new approach work?
A limit on the “structural deficit” means that a country can run a deficit above the limit to the extent – and only to the extent – that the gap between revenue and spending is cyclical (that is, its economy is operating below potential due to temporary negative shocks).
In other words, the target is cyclically adjusted.
The budget-balance rule must be adopted in each country – preferably enshrined in their national constitutions – by the end of 2013.
The aim is to fix Europe’s long-term fiscal problem, which has been exacerbated by three factors: the failure, since the euro’s inception, of the eurozone-wide Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) to enforce deficit and debt limits; the crisis that erupted in Greece and other countries on the eurozone periphery in 2010; and the various bailouts that have followed.
There is no reason to doubt that the member states will follow through and adopt national rules by the end of the year.
The problem is what comes after that: the risk that the fiscal compact will founder on precisely the same shoals as the SGP.
Ever since the eurozone was established, its members have issued official fiscal forecasts that are systematically biased in the optimistic direction.
Other countries do this, too, but the bias among eurozone countries is, if anything, even worse than it is elsewhere.
During an economic expansion, such as in the 2002-2007 period, governments are tempted to forecast that the boom will continue indefinitely.
Forecasts for tax revenue and budget surpluses are correspondingly optimistic and so hide the need for fiscal adjustment.
During a recession, such as in 2008-2012, governments are tempted to forecast that their economies and budgets will soon rebound.
Since forecasting is subject to so much genuine uncertainty, no one can prove that the forecasts are biased when they are made.
But, if forecasts are biased, fiscal rules will not constrain budget deficits.&#160;In any given year, governments can forecast that their growth rates, tax revenues, and budget balances will improve in subsequent years, and then argue the following year that the shortfalls were unexpected.
Indeed, in a new paper, co-authored with Jesse Schreger, we show that eurozone members’ bias in official forecasts can be neatly characterized as responding to the SGP’s 3%-of-GDP limit on budget deficits in 1999-2011: each time governments exceeded the limit, over-optimistic forecasts followed.
In other words, governments adjust their forecasts, not their policies.
Framing the budget rules in cyclical terms, while highly desirable in terms of its macroeconomic impact, does not help to solve the problem of forecast bias.
In fact, it can make the problem worse.
In a year when a forecast for the structural budget deficit turns out to have been over-optimistic, the government can still claim that its own calculations show the shortfall to have been cyclical rather than structural.
After all, estimation of potential output – and hence the cyclical versus structural decomposition of the fiscal position – is notoriously difficult, even after the fact.
Perhaps it will help that, under the fiscal compact, the rules are to be adopted at the national level, as opposed to the SGP, which operated on the supranational level.
A look at the various rules and institutions that European countries have already tried shows that some work and others do not.
Creating an independent fiscal institution that provides its own budget forecasts works, insofar as it reduces the bias in deficit projections.
When forecasting while in violation of the eurozone’s Excessive Deficit Procedure, eurozone members with an independent budget-forecasting institution have a mean bias that is 2.7% of GDP smaller at the one-year horizon than members without such an institution.
It would be better still if governments were legally bound to use these independent forecasts in their budget plans (borrowing an innovation from Chile).
But, regardless of how well designed the rules are, clever and determined politicians can find ways around them.
One trick is privatization of government enterprises, which reduces the budget deficit in a given year on a one-time basis, but might increase the deficit in the long run if the enterprise had been profitable.
Another trick is to legislate tax cuts that are “temporary,” in order to make future revenues look larger, despite the intention to make the cuts permanent before they expire.
Other things being equal, the right institutions can curbpro-cyclical fiscal policies – tax cuts and spending hikes during booms and austerity during downturns – in the short run, while helping to deliver debt sustainability in the long run.
These institutions include independent fiscal-forecasting agencies, combined with the cyclically adjusted budget targets that the eurozone’s fiscal compact mandates.
Much can go wrong even if such mechanisms are in place; but, as the history of the SGP illustrates, the risk is higher if they are not.
Will Ex-Mexicans Choose America’s Next President?
Among the many surprises during the Republican Party presidential candidates’ debates a couple of weeks ago was the rekindled importance of immigration.
After the failure of President George W. Bush’s and Senator Edward Kennedy’s comprehensive immigration reform effort last spring, most observers thought the matter would remain dormant until 2009, since even touching it was potentially fatal for Democrats and Republicans alike.
But as Democrats discovered in other recent debates, and as Republicans realized with a little help from the CNN organizers, who skewed the questions toward issues they feel strongly about, immigration is an issue that just won’t go away.
This is one reason why I wrote a short but – I hope – useful book on Mexican immigration to the United States, entitled Ex-Mex: From Migrants to Immigrants .
Based on internal documents from the Mexican and US governments, countless interviews, and a survey of much of the existing literature on the subject, Ex-Mex seeks to fulfill three purposes.
First, I wanted to provide a Mexican voice in the immigration debate.
Mexicans make up more than half of the flow and stock – legal or not – of all immigrants in the US, but a point of view attempting to reflect their interests and aspirations has been largely absent from the American discussion.
Of course, my book cannot be the Mexican stance.
But an assessment from the vantage point of past, current, and future Mexican immigrants to the US is a necessary component of the American debate – all the more so when one recalls that immigration has, in fact, not generally been exclusively a domestic US policy question.
The first American immigration agreement with another country was signed in 1907 – the so-called Gentleman’s Agreement with Japan, while the US and Mexico negotiated and administered the Bracero Program for more than twenty years, from 1942 thru 1964.
And, of course, the US has had a standing immigration agreement since 1965 with a country most Americans would not imagine: Fidel Castro’s Cuba.
Second, it is important to place the current, raging debate in historical context.
The most important feature of that context is that the actual flow of Mexicans entering the US today is not much greater than the overall average figure for the Bracero Program period: around 400,000 per year.
It is similarly important to understand the evolution of US legislation on immigration since the 1920’s, and the shifts and hypocrisy involved in the application of those laws.
For example, the 1996 immigration reforms implemented by the Clinton administration, along with other, underlying structural trends, halted the traditional circular pattern whereby Mexicans came and went to the US every year.
Instead, they began to settle in communities farther from the border, greatly increasing the stock of Mexicans in the US.
Finally, the efforts of the Mexican and US governments since 2001 to reach an accommodation on the issue have not been well understood.
Confidential papers from the Bush and Fox administrations show that talks went further than previously known.
The US, and particularly then-Secretary of State Colin Powell, was willing, as stated in a unclassified memo addressed to Bush in late August 2001, to go to great lengths to reach an understanding with Mexico on the issue.
Indeed, the substance of the negotiations was not much different from the content of the Bush-Kennedy “grand bargain” that was fashioned in 2007.
The electoral numbers perhaps best explain the immigration equation’s importance in today’s presidential campaigns.
In 2008, it is likely that Latinos will make up 9% to 10% of the electorate, the highest share ever.
They will wield decisive importance in swing states like Colorado, New Mexico, Florida, and Nevada.
Having made significant inroads among Hispanic voters in 2000 and 2004, thanks to Bush’s support for immigration reform, Republicans now can barely count on 20% of that total – mainly among Cuban-Americans – thanks to their strident anti-immigration stance.
Thus, if the Democrats demonstrate a minimum of compassion, sensitivity, and realism, they can count on a 7% advantage in the popular vote.
But doing so could cost Democrats dearly in old industrial states like Pennsylvania, Ohio, and Michigan, where the arrival of Mexican migrants, transformed into immigrants, has stoked passions.
Since the Democrats’ victory will most likely depend on these states, the Democratic candidate who can square this circle, or the Republican who can break it, may well win the presidency.
Will Global Imbalances Return?
BEIJING – Future history books, depending on where they are written, will take one of two approaches to assigning blame for the world’s current financial and economic crisis.
One approach will blame lax regulation, accommodating monetary policy, and inadequate savings in the United States.
The other, already being pushed by former and current US officials like Alan Greenspan and Ben Bernanke, will blame the immense pool of liquidity generated by high-savings countries in East Asia and the Middle East.
All that liquidity, they will argue, had to go somewhere.  Its logical destination was the country with the deepest financial markets, the US, where it raised asset prices to unsustainable heights.
Note the one thing on which members of both camps agree: the global savings imbalance – low savings in the US and high savings in China and other emerging markets – played a key role in the crisis by allowing Americans to live beyond their means.
It encouraged financiers desperate to earn a return on abundant funds to put them to more speculative use.
If there is a consensus on one issue, it is the impossibility of understanding the bubble and the crash without considering the role of global imbalances.
Preventing future crises similar to this one therefore requires resolving the problem of global imbalances.
Here, the early signs are reassuring.
American households are saving again.
The US trade deficit has declined from $60 billion a month to just $26 billion, according to the most recent data.
As a matter of simple arithmetic, we know that the rest of the world is running correspondingly smaller surpluses.
But once American households rebuild their retirement accounts, they may return to their profligate ways.
Indeed, the Obama administration and the Federal Reserve are doing all they can to pump up US spending.
The only reason the US trade deficit is falling is that the country remains in a severe recession, causing US imports and exports to collapse in parallel.
With recovery, both may recover to previous levels, and the 6%-of-GDP US external deficit will be back.
In fact, there has been no change in relative prices or depreciation of the US dollar of a magnitude that would augur a permanent shift in trade and spending patterns.
Whether there is a permanent reduction in global imbalances will depend mainly on decisions taken outside the US, specifically in countries like China.
One’s forecast of those decisions hinges, in turn, on why these other countries came to run such large surpluses in the first place.
One view is that their surpluses were a corollary of the policies favoring export-led growth that worked so well for so long.  China’s leaders are understandably reluctant to abandon a tried-and-true model.
They can’t restructure their economy instantaneously.
They can’t move workers from painting children’s toys in Guangdong to building schools in Western China overnight.
They need time to build a social safety net capable of encouraging Chinese households to reduce their precautionary saving.
If this view is correct, we can expect to see global imbalances re-emerge once the recession is over and to unwind only slowly thereafter.
The other view is that China contributed to global imbalances not through its merchandise exports, but through its capital exports.
What China lacked was not demand for consumption goods, but a supply of high-quality financial assets.
It found these in the US, mainly in the form Treasury and other government-backed securities, in turn pushing other investors into more speculative investments.
Recent events have not enhanced the stature of the US as a supplier of high-quality assets.
And China, for its part, will continue to develop its financial markets and its capacity to generate high-quality financial assets internally.
But doing so will take time. Meanwhile, the US still has the most liquid financial markets in the world.
This interpretation again implies the re-emergence of global imbalances once the recession ends, and their very gradual unwinding thereafter.
One development that could change this forecast is if China comes to view investing in US financial assets as a money-losing proposition.
US budget deficits as far as the eye can see might excite fear of losses on US Treasury bonds.
A de facto policy of inflating away the debt might stoke such fears further.
At that point, China would pull the plug, the dollar would crash, and the Fed would be forced to raise interest rates, plunging the US back into recession.
There are two hopes for avoiding this disastrous outcome.
One is relying on Chinese goodwill to stabilize the US and world economies. The other is for the Obama administration and the Fed to provide details about how they will eliminate the budget deficit and avoid inflation once the recession ends.
The second option is clearly preferable.
After all, it is always better to control one’s own fate.
Will Governmental Folly Now Allow for a Cyber Crisis?
CAMBRIDGE – When the financial crisis of 2008 hit, many shocked critics asked why markets, regulators, and financial experts failed to see it coming.
Today, one might ask the same question about the global economy’s vulnerability to cyber-attack.
Indeed, the parallels between financial crises and the threat of cyber meltdowns are striking.
Although the greatest cyber threat comes from rogue states with the capacity to develop extremely sophisticated computer viruses, risks can also come from anarchistic hackers and terrorists, or even from computer glitches compounded by natural catastrophe.
A few security experts have voiced great alarm, including, most recently, Jonathan Evans, the head of the British Security Service (MI5).
By and large, however, few leaders are willing to compromise growth in the tech sector or the Internet in any significant way in the name of a threat that is so amorphous.
Instead, they prefer to establish relatively innocuous working groups and task forces.
It is difficult to overstate the dependence of modern economies on large-scale computer systems.
But imagine if one day a host of key communications satellites were incapacitated, or the databases of major financial systems were erased.
Experts have long identified the electricity grid as the most acute vulnerability, since any modern economy would collapse without power.
True, many skeptics argue that with reasonable low-cost prophylactic measures, large scale cyber-meltdowns are highly implausible, and that doom-mongers overstate the worst-case scenarios.
They say that the ability of cyber-terrorists and blackmailers to take the global economy to the brink, as in the 2007 Bruce Willis movie Die Hard 4, is utterly fictional.
It is difficult to judge who is right, and there are important experts on both sides of the debate.
But there do seem to be an uncomfortable number of similarities between the political economy of cyberspace regulation and of financial regulation.
First, both cyber-security and financial stability are extremely complex topics with which government regulators can hardly keep up.
Industry remuneration for experts is far in excess of any public-sector salary, and the best minds are continually bid away.
As a result, some argue that the only solution is reliance on self-regulation by the software industry.
One hears this argument for many modern industries, from big food to big pharma to big finance.
Second, like the financial sector, the tech industry is enormously influential politically through contributions and lobbying.
In the United States, all presidential candidates must make pilgrimages to Silicon Valley and other tech centers to raise money.
Excessive financial-sector influence was, of course, a root cause of the 2008 meltdown and remains deeply implicated in today’s continuing eurozone mess.
Third, with slowing growth in advanced economies, information technology seems to hold the moral high ground, just as finance did until five years ago.
And crude attempts by governments to enforce regulation are likely to prove ineffective in protecting against catastrophe, while all too effective in strangling growth.
In both cases – financial stability and cyber security – the risk of contagion creates a situation in which a wedge can form between private incentives and social risks.
Admittedly, progress in the technology sector overall often produces huge social-welfare gains, which arguably outstrip those produced by all other sectors in recent decades.
But, just as with nuclear power plants, progress can go awry in the absence of good regulation.
Finally, the greatest risks come from arrogance and ignorance, two human characteristics at the heart of most financial crises.
Recent revelations about the super-viruses “Stuxnet” and “Flame” are particularly disconcerting.
These viruses, apparently developed by the US and Israel to disrupt Iran’s nuclear program, embody a level of sophistication far beyond anything previously seen.
Both are deeply encrypted and difficult to detect once inside a computer.
The Flame virus has the capacity to take over a computer’s peripherals, record Skype conversations, take pictures through a computer’s camera, and transmit information via Bluetooth to any nearby device.
If the world’s most sophisticated governments are developing computer viruses, what guarantee is there that something won’t go awry?
How can we be sure that they won’t “escape” and infect a much broader class of systems, or be adopted for other uses, or that future rogue states or terrorists won’t find a way to turn them on their creators?
No economy is more vulnerable than the US, and it is arrogance to believe that US cyber superiority (to all except perhaps China) provides it with impenetrable security from attack.
Unfortunately the solution is not so simple as just building better anti-virus programs.
Virus protection and virus development constitute an uneven arms race.
A virus can be just a couple hundred lines of computer code, compared to hundreds of thousands of lines for anti-virus programs, which must be designed to detect wide classes of enemies.
We are told not to worry about large-scale cyber meltdowns, because none has occurred, and governments are being vigilant.
Unfortunately, another lesson of the financial crisis is that most politicians are congenitally incapable of making difficult choices until risks actually materialize.
Let us hope that we are lucky for a while longer.
Will Hamas Win the Peace?
WASHINGTON, DC –For generations to come, the Palestinians will remember the horrific war in Gaza with pain and bitterness.
But what cannot yet be seen is how Palestinians will view Hamas.
Whether Hamas can claim a victory – and whether Palestinians will believe them will be determined by the type of ceasefire that is eventually agreed, if a formal one is eventually agreed.
The end game – for both Israel and Hamas – is thus crucially important.
For the moment, Hamas is perceived by the majority of Palestinians as the victim of a war intended to gain its surrender.
After all, Hamas was democratically elected, but was forbidden from ruling and besieged in Gaza.
At the same time, Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas is accused of siding with Israel in order to restore his lost authority in Gaza.
The war exposed flaws in Hamas’ judgment.
Hamas apparently did not envision a full-scale confrontation with Israel when it refused to renew a six-month truce.
With Gaza suffering under a lengthy siege, Hamas leader Khalid Mashal said that there was no point in a new truce, since the old one had “failed to lift the siege on Gaza.”
Other leaders were quoted as saying that Hamas would “lift the siege by force.”
If Hamas is to survive the war, it must demonstrate that its resistance resulted in a permanent opening of Gaza’s border crossings, especially in Rafah.
For Palestinians, these are signs of victory.
With open borders, Hamas would secure its regime in Gaza and build its popularity in the West Bank, putting enormous pressure on Abbas, the leader of the rival Fatah movement, to accept a national unity government on terms set by Hamas.
Members of Fatah’s Central Committee are already accusing Abbas of supporting Israel in the fighting, of wanting to “return to Gaza on an Israeli tank.”
Radical groups within Fatah are leaning toward an open alliance with Hamas.
If Hamas comes out ahead, Abbas’s allies in other Palestinian factions will press him to accept Hamas and Islamic Jihad within the PLO.
Egypt will have to backtrack on its rejection of Hamas in order to recover its image among the Arabs and to reduce tensions within Egyptian society.
Pressure to integrate Hamas into Palestinian politics is also likely in some European capitals, particularly Paris and London, where some expressed opposition to isolating Hamas even before the war.
But if Israel forces Hamas to accept its conditions for border controls and a formal ceasefire, Hamas’s image as the guardian of Palestinian resistance will be severely damaged.
Palestinians will ask if it was really necessary to fight this war and pay such a high price.
Abbas will be able to argue that he advised Hamas to renew the truce and to end its missile fire on Israeli towns, but that Hamas insisted on exposing Palestinian civilians to devastation.
One indicator to watch for: the length of that ceasefire.
Palestinians will recognize Hamas’s acceptance of a multi-year truce with Israel as a sign of defeat, which would also underscore Palestinian feelings of humiliation and abandonment.
Hezbollah, despite its rhetoric, has taken no steps to support Hamas, and the Arab states seemed more than willing to support its defeat.
It is in rebuilding Gaza that the stakes of the competition will increase.
Abbas, supported by the United States and the European Union, may have control over significant funding.
The test for him will be to deliver quickly.
Hamas will also have resources for reconstruction.
Qatar, a Hamas supporter, has already announced an investment fund for Gaza and contributed $250 million.
Hamas will have to make a convincing case that Gaza’s near destruction is a price that had to be paid.
Many Palestinians believe that Israel inflicted this damage on Gaza to drive a wedge between the people and the “resistance.”
There is a precedent for this argument: Hezbollah described the destruction of Beirut’s southern suburbs in exactly these terms at the end of the Lebanon War in July 2006.
More importantly, Hamas can demonstrate that its leaders have been on the front lines during this war, sharing Palestinian suffering; many have been killed, along with their families.
The biggest question is whether the war will alter Hamas’ political goals.
Two weeks ago, Musa Abu Marzouk, a senior Hamas official, praised Jimmy Carter in The Los Angeles Times as the only American president who had brought true peace in the Middle East.
This is a radical departure from Hamas rhetoric, which has always portrayed the Camp David agreement between Israel and Egypt as a betrayal of the Islamic world.
It remains to be seen whether Abu Marzouk’s view is merely a tactic intended to encourage the Obama administration to reach out to Hamas, or whether the war convinced Hamas that the two-state solution is the only viable option to settle the conflict with Israel.
The Framing of MH-17
PHILADELPHIA – US President Barack Obama called the downing of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 an “outrage of unspeakable proportions,” whereas Russian President Vladimir Putin termed it an “accident” and a “terrible tragedy.”
Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko branded it an “act of terrorism,” and Malaysian Prime Minister Najib Razak called it an “inhumane, uncivilized, violent, and irresponsible act.”
All of these descriptions may be accurate, but each carries different rhetorical weight and legal implications.
The time has come for governments and international organizations to call the attack on MH17 a probable war crime.
This rhetorical shift is needed, first and foremost, because framing the moral reprehensibility of this despicable act within a common language will help to align public perceptions of it.
As it stands, the public narrative in Russia and the West diverges sharply.
Russian media and officials portray the episode as, at best, a terrible mistake, and, at worst, an American plot to undermine support for the rebels.
Americans and Europeans, for their part, increasingly blame Russia for possibly equipping or assisting the rebels.
As a result, the possibility of achieving a common understanding of the act is being lost – and, with it, whatever potential there may be for meaningful cooperation.
But, by recognizing the downing of MH17 as a war crime, governments may be able to create an opening to reconcile these narratives.
Whatever the perpetrators’ underlying motives, there is no denying the moral and legal wrongdoing that occurred.
Calling the offense by its legal name acknowledges this, thereby preempting a rhetorical battle to frame the attack as terror, tragedy, or conspiracy.
Even the Russians may be willing to accept this framing, because it avoids finger-pointing against particular actors and affirms that a court of law – not a series of media statements – will determine what occurred and who is responsible.
In fact, another important reason to characterize the downing of MH17 publicly as a war crime is that it may prove beneficial in apprehending the perpetrators.
There is a real danger that those responsible for pressing the launch button – and, perhaps, for ordering the launch – will disappear into the chaos of eastern Ukraine, the vast expanses of Russia, or elsewhere.
There is also a danger that the perpetrators, if found, might avoid trial if the local authorities label the crime political, and thus exempt from normal extradition requirements.
All of the relevant states in the region have accepted the legal obligation to assist in the investigation and prosecution of war crimes.
The obligation to prosecute suspected war criminals, or extradite them to face prosecution elsewhere, becomes more compelling in accordance with the seriousness of the alleged crime.
While the full details of the attack on MH17 remain unknown, shooting a surface-to-air missile at a civilian airliner flying over a war zone is most likely a violation of the law of war – by which the Ukrainian government, the Russian government, and the rebels are all bound.
Indeed, the conflict in eastern Ukraine constitutes a non-international armed conflict (a war between a government and rebel movement) governed by international humanitarian law, which categorically bans the intentional targeting of civilians.
In other words, if whoever launched the missile did so with the intent of killing the civilian passengers aboard MH17, the act was unmistakably a war crime.
Even if the objective was to strike a Ukrainian transport aircraft, the act likely constitutes a war crime.
Fundamental to the law of war, including the law applicable in non-international armed conflicts, is the principle of distinction – the requirement that fighting parties distinguish between civilian and military targets.
In the words of the International Committee of the Red Cross, that duty of care includes doing “everything feasible to verify that targets are military objectives.”
In this case, many steps could easily have been taken to differentiate MH17 from a military-transport plane, including visual identification (perhaps with binoculars), radar-signature analysis, and a check of the civilian aircraft transponder-code broadcast.
If, as seems likely, these basic steps were not taken, even an accidental strike on MH17 would constitute a war crime.
A Dutch or Malaysian court, or even a special tribunal under the auspices of the United Nations (like the one that prosecuted the 1988 Pan Am Lockerbie bombing), will ultimately determine who bears legal responsibility for the downing of MH17.
Framing the attack as a likely war crime now – as UN High Commissioner for Human Rights Navi Pillay has done – may help to reconcile the conflicting narratives that are emerging.
And, perhaps more important, doing so can play a key role in securing the political, diplomatic, and legal support needed to bring the perpetrators to justice.
China’s New Reforms in Theory and Practice
HONG KONG – On November 12, the Third Plenary of the 18th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) announced a major turn to market-oriented policies: interest-rate and currency liberalization, reform of banks and state enterprises, clearer land ownership for rural inhabitants, and a better deal for urban migrants.
Behind this landmark decision was a potential crisis.
China’s success has been driven by cheap exports based on cheap labor, infrastructure built by state enterprises with low-cost bank funding, and government budgets funded by land sales.
But labor is no longer cheap, road construction to connect major cities has given way to building large shopping malls in small towns, and land sales based on rezoning are reaching both economic limits and the limits of villagers’ tolerance.
Cheap money with limited investment outlets now risks fueling property bubbles and industrial overcapacity.
All successful Asian countries have made this shift; South Korea and Taiwan are models.
But rapid change entails immense pain.
SOEs will lose their low-interest loans, subsidized land, monopoly protection, and privileged housing.
Party and state bureaucracies will lose power (and income).
Local governments are particularly desperate.
They have huge debts, which they amortize by rezoning and selling land.
Already squeezed by exorbitant property prices and popular resistance to land takings, they now face higher interest rates, property taxes, villagers empowered by stronger rights, and expensive new requirements to provide social services to migrants.
The desperation of local potentates and SOE executives has created powerful resistance to reform.
At a plenary reportedly marked by acrimony, China’s political leaders sided with reform.
As one economic planner said, when asked about resistance before the decisive meeting, “In the end, all of our leaders understand numbers.
The implications of the numbers are clear.”
The Third Plenum’s announcement of its decisions took the form of a statement of broad principles, leaving many observers concerned by the lack of detail.
But the CCP’s role is to set the direction of policy; executing the Party’s decisions is the government’s job.
And the Plenum did establish a top-level group to coordinate and enforce implementation of its decisions.
While implementation will be a long struggle, with occasionally fierce resistance, key reforms are already underway.
The current 12th Five-Year Plan calls for annual wage increases to average at least 13.4%; this year, wages are rising at an average rate of 18%, which will squeeze out industries characterized by obsolescence or overcapacity.
Moreover, the government’s anti-corruption campaign is targeting some of the most powerful industry groups, such as the petroleum faction, thereby weakening their resistance to reform.
Most important, economic outcomes are becoming increasingly aligned with the authorities’ goals.
Services already account for more output and employment than industry – the Internet company Alibaba, for example, is empowering both consumers and smaller companies on a previously unimaginable scale – and recent growth has been driven by domestic demand rather than net exports.
Reform is not just a plan; it is already happening.
Economic openings to Central Asia and to ASEAN (specifically to Vietnam) are well underway, and reform will include further international opening.
The Third Plenum’s decisions follow the launch in September of the Shanghai Free-Trade Zone, which will open new sectors to foreign investment and permit largely market-based financial transactions and capital flows.
The liberalization of capital flows is intended to be a gradual national policy, channeled through trusted institutions in Shanghai.
For trade in goods, the new free-trade zone is intended to compete directly with Singapore and Hong Kong.
China fears dependence on those entrepôts in the event of conflict.
For foreign investors, the policy will be to expand greatly the range of opportunities while curtailing foreign control; foreign companies, for example, may hold minority stakes in the telecoms sector, while dominant foreign companies like Monsanto will face constraints.
President Xi Jinping faces the politically risky task of pushing the CCP’s reform agenda against fierce opposition while the economy slows.
By emphasizing Party control – through a crackdown on SOEs, government opponents, and critics in the media and academia – Xi seeks to maximize his ability to impose economic reforms while minimizing the risk of a challenge from conservative forces.
Above all, he is determined to avoid the fate of previous Chinese leaders like Hu Yaobang and Zhao Ziyang, who lost their jobs after a critical mass of their opponents came to believe that economic and political reform jeopardized Party control.
So, at least for now, China will focus on another great wave of economic reform, whereas political reform will mostly be limited to reorganization of government agencies to boost efficiency and strengthen efforts to reduce corruption.
(There have been some steps toward reform, including a decision to remove judges from local political control.)
And yet China will find it increasingly difficult to postpone stronger measures that would appease popular demands for fairness, including the establishment of an independent judiciary, which could prove to be no less an imperative than structural economic reforms.
Likewise, the leaders must either accept much of the information revolution’s swamping of controls or engage in far more costly repression.
Hopes for political reform rest on the possibility that Xi’s second term will see the accession to top leadership of reformers like Politburo member Wang Yang and Vice President Li Yuanchao.
For now, however, China will focus on another great wave of economic reform. 
China’s Xi Factor
HONG KONG – Before China’s leadership transition earlier this year, experts said that the Chinese Communist Party was intent on preventing a larger-than-life personality from assuming power.
The CCP, it was argued, wanted someone more like the bureaucratic outgoing leader, Hu Jintao, rather than a charismatic successor like, say, the former Chongqing provincial governor Bo Xilai.
Yet the new president and CCP leader, Xi Jinping, is hardly dull.
He began his term by paying homage to Deng Xiaoping at his statue in Shenzhen, where, more than three decades ago, the former Communist Party leader had launched the campaign to convert a reluctant Party to free-market reforms.
In a top-level November meeting, Xi set out the details of a fundamental change in economic direction, overshadowing his colleagues.
Xi now leads a new economic group that will coordinate and impose his reforms on fractious colleagues.
And, unlike Hu, he immediately became head of the military and now runs a parallel national security council.
At first glance, a new “paramount leader” appears to be emerging.
Recent history explains this re-concentration of power.
In 1993, central-government leaders enjoyed relatively limited powers: they did not control the money supply and had difficulty firing provincial governors or relocating top generals.
Central government revenue was low; indeed, proportionately smaller than that of central governments in any other major economy.
This changed when then-Party leader Jiang Zemin and his prime minister, Zhu Rongji, centralized authority in order to stave off economic crisis at a time of growing risk to China’s banks.
In the process, the labor force of China’s state enterprises declined by 50 million, China lost 25 million manufacturing jobs, and central-government employment was slashed.
These measures saved China’s economy, but at the price of widespread social stress, which made Zhu widely disliked when he left office.
Popular reaction against the cosmopolitan, coastal, and market-oriented reforms of Zhu and Jiang brought to power leaders whose formative experiences were in the inland provinces of Gansu and Tibet.
Riding a wave of resentment against inequality and social tensions, Hu and his prime minister, Wen Jiabao, promised a “harmonious society,” without the stresses of Zhu’s agenda.
They slowed economic reform and ceased political reforms.
The bureaucracy expanded from 40 million to 70 million, and power devolved to provinces, bureaucracies, and state-owned enterprises (SOEs).
The somnolent Hu/Wen era, fortunately, did not dampen the economic growth triggered by the earlier reforms undertaken by Jiang and Zhu.
But the economic-growth model that those reforms created was running out of steam.
Low-cost exports were struggling as labor costs rose.
Investment in infrastructure was shifting from growth-enhancing projects, such as inter-city highways, to less productive shopping malls in second- and third-tier cities.
Productivity plummeted in SOEs, whose privileged access to financing crowded out private-sector investment.
Local-government funding, through the seizure and resale of property, was reaching its limits.
Thus, it became essential to launch a new wave of far-reaching reforms, including liberalization of interest rates, securities markets, and foreign-exchange controls, in order to fund the more productive private sector and reduce excess capacity in SOEs.
In particular, the reforms were needed to deflate an emerging property bubble resulting from huge savings and foreign capital inflows that had no other profitable investment outlet.
The government planned to liberalize interest rates and the capital account to encourage investment in modern, high-value industries, rather than continue to subsidize low-value exports.
It started to shift the economy’s base from export-oriented industries to domestic growth, and from manufacturing to services.
And it announced its intention to slow local governments’ seizures of farmland and excessive borrowing through captive enterprises.
Unsurprisingly, opposition to reform was implacable.
SOEs were determined to defend their privileges.
Highly leveraged local governments could not tolerate higher interest rates or an appreciating currency, and they were adamant about continuing land sales and opposing property taxes.
They feared the financial burden of new requirements to provide social services to urban migrants.
As a result, a new, lean leadership team had to be mobilized.
The number of top leaders was cut from nine to seven.
The new lineup eliminated the most powerful voice on the left (Bo) and relegated the “extreme reformers” on the right (Li Yuanchao and Wang Yang) to the second tier.
To reduce elders’ interference, Hu stepped down as head of the military and Jiang Zemin promised to step back.
Moreover, a leading economic group was established to enforce bureaucratic compliance, as was a national security council (similar to that in the United States) to coordinate foreign policy.
Previously, the military often kept the foreign ministry in the dark; and the party’s foreign-affairs office, which handled North Korea, often failed to coordinate its activities with the foreign ministry, which handled South Korea.
An anti-corruption campaign weakened opposition, and Zhu re-emerged as a hero.
This set the stage for Xi’s arrival.
In short, the new-style leadership, a form of managed charisma, was collectively designed to serve national needs.
And it implies that Xi is unlikely to emerge as paramount leader.
The Chinese presidency’s authority has certainly increased; but Xi is powerful only when he has the votes.
On contentious issues, he has but one of seven.
Desperate Women’s Dangerous Moves
GENEVA – One of the most significant recent trends in migration has been the rise in the number of women using dangerous routes previously used mainly by men.
More and more women – fleeing discrimination, violence, or poverty – are now taking the same risks as men in search of a better life for themselves and their children.
This is desperation migration.
Indeed, while many women travel with their families, the International Organization for Migration (IOM) is seeing an increasing number of women migrating on their own to an unknown, unpredictable, and often dangerous future.
Women and children migrants are dying with increasing frequency at sea, crossing deserts, and on other hazardous routes.
What has changed?
Among the many factors pushing women to migrate are pervasive gender bias and social prejudices against single mothers or widows in their country of origin.
But poverty is almost always the strongest force driving women to leave.
In most poor countries, women are poorer than men, owing to the systematic discrimination that they face in education, health care, employment, and control of assets.
Of course, most migrant women do not encounter mistreatment or die on their journeys; in fact, many derive real benefits from migration.
But, among the world’s estimated 111 million migrant women (half the total), violence and abuse can occur at any time, starting from the very outset of the migration process.
Throughout the migration cycle, women are more at risk from physical violence by fellow migrants, smugglers, and state officers, and can be forced to exchange sex for transportation, food, or accommodation.
Unsurprisingly, migrant women are often victims of human trafficking, finding themselves enslaved as laborers, prostitutes, or participants in organized begging operations.
This is true regardless of why women migrate.
When women run for their lives because of natural or man-made disasters, gender-based violence is one of the great risks they face.
Displaced women, often destitute, are easy prey for criminals.
This was one of my immediate concerns when Typhoon Haiyan struck the Philippines, and at my request a special program was instituted to alert and help women in peril.
Even when women migrants find a job in a host country, it is rarely easy for them.
They are predominantly employed in domestic work, care-giving, agriculture, and entertainment – all low-paid, largely unregulated sectors that are rarely covered by national labor laws.
They are often subject to punishingly long working hours, non-payment of wages, forced confinement, starvation, beating, sexual abuse, and threats and intimidation.
Many women migrants are unskilled or undocumented domestic workers.
This makes them more vulnerable to violence, because they typically depend on a single employer and in many countries face deportation if they attempt to change jobs.
Moreover, social integration in a new country can be more difficult for women than for men.
This is partly because women are often subject to harmful traditional practices, such as early and forced marriage, female genital mutilation, and so-called “honor” crimes, enforced by families who want to maintain a link with their country of origin.
And it is especially difficult for women migrants to navigate between the tantalizing freedom of choice and expression in their host society and the traditional roles expected of them at home.
The rising number of migrant deaths – both women and men – at sea and in deserts is a wake-up call for the international community to act.
IOM has called on all relevant actors – including countries of origin, transit countries, and destination countries – to address the plight of migrants attempting life-threatening journeys and find solutions.
Protecting women migrants – often the most desperate of the desperate – should top their priorities.
In 2014, the international community will review the United Nations Millennium Development Goals, which expire next year, and decide on a post-2015 development agenda.
IOM believes that migrants, and in particular women migrants, who in the past have been largely invisible in the language of development, must be a part of this.
We must no longer ignore half the world’s migrants.
Like all migrants, women on the move are entitled to personal security and basic dignity.
Will NATO’s Prodigal Son Return?
PARIS &#45;&#45; Few state visits have lasting results.
Nicolas Sarkozy’s just completed trip to Washington may be an exception, because the French President may be preparing to bring NATO a highly valued present for its 60th anniversary in the spring of 2009: France’s return to NATO’s integrated military structure, from which Charles de Gaulle withdrew in 1966.
In retrospect, de Gaulle’s decision proved to be much more detrimental for France than for the Alliance.
By withdrawing from NATO’s integrated military command, France excluded itself from political decision-making within the Alliance and thus became the equivalent of the “Harkis”– the local soldiers who served with the French army during the Algerian war: fine soldiers, but with virtually no reward for their service.
How realistic is the possibility of scenario French return to NATO’s military fold?
Historically, aborted moves and faux pas abound on both sides in the French/NATO relationship, the latest being Jacques Chirac’s failed attempt to patch up France’s relations with NATO upon his arrival in power in 1995.
Success is not guaranteed this time, either, but the chances are much higher now, because France, the United States, and the world have changed.
For starters, the US now has a real friend and ally in the Élysée Palace.
To speak of Sarkozy as a substitute for Tony Blair in Europe would be premature – and unhelpful, given Blair’s inability to exert significant influence on US policy.
But Sarkozy is both eager to transform France’s relations with the Alliance and has a strategy to do so.
Moreover, the French army supports such a move, while only a small segment of the Foreign Ministry is opposed.
Sarkozy’s strategy is to link progress in building a common European defense and security structure with a redefinition of NATO.
More Europe in security terms means more Alliance.
So, because Sarkozy wants to be seen as a convinced European, he must normalize France’s relations with a new Alliance based on two pillars – European and American.
Moreover, financial and human resources for military affairs are scarce and cannot be duplicated, while France and Britain want to restart the Saint-Malo process of bilateral defense efforts launched nearly ten years ago.
As a result, for the sake of Europe, France must move closer to the Alliance.
Sarkozy has also fully integrated into France’s approach to Europe a reckoning with the new balance of power within the European Union following the accession of Eastern European states.
Unlike Chirac, he understands that it is counterproductive and unrealistic to ask countries like Bulgaria or Romania to choose between their European or Atlantic loyalties.
Here, again, strengthening Europe requires strengthening the Alliance.
Sarkozy’s approach may work, because America, too, has changed.
In American eyes, the Kosovo war in 1999 demonstrated NATO’s glaring and myriad shortcomings, while the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, moved America still further away from the Alliance, particularly after President George W. Bush disparagingly rejected NATO’s offer of help.
Former Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld even tried to use divide-and-rule tactics by pitting “New” Europe against the “Old” Europe led by France and Germany, which opposed the Iraq war.
Those divisions are now history, and American reservations about a European security pillar cannot trump America’s pressing needs for allied support.
Confronted with disaster in Iraq, the risk of Afghanistan following Iraq into chaos, and the escalating crisis with Iran, the US can no longer treat the NATO allies with disdain.
Although Europe remains militarily weak, America’s power is now in doubt.
If a European pillar within NATO is needed to strengthen the Alliance, why not accept it?
Beyond the changes in France and the US, the decisive factor behind the possible reinvention of NATO is the transformation of the international system itself.
Aside from the explosive situation in the Middle East and the threat of Islamist terrorism, the West is now confronted with the rise of Asia, the return of a more assertive Russia, and new energy and environmental challenges.
Both France and America have a key role to play in addressing these issues effectively.
Sarkozy’s trip to Washington, and his address to a receptive US Congress, was one more step toward ensuring that they do so together.
Bankers with Borders
LONDON – When Mark Carney replaces Mervyn King as Governor of the Bank of England in July 2013, the world will be deprived of King’s witty public utterances.
My personal favorite came when, commenting on strong retail-sales figures during one Christmas period, he cast doubt on their significance for assessing the state of the economy.
“The true meaning of the story of Christmas” he solemnly intoned, “will not be revealed until Easter, or possibly much later.” A new career on the stage, or in the pulpit, surely beckons.
King’s most quoted phrase is that “global banking institutions are global in life, but national in death.”
They trade globally, across porous borders, attaching little significance to the geographical location of capital and liquidity.
But, when the music stops, it is the home regulator, and the home central bank, that picks up the tab, even if the losses were incurred elsewhere.
By the same token, a failing bank may leave behind a mess in third countries, which its home authorities may not clean up.
Icelandic banks, for example, took deposits in the United Kingdom and the Netherlands, and swept them back to Reykjavik, leaving the host countries out of pocket.
Likewise, the collapse of Lehman Brothers left European creditors more exposed than those in the US, whose funds had been wired home to New York on the Friday before the end.
Regulators have been wrestling with this problem for years, without conspicuous success.
In mid-December, the Bank of England (BoE) and the United States Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) announced what seemed like a breakthrough, at least concerning the major banks headquartered in the US or the UK – that is, 12 of the 28 institutions regarded by the Financial Stability Board as globally systemic.
In their case, a resolution authority, in London or Washington, would take control of the parent company, remove senior management, and apportion losses to shareholders and unsecured creditors.
It sounded plausible.
BoE officials declared firmly that they were prepared to trust their American counterparts, and would not step in to grab subsidiaries or assets based in the UK.
“This is a journey that involves trust,” said BoE Deputy Governor Paul Tucker.
But the Anglo-American love-in quickly soured when the FDIC chairman was asked to give the same assurances of confidence in the British authorities.
According to the Financial Times, he “laughingly declined.”
Indeed, while the FDIC and the BoE were working on their plan, the US Federal Reserve was developing proposals that will expose overseas banks in the US to a far tighter set of controls, and closer supervision, than they have hitherto experienced.
The Fed is seeking to oblige foreign banks to create a holding company to own their separately capitalized subsidiaries, effectively giving the Fed direct oversight of their business.
They will also be required to maintain stronger capital and liquidity positions in the US.
The justification offered for these new impositions is that overseas banks have moved beyond their traditional lending business to engage in substantial and often complex capital-market activities.
“The crisis revealed the resulting risks to US financial stability,” said Fed Governor Daniel Tarullo.
The UK’s Financial Services Authority has been invoking the same rationale for requiring foreign banks to establish local subsidiaries, rather than taking deposits or lending through a branch of the parent bank.
On the face of it, these moves appear to be well justified, given the mayhem created by poorly regulated banks in the major financial centers.
But we should be clear that these changes are not just tinkering at the edges.
They amount to a reversal of decades of policy by American and British regulators.
Ernest Patrikis, a former Fed supervisor, points to the clear implication that in the US domestic banks will have a strong advantage over foreign banks.
More dramatically, he asserts that “subsidiarization would be the end of international banking.”
Larry Fink, the CEO of the multinational investment-management firm BlackRock, takes a similar view: “It really throws into question [the] whole globalization of these firms,” with “each country for [itself].”
He adds: “I wouldn’t call it a trade war, but I would certainly call it a high level of protectionism.”
One delicious irony in Europe is that Chinese banks are contesting the requirement to subsidiarize in London on precisely those grounds.
For now, high-octane worries about protectionism are probably overdone.
And it is difficult to deny that the Fed should take a close interest in the funding strategies of foreign banks operating in the US.
Another Fed governor, Jeremy Stein, has pointed out that foreign banks have dollar liabilities of roughly $8 trillion, much of it short-term wholesale funding.
But there is a risk that these interventions are the thin end of a dangerous wedge.
Forced subsidiarization causes capital and liquidity to be trapped in local legal entities, reducing the effectiveness with which that capital is used.
At a time when bank capital is scarce, that impediment carries significant economic costs.
Moreover, tools that may be used wisely and well by institutions with a global outlook, like the Fed and the Bank of England, could take on a different character in countries where a commitment to free and open markets cannot be taken for granted.
So we must hope that the US and British authorities move carefully and do not use their new powers to freeze out foreign competition.
“Be careful what you wish for” is wise advice in the regulatory world, as it is elsewhere.
Will Next Time Be Different?
CHICAGO – Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff, in their excellent, eponymous book on debt crises, argue that the most dangerous words in any language are “This time is different.”
Perhaps the next most dangerous words are “Next time will be different.”
These words are often uttered when politicians and central banks want to bail out some troubled segment of the economy.
“Yes,” one can almost hear them saying, “we understand that bailing out banks will subvert market discipline. But you cannot expect us to stand by and watch the system collapse, causing millions of innocent people to suffer.
We have to live with the hand we are dealt.
But next time will be different.” They then use every tool they have to prevent economic losses on their watch.
The government’s incentives are clear.
The public rewards them for dealing with the problem at hand – whether building levees to protect houses built on a flood plain or rescuing banks that have dodgy securities on their balance sheets.
Politicians and central bankers gain little by letting the greedy or careless face the full consequences of their actions, for many innocent people would suffer as well.
A sympathetic press would amplify their heart-rending stories of lost jobs and homes, making those counseling against intervention appear callous.
Democracies are necessarily soft-hearted, whereas markets and nature are not; government inevitably expands to fill the gap.
To the extent that the rough justice meted out by markets or nature teaches anyone to behave better, it has consequences far beyond the horizon of anyone in power today.
When asked to choose between the risk of being known to posterity as the central banker who let the system collapse and the intangible future benefits of teaching risk takers a lesson, it does not take genius to predict the central banker’s decision.
Democracy tends to institutionalize moral hazard in sectors that are economically or politically important, such as finance or real estate, allowing them to privatize gains and socialize losses.
Even though the authorities insist that the next time will be different, everyone knows that they will make the same decision when confronted with the same choice again.
So, knowing that next time will not be different, the authorities try their best to prevent a “next time.”
But risk takers have every incentive to try their luck again, knowing that, at worst, they will be bailed out.
In this cat-and-mouse game, risk takers have the upper hand.
For one thing, risk takers are typically small, cohesive interest groups that, once rescued, have a powerful incentive, as well as the resources, to buy the political influence needed to ensure a return to the status quo ante.
If risk takers were allowed to face more serious losses, they would have fewer resources to fight political attempts to constrain their risky activities.
Moreover, the public does not have a long memory, a long time horizon, or an appetite for detail.
Even as the United States’ voluminous Dodd-Frank bill tried to ensure that bankers never subjected American taxpayers to undue risk again, public attention had moved on to the state of the real economy and unemployment.
Why focus on financial regulation when the risks of an immediate collapse are small, and when the details are so tedious?
As technical experts and lobbyists took over, and the public lost interest, Dodd-Frank became friendlier and friendlier to the banks.
So how can this one-way betting be stopped?
The scary answer may be that it does not end until governments run out of money (as in Ireland) or the public runs out of sympathy (as in Germany vis-à-vis the rest of Europe).
To avoid that fate, governments should start by recognizing that the system is programmed to respond to deep distress, and that they can do nothing about it.
But they must try to ensure that they do not destroy incentives by doing too much. And they must offset the distortions created by intervention in other ways.
For example, the US Federal Reserve has essentially guaranteed the financial sector that if it gets into trouble, ultra-low interest rates will be maintained (at the expense of savers) until the sector recovers.
In the early to mid-1990’s, rates were kept low because of banks’ real-estate problems.
They were slashed again in 2001 and kept ultra-low after the dot-com bust.
And they have been ultra-low since 2008.
Senior Fed policymakers deny that their interest-rate policy bears any responsibility for risk taking, but there is much evidence to the contrary.
It would be difficult for the Fed to respond differently if the financial sector gets into trouble again.
But it does not have to maintain ultra-low interest rates after the crisis has passed, especially if those rates have little impact on generating sustainable economic activity.
Doing so merely rewards banks for their past excesses – and taxes savers.
More importantly, if the Fed wants to restore incentives for risk takers and savers, it should offset the effects of staying “low for long” in bad times by increasing interest rates more rapidly than is strictly necessary as the economy recovers.
This will, of course, be politically difficult, because the public has been programmed to think that ultra-low rates are good, and higher rates bad, for growth, without any consideration for the long-term sustainability of growth.
Finally, the pressure on governments to intervene would be lower if individuals had access to a minimum safety net.
Official US policy is so activist in downturns (regardless of its effectiveness) partly because unemployment is so costly to workers – who have little savings, unemployment benefits that run out quickly, and health care that is often tied to a job.
A stronger safety net for individuals might allow politicians to accept more corporate or financial-sector distress, and help bolster their claim that next time really will be different.
Will Olmert Survive?
After Israel’s inability last summer to achieve a conclusive victory over Hezbollah in southern Lebanon, public pressure forced Prime Minister Ehud Olmert’s government to appoint a commission to examine the causes of this surprising failure.
How could a small militia, numbering less than a few thousand combatants, survive the onslaught of the Middle East’s most formidable military machine?
The commission, headed by retired Supreme Court judge Eliyahu Winograd, has just published its interim report.
Its criticism of Olmert, Defense Minister Amir Peretz, and Chief-of-Staff Dan Halutz – set forth in a detailed and meticulous 117-page assessment – is harsh, but not surprising.
The Winograd Commission articulated what most Israelis already think: Olmert and Peretz lacked the military, security, and policy experience to confront a terrorist organization that raided Israeli territory, killed a number of soldiers and kidnapped two, and then launched thousands of rockets on civilian targets for over a month.
Indeed, the inexperience of the prime minister and the defense minister are unprecedented in Israel’s history.
Olmert, who stepped into Ariel Sharon’s shoes as leader of the new Kadima Party, was considered a competent but lackluster parliamentarian – and later mayor of Jerusalem – who was known more for his polemical style than for his political stature or gravitas.
For most Israelis, even those who voted for him as the bearer of Sharon’s legacy after the Gaza disengagement, Olmert thus remained the accidental prime minister.
Likewise, Peretz, a rabble-rousing but effective trade unionist, surprised all when he won the Labor Party’s leadership primary and then chose the defense portfolio over the treasury.
To many, the duo of Olmert and Peretz seemed to invite trouble.
Precisely because Israelis are aware of the constant security threat facing their country, they have always believed that their leaders should be able to lead Israel in war – but also to ask the military tough questions when diplomacy may fail.
When such a moment arrived, totally out of the blue (or so it seemed) with Hezbollah’s raid on July 12, 2006, Israel’s two top politicians were completely out of their depth, stumbling into a war for which neither they nor the Israeli Army were prepared.
The military was led – for the first time in its history – by an Air Force general, Dan Halutz, who believed that everything could be solved by air power, creating a combustible combination of civilian ignorance and military arrogance.
In measured but devastating prose, the Winograd Commission gives failing marks to all three leaders.
Olmert decided to go into battle recklessly and unaware of the consequences.
Peretz was unable to gauge the strategic implications of his decisions.
And Halutz failed to present the civilian leadership with the full panoply of military options at the army’s disposal.
Halutz already resigned a few months ago.
But both Olmert and Peretz have declared that, despite the Commission’s conclusions, they would not quit: instead, they have vowed to implement the report’s many far-reaching substantive recommendations about policy, strategy, and decision-making processes.
Will Olmert and Peretz be able to stay on?
Their coalition government enjoys a comfortable parliamentary majority; nor does the political arithmetic imply a viable parliamentary alternative.
But public opinion – volatile and angry – calls for both to resign: a public-opinion poll conducted after the Commission published its report indicated that only 14% of Israelis believe that Olmert should keep his job, while less than 11% support Peretz.
Later this week, demonstrations calling for the government's resignation are planned, and it will become obviously more difficult for the government to continue to function.
There are already rumors about a palace coup within Kadima, aimed at replacing Olmert with either the deputy prime minister, the veteran Shimon Peres, or the popular foreign minister, Tzipi Livni.
But it does not appear that Olmert will allow himself to be pushed out.
In fact, Olmert’s weak and discredited government may yet survive.
If the government were to fall and new elections held, there are strong indications that the winner might be Binyamin Netanyahu, of the right-wing Likud, which was decimated in the 2006 elections, but is now patiently waiting in the wings.
Many who want Olmert to go would still not welcome a Netanyahu comeback, which may also explain what appears to be an indirect endorsement of Olmert by the United States.
Only a strong Israeli government can make the painful decisions necessary for negotiations with the Palestinians to succeed.
As a result, the prospects for meaningful continuation of Israeli-Palestinian talks look even dimmer than they did before.
Indeed, the real loser of the 2006 Lebanon war was neither Israel nor Hezbollah, but, at least for the time being, the peace process.
Will Rising Interest Rates Torpedo Stock and House Prices?
Interest rates around the world are poised to rise.
Short-term rates have gone so low since the worldwide recession of 2001 - 1% and 2%, respectively, in the United States and the Eurozone, and practically zero in Japan - that a strengthening world economy will force central banks to tighten the monetary reins.
Australia's central bank has already been raising rates since May 2002, and Great Britain's since November 2003.
In the US, the two-day Federal Open Market Committee meeting on June 29-30 is likely to mark a major turning point, reversing the steady decline of the benchmark federal funds rate since Alan Greenspan began loosening monetary policy in 2001.
This is likely to be followed by rate increases in China, the Eurozone, and elsewhere.
Given the tendency of central banks to change interest rates gradually, any change of direction likely means more changes in the same direction later.
What will this landmark change mean for prices of such assets as stocks and homes?
In theory, when interest rates go up, there is reason to believe that asset prices will go down.
The higher interest rates go, the better are investments in bonds, which compete with investments in other assets such as stocks or homes.
Higher interest rates also raise the cost of borrowing to buy these assets, which may diminish demand for them, exerting downward pressure on their prices.
When interest rates fall, the opposite effect on asset prices may be predicted.