But these bargains, by their very nature, produce electoral democracies rather than liberal democracies.
The dispossessed minorities who have the strongest stake in civil rights play no role during the democratic transition for the simple reason that they cannot normally bring anything to the bargaining table.
So the democratic bargain yields property and political rights, but only rarely civil rights as well.
Viewed from this perspective, the puzzle is not why democracy so often turns out to be illiberal.
It is that liberal democracy can ever emerge.
One set of circumstances that favors liberal democracy is the absence of clear-cut ethnic or other identity cleavages among the non-elites.
Cultural and social homogeneity means that there is no identifiable minority against which the majority can discriminate.
Scandinavian countries historically, and Japan and South Korea more recently, approximate this prototype.
A different situation that produces a similar outcome is the presence of multiple and overlapping cleavages.
If there is no clear-cut majority-minority distinction, each group in power may be willing to recognize the rights of others for fear that it may face a period out of power in the future.
This is the kind of precarious balance on which, for example, Lebanon’s “consociational” democracy rested – until differential population growth and external intervention undid it.
A third possibility is that society’s most distinctive ethnic or racial cleavage aligns with the divide that separates the masses from the propertied elite.
In South Africa, for example, whites were both the elite and the racial minority.
When the apartheid government negotiated with the African National Congress prior to the 1994 democratic transition, it demanded (and received) property and civil rights for the white minority in exchange for political rights for the black majority.
The bargain has survived remarkably well, despite the tough times that South African democracy has experienced since then.
Alternatively, perhaps liberal democracy has little to do with the balance of power among social groups and their strategic motivations.
Maybe it requires instead, the development over time of a culture of tolerance and civil liberties.
Or maybe both are needed to sustain institutions that uphold property, political, and civil rights in the long term.
Whatever the reason for the emergence of liberal democracy, we should not be surprised by how uncommon it is in practice.
Only rarely do political forces align to produce a sustainable version of it.
Liberating NASA
NEW YORK – Let me disclose my biases up front: I did not dream of going into space as a child. I took it for granted.
My father was a (genuine) rocket scientist, and I figured that just as airplanes had become commonplace over the course of his life, space travel would become commonplace over the course of mine.
People first landed on the Moon while I was a teenager, and I turned to other pursuits – journalism, the Internet, startup companies.
But then, decades later, I woke up and discovered that space travel was still reserved for a small corps of astronauts and cosmonauts, and a tiny group of wealthy space tourists – six so far.
The space business was the preserve of a few governments, plus a number of large cost-plus contractors who lived in symbiosis with their government customers. 
Then there was Space Adventures, the private company that arranges the space tourist trips with Roskosmos, the Russian Federal Space Agency, for upwards of $35 million a flight.
I invested in Space Adventures, and also in XCOR Aerospace, a rocket maker.
As with the Internet, I could see the glimmer of the energy that results  when commercial startups invade a market dominated by large, established organizations.
I wanted to know more about space travel (not about startups!) and figured that six months of space training with Roskosmos, organized by Space Adventures, was the best way to get totally immersed.
After I returned, I had the opportunity to join the NASA Advisory Council, as chairman of its Technology and Innovation Committee.
The Council has recently been shaken up, with its membership reduced from 50 to 10 and each member's role clarified.
However,  the Council's actual power is limited: NASA is told what to do – and is financed to to do it – by the United States Congress.
We can only advise on what Congress decrees and funds.
This shakeup reflects a shakeup at NASA itself, under new Administrator Charlie Bolden, appointed by President Barack Obama. And it's a huge opportunity for NASA as well as for space exploration and science.
Obama has proposed a new budget for NASA that directs it to focus on longer-term goals, and adds another $6 billion over the next five years (at a time when almost every other agency faces budget cuts).
Over the past four decades, NASA has matured, which has made it so process-ridden and cautious – so responsible – that it has lost much of its energy and innovativeness.
With almost every US election cycle, it endured funding cuts, re-orientations, and the like.
Then NASA had two large and image-damaging space-shuttle accidents – the Challenger disaster of 1986, followed by the disintegration of the Columbia over Texas in 2003. These catastrophes stripped NASA of its appetite for risk.
The astronauts themselves were eager to return to space, but the bureaucrats were unwilling to send them.
This is a persistent challenge for government agencies: they get hammered whenever something goes wrong.
The new budget does two things.
First, it acknowledges that the so-called Constellation project, which was focused on returning to the Moon, is behind schedule, over budget, and unambitious.
So the budget cancels Constellation – though many of the specific projects and employees that comprised it will live on.
The new budget will apply the freed-up funds and resources towards a still-to-be-defined program aimed at going beyond the Moon to asteroids, so-called “near-Earth objects,” and, eventually, Mars.
Obama did not, however, define the new goals tightly, leaving that up to NASA – a sensible and modest approach, but unfortunately a political mistake.
It is never a good idea to replace something with vagueness. Politicians and lobbyists who care only about this year's jobs and next year's votes have jumped all over this lack of a plan.
Their scorn has also extended to the second part of the budget, a program that normally they would have liked: bringing back to the US jobs that currently go to Russians.
For the budget proposes contracting with American startups to send astronauts and cargo to low-Earth orbit – mostly to the International Space Station.
For the next few years, NASA will be buying those services from RosKosmos and sending astronauts up in Russian Soyuzes.
But after that, under the new budget, they will be buying from the likes of start-ups SpaceX and Orbital Sciences (and eventuallly, I hope, XCOR).
Government should focus on long-term, risky research (where the risk is to projects, not to people), and the private sector should focus on delivering services that are already well understood and ready to be handled in a routine way.
The irony of American politics right now is that normally pro-business Republicans are those most hostile to NASA’s new budget – which espouses the values of entrepreneurship and innovativeness that Republicans claim to hold dear.
NASA itself is a typical large organization. Most of its people would welcome a more entrepreneurial environment, but they have been beaten down by years of criticism, constraints, regulations, and arbitrary budget cuts.
As a system, NASA is resistant to change, but inside there are thousands of people yearning to experiment and learn from both successes and failures.
They want the liberation of a grand challenge.
They want to take risks with technology, not with people.
Look around you. There are lots of organizations like that, waiting to be liberated, their employees yearning to breathe free.
Liberty’s Revolutionary Muse
Great social thinkers almost always start out as polarizing figures, admired by some and scorned by others, until their radical challenge to how we understand the world finally prevails.
Milton Friedman was a giant among modern social thinkers for at least two reasons.
First, he profoundly influenced not only his own field of economics, but also the social sciences more broadly.
Second, judging by historical experience, his influence on public opinion and economic policymaking improved countless lives for the better.
For decades, Friedman remained stranded in the intellectual wilderness, spurning the postwar Keynesian consensus that governments should use fiscal policy to manage aggregate demand – a view that sustained statist economic policies through the 1970’s.
Indeed, in the context of his age, Friedman was a true intellectual revolutionary, combining rigorous academic research and gracefully written popular books and journalism to argue for free-market policies – and to affirm the link, defended by writers from Adam Smith to Friedrich von Hayek, between economic freedom and political liberty.
In economics, Friedman revived and developed the monetarist theory that the quantity of money in circulation is the main determinant of how economies perform.
In his masterpiece A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960 (written with Anna Schwartz), he famously attributed recessions, including the Great Depression of the 1930’s, to a decline in the money supply.
Likewise, he argued that it was an oversupply of money that caused inflation.
In the 1960’s, Friedman showed that Keynesian demand management through government spending constantly increased the money supply, accelerating wage and price growth.
Together with Edmund Phelps – this year’s Nobel Prize laureate – he proved that there is no stable tradeoff between unemployment and inflation.
Any attempt to use expansionary government policies to drive unemployment below a certain level, they demonstrated, would fuel inflationary expectations and undermine both economic growth and employment.
That analysis both anticipated and explained the combination of rising inflation and rising unemployment of the 1970’s that came to be known as “stagflation.”
Friedman was the catalyst for a profound shift in how governments conduct economic policy.
Rather than fiscal stimulation and control, the main tool of economic management nowadays is monetary policies conducted by independent central banks.
Keynesian demand management was thus displaced by a new understanding – which we owe largely to Friedman – that pursuing fiscal discipline and price stability is the best guarantee of macroeconomic sustainability.
Equally important were Friedman’s contributions to influencing public opinion through works that addressed the role of the state in society.
Alongside Hayek, his colleague at the University of Chicago, Friedman launched a more general intellectual assault on Keynesianism, arguing that any government permitted to regulate the economy in the name of equality posed a threat to individual liberty.
In his Newsweek columns published between 1966 and 1983, and in his books Capitalism and Freedom , Free to Choose , and The Tyranny of the Status Quo (written with his wife, Rose), Friedman offered a vision of liberty that was both appealing and achievable.
Indeed, Free to Choose – later the basis of a popular television series that he hosted – was published illegally in Poland in the 1980’s, helping to inspire me, and many others, to dream of a future of freedom during the darkest years of communist rule.
With remarkable clarity, his popular writings advanced a compelling political philosophy, together with concrete policy proposals.
For example, he pioneered the idea of school vouchers, arguing that private competition would ensure better educational performance than government systems.
Friedman’s views made him a guiding light for economic conservatives worldwide.
His influence on Margaret Thatcher’s government helped transform Britain from a post-industrial basket case dominated by class struggle into Europe’s dominant economic power.
When Vietnam launched free-market reforms in the 1980’s, senior government officials pored over his writings.
He also initiated the now common practice of measuring and comparing political and economic freedom across countries, helping to shape opinion in countries that are viewed as limiting freedom.
But Friedman’s consistent anti-statism also led him to embrace positions that ran afoul of many conservatives’ political sensibilities, underscoring the intellectual honesty that was the hallmark of his career.
For example, his opposition to governments’ authority to prohibit or regulate human behavior extended to licensing requirements for doctors and car drivers, as well as to anti-drug laws, which he believed operated as a subsidy to organized crime.
Likewise, he expended considerable effort agitating against America’s military draft.
Although he did not win all his intellectual battles, rarely can it be said with as much certainty that a man was great, and that the work that he has left behind will retain enduring influence.
I live in a Poland that is now free, and I consider Milton Friedman to be one of the main intellectual architects of our liberty.
Libya After Qaddafi
BENGHAZI – Middle Eastern autocrats routinely warn their people of rivers of blood, Western occupation, poverty, chaos, and Al Qaeda if their regimes are toppled.
Those threats were heard in Tunisia, Egypt, Yemen, Bahrain, Syria, and – rendered in black-comedy style – in Libya.
But there is a strong belief across the region that the costs of removing autocracies, as high as they might be, are low compared to the damage inflicted by the current rulers.
In short, freedom is worth the price.
In Libya, four scenarios may negatively affect prospects for democratization: civil/tribal war, military rule, becoming “stuck in transition,” and partition.
Given the high price Libyans have paid, those scenarios should be prevented rather than cured.
The civil/tribal war scenario is the worst risk.
Egypt’s revolutionaries understood this.
When sectarian violence erupted there following the removal of Hosni Mubarak, the revolutionary coalitions adopted the slogan, “You won’t gloat over this, Mubarak.”
Repressive dictatorships cannot win free and fair elections.
But they can use extreme violence to consolidate their control over the state, its people, and its institutions.
So, to win, Libya’s Colonel Muammar el-Qaddafi has deliberately and successfully turned a civil-resistance campaign into an armed conflict.
That will have ramifications in the post-authoritarian context.
A study published by Columbia University on civil resistance has shown that the probability of a country relapsing into civil war following a successful anti-dictatorship armed campaign is 43%, versus 28% when the campaign is unarmed.
According to the same study, which was based on 323 cases of armed and unarmed opposition campaigns between 1900 and 2006, the likelihood of democratic transition within five years following a successful armed opposition campaign is only 3%, compared to 51% when campaigns were unarmed.
Libya, of course, can survive the gloomy prospect of post-authoritarian civil war.
But this requires containing tribal and regional polarization, as well as the rivalries between the Interim National Council (INC) and the Military Council (MC), and between senior military commanders.
Violent polarization has developed not only between Eastern and Western tribes, but also between some of the Western tribes.
Last month, for example, armed clashes erupted between rebels in al-Zintan and the villagers of al-Rayyaniya, 15 kilometers away.
Six people were killed – a reminder of what can happen if violent polarization continues between neighboring towns and villages.
Vendetta politics is not unknown in Libya, and, in an armed society comprising more than 120 tribes – including around 30 with significant numbers and resources – it can become extremely dangerous.
Another negative scenario is military rule.
Several figures from the “free officers” – the group that plotted the 1969 coup against the monarchy – are leading the INC.
They include General Abd al-Fattah Younis, General Soliman Mahmoud, Colonel Khalifa Haftar, Major Mohamed Najm, and others.
Those figures hold a mix of historical legitimacy, for participating in the 1969 coup, and current legitimacy, for helping the 17th February revolution.
They also belong to several large tribes, guaranteeing wide tribal representation if a military council were to take power, as in Egypt.
Unlike Egypt, however, whoever takes power in Libya will not necessarily inherit poor economic conditions that could threaten their legitimacy and undermine their popularity.
This might lead a group of senior officers to rule directly, especially if victory in Libya comes militarily.
A move by army officers in Tripoli against Qaddafi and his sons might end the conflict, with military commanders getting the credit – and the political capital.
But four decades of military-based dictatorship may be enough for Libyans, a majority of whom never really benefited from their country’s wealth or potential.
When it comes to producing terrorists and undocumented immigrants – two critical issues for Europe – Arab military dictators have an inglorious record.
Algeria in the 1990’s is a potent reminder of this, and Western governments do not want the vicious cycle of repressive autocrats producing violent theocrats and refugees to restart.
Getting “stuck in transition” is a third possible scenario, with Libya remaining in a “gray zone” – neither a fully-fledged democracy nor a dictatorship, but “semi-free.”
This means regular elections, a democratic constitution, and civil society, coupled with electoral fraud, skewed representation, human rights violations, and restrictions on civil liberties.
Getting stuck in transition usually kills the momentum for democratic change, and widespread corruption, weak state institutions, and lack of security serve to reinforce a myth of the “just autocrat.”
Vladimir Putin’s rule in Russia illustrates this outcome.
Unfortunately, a study published in the Journal of Democracy showed that out of the 100 countries that were designated “in transition” between 1970 and 2000, only 20 became fully democratic (for example, Chile, Argentina, Poland, and Taiwan).
Five relapsed into brutal dictatorships (including Uzbekistan, Algeria, Turkmenistan, and Belarus), while the rest were stuck somewhere in transition.
Given Libya’s lack of democratic experience, some view this as a likely outcome in the post-Qaddafi era.
But Libya is not the only country that has tried to move from dictatorship to democracy with weak institutions and strong tribal identities.
Albania, Mongolia, and India successfully passed more complicated tests – and offer some useful lessons in democratic transitions under unfavourable conditions.
The fourth scenario is partition, with the old three-province, Ottoman-style setup commonly mentioned: Cyrenaica (east), Fezzan (south), and Tripolitania (west).
Cyrenaica is Qaddafi-free, Tripolitania is not, and Fezzan did not fully join the revolution.
But the administrative borders of these districts were never fully established, and they have changed at least eight times since 1951.
In 2007, Libya had 22 sha‘biya (administrative districts), not three.
All of these scenarios will be affected by outcomes in Egypt and Tunisia.
In the case of democratic transitions, a success nearby often helps at home.
Either country, or both, could offer Libya successful transition models, erecting an important obstacle to military dictatorship or civil war.
Libya Calling
VALLETTA, MALTA – The recent signing in Tripoli of “a comprehensive claims settlement” between the United States and Libya marks a new beginning not only in US-Libya relations, but between Libya and the rest of the world.
The agreement provides a process for compensating the victims of attacks ranging from the 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, to the US air strikes on Tripoli and Benghazi in 1986.
It thus removes a final hurdle to Libya establishing normal diplomatic and economic relations with the West and opens the way for US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice’s visit to Tripoli this week.
The Joint Statement, while clinically welcoming the agreement, states that both parties “thereby turn their focus to the future of their bilateral relationship,” underscoring “the benefits an expansion of ties would provide for both countries as well as for the American and Libyan peoples.”
This is a far cry from recent years, when staying at a Libyan-owned hotel would make you subject to a US felony charge!
Clearly, the way is now open for US-Libya relations to move forward in the same way that the release of a group of Bulgarian nurses, who were jailed in Libya on charges of deliberately infecting Libyan children with AIDS, unblocked European Union-Libya relations.
Indeed, Libya has also just strengthened its relations with the EU: Seif al-Islam Gaddafi, the son of Libya’s long-serving ruler, Muammar al-Gaddafi, recently declared that soon the two sides should be able to sign an Association agreement, giving Libyan goods access to European markets.
In his effort to restore seemingly irreparably damaged relations with the West, Gaddafi has played the oil and gas cards that he holds extremely well.
Indeed, the West’s hunger for energy brought invitations for Libya’s leader to visit France, Spain, and Portugal within the past year.
This opening is welcome, because Libya remains heavily engaged with the other countries of the Sahel, and across Africa in general, as well as with Arab states.
A more development-minded Libya could help dampen tensions in these vital regions.  Indeed, Gaddafi’s emphatic call for Libya to embrace the market economy could have a sort of revolutionary domino effect among North Africa’s “dirigiste” economies, improving the chances for a revitalization of plans to open and integrate the Maghreb Union economies.
Libya’s newfound engagement with the US and the EU represents not only a major shift in its international policies and diplomatic posture, but also a major internal reorientation, because the country now wants to develop an economy that is not exclusively based on oil.
Indeed, like so many post-communist countries over the past 20 years, Libya is now making the gradual and at times painful transition to a market economy.
Given that Islamic fundamentalism breeds in economic despair, Libya’s rulers seem to want to take particular care that this process does not create an underclass of victims who might fall prey to the call of religious fanatics.
Of course, it is unrealistic and naïve to expect that the changes now underway in Libya will result in a rapid transition to European-style democracy.
Libyan politics will undoubtedly continue to be based on Gaddafi’s “Green Book” and “people power,” as expressed in its People’s Congress.
But Gaddafi now seems to want to reconcile his teachings and rule with a more open economy, including foreign direct investment and market-based competition.
Internally, Libya has launched a “Go East” policy, so that development does not become clustered only in its oil and gas regions and around the capital of Tripoli.
It wants, in particular, to ensure that the people and tribes in its Eastern “Cyrenaica” territories centered in Benghazi have a chance to develop equally with the rest of the country.
A bulwark of secular government and anti-fundamentalism in a North Africa that is struggling to contain the spread of Islamic extremism, Libya is of strategic importance to Europe and the US beyond its oil riches, notwithstanding the overwhelming significance of its energy resources.
Fully aware of its growing importance in an oil-starved world, Libya will use that advantage to the full and it will no doubt guard, with Gaddafi at the forefront, its sovereign rights vociferously and assiduously.
Nevertheless, drawing Libya deeper into international discourse, despite the possibility of roadblocks along the way, is a strategic decision that, now that it has been taken, the West must pursue with patience, perseverance, and constant nurturing.
In that process, underestimating Libyan diplomacy, shrewdness and negotiating skills is the folly of the ignorant.
Libya’s Defeated Islamists
TRIPOLI – “We certainly did not expect the results, but...our future is certainly better than our present and our past,” said Sami al-Saadi, the former ideologue of the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group and the founder of the political party al-Umma al-Wasat, which finished third in Central Tripoli during Libya’s recent parliamentary election.
The man whom Taliban leader Mullah Omar once called the “Sheikh of the Arabs,” and who authored the LIFG’s anti-democracy manifesto The Choice is Theirs, accepted the apparent victory of Libya’s more liberal forces.
Indeed, the results raised eyebrows, even of those analysts who did not expect an Islamist landslide.
In the electoral district that includes Derna, commonly viewed as an Islamist stronghold, the liberal-leaning National Forces Coalition (NFC), a grouping of more than 60 parties and hundreds of local civil-society organizations, won 59,769 votes, while the Justice and Construction Party (JCP) of the Muslim Brothers (MB) received only 8,619.
The liberal-leaning Central National Trend (CNT) finished third, with 4,962 votes.
In the impoverished western district of Abu Selim, where many Islamists are seen as local heroes due to their sacrifices under Colonel Muammar el-Qaddafi’s regime, the NFC swept the field with 60,052 votes, defeating all six Islamist parties, which received a combined total of less than 15,000 votes.
Overall, liberal-leaning parties finished first in 11 of Libya’s 13 electoral districts, with the NFC winning ten and the CNT taking one.
To be sure, the results will affect only 80 of the 200 seats in the constituent assembly, whose mandate is to appoint a prime minister, government, and a committee to draft the constitution.
The other 120 seats are assigned to individual candidates, who are likely to be local notables, independents with strong tribal affiliations, and, to a lesser extent, a mix of Islamist and liberal politicians.
Moreover, while the Islamists were soundly defeated, they performed quite well in many districts.
Across Libya, they took second place in ten districts (the JCP in nine and the Salafi-leaning Originality Coalition in one).
In Misrata, the JCP finished second, after the local Union for Homeland Party, but still managed to win almost three times as many votes as the NFC, which came in fourth.
Nevertheless, the question remains: what happened to the Islamists?
They spearheaded the opposition to Qaddafi, were advised by their Tunisian and Egyptian brethren, and larded their rhetoric with religious symbolism in a conservative Muslim country.
For many, however, this was not enough.
A striking difference between Egypt’s Muslim Brotherhood and Tunisia’s Ennahda, on the one hand, and Libya’s Islamists on the other is the level of institutionalization and interaction with the masses.
In Qaddafi’s four decades in power, Libya’s Islamists could not build local support networks; develop organizational structures, hierarchies, or institutions; or create a parallel system of clinics and social services, as their counterparts in Egypt, Tunisia, Morocco, and Jordan were able to do.
As a result, Libya’s Islamists could not unite in a coalition as large as that of Mahmoud Jibril, the former prime minister under the National Transitional Council, who heads the NFC.
Instead, their votes were divided between several parties, six of which are significant.
But another reason for the strong “liberal” turnout is the “blood” factor.
“I am not giving my family’s votes to the MB.
Two of my cousins died because of them,” Mohamed Abdul Hakim, a voter from Benghazi, told me.
He agrees that Islam should be the source for legislation, and his wife wears a niqab.
Nonetheless, he voted liberal: his cousins were killed in a confrontation in the 1990’s, most likely between the Martyrs Movement (a small jihadist group operating in his neighborhood at the time) and Qaddafi’s forces.
But many average Libyans, including Hakim, do not distinguish between Islamist organizations and their histories.
For them, all Islamists are “Ikhwan” (MB).
The “stain” of direct involvement in armed action, coupled with fear of Taliban-like laws or a civil war like Algeria’s in the 1990’s harmed Islamists of all brands.
A third reason for the Islamists’ defeat had to do with their campaign rhetoric.
“It is offensive to tell me that I have to vote for an Islamic party,” Jamila Marzouki, an Islamic studies graduate, told me.
Marzouki voted liberal, despite believing that Islam should be the ultimate reference for Libyan laws.
“In Libya, we are Muslims.
They can’t take away my identity and claim that it’s only theirs.”
Others factors had to do more with the liberal side.
Jibril’s international legitimacy, his tribal affiliation (the Warfalla tribe includes about one million of Libya’s 6.4 million people), and leadership style, coupled with a broad coalition, served the country’s liberal forces well.
So did a clever electoral campaign, which focused on incentives and hope (while also exaggerating the repercussions of an Islamist takeover).
The result was yet another paradox of the Arab Spring: a country that seemed to meet all of the conditions for an Islamist victory produced the sort of election results that liberals in Egypt and Tunisia could only dream about.
Libya’s Jihadist Minority
DOHA – “They are armed, I am not going to fight a losing battle and kill my men over a demolished shrine,” said Fawzi Abd al-‘Aali, the former Libyan interior minister, before he “resigned” last August.
He was referring to the armed Salafi groups that were accused of destroying Sufi shrines.
One of the accused groups was the Ansar al-Shariah Brigade, which was quick to support the demolition, but denied any responsibility for it.
Ahmed Jibril, Libya’s deputy ambassador to London, has now accused the Brigade, headed by Muhammed Ali Al-Zahawy, of perpetrating the attack on the US Consulate in Benghazi, which killed the American ambassador, Christopher Stevens, and three other US personnel, as well as Libyan guards.
Others have quickly embraced and promoted Jibril’s allegation.
But the picture is more complex.
The&nbsp;Brigade denied responsibility in a written statement, as well as in a brief interview with its spokesperson, who at the time was in charge of guarding Al Jala&nbsp;Hospital in Benghazi.
Like its statement on the destruction of Sufi shrines, it denied involvement in the attack on the US Consulate, but stressed the gravity of the insult against the Prophet that putatively triggered it.
The Brigade attracted public attention last June as well, when around 300 armed members staged a rally in Benghazi, sparking outrage among Libyans.
“We wanted to send a message to the General National Council members,” according to Hashim Al-Nawa‘, one of the Brigade’s commanders. “They should not come near the Shariah.
It should be above the constitution, and not an article for referendum.”
But was the Ansar al-Shariah Brigade really behind the attack on the US Consulate?
The nature of Libya’s post-revolution armed Islamist forces is by no means straightforward.
Salafi jihadism is not an organization, but an ideological trend based on the core belief that armed tactics of all kinds are the most effective – and, in some versions, the most legitimate – method of bringing about social and political change.
Last year, its adherents did play an important role in the removal of Libya’s brutal dictator, Colonel Muammar el-Qaddafi.
Many subsequently matured politically, revised their worldview, and shifted from armed to unarmed activism, forming political parties and contesting elections.
The Libyan Islamic Fighting Group, for example, has produced two main political parties.
Al Watan (The Homeland) is led by former LIFG and Tripoli Military Council commander Abd al-Hakim Belhaj.
The other, Al Umma al-Wasat (The Central Nation), is led by Sami al-Saadi, the group’s former chief ideologist, and Abd al-Wahad Qaid, an LIFG military commander and the brother of the deceased Al Qaeda commander Hasan Qaid (Abu Yahya al-Libi).
Both parties fared poorly in the election in July of a new General National Congress, with only Qaid winning a seat.
Indeed, the GNC elections were in many ways a defeat for Libya’s non-violent Salafi parties(such as Al Asala), as well as for the post-jihadists.
Other armed Islamist formations, including Salafi groups, accepted integration into Libya’s new state institutions, such as the Supreme Security Committee (interior ministry) and the Libyan Shield Force (defense ministry).
The National Guard, headed by the former LIFG deputy leader, Khaled al-Sharif, absorbed more than 30 brigades, mostly from the west and southwest.
But several armed formations, such as Ansar al-Shariah and the Imprisoned Sheikh Omar Abd al-Rahman Brigades, still reject the transition to party politics and integration into state institutions.
These organizations are numerous, but small.
Some were not invited –&nbsp;or given sufficient incentive – to join official bodies.
“Nobody asked us to join the army or the police,” Sufian bin Qumu, Ansar al-Shariah’s commander in Derna and a former Guantánamo detainee, said in an interview last April. “They did not even give me or any of my men a reward for fighting.”
Bin Qumu has a small paramilitary force training in the Bou Musafir forest on the outskirts of Derna.
He insists that if the head of the boy scouts or the city’s clan leaders asked him to disband the training camp, he would do so.
The tragic death of Stevens and his colleagues has engendered wide public outrage in Libya, adding to the isolation and de-legitimization of the armed groups.
Dozens of Libyan activist groups have uploaded videos paying tribute to Stevens, as well as issuing statements against terrorism and Al Qaeda.
One of the Muslim Brothers’ Web sites includes such a statement, and Libya’s Grand Mufti, Sheikh Sadeq al-Gheriani, also condemned the attack.
Two issues remain critical in Libya to prevent future tragedies.
The first is the need to capitalize on public support and continue the disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration process that started under the National Transitional Council but was never completed.
Second, the government must enhance its communication strategy.
Arab Spring governments condemned the outrageous movie smearing the Prophet of Islam, but they should have stressed that American official and unofficial bodies had nothing to do with the film’s production.
Collective punishment and targeting the innocent is forbidden in the Koran in more than 20 verses: “That no burdened person (with sins) shall bear the burden (sins) of another” (The Star Chapter 53:38).
Libya’s Shadow on Sovereign Wealth Funds
NEW YORK – As Libya’s citizens rebuild their lives and economy, undoing the corruption in the Libyan Investment Authority (LIA), the sovereign wealth fund in which Muammar el-Qaddafi’s regime allegedly stashed and misused Libya’s oil wealth, is becoming a priority.
The National Transitional Council is debating who should take over Libya’s Central Bank and the LIA’s assets – an especially important decision, given that oil production is not expected to return to pre-war levels for several years.
Regardless of how the Libyan government eventually handles the LIA, all sovereign wealth funds – and their advisers and fundraisers – can learn several important lessons.
Of course, no one should infer from the Libyan case that other SWFs across the board are riddled with corruption and conflicts of interest.
The LIA has always been exceptional; indeed, several indices that rank SWFs on transparency, accountability, and governance issues have traditionally given only Iran a lower ranking.
Yet, while hard cases tend to make bad law and it is too early to judge, the LIA should be a wake-up call for corporations and funds both in the Middle East and around the globe.
First, governments should better clarify the sources of funding behind each particular investment.
Private funding that turns out to be public funding tied to the ruling family or government ministers presents different political and financial risks and should therefore be valued differently.
Second, the Libyan crisis has crystallized the problem of corporate shares owned by sovereign governments.
When the United States and the European Union decided to impose sanctions on the Libyan regime, including freezing shares owned by the LIA in European and American companies, many executives at these companies were surprised by how dramatically their firms were affected by the ownership structure.
Clearly, the liquidity of the shares and the perception of a lack of diligence on the part of corporate managers matters mightily.
Third, the LIA saga highlights SWFs’ potential cumulative effect on the stability of global markets.
All SWFs can respond to global political events by quickly withdrawing funds invested abroad.
As one of the WikiLeaks documents revealed, American diplomats lobbied the Libyan government during the financial crisis to keep funds in US banks, and to invest directly in a troubled US financial institution.
In this case, the Libyans did not respond by withdrawing a large amount of funds, but that could happen in the future.
Some argue that SWFs’ home governments and host countries have too many mutual interests – including the stability of the financial system and maintaining the US dollar as the world’s reserve currency – to threaten global markets.
That is true, on average and in normal times, but what happens if many SWFs, responding to sudden uncertainty and volatility, pull back at the same time for diplomatic or commercial reasons?
Individually rational behavior is often collectively suicidal.
Finally, the Libyan case and the Dubai debt crisis of 2009 might increase suspicion in the developed world and lead to protectionism against SWFs, especially those from North Africa and the Gulf.
The free flow of capital from these regions’ SWFs to corporations in the advanced countries is crucial in order to balance the global economy and provide liquidity to financial markets, especially given the prospect of another recession in the West.
Both home and host states will have to make sure that the current conflict over the LIA will not impede this important process.
But are we being fair by comparing the various regions’ SWFs and expecting them to adhere to Western standards?
The current efforts to restructure Libya’s Central Bank and LIA will affect markets’ perceptions of other sovereign players in the region.
Bahrain and Dubai come to mind.
Although recent reports of the International Working Group of sovereign funds have indicated the difficulties in applying uniform governance standards, several measures are needed in order to bring Libya back to global capital markets.
Despite the unique status of Libya’s economy and political system today, scrutinizing the process of investment in foreign companies, as well as defining the nature of the relationships between the Libyan regime and fund management, is necessary to ensure healthy commercial relations between sovereigns and their portfolio investments.
Large allocations based on pragmatic political concerns, such as Libya-Italy relations, or cronyism should be reevaluated in the light of better and stronger governance practices.
Both governments and corporations should internalize the message and learn from the Libyan example.
The alternative may be too expensive for shareholders and citizens alike.
Libya’s Transition to Transition
SIRTE, LIBYA – Although Libyans are now celebrating the first anniversary of the revolution that toppled Muammar el-Qaddafi, they are increasingly frustrated with their new leaders.
Libyans complain that the interim government, known as the National Transitional Council (NTC), has not moved quickly enough to purge and prosecute senior Qaddafi officials, or to rein in the militias that overthrew his regime.
Though the NTC is dedicated to implementing Libyans’ demands, it lacks the technical capacity and time necessary to do so before the elections tentatively scheduled for this coming summer.
Facing such constraints, it must concentrate on a small number of important initiatives, before turning power over to an elected government.
Political experience has never been a prerequisite for NTC membership.
One representative was named to the Council because he defected with his MIG fighter plane 20 years ago.
Other members were previously political prisoners or exiled dissidents.
Unseasoned in the art of politics, the NTC frequently lacks the foresight needed to make critical decisions.
During last year’s eight-month revolution, the NTC concentrated on overthrowing Qaddafi, gaining international recognition, and securing access to frozen Libyan assets. Those tasks left little room for attention to planning a post-Qaddafi Libya.
Today, the NTC simply does not have the human resources to consolidate the transition.
Libya has never been blessed with a professional bureaucracy like that of neighboring Egypt.
Qaddafi frequently farmed out power to municipalities and citizens in an attempt to bypass the civil servants who consistently thwarted his grandiose plans.
And almost two decades of international sanctions prevented a generation of Libyans from gaining the necessary technical skills by studying at Western universities.
Even the oil sector – the lifeline of the Libyan economy, accounting for 95% of the country’s foreign-currency earnings – suffers from a shortage of professional managers.
According to an American diplomatic cable released by WikiLeaks, “Libyans put forward for employment with foreign (oil) companies often lack formal qualifications or applicable practical experience.”
Instead of injecting new blood into senior government posts during his 42 years in power, Qaddafi merely shuffled cronies between ministries.
His last foreign-intelligence chief, Abu Zayd Dorda, epitomizes this trend.
During his 30-year political career, Dorda held numerous cabinet portfolios, ranging from agriculture to economics to municipalities. Dorda later served as Speaker of Parliament, Prime Minister, and Ambassador to the United Nations.
Today, the NTC is hard-pressed to find competent, politically untainted bureaucrats to fill its ministries.
But that does not concern most Libyans, who are clamoring for the dismissal of Qaddafi loyalists.
One name on the tip of many tongues here is Central Bank Governor Sadiq al-Kabir.
Others, such as Libya’s former ambassador to France, Omar Brebesh, were found dead, apparently tortured by a militia that spearheaded the campaign to overthrow Qaddafi.
Lack of skilled civil servants is also making it difficult for the NTC to push through the changes that Libyans are demanding.
The Council is not ready to try senior Qaddafi officials, many of whom are now in the custody of militias, because the existing justice system was never tasked with prosecuting political cases.
Such trials were held in revolutionary courts staffed by Qaddafi zealots and operating outside the formal judiciary.
With no prospect for a fair trial in the foreseeable future, Qaddafi officials languish in jails.
Such bureaucratic inertia does not sit well with the many Libyans who are still undecided about the revolution.
But it is not only a shortage of capable public servants that hamstrings the NTC. Just as pressing are the time constraints under which it is operating.
Since its inception last February, the NTC has consistently declared itself to be a transitional body that would cede power to an elected government once the country was liberated.
With elections set to be held no later than June 23, the Council has less than four months to prepare Libya for its first free vote in sixty years.
As a result, the NTC simply does not have the time necessary to implement the changes the Libyan people expect.
It will not be able to disband the myriad militias that are destabilizing the country, because it cannot find their fighters the vocational training that it hopes will entice them to return to civilian life. It will fall on an elected government to carry out these reforms.
With the NTC confronting so many dilemmas with so little time, it must concentrate on a small number of key issues that can be resolved before it hands over power.
The Council needs to focus on establishing some degree of rule of law, and on curbing militia abuses. It must respect and protect individual rights in order to demonstrate to Libyans that the type of arbitrary justice that characterized the Qaddafi era will not be tolerated.
The NTC may not be able to solve all of Libya’s problems.
But, by chipping away at the mountain of challenges that the country faces, it can ease the burdens that will confront the elected government that emerges from the popular vote in June.
Libya’s Unwilling Revolutionaries
TRIPOLI – Egypt is not the only place where the bright hopes of the Arab Spring are fading.
From attacks against Western governments to ethnic clashes in remote desert oases, Libya’s revolution is faltering.
The blame for Libya’s current travails rests largely with the interim government that led the uprising.
The National Transitional Council refuses to make difficult decisions, instead palming them off to a future elected government.
The NTC has preserved much of the institutional paralysis and knee-jerk behavior typical of Colonel Muammar al-Qaddafi’s overthrown regime.
If the Libyan revolution is to succeed, the country’s new leaders must make a clean break with the spirit of the past.
During his 42 years in power, Qaddafi surrounded himself with advisers who were companions from his youth, supplemented by a small coterie of technocrats.
As a result, the leaders of the revolt that overthrew him have little government experience.
And, in a country where any political activity was considered treasonous, many expected the neophyte NTC to stumble early and often.
And so it has.
Indeed, the revolution was never a smooth affair.
When fighters failed to defeat loyalist forces on their own, outside powers were compelled to intervene.
Later, the NTC was unable to impose discipline on the myriad militias that formed to fight Qaddafi’s troops, or even to direct foreign weapons efficiently to the fledgling Libyan National Army.
When the military chief of staff was assassinated in July under mysterious circumstances, the NTC could not offer concrete answers to an angry public.
With no access to Libyan assets frozen abroad, it frequently paid salaries weeks in arrears.
While the battle against Qaddafi was still raging, Libyans considered it unpatriotic to point out the NTC’s weaknesses.
Today, however, those flaws have been magnified by its paralysis.
The NTC deliberates rather than decides.
The two-thirds majority required to pass legislation means that many bills die after extensive debate.
Many NTC members believe that the Council lacks the legitimacy to make tough choices.
They argue that the NTC should limit itself to serving as a caretaker government, implementing only the most essential decisions until elected officials take office.
As a result, the NTC and the cabinet that it appointed, known as the executive committee, merely want to pass the baton of authority.
Hesitant to leave a large imprint in their wake, some ministries have no budgets, and ministers are reluctant to sign deals with foreign firms.
But, beyond the question of the proper role of custodian governments lies the indecisiveness of the NTC’s leaders, who simply prefer to defer to others.
When a colonel recently asked NTC Chairman Mustafa Abdel-Jalil why he has not moved to merge the militias into a national army, Abdel-Jalil replied, “I head the legislative branch.
You must speak with the executive (committee).”
Other senior Libyan officials suffer from the same managerial torpor.
The NTC’s first prime minister, Mahmud Jibril, was praised by the international community for his vision.
But much like Abdel-Jalil, Jibril proved unable to make decisions.
The NTC’s paralysis is clearly reflected in the trial of Qaddafi’s son, Saif al-Islam el-Qaddafi.&nbsp; Though considered the most prized captive of the ancien regime, the Council has made little progress in prosecuting him.
Ahmad Jihani, Libya’s representative to the International Criminal Court, recently told me that, “we as Libyans cannot begin Saif’s trial.
There is no central power to prosecute him.”
The ICC prosecutor echoed his sentiments in a June 5 legal brief, noting that “the Government of Libya may be unable to move the case forward.”
With no progress toward trying Qaddafi for war crimes, the NTC is holding him on the innocuous charge of failure to possess a camel license.
Bureaucrats lament ministerial dithering.
“Everyday people come with ideas to demobilize the fighters and integrate them into society,” notes an official in the Labor Ministry, referring to the most pressing problem facing the NTC.
“But, with no one to make a decision, all of these plans just sit on our desks.”
One reason for this inertia can be found in Libya’s prevailing political culture.
For decades, Qaddafi personally reviewed every agreement worth more than $200 million and often chose which foreign firms would receive contracts.
When he devolved ministerial planning to bureaucrats in 2008, many were not pleased.
“Unused to planning and possessed of limited human capacity, senior officials in the ministries are very nervous,” an American diplomatic cable released by WikiLeaks reported.
Libya’s new leaders suffer from something worse than foot-dragging.
They are falling back on the same facile, prefabricated responses that Qaddafi used to demonize his domestic and international opponents for four decades.
For example, when eastern Libyans recently announced the formation of an interim regional council as a first step toward declaring a federalist state, Abdel-Jalil alleged “the beginning of a conspiracy against Libya” in the brewing crisis between the country’s provinces.
Life after Darwin
MARSEILLE – Many Greek philosophers perceived the world to be in perpetual motion – a process of constant evolution.
Darwin’s vision of the world deeply influenced biology in the twentieth century, despite persistent questions posed by factors such as lateral gene transfer, neutral evolution, and chaotic bottlenecks in natural selection.
But recent genetic research unequivocally refutes this worldview.
Life is primarily the expression of the information contained in genes.
All living organisms appear as mosaics of genetic tissue, or chimeras, suggesting that no two genes have the same evolutionary history.
This framework is incompatible with the “tree of life” representation.
Rather, it resembles a rhizome – an underground stem that sends out roots and shoots that develop into new plants.
Indeed, we now know that the proportion of genetic sequences on earth that belongs to visible organisms is negligible.
Furthermore, only 15% of the genetic sequences found in the samples from the environment and from feces analyzed in metagenomic studies belong to the three domains of microbes currently recognized in the tree-of-life framework – bacteria, archaea, and eukaryotes.
Viruses contain another 15-30% of these genetic sequences.
The unidentified genetic sequences pose a problem, because it is not known whether vehicles other than viruses, bacteria, archaea, and eukaryotes exist.
Conversely, we know that new genes, designated ORFans (“orphan genes”), are commonly created by gene duplication, fusion, or other unknown mechanisms.
Yet, according to Darwin’s tree of life concept, this phenomenon would be impossible.
Human cells comprise genes of eukaryotic, bacterial, archaean, and viral origin.
As this chimerism increases, it occasionally integrates genes from microbes that live within the human body – as happens when a human is infected by herpesvirus 6.
Once integrated in a person’s genome, these genes can be transmitted from parent to child – making microbial genes their “grandfathers.”
This transfer of genetic sequences from parasites to hosts could involve hundreds of genes for a bacterium in different hosts.
For example, if the bacterium Wolbachia’s genes are integrated by different hosts, such as spiders, insects, or worms, the hosts’ offspring are also descendants of Wolbachia.
Moreover, certain viruses’ size and genetic repertoire is comparable with that of bacteria, archaea, or small eukaryotes.
Indeed, the life of giant viruses is as complex as that of like-sized microorganisms.
But the current classification of the domains of life is based on the ribosome – the production apparatus of proteins – which does not exist in these viruses.
Without ribosomes, traditionalists say, viruses cannot be considered biological entities comparable to other microbes.
But that is pure dogma; these viruses are akin to the other microbes.
Darwin’s theory is further used to support the belief that ancient humans – Neanderthal, Cro-Magnon, and Denisova – did not mix.
In fact, based on Darwin’s assumptions, most anthropologists claim that modern humans were simply descended from Cro-Magnons, who had exterminated their less-fit adversaries.
Given this supposition, a single name (Homo sapiens) is used for both modern humans and the preferred ancestor, Cro-Magnon.
But we now know that modern humans are chimeras of these three ancient humans.
This understanding also refutes the legend of “Mitochondrial Eve,” the woman from whom all humans supposedly descend on their mother’s side.
Research on the human leukocyte antigen genes, which are involved in the human immune response, shows that such a common ancestor could not have existed; this group of genes derives from those of all three known ancient humans.
Genetic research, in particular, must be free to find new models to explain, and enhance, twenty-first-century scientific discovery.
Today, Darwin’s theory of evolution is more a hindrance than a help, because it has become a quasi-theological creed that is preventing the benefits of improved research from being fully realized.
Life by the Numbers
NEW YORK – Last week, I learned that I don't have cancer.
My doctor called and said, “I have some good news!”
Fortunately, we were in the middle of a fire drill in my office at the time, so no one noticed as I blinked back tears of relief.
I had found the lump almost two weeks earlier, while at a conference in South Africa.
I returned home early to have a biopsy, but the pathology lab was achingly slow; days passed with no word.
Clearly they were working hard to figure out exactly how bad my condition was.
In fact, they were working hard not to miss anything before they concluded that my tumor was rare but benign.
I had been preparing for the diagnosis for more than a week…and to some extent for years, as I turned my investing focus from “all things Internet” to all things health-related.
It turns out that understanding and promoting health is a great application of information technology.
Health increasingly involves numbers.
Many of those numbers aren't just medical probabilities; they concern daily life choices that you can make before you get sick (or are threatened, as I was).
As a director of 23andMe, a consumer genetics start-up, and a participant in the Personal Genome Project research study (http://www.personalgenomes.org/public/3.html#Data_Sets), I have been studying how genes affect one's chances of getting various diseases, and how much impact behavior can have on those chances.
For most people and for most conditions, the genetic chances of becoming ill are well below 20%.
Moreover, regardless of your genotype, you can raise or lower those chances through diet, exercise, avoidance of stress, and engagement with friends.
Yet there is some emerging thinking – and statistics – about how the toxins we encounter in the modern world affect our immune system, which in turn affects our bodies’ ability to combat cancerous cells.
Everyone has cancer cells every day, but usually the body deals with them, using strength gained from eating right, exercise, and social engagement.
When the body gets overloaded or weakened, cancer has an extra chance of winning, especially if you have a genetic vulnerability to a particular cancer.
Before finding out that I would get a free pass – this time, at least – I had already started considering my options.
I have no particular risk for breast cancer – no family history, and no known genetic markers.
But that is true for many of the one-in-eight women who get breast cancer over their lifetimes in the United States.
Given that I'm almost 60, it's probably not life-threatening (or not that much more so than being 60 itself!).
Even without cancer, I have perhaps 30 years left, 40 if I’m lucky.
If I were a young mother, I would trade almost anything for the chance to see my kids grow up, but, as an older person, I'm more concerned with quality of life than length.
Of course, if the cancer was aggressive, I would take more treatment now just to stay alive.
If it was slow-growing, I’d remove the tumor and engage in what is called “watchful waiting.”
Perhaps the most important thing to understand is statistics – whether for cancer or health in general.
In my case, they could have gone something like this: assume you have a 70% chance of survival (defined as no recurrence for five years) if you simply have the tumor removed.
Radiation and chemotherapy treatments can reduce recurrence by a further 30%.
That sounds like a lot, until you realize that it means your “survival” chances go up only nine points, from 70% to 79%, because it is the 30% recurrence rate that drops 30%, to 21%.
That is not such a great increase in odds, given that there may be better treatments available by the time the cancer recurs, and that costs of treatment – in time, pain, and side-effects such as heart disease and cognitive impairment (“chemo brain”), as well as money – are high.
Was I willing to take on three years of aggressive treatment and potential long-term side-effects for a 10-point increase in my chances of being alive and cancer-free for five years, especially since no one really knows what the chances of recurrence in 10 or 20 years are?  Meanwhile, five years from now there may be new drugs that are more effective and less toxic, mitigating the downside of a later recurrence.
These numbers may be perplexing, but they are useful to understand.
Almost everyone is faced at some point with decisions about treatments and side-effects, for themselves and for loved ones.
Indeed, you are probably facing such choices right now – if you pay attention to them.
A large number of painful, dangerous conditions are more likely if you are overweight, under-exercised, a big drinker, lonely, or stressed.
Even if you’re not and get such a disease anyway, you will be better able to cope and undergo treatment if your health is good.
It may be that the main value of services such as 23andMe (at least until researchers use its data and others to learn a lot more about genetics) is not the specific genetic details, but the way that it makes us focus on the numbers.
Whether we are choosing what to eat or how much to exercise, or trying to assess our chances of a specific condition, the numbers make it feel real and immediate.
For example, a vague warning against diabetes is a lot easier to ignore than the fact that your risk of diabetes is 22% (as mine is, slightly above normal), but that you can lower it substantially (as I have) by eating right, exercising, and so forth.
Yet many people are afraid of knowing these numbers; they don’t realize that they are a guide, and something that they can change, rather than an immutable destiny. Just as a student can improve his grades by studying or an athlete can improve his performance by practicing, so you can change many of the numbers that define your health prospects.
Life Made to Order
MELBOURNE – In the sixteenth century, the alchemist Paracelsus offered a recipe for creating a living being that began with putting sperm into putrefying “venter equinus.” This is usually translated as “horse manure,” but the Latin “venter” means abdomen or uterus.
So occultists now will no doubt have a fine time with the fact that Craig Venter was the driving force behind the team of scientists that last month announced that they had created a synthetic form of life: a bacterium with a genome designed and created from chemicals in a laboratory.
The new bacterium, nicknamed “Synthia,” replicates and produces proteins.
By any reasonable definition, it is alive.
Although it is very similar to a natural bacterium from which it was largely copied, the creators put distinctive strings of DNA into its genome to prove that it is not a natural object.
These strings spell out, in code, a Web site address, the names of the researchers, and apt quotations, such as Richard Feynman’s “What I cannot build, I cannot understand.”
For some years now, synthetic biology has been looming as the next big issue in bioethics.
The scientists at the J. Craig Venter Institute expected to be told that they were “playing God,” and they were not disappointed.
Yes, if one believes that life was created by God, then this comes as close to “playing God” as humans have come, so far.
Well-known University of Pennsylvania bioethicist Art Caplan says that the achievement ranks as a discovery of historic significance, because it “would seem to extinguish the argument that life requires a special force or power to exist.”
Asked about the significance of what the team had done, Venter described it as bringing about “a giant philosophical change in how we view life.”
Others have pointed out that, although the team produced a synthetic genome, they put it into a cell from another bacterium, replacing that cell’s DNA.
We have yet to build a living organism entirely from bottles of chemicals, so anyone who believes in a “life force” that only a divine being could imbue into inert matter will no doubt continue to believe in it.
At a more practical level, Venter said, the team’s work has produced “a very powerful set of tools” for redesigning life.
There are good grounds for objecting to turning a sentient being into a patented laboratory tool, but it is not so easy to see why patent law should not cover newly designed bacteria or algae, which can feel nothing and may be as useful as any other invention.
Indeed, Synthia’s very existence challenges the distinction between living and artificial that underlies much of the opposition to “patenting life” – though pointing this out is not to approve the granting of sweeping patents that prevent other scientists from making their own discoveries in this important new field.
As for the likely usefulness of synthetic bacteria, the fact that Synthia’s birth had to compete for headlines with news of the world’s worst-ever oil spill made the point more effectively than any public-relations effort could have done.
One day, we may be able to design bacteria that can quickly, safely, and effectively clean up oil spills.
And, according to Venter, if his team’s new technology had been available last year, it would have been possible to produce a vaccine to protect ourselves against H1N1 influenza in 24 hours, rather than several weeks.
The most exciting prospect held out by Venter, however, is a form of algae that can absorb carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and use it to create diesel fuel or gasoline.
Synthetic Genomics has a $600 million agreement with ExxonMobil to obtain fuel from algae.
Obviously, the release of any synthetic organism must be carefully regulated, just like the release of any genetically modified organism.
But any risk must be weighed against other grave threats that we face.
For example, international climate-change negotiations appear to have reached an impasse, and public skepticism about global warming is rising, even as the scientific evidence continues to show that it is real and will endanger the lives of billions of people.
In such circumstances, the admittedly very real risks of synthetic biology seem decisively outweighed by the hope that it may enable us to avert a looming environmental catastrophe.
The Real Lima Deal
LIMA – It was the agreement that everyone wanted, yet that no one much likes.
This year’s annual United Nations climate-change conference in Lima, Peru, finally concluded in the early hours of Sunday morning, more than 24 hours after the scheduled close, after fierce argument in the final days.
Negotiators from 196 countries patched together a compromise that keeps the world on course to a new global climate agreement in Paris next year; but almost everyone was left unhappy with some provision or another.
Many critics of the deal, however, have missed the point.
The Lima deal is weak in many respects.
But it also represents a fundamental breakthrough for shaping a comprehensive global climate regime.
The Lima conference had two goals.
The first was to adopt an outline of the text of the 2015 Paris agreement.
This goal was achieved – but only by creating a huge 37-page document containing every possible option that countries may want to see in next year’s deal.
Delegates did not attempt to negotiate between the various options, taking to heart the old maxim “Why do today what you can put off until tomorrow?”
That negotiation has been left to the five sessions of talks scheduled for 2015, starting in February.
Given the divergence among the positions included in the Lima text, arriving at a draft fit for signing in Paris next December will be a huge task.
The second goal was to agree on the terms under which countries will devise their national commitments – officially, their “intended nationally determined contributions” (INDCs) – in 2015.
Here, the compromises were sharply felt.
Developing countries wanted the INDCs to include plans for adaptation to climate change as well as emissions cuts, and they wanted developed countries to include financial support for poorer countries.
Instead, no commitments to new money were made, and the inclusion of adaptation plans will be optional, not compulsory.
Meanwhile, developed countries wanted all countries to provide standardized information on their emissions targets and plans, to ensure transparency and comparability.
The key elements were agreed on, but only in the form of guidance, not as requirements.
Likewise, the proposal by the European Union and the United States that countries’ plans be subject to some kind of assessment was dropped from the final text.
But the aggregate effect of all countries’ plans will be calculated, allowing evaluation next year of whether the world has done enough to limit average global warming to the agreed ceiling of 2º Celsius.
It almost certainly will have not.
For many of the agreement’s critics, particularly those in the environmental movement, these compromises made the Lima deal an excessively “bottom-up” agreement.
Countries have too much latitude to make whatever commitments they want, relatively unconstrained by a common set of “top-down” rules imposed by the agreement.
Such critics worry that this will make it harder to persuade countries to cut emissions further when it becomes clear that their collective efforts are not enough, and that it may even allow some countries to use irregular accounting methods.
But this overlooks the Lima agreement’s greatest accomplishment: It ends the longstanding division of the world into only two kinds of countries, developed and developing.
Ever since the original UN Framework Convention on Climate Change was signed in 1992, countries’ obligations have been defined according to their level of development in that year.
The rich so-called “Annex 1” countries have had compulsory obligations, while poorer “non-Annex 1” countries merely have been required to make voluntary efforts.
Over the last 22 years, that binary distinction has looked increasingly obsolete, as the larger developing countries, such as China and Brazil, have emerged as economic superpowers and major greenhouse-gas emitters.
For this reason, the developed world has long wanted to replace the “firewall” between the two historic groupings with a form of differentiation that better reflects the contemporary world.
But the developing countries – including major powers like China – have insisted that it remain.
No longer.
The Lima agreement creates obligations for countries without regard for the distinction between Annex 1 and non-Annex 1.
Rather, it uses a new phrase drawn from the recent agreement between the US and China: countries’ responsibilities will be based on “common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities in light of different national circumstances.”
The firewall has been breached.
In theory, the Lima agreement on INDCs does not determine the shape of the long-term Paris agreement.
So another fierce battle on this issue can be expected next year.
But the vast majority of developing countries – including China and Brazil – are happy with the new regime.
So it is impossible to imagine the binary model being restored – and those countries that opposed the change know it, which is why the final two days in Lima were so fiercely fought.
The Lima conference has shown just how hard the negotiations in Paris next year will be, despite recent optimism about global progress.
But one highly significant decision has now effectively been made.
Abandoning the rigid distinction between developed and developing countries paves the way toward an agreement that all countries, including the US and China, can sign.
Batasan Pertumbuhan Hijau
BERLIN – Dalam beberapa tahun terakhir, pembangunan “ekonomi hijau” (green economy) untuk menghindari krisis lingkungan dan ekonomi yang terus menerus dan mengantar era pertumbuhan berkelanjutan semakin marak.
Akan tetapi, hal ini menimbulkan kontroversi yang tidak diperkirakan sebelumnya. Banyak yang memperkirakan bahwa tidak akan banyak perubahan yang dilakukan, meskipun seruan hijau ada di mana-mana.
Apakah memang sesulit itu untuk menyatukan kepentingan lingkungan dan ekonomi?
Singkatnya, ya.
Persepsi umum menganggap bahwa dengan ekonomi hijau, kita dapat terbebas dari ketergantungan kita pada bahan bakar fosil tanpa menghentikan pertumbuhan.
Banyak pihak yang percaya bahwa ekonomi hijau akan mendorong pertumbuhan baru.
Meskipun menarik, gagasan ini tidak realistis, sebagaimana dijelaskan dalam buku baru kami Inside the Green Economy.
Tentunya ada kemungkinan bahwa ekonomi “hijau” akan berhasil.