Whether the talks between the “P5 + 1” (the United Nations Security Council’s five permanent members and Germany) and Iran, which concluded in Istanbul on April 14 and are due to resume in Baghdad on May 23, have any chance of succeeding remains highly uncertain.
The smart money is most likely being wagered on failure.
But those of little faith need to understand a basic, but sometimes-elusive point about such negotiations: they are conducted for two purposes.
The first purpose is, of course, to persuade the country in question to come around to others’ views.
But negotiation must also demonstrate that everything that could be done has in fact been done before further steps – especially the highly risky and fraught decision to take military action – are considered.
Military measures require broad international acceptance, and that condition can be met only in a context of good-faith efforts at diplomacy.
Effective diplomacy is not just about substance; it is also about timing and sequencing.
Those who support a military solution to the problem of Iran’s nuclear aspirations, without first supporting diplomacy and economic measures of the kind currently being implemented against Iranian exports, miss that point.
Few serious political leaders today argue the case for war.
Those who do have succeeded only in driving up the price of oil, as markets, fearing the likely effect of military action on the region, respond to Iran’s bellicose reactions.
There has been another avenue to cutting short diplomacy with Iran: Israel, which would lie within range of a nuclear-armed Iranian missile, and therefore is most threatened by that prospect.
Being willing to fight to the last Israeli is a familiar pattern for those disinclined to take risks themselves.
But to encourage Israel to do what others with far greater means are not prepared to undertake is to expect a great deal of a small country in the Middle East with problems far and wide, most notably among its neighbors.
Israel, after all, has watched the political developments in Egypt not with hope, but rather with growing alarm.
The Israelis also see with greater clarity than many in the world the nature of the likely successor regime in Syria (hint: it will probably not be comprised exclusively of Facebook and Twitter users).
While it is true that many Arab states worry night and day about a nuclear Iran, they are singularly unlikely to support military intervention by Israel.
After all, this is the Middle East, where, as the old joke goes, the scorpion stings the camel carrying it across the Suez Canal, knowing that they will both drown.
War is a serious means toward serious ends, as Carl von Clausewitz observed almost 200 years ago.
Countries that have suffered it firsthand know better than many its painful effects on subsequent generations.
It is, after all, the human endeavor most associated with unintended consequences.
To advocate military action out of sequence with other efforts, even if those efforts’ odds of succeeding are very long, is to ask a lot not only of the countries that are supposed to support it, but, more importantly, of the men and women who must wage it.
The proper sequencing of steps in dealing with world trouble spots is essential to gaining international support for further action.
The air campaign that ultimately succeeded in breaking Slobodan Milošević’s grip on Kosovo (and later his grip on Serbia proper) was made possible by prolonged diplomacy on the part of the United States, the European Union, and Russia.
No one at the time tried to argue that peace was not given a chance, which is why advocating a quick end to diplomacy when it is judged unlikely to achieve anything is often a mistake.
Many countries will be unlikely to support a military solution until they have seen genuine efforts at other means of persuasion (and coercion) fail.
Even if no military option is contemplated for the future, negotiations can pay other dividends.
On the eve of the start of the six-party talks aimed at disarming North Korea, many opinion surveys in South Korea showed a substantial percentage of the public there blaming the US for the North Korean nuclear threat.
While the six-party process has fallen well short of ending the threat, it has virtually eliminated efforts to blame the US as the culprit.
Iran’s nuclear aspirations are a problem that, if not resolved, could lead to dangerous escalation, as countries such as Saudi Arabia, Turkey, the US, and Israel review their options.
But these options will become much clearer and more sustainable if the diplomatic track is carefully explored first.
The Dirt on Nuclear Power
SINGAPORE – Japan’s nuclear crisis is a nightmare, but it is not an anomaly.
In fact, it is only the latest in a long line of nuclear accidents involving meltdowns, explosions, fires, and loss of coolant – accidents that have occurred during both normal operation and emergency conditions, such as droughts and earthquakes.
Nuclear safety demands clarity about terms.
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission in the United States generally separates unplanned nuclear “events” into two classes, “incidents” and “accidents.”
Incidents are unforeseen events and technical failures that occur during normal plant operation and result in no off-site releases of radiation or severe damage to equipment.
Accidents refer to either off-site releases of radiation or severe damage to plant equipment.
The International Nuclear and Radiological Event Scale uses a seven-level ranking scheme to rate the significance of nuclear and radiological events: levels 1-3 are “incidents,” and 4-7 are “accidents,” with a “Level 7 Major Accident” consisting of “a major release of radioactive material with widespread health and environmental effects requiring implementation of planned and extended countermeasures.”
Under these classifications, the number of nuclear accidents, even including the meltdowns at Fukushima Daiichi and Fukushima Daini, is low.
But if one redefines an accident to include incidents that either resulted in the loss of human life or more than $50,000 in property damage, a very different picture emerges.
At least 99 nuclear accidents meeting this definition, totaling more than $20.5 billion in damages, occurred worldwide from 1952 to 2009 – or more than one incident and $330 million in damage every year, on average, for the past three decades.
And, of course, this average does not include the Fukushima catastrophe.
Indeed, when compared to other energy sources, nuclear power ranks higher than oil, coal, and natural gas systems in terms of fatalities, second only to hydroelectric dams.
There have been 57 accidents since the Chernobyl disaster in 1986.
While only a few involved fatalities, those that did collectively killed more people than have died in commercial US airline accidents since 1982.
Another index of nuclear-power accidents – this one including costs beyond death and property damage, such as injured or irradiated workers and malfunctions that did not result in shutdowns or leaks – documented 956 incidents from 1942 to 2007.
And yet another documented more than 30,000 mishaps at US nuclear-power plants alone, many with the potential to have caused serious meltdowns, between the 1979 accident at Three Mile Island in Pennsylvania and 2009.
Mistakes are not limited to reactor sites.
Accidents at the Savannah River reprocessing plant released ten times as much radio­iodine as the accident at Three Mile Island, and a fire at the Gulf United facility in New York in 1972 scattered an undisclosed amount of plutonium, forcing the plant to shut down permanently.
At the Mayak Industrial Reprocessing Complex in Russia’s southern Urals, a storage tank holding nitrate acetate salts exploded in 1957, releasing a massive amount of radioactive material over 20,000 square kilometers, forcing the evacuation of 272,000 people.
In September 1994, an explosion at Indonesia’s Serpong research reactor was triggered by the ignition of methane gas that had seeped from a storage room and exploded when a worker lit a cigarette.
Accidents have also occurred when nuclear reactors are shut down for refueling or to move spent nuclear fuel into storage.
In 1999, operators loading spent fuel into dry-storage at the Trojan Reactor in Oregon found that the protective zinc-carbon coating had started to produce hydrogen, which caused a small explosion.
Unfortunately, on-­site accidents at nuclear reactors and fuel facilities are not the only cause of concern.
The August 2003 blackout in the northeastern US revealed that more than a dozen nuclear reactors in the US and Canada were not properly maintaining backup diesel generators.
A successful attack or accident at the Indian Point power plant near New York City, apparently part of Al Qaeda’s original plan for September 11, 2001, would have resulted in 43,700 immediate fatalities and 518,000 cancer deaths, with cleanup costs reaching $2 trillion.
Perhaps the unfolding tragedy in Japan will finally be enough to stop the nuclear renaissance from materializing.
The Disappearing Sky
Some months ago, an American astronaut accidentally let a tool escape into orbit, eliciting concern about its hazardous potential as a hurtling object that could destroy an expensive satellite or even threaten lives aloft.
Shortly afterwards, China blew up one of its satellites, immediately doubling the type of fine orbiting debris that is dangerous because it is hard to track.
Once again the world became aware of the strange situation emerging in our skies.
The sky is a unique domain, and one that is inadequately regulated.
With the advent of global pollutions and technologies, remedying this is becoming an increasingly urgent problem.
In most cases, the laws for skies mirror those governing the world’s oceans.
Oceans belong to everyone except those near landmasses, which are managed in a similar manner to the country's land-bound borders.
As a result, the sky is usually conceptualized in terms of traffic.
Airliners and fighter planes operate in “controlled” air close to the ground, while nationality is supposed to matter less the higher you go.
Fragile treaties that cover this are enforced mostly by the fact that few nations can afford to place assets that high.
But lately, more complex problems are beginning to arise from humanity’s sharing the atmosphere.
Carbon and fluorocarbons affect everyone’s children.
When Chernobyl exploded, it was not Ukraine alone that inherited generations of radioactive effects.
Soon nations will colonize the moon, giving rise to the same unsatisfactory and tentative situation we have in Antarctica, where nations essentially take without legally owning.
A more enlightened approach to shared resources is needed, one less dependent on neo-colonial control.
Some suggest that sky governance follow the precedent set by the electromagnetic spectrum.
The “airwaves” are used for a variety of communications, including government use and public access like radio.
The range of usable territory – the spectrum – is administered by governments as though it were real estate, and is broken up according to wavelength, with an amount apportioned for cell phones, other bits for military pilots, and so on.
This situation would be disastrous if it could not be closely managed, because people would broadcast on top of one another.
Soon, we will see the spectrum become even more active, with the merger of cell phone infrastructure and the relatively unregulated Internet.
This will likely be followed by more sophisticated means of communications based on access to the air.
To some extent, everyone will benefit from this, because governments will be less able to censor information.
But would it be a better model of atmospheric administration?
Perhaps not.
The problem is that at least some electromagnetic waves are dangerous.
Consider this: at any given moment, the average citizen in the developed world has billions of messages passing through his or her brain.
It can be shown that cells are able to detect these messages, but the extent to which they affect the body is unknown.
However, it is known that bees are dying in the northern hemisphere.
This is a major concern because so much food depends on bees for pollination.
The primary causes of this recent epidemic are germs and mites, but these have always been with us.
So why are they affecting bees now? 
A German study suggests that the proliferation of cell phone towers is weakening bees’ immune systems (the study correlates towers and signal strength to bee deaths).
The jury is still out, but it may be that there is no safe level of exposure to many common radiations; the more we are exposed, the more damage we do.
We would see the result of this in indirect effects, such as growing rates of asthma and hyperactivity in children.
So perhaps the problem with existing regulatory models lies in the assumption that the entire atmosphere is available for unconstrained use.
We have an intuitive understanding of the importance of limits when the loss of our sky is articulated in poetic terms.
As light pollution covers more of the planet, we are losing one of our oldest connections to nature: the ancient ability to gaze at the stars.
If dying bees do not inspire formal guidelines about how the sky should be shared, let us hope that empty space will.
The sky must belong to the people.
Abuse of it harms everyone, and profits from its use should benefit all as well, implying the need to establish worldwide democratic rights over what is an unarguably universal resource.
The Discreet Terror of Fidel Castro
This spring marks the third anniversary of the wave of repression in which Fidel Castro’s regime arrested and handed down long sentences to 75 leading Cuban dissidents.
Soon afterwards, many friends and I formed the International Committee for Democracy in Cuba.
The bravery of those who found their social conscience, overcame fear, and stood up to communist dictatorship remains fresh in my memory.
It reminds me of the jingle of keys that rang out on Prague’s Wenceslas Square -- and later around the rest of what was then Czechoslovakia -- in the autumn of 1989.
This is why I rang keys during the conference calling for democracy in Cuba that our committee held in Prague three years ago.
I wanted to draw the international community’s attention to the human-rights situation in Cuba, to support that country’s opposition, and to encourage all pro-democratic forces.
The European Union then introduced diplomatic sanctions, albeit mostly symbolic, against Castro’s regime.
Soon after, however, a contrary position came to the fore.
The EU opened a dialogue with the Cuban regime, sanctions were conditionally suspended, and it was even made clear to dissidents that they were not welcome at the embassies of several democratic countries.
Cowardly compromise and political alibis – as so often in history – defeated a principled position.
In return, the Cuban regime made a sham gesture by releasing a small number of the prisoners of conscience – mostly those who were tortured and seriously ill – who the regime most feared would die in its notorious prisons.
Those of us who live in Europe’s new post-communist democracies experienced similar political deals when we lived behind the former Iron Curtain.
We are also extremely familiar with the argument that European policies have not led to any mass arrests in Cuba.
But democracy has shown weakness and the Cuban regime has in turn adapted its tactics.
Respected organizations like Reporters without Borders and Amnesty International have collected ample evidence of violence and intimidation against freethinking Cubans, who can expect a different kind of ring than that from jangling keys.
Their cases often do not end in courts but in hospitals.
Groups of “fighters for the revolution” – in reality, the Cuban secret police – brutally attack their political opponents and accuse them of absurd crimes in an effort to intimidate them or to force them to emigrate.
On the island, such planned harassments are called “actos de repudio” – “acts of rejection.”
Political violence that creates the impression of mere street crime is never easy to prove, unlike jail terms of several years, and therefore it does not receive due attention from the world.
However, thousands of former political prisoners in central and eastern Europe can attest to the fact that a kick from a secret policeman on the street hurts just as much as a kick from a warden behind prison gates.
The powerlessness of the victim of state-organized street fights and threats against his family is experienced in the same way as the powerlessness of somebody harassed during a state security investigation.
Many European politicians who have sought to see the situation on the ground have been barred in recent years.
Some Europeans apparently regard Cuba as a faraway country whose fate they need take no interest in, because they have problems of their own.
But what Cubans are enduring today is part of our own European history.
Who better than Europeans, who brought communism to life, exported it to the world, and then paid dearly for it over many decades, know better about the torments inflicted upon the Cuban people?
Humanity will pay the price for communism until such a time as we learn to stand up to it with all political responsibility and decisiveness.
We have many opportunities to do so in Europe and Cuba.
And it is no surprise that the new member countries of the EU have brought to Europe fresh historical experience, and with it far less understanding for and tolerance of concession and compromise.
Representatives of the EU’s member states will meet in Brussels in mid-June to review a common policy towards Cuba.
European diplomats should weigh up the consequences of accommodating Castro’s regime.
They should show that they will neither ignore his practices nor neglect the suffering of Cuban prisoners of conscience.
We must never forget the seemingly anonymous victims of Castro’s “acts of rejection.”
The Dismal Economist’s Joyless Triumph
NEW YORK – I have long been forecasting that it was only a matter of time before America’s housing bubble – which began in the early days of this decade, supported by a flood of liquidity and lax regulation – would pop.
The longer the bubble expanded, the larger the explosion and the greater (and more global) the resulting downturn would be.ampnbsp; 
Economists are good at identifying underlying forces, but they are not so good at timing.
The dynamics are, however, much as anticipated.
America is still on a downward trajectory for 2009 – with grave consequences for the world as a whole.
For example, as their tax revenues plummet, state and local governments are in the process of cutting back their expenditures.
American exports are about to decline.
Consumer spending is plummeting, as expected.
There has been an enormous decrease in (perceived) wealth, in the trillions, with the decline in house and stock prices.
Besides, most Americans were living beyond their means, using their houses, with their bloated values, as collateral.
That game is up.ampnbsp; 
America would be facing these problems even if it were not simultaneously facing a financial crisis.
America’s economy had been supercharged by excessive leveraging; now comes the painful process of deleveraging.
Excessive leveraging, combined with bad lending and risky derivatives, has caused credit markets to freeze.
Moreover, what little action has been taken has been aimed at shoring up the financial system.
But the financial crisis is only one of several crises facing the country: the underlying macroeconomic problem has been made worse by the sinking fortunes of the bottom half of the population.
Those who would spend don’t have the money, and those with the money aren’t spending.
But there are equally fundamental changes in the global balances of economic power: the hoards of liquid money to help bail out the world lie in Asia and the Middle East, not in West.
But global institutions do not reflect these new realities.
Globalization has meant that we are increasingly interdependent.
One cannot have a deep and long downturn in the world’s largest economy without global ramifications.
Indeed, it is the ultimate irony that money is now flowing from poor and well-managed economies to the US, the source of the global problems.
The point of reciting these challenges facing the world is to suggest that, even if Obama and other world leaders do everything right, the US and the global economy are in for a difficult period.
The question is not only how long the recession will last, but what the economy will look like when it emerges.
Will it return to robust growth, or will we have an anemic recovery, à la Japan in the 1990’s?
Right now, I cast my vote for the latter, especially since the huge debt legacy is likely to dampen enthusiasm for the big stimulus that is required.
Without a sufficiently large stimulus (in excess of 2% of GDP), we will have a vicious negative spiral: a weak economy will mean more bankruptcies, which will push stock prices down and interest rates up, undermine consumer confidence, and weaken banks.
Consumption and investment will be cut back further.
Many Wall Street financiers, having received their gobs of cash, are returning to their fiscal religion of low deficits.
Does an SNP-led government herald the break-up of the United Kingdom?
More broadly, does nationalism, that product of nineteenth-century politics, still have a role to play in Europe?
The answer to the first question is almost certainly no.
Nationalist polled only 31.9% of the votes cast with parties supporting the union polling 59.6%.
Proof positive that proportional representation can produce strange outcomes.
Back in 1957, the motive for “laying the foundations of an ever closer union of the peoples of Europe” was to make war between European nations obsolete, and, in doing so, to bring internal stability to all European nations.
For 50 years, the European Union was not much tested by this mission because nationalist impulses were crushed between the two great Cold War alliances.
With those constraints gone, nationalism in both its Bismarckian state-making and ethnic state-breaking guises has gotten a second wind.
When people nowadays speak of nationalism, sinister images from another era come to mind.
But nationalism is, of course, not inevitably violent: it flares into conflict only in places with a flammable legacy.
The break-up of the Soviet Union and its satellite empire shows that the way to address such a legacy is not to force unhappy peoples to live together in one country.
It is to recognize that in some places divorce is inevitable, and to ensure that it is as amicable as possible.
The world could not have prevented Yugoslavia’s spiral into civil war, but it might have made it less cruel by helping to negotiate terms of separation earlier.
Some suggest that the SNP’s accession to power in Scotland does herald the rebirth of a nation, many others regard that claim as rhetoric which ignores the tremendous advances made in the quality of life, opportunity and living standards.
If the claim were true it is a rebirth that is coming about in an extraordinary way.
Except for some odd and hapless individuals, there have been no underground armies, separatist terrorists, campaigns of civil disobedience aimed at unseating governments, or even any mass demonstrations.
The establishment of a Scottish Parliament vested with powers devolved from the United Kingdom Parliament at Westminster has been perhaps the first revolution of the modern era that was conducted by committees of lawyers, clergymen, and accountants rather than cells of bearded radicals.
Moreover, it was achieved without a shot being fired.
So it is not surprising that it has also been a revolution that – unlike that which divided Czechoslovakia 14 years ago – falls well short of achieving full statehood for Scotland.
The Parliament at Westminster, to which Scots continue to elect MP’s, still controls defense and foreign affairs, macroeconomic policy, taxation, and social security.
The Scottish Parliament, however, is able to legislate over health services, education, local government, housing, criminal and civil justice, and economic development.
It can also raise or lower the basic rate of income tax – though by no more than 3% – and levy charges, such as road tolls.
This semi-independence partly reflects the absence of linguistic motives in Scottish nationalism, unlike the Quebecois of Canada or Flemish nationalism in Belgium.
Gaelic is spoken by only about 80,000 of Scotland’s 5.1 million inhabitants.
Nor does religion play a discernible role; while Roman Catholics used to fear independence as being liable to result in Protestant hegemony, today Catholics and Protestants are roughly equal in their support of Scotland’s institutions.
Moreover, unlike East European or Balkan nationalism, the Scottish variety has little to do with ethnicity or religion.
Thus, in Scotland today there are none of the conditions that fomented rebellion in Ireland and led to Irish independence in 1922, the last great rupture in the political union of the British Isles.
Scottish nationalists do look longingly at Ireland, but for its recent phenomenal economic growth.
For most Scots, however, the Irish experience is not an appealing model – perhaps because it is associated with terrorism.
They also know that the huge financial assistance which Ireland received form the European Union will never be repeated
What motivates Scottish nationalism is the strong attachment to Scotland’s civic institutions.
In this respect, Scotland differs from Wales, which was forcibly incorporated into England more than 400 years before the Scots signed the voluntary Act of Union in 1707.
Distinctive Welsh institutions, apart from those concerned with the Welsh language, are difficult to identify.
By contrast, Scotland’s institutional landscape – schools and universities with their own curriculum and exam structures, a legal system with its own codes and rules, a church independent of the state, and a distinctive system of local government – were left untouched by the union.
Today’s Scottish parliament helps to dissipate Scottish discontents because it is revitalizing those institutions.
But it is also propelling British politics into a new and unfamiliar decentralized political system.
Westminster’s writ no longer runs north of the border, at least as far as things like education and health are concerned. Equally, it is now far harder for Scots to blame a distant government in London for their problems, although the SNP will now try to make blaming Westminster for all ills even more of an art form.
So, far from being a harbinger of the break-up of Britain, devolution has brought fresh vitality to national life outside London.
The new confidence in Edinburgh, which is experiencing an economic boom, is self-evident.
What is arising is a different Scotland, and a different Britain, and this is Scotland’s lesson for Europe.
Britain’s highly centralized political culture has been irreversibly changed.
It is being replaced by a more diverse sort of politics, in which different regional and national identities gain encouragement and expression.
By cooperating with the rest of the United Kingdom, rather than clashing, Scotland is giving new meaning to the phrase “ever closer union.”
The Climate Countdown
LONDON – It seems to have become a ritual for United Nations climate negotiations to reach the brink of collapse before an intense, contentious compromise is achieved after the deadline.
But the torturous conclusion to this year’s talks in Doha – in which nearly 200 countries agreed to extend the Kyoto protocol – has merely set the stage for more dramatic negotiations in 2015, when a new comprehensive agreement must be reached.
The just-concluded deal establishes a bridge between the old climate regime and a new, as-yet-undefined one.
By extending the Kyoto Protocol – which limits some developed countries’ greenhouse-gas emissions – for another eight years, the Doha agreement preserves the vital framework of international law and retains hard-won accounting rules for emissions allowances and trading between countries.
But the deal also confirms that, in 2020, Kyoto will be replaced by a new treaty, which will discard the outdated binary distinction between “developed” and “developing” countries.
The new arrangement will require commitments from all countries that are commensurate with their level of development.
The decision in Doha reaffirms that any new agreement must bolster efforts to meet the UN target of limiting global warming to two degrees centigrade.
Indeed, it will spur a review of countries’ emissions targets, aimed at closing the gap between current pledges and the reductions needed to remain below the two-degree threshold.
The deal also creates a new mechanism to compensate the countries that are suffering the most as a result of climate change.
Moreover, a single negotiation platform has been established, and a 2015 deadline for concluding a new agreement has been set – a much more significant accomplishment than most commentators or governments have recognized.
The last UN climate-change conference took place in Copenhagen in December 2009.
In the run-up to that conference, a global campaign put pressure on governments.
As a result, the talks were transformed into a full-blown leaders’ summit, with presidents and prime ministers heading to Denmark to seal the deal themselves.
But the talks failed to deliver a comprehensive, legally binding agreement, causing investors to lose confidence in a low-carbon economy and delaying progress by several years.
Many fear a similar outcome in 2015, given that conditions seem even less conducive to agreement.
Preoccupied by crisis, the world’s leading economies seem unwilling to make significant new emissions-reduction commitments.
And public anxiety about employment and living standards has replaced the fears about global warming that inspired the 2009 movement.
Environmental NGOs worry that raising expectations could worsen the fallout from failure, damaging efforts at the national level to build low-carbon economies.
But this threatens to become a self-fulfilling prophecy.
If expectations are low, talks can only fail.
Although political leaders are not focused on climate change, a big international event can capture their attention, as the Copenhagen conference did.
And next year, when the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change begins publishing its latest assessment of the scientific evidence, the prospect of runaway climate change is bound to mobilize civil society.
In fact, the current situation, characterized by rising global greenhouse-gas emissions, already amounts to failure, with the current trend putting the two-degree target out of reach in less than a decade.
The only hope is an international movement for immediate action, such as that which, in advance of the Copenhagen conference, compelled the world’s largest carbon emitters – including the United States and China – to set emissions targets.
Indeed, the Copenhagen experience offers some valuable lessons.
First, given that countries make international commitments only when their citizens are ready to do so, increasing domestic pressure for emissions reduction is crucial.
Every major economy must recognize that investment in “green growth” can create jobs and bolster economic development.
Moreover, combating climate change must again become a moral crusade, which entails appealing to people’s emotions.
After all, crossing that two-degree threshold implies condemning future generations to global warming’s most devastating consequences.
Third, developing countries should lead the debate over a new global agreement, in order to ensure equity and protect their right to develop.
Climate action should be viewed as a means to improve the well-being of the world’s poorest people – those who most need an agreement – rather than as a burden.
Finally, the involvement of heads of state and government must complement the UN process, rather than supplant it.
UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has called for a leader’s summit on climate change in 2014; that summit must now become the focus of public pressure to move toward an agreement in 2015.
The path to an international agreement strong enough to keep global warming under two degrees will be fraught with obstacles.
But, if citizens ratchet up the pressure on their leaders, and policymakers demonstrate vision and leadership, the route can be navigated.
The countdown to 2015 has begun.
The Bilateral Threat to Free Trade
ISTANBUL – The Doha Round of global trade talks appears to have died this year, almost without a whimper.
While a small portion of the project may be saved, the essential reality is that this is a unique failure in the history of multilateral trade negotiations, which have transformed the global economy since World War II.
Many of the seven previous rounds of negotiations – including the Uruguay Round, which resulted in the establishment of the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 1995 as the successor to the General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs (GATT) – took years to complete, but none died of neglect or disinterest.
Today’s indifference is particularly, though not exclusively, evident in the United States.
President Barack Obama was silent on the issue in his re-election campaign, and breathed scarcely a word about it in his first campaign, too. One wonders whether what is at stake is even fully understood in some capitals.
Successful multilateral trade negotiations have significantly shaped the world in which we live and have dramatically enhanced the lives of millions of people.
Between 1960 and 1990, only one person in five lived in an economically open society; today, nine in ten do.
The rule-based trading system developed by the GATT and the WTO has been embraced by virtually the entire global community.
It has provided an effective road map for the former planned and import-substituting economies, facilitating their integration into the global market.
Initially, “globalization” was a dirty word to some.
But, even among its opponents, its value for poorer countries came to be recognized, as it helped to lift more than a billion people in Asia out of abject poverty.
While much more needs to be done for Africa and parts of Latin America, the Doha Round was intended to assist in providing market access (and therefore opportunity) to many more in the developing world.
The essence of the multilateral system consists in two principles: non-discrimination and national treatment.
The former is described in the trade negotiators’ lexicon as the ���most favored nation” principle, which essentially seeks to ensure that trade benefits provided to one country are provided to all.
The latter requires member states to provide the same treatment to trading partners within national borders as that provided to nationals.
The non-discrimination principle ensured that global trade did not become a “spaghetti bowl” of preferential bilateral trade agreements.
Moreover, a multilateral framework for trade negotiations gave weaker states far more balanced conditions than they would face were they forced to negotiate bilaterally with the likes of China, the United States, or the European Union.
In fact, what we have seen in recent years is an increasing rush to bilateral agreements by the major trading countries and blocs.
This has apparently consumed virtually all of their attention.
The WTO has been marginalized, and even what has already been achieved in the incomplete Doha Round appears unlikely to be delivered in a final agreement in the foreseeable future.
The damage to the credibility of the WTO – once lauded as the greatest advance in global governance since the inspired institution-building of the immediate postwar period – may yet prove lasting.
Worse, it could have a serious impact not merely on trade, but on political relationships more generally.
One of the WTO’s great achievements has been the adjudication system that it provides – the so-called Dispute Settlement Mechanism.
This independent body has been a resounding success, giving the world an effective quasi-judicial system to resolve disputes between trading partners.
But its continued success depends ultimately on the credibility of the WTO itself; it will inevitably suffer collateral damage from a failure of multilateral negotiations.
Indeed, the current rush to bilateral trade agreements has been accompanied by a rise in protectionism.
For example, there have been 424 new measures of this kind in the EU since 2008.
Furthermore, the EU’s non-discriminatory tariffs are fully applicable to only nine trading partners.
Everyone else has “exceptional” treatment.
Next, no doubt, we will have the prospect of a bilateral free-trade agreement between the EU and the US.
An EU-Japan treaty is already in the wind, as is a “Trans-Pacific Partnership” to liberalize trade among the US and major Asian and Latin American economies.
If either ever comes to pass, which I doubt, a huge share of world trade would be conducted within a discriminatory framework.
Some recognize the risks.
In May 2011, Jagdish Bhagwati of Columbia University and I co-chaired a High Level Group convened by the prime ministers of the United Kingdom, Germany, Turkey, and Indonesia to attempt to move the multilateral process ahead.
Our sponsors welcomed our recommendations, but that and similar efforts have gained little traction, leaving all countries rushing headlong toward a world full of uncertainty and risk.
It is not too late to reverse the apparently inexorable tide of bilateralism.
But the only way to do so is by proceeding with WTO negotiations.
Even if the Doha Round cannot be concluded, there may be other routes, such as implementing what has already been agreed.
Another alternative might be to advance multilateral negotiations among willing countries in specific areas, such as services, with other WTO members joining later.
But if we are to move forward rather than revert to earlier, more dangerous times, the US, in particular, must reassert a constructive role in multilateralism.
The US must lead again, as it did in the past.
And now it must do so with China at its side.
The Dollar and the Dragon
CAMBRIDGE – For several years, American officials have pressed China to revalue its currency.
They complain that the undervalued renminbi represents unfair competition, destroying American jobs, and contributing to the United States’ trade deficit.
How, then, should US officials respond?
Just before the recent G-20 meeting in Toronto, China announced a formula that would allow modest renminbi appreciation, but some American Congressmen remain unconvinced, and threaten to increase tariffs on Chinese goods.
America absorbs Chinese imports, pays China in dollars, and China holds dollars, amassing $2.5 trillion in foreign-exchange reserves, much of it held in US Treasury securities.
To some observers, this represents a fundamental shift in the global balance of power, because China could bring the US to its knees by threatening to sell its dollars.
But, if China were to bring the US to it knees, it might bring itself to its ankles in the process.
China would not only reduce the value of its reserves as the dollar’s value fell, but it would also jeopardize America’s continued willingness to import cheap Chinese goods, which would mean job losses and instability in China.
Judging whether economic interdependence produces power requires looking at the balance of asymmetries, not just at one side of the equation.
In this case, interdependence has created a “balance of financial terror” analogous to the Cold War, when the US and the Soviet Union never used their potential to destroy each other in a nuclear exchange.
In February 2010, angered over American arms sales to Taiwan, a group of senior military officers called for the Chinese government to sell off US government bonds in retaliation.
Their proposal went unheeded.
Instead, Yi Gang, China’s director of state administration of foreign exchange, explained that “Chinese investments in US Treasuries are market investment behavior, and we don’t wish to politicize them.”
Otherwise, the pain would be mutual.
Nevertheless, this balance does not guarantee stability.
There is always the danger of actions with unintended consequences, especially as both countries can be expected to maneuver to change the framework and reduce their vulnerabilities.
For example, after the 2008 financial crisis, while the US pressed China to let its currency appreciate, officials at China’s central bank began arguing that America needed to increase its savings, reduce its deficits, and move toward supplementing the dollar’s role as a reserve currency with IMF-issued special drawing rights.
But China’s bark was louder than its bite.
China’s increased financial power may have increased its ability to resist American entreaties, but despite dire predictions, its creditor role has not been sufficient to compel the US to change its policies.
While China has taken minor measures to slow the increase in its dollar-denominated holdings, it has been unwilling to risk a fully convertible currency for domestic political reasons.
Thus, the renminbi is unlikely to challenge the dollar’s role as the largest component of world reserves (more than 60%) in the next decade.
Yet, as China gradually increases domestic consumption rather than relying on exports as its engine of economic growth, its leaders may begin to feel less dependent than they now are on access to the US market as a source of job creation, which is crucial for internal political stability.
In that case, maintaining a weak renminbi would protect the trade balance from a flood of imports.
Asymmetries in currency markets are a particularly important aspect of economic power, since they underlie global trade and financial markets.
By limiting the convertibility of its currency, China is avoiding currency markets’ ability to discipline domestic economic decisions.
Compare, for example, the discipline that international banks and the IMF were able to impose on Indonesia and South Korea in 1998, with the relative freedom of the US – bestowed by denomination of American debt in dollars – to increase government spending in response to the 2008 financial crisis.
Indeed, rather than weakening, the dollar has appreciated as investors regard the underlying strength of the US as a safe haven.
Obviously, a country whose currency represents a significant proportion of world reserves can gain international power from that position, thanks to easier terms for economic adjustment and the ability to influence other countries.
As French President Charles de Gaulle once complained, “since the dollar is the reference currency everywhere, it can cause others to suffer the effects of its poor management.
This is not acceptable.
This cannot last.”
But it did.
America’s military and economic strength reinforces confidence in the dollar as a safe haven.
As a Canadian analyst put it, “the combined effect of an advanced capital market and a strong military machine to defend that market, and other safety measures, such as a strong tradition of property rights protection and a reputation for honoring dues, has made it possible to attract capital with great ease.”
The G-20 is focusing on the need to “re-balance” financial flows, altering the old pattern of US deficits matching Chinese surpluses.
This would require politically difficult shifts in consumption and investment, with America increasing its savings and China increasing domestic consumption.
Such changes do not occur quickly.
Neither side is in a hurry to break the symmetry of interdependent vulnerability, but both continue to jockey to shape the structure and institutional framework of their market relationship.
For the sake of the global economy, let us hope that neither side miscalculates.
The Dollar’s Last Days?
CAMBRIDGE – Zhou Xiaochuan, the governor of the People’s Bank of China, recently suggested that replacing the dollar with the International Monetary Fund’s Special Drawing Rights as the dominant reserve currency would bring greater stability to the global financial system.
The idea of reforming the system by introducing a supranational reserve currency is also, it appears, supported by Russia and other emerging markets.
And a United Nations advisory committee chaired by the Nobel laureate Joseph Stiglitz has argued for a new global reserve currency, possibly one based on the SDR.
Transforming the dollar standard into an SDR-based system would be a major break with a policy that has lasted more than 60 years.
The SDR was introduced 40 years ago to supplement what was then seen as an inadequate level of global reserves, and was subsequently enshrined in the IMF’s amended Articles of Agreement as the future principal reserve asset.
But the world soon became awash in dollars.
Such an outcome is probably only possible if two conditions are met: first, the United Kingdom joins the euro area, and, second, the United States makes serious, confidence-sapping mistakes.
The latter condition may already have been partially met, but US policies to stabilize its financial system should help avoid a major dollar slide.
Moreover, the European Central Bank has repeatedly stated that it neither encourages nor discourages the euro’s international role.
With the dollar’s hegemony unlikely to be seriously undermined by market forces, at least in the short and medium-term, the only way to bring about a major reduction in its role as a reserve currency is by international agreement. The Chinese proposal falls into this category.
One way to make the SDR the major reserve currency relatively soon would be to create and allocate a massive amount of new SDRs to the IMF’s members. While the G-20 leaders have decided to support an SDR allocation of $250 billion, this will increase the share of SDRs in total international reserves to no more than 4%.
In order to make the SDR the principal reserve asset via the allocation route, close to $3 trillion in SDRs would need to be created, an unrealistic proposition.
But there is a more realistic way for the SDR’s importance to grow.
Back in 1980, the IMF came close to adopting a so-called SDR Substitution Account.
The idea was to permit countries whose official dollar holdings were larger than they were comfortable with to convert dollars into SDRs.
Conversion would occur outside the market, and thus would not put downward pressure on the dollar.
Member countries would receive an asset that was more stable than the dollar, as it was based on a basket of currencies, thereby providing better protection against losses.
The plan fell apart when some major IMF shareholders could not accept the burden-sharing arrangements that would be necessary in case of losses due to exchange-rate movements.
The US also lost interest in the scheme as the dollar strengthened.
What are the chances of adopting a scheme of this kind today?
Is the US prepared to go along with a reform of the international monetary system that reduces the dollar’s role?
Until recently, I would have considered this unlikely.
But the changed international climate, and the possibility of a bout of severe dollar weakness, could convince the US to go along with a conversion scheme that would alleviate excessive pressure on the dollar.
And, apart from possible political considerations, large holders of dollars would find a substitution account attractive as a form of protection against strong fluctuations in the dollar’s value.
What about possible losses suffered by the Substitution Account?
This can be dealt with by setting aside part of the IMF’s large gold stock.
Even if an SDR Substitution Account is established, it is unlikely that the dollar’s share in international reserves would fall to an insignificant level.
The dollar will remain important for many countries as a vehicle for intervention in foreign-exchange markets, as well as for invoicing and for denominating internationally traded securities.
But one can envisage a system in which international reserves are held each in roughly equal shares of dollars, euros (assuming a further gradual increase in its share), and SDRs.
While there are currently other priorities, it would be useful for the IMF to study anew an SDR substitution account and similar schemes.
If it does not, the debate will take place elsewhere.
The Dollar’s Long Tail
NEW DELHI – The ongoing economic crisis and the persistent deficits of the United States have increasingly called into question the dollar’s role as the world’s anchor currency.
Recent moves to internationalize China’s renminbi have led to anticipation of a looming shift in the global monetary system.
Many prominent economists, including the members of a United Nations panel headed by the Nobel laureate economist Joseph Stiglitz, are recommending a “Global Reserve System” to replace the dollar’s hegemony.
But the long history of global anchor currencies suggests that the dollar’s days on top may be far from over.
In ancient times, India ran a large trade surplus with the Roman empire.
As Pliny wrote in the first century: “Not a year passed in which India did not take 50 million sesterces away from Rome.”&nbsp; That trade imbalance implied a continuous drain on gold and silver coin, causing shortages of these metals in Rome.
In modern terms, the Romans faced a monetary squeeze.
Rome responded by reducing the gold/silver content (the ancient equivalent of monetization), which led to sustained inflation in the empire.
But the frequent discovery of Roman coins in India suggests that Roman coinage continued to be accepted internationally long after it must have been obvious that its gold or silver content had fallen.
In the sixteenth century, Spain emerged as a superpower following its conquest of South America.
Between 1501 and 1600, 17 million kilograms of pure silver and 181,000 kilograms of pure gold flowed from the Americas to Spain, which spent the money on wars in the Netherlands and elsewhere.
This increase in liquidity caused both an economic boom and inflation across Europe.
Despite this wealth, Spain became increasingly indebted, eventually defaulting three times – in 1607, 1627, and 1649 –&nbsp;and heading into sharp geopolitical decline.
Yet Spanish silver coins (known as “pieces of eight” or Spanish dollars) remained the main currency used in world trade right up to the American Revolutionary War.
In fact, Spanish coin remained legal tender in the US until 1857 – long after Spain itself had ceased to be a major power.
By the middle of the nineteenth century, the world was functioning on a bi-metal system based on gold and silver.
But, following the British example, most major countries had shifted to a gold standard by the 1870’s.
The Bank of England stood ready to convert a pound sterling into an ounce of (11/12 fine) gold on demand.
That system was disrupted by World War I, but Britain went back to a gold peg in 1925.
As the Great Depression took root, however, the Bank of England was forced to choose between providing liquidity to banks and honoring the gold peg.
It opted for the former in 1931.
Yet pound sterling continued to be a major world currency until well after World War II.
Even as late as 1950 – more than a half-century after the US had replaced Britain as the world’s largest industrial power – 55% of foreign-exchange reserves were held in sterling, and many countries continued to peg their currencies to it.
Three things should be clear from this history.
First, a global monetary system based on precious metals does not resolve the fundamental imbalances of a global economic system.
Second, precious metals do not resolve the problem of inflation.
And, finally, the anchor currency and the underlying eco-system of world trade often outlive the geopolitical decline of the anchor country by decades.
A new economic order was established after World War II, with the US as the anchor country.
The Bretton Woods system linked the US dollar to gold at $35 per ounce, with other currencies linked to the dollar (though occasionally allowed to make adjustments).
The flaw in the system was that it underpinned global economic expansion for only as long as the US was willing to provide dollars by running up deficits – the same deficits that would eventually undermine America’s ability to maintain the $35/ounce gold price.
In 1961, the US responded by creating the London Gold Pool, which obliged other countries to reimburse the US for half of its gold losses.
But this arrangement quickly bred discontent, with France leaving the Gold Pool in 1967.
The Bretton Woods system collapsed four years later.
Or did it?
Despite the problems of the 1970’s, the dollar remained the world’s dominant currency, with successive generations of Asian countries pegging their exchange rates to it.
As with the Bretton Woods system, a peripheral economy (for example, China) could grow very rapidly even as the anchor economy (the US) enjoyed cheap financing.
China’s relative rise did not diminish the dollar’s role – and may even have enhanced it.
Indeed, like the Japanese during their period of rapid growth, the Chinese have, until recently, resisted internationalization of the renminbi.
So, are we entering a post-dollar world?
Despite all of the pain caused by the Great Recession, there is no sign that the world is forsaking the greenback.
Investors remain willing to finance the US at rock-bottom interest rates, and the nominal trade-weighted index of the dollar has not collapsed.
Even if China replaces the US as the world’s largest economy within a decade, an anchor currency can be more resilient than the economic and geopolitical dominance of its country of origin.
That is why the dollar will most likely remain the dominant global currency long after the US has been surpassed.
The Unloved Dollar Standard
PALO ALTO – Since World War II’s end, the US dollar has been used to invoice most global trade, serving as the intermediary currency for clearing international payments among banks and dominating official foreign-exchange reserves.
This arrangement has often been criticized, but is there any viable alternative?
The problem for post-WWII Europe, mired in depression and inflation, was that it lacked foreign reserves, which meant that trade carried a high opportunity cost.
To facilitate trade without requiring payment after each transaction, the Organization for European Economic Cooperation created the European Payments Union in 1950.
Supported by a dollar-denominated line of credit, the EPU’s 15 Western European member states established exact dollar exchange-rate parities as a prelude to anchoring their domestic price levels and removing all currency restrictions on intra-European trade.
This formed the keystone of the hugely successful European Recovery Program (the Marshall Plan), through which the US helped to rebuild Europe’s economies.
Today, most developing economies, with the exception of a few Eastern European countries, still choose to anchor their domestic macroeconomic arrangements by stabilizing their exchange rates against the dollar, at least intermittently. Meanwhile, to avoid exchange-rate conflict, the US Federal Reserve typically stays out of the currency markets.
But the dollar’s role as international anchor is beginning to falter, as emerging markets everywhere grow increasingly frustrated by the Fed’s near-zero interest-rate policy, which has caused a flood of “hot” capital inflows from the US.
That, in turn, has fueled sharp exchange-rate appreciation and a loss of international competitiveness – unless the affected central banks intervene to buy dollars.
Indeed, since late 2003, when the Fed first cut interest rates to 1%, triggering the US housing bubble, dollar reserves in emerging markets have increased six-fold, reaching $7 trillion by 2011.
The resulting expansion in emerging markets’ monetary base has led to much higher inflation in these countries than in the US, and to global commodity-price bubbles, particularly for oil and staple foods.
But the US is also unhappy with the way the dollar standard is functioning.
Whereas other countries can choose to intervene in order to stabilize their exchange rates with the world’s principal reserve currency, the US, in order to maintain consistency in rate setting, does not have the option to intervene, and lacks its own exchange-rate policy.
Moreover, the US protests other countries’ exchange-rate policies.
Two decades ago, the US pressed the Japanese to allow the yen to strengthen against the dollar, claiming that Japan’s unfair exchange-rate policies were responsible for America’s ballooning bilateral trade deficit.
Likewise, today’s “China-bashing” in the US – which has intensified as China’s contribution to America’s trade deficit has soared – is intended to force the Chinese authorities to allow faster renminbi appreciation.
Herein lies the great paradox.
Although no one likes the dollar standard, governments and private market participants still consider it the best option.
In fact, US trade deficits are primarily the result of insufficient, mainly government, saving – not a misaligned exchange rate, as economists have led policymakers to believe.
Large US budget deficits during Ronald Reagan’s presidency generated the famous twin fiscal and trade deficits of the 1980’s.
This, not an undervalued yen, caused the bilateral deficit with Japan to widen in the 1980’s and 1990’s.
The much larger US fiscal deficits of the new millennium, courtesy of Presidents George W. Bush and Barack Obama, portend large – and indefinite – trade deficits.
But American policymakers continue to blame China, claiming that the renminbi has been undervalued for the last decade.
The claim that exchange-rate appreciation will reduce a country’s trade surplus is false, because, in globally integrated economies, domestic investment falls when the exchange rate appreciates.
So the ill will that China-bashing is generating is for nothing.
Worse, it detracts political attention from America’s huge fiscal deficit – $1.2 trillion (7.7% of GDP) in 2012 – and thus impedes any serious effort to rein in future spending for entitlements, such as health care and pensions.
Some contend that large fiscal deficits do not matter if the US can exploit its central position under the dollar standard –&amp; that is, if it finances its deficits by selling Treasury bonds to foreign central banks at near-zero interest rates.
But America’s ongoing trade deficits with highly industrialized countries, particularly in Asia, are accelerating de-industrialization in the US, while providing fodder for American protectionists.
Indeed, America’s trade deficit in manufactures is roughly equal to its current-account deficit (the amount by which domestic investment exceeds domestic saving).
So those concerned with job losses in US manufacturing should join the chorus lobbying for a much smaller fiscal deficit.
Can large US fiscal deficits and near-zero interest rates be justified because they help to revive domestic economic growth and job creation?
Five years after the credit crunch of 2007-2008, it seems that they cannot.
And, without even that justification, the latest wave of criticism of the US dollar standard appears set to rise further – and to stimulate the search for a “new” arrangement.
But the best new arrangement – and possibly the only feasible one – would follow an old formula: as in the 1950’s and 1960’s, the US would set moderately positive and stable interest rates, with sufficient domestic saving to generate a (small) trade surplus.
The cooperation of China, now the world’s largest exporter and US creditor, is essential for easing and encouraging the transition to this nirvana.
Apart from the ongoing euro crisis, a stable renminbi/dollar exchange rate is the key to renewed (dollar) exchange-rate stability throughout Asia and Latin America – as envisaged in the original 1944 Bretton Woods Agreement.
The Domestic Logic of Iran’s Foreign Plots
WASHINGTON, DC – Though Saudi Ambassador Adel al-Jubeir is alive and well in Washington, the plot to assassinate him may have succeeded – if its aim was not to kill al-Jubeir, but rather Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad’s foreign policy.
The history of the Islamic Republic is filled with cases of factions exploiting foreign policy to gain power against their domestic rivals.
It is common for competing groups to sacrifice national interests – such as Iran’s international credibility – to achieve their own goals.
During the Iran-Iraq war, Ronald Reagan’s national security adviser, Robert McFarlane, paid a clandestine visit to Iran with the approval of the country’s highest authorities, to pursue a deal that would have been to Iran’s advantage.
But anti-American elements in the government leaked the news to an Arab newspaper, killing the deal and landing both the Reagan administration and the Iranian government in huge trouble.
Mir Hossein Mousavi, the former prime minister who now leads the opposition, spelled out the problem more than 20 years ago.
On September 5, 1988, he resigned in protest against then-president Ali Khamenei’s interference in his duties.
In his resignation letter, Mousavi complained that the “government’s authority on foreign policy was taken away.” He charged that
“[military and intelligence] operations outside the country are taking place without the government’s knowledge or orders....Only after an airplane is hijacked are we made aware of it.
Only after a machine gun opens fire in one of Lebanon’s streets and its noise echoes everywhere do we find out.
Only after [Saudi police] find explosive material in Iranian pilgrims’ baggage am I informed.”
Iranian intelligence has assassinated more than 400 Iranian dissidents outside of Iran, including the last prime minister under the Shah, Shapour Bakhtiar, and four Kurds in Berlin’s Mikonos restaurant in 1992 (a German judge later officially named Iran’s Supreme Leader as one of the senior officials involved in the terrorist attack).
Similarly, the Quds Force of Iran’s Revolutionary Guard has carried out hundreds of operations in Iraq, Afghanistan, Lebanon, and elsewhere.
By contrast, the plot targeting al-Jubeir seems to have been highly unprofessional, almost unconcerned with success.
So unlikely are the details that only a power struggle within Iran could justify it.
If so, the plot’s target likely was not al-Jubeir himself, but rather those elements in the regime that seek a diplomatic opening to the US –&#160;namely, Ahmadinejad and his circle.
When news about the assassination plot first appeared, the Supreme Leader, Ali Khamenei, was on his way to the western province of Kermanshah.
In his first speech after the story broke, he made no reference to it, most likely expecting the president to make a statement.
After two days of Ahmadinejad’s meaningful silence, Khamenei felt forced to reject the US allegations publicly.
Only after five days did Ahmadinejad issue a statement denying the accusations – and not as strongly as did Khamenei.
It is ironic to see Iran’s radical Islamist president portray himself as open to resuming US-Iran relations and suffer for it at the hands of a supposedly pragmatic Supreme Leader.
But Ahmadinejad is no exception to the historical rule in Iran: every faction that loses out to its domestic rivals looks beyond the country for an alliance with outside powers.
In the Islamic Republic, those interested in opening up to the West are typically those with little authority.
Ahmadinejad and his faction face a two-edged problem: Khamenei has boxed them in politically, while rampant economic corruption and failed efforts at reform have disillusioned many of the president’s supporters.
As a result, Ahmadinejad, in a further ironic twist, is seeking to glorify Iran’s pre-Islamic history in order to stir nationalist sentiment in his favor and accomplish what he is sure that Khamenei does not want: greater openness to the West, particularly to the US.
He has repeatedly expressed his willingness to meet with US President Barack Obama – even sending him a congratulatory letter on his inauguration – and has traveled to New York to be interviewed by the American media much more often than his predecessors.
Ahmadinejad is well aware that if he succeeds in portraying himself as someone who – in opposition to the Supreme Leader’s will – wants to solve major issues between Iran and the US, that could partly compensate for his economic failures and gain him some new supporters.
For that plan to work, Ahmadinejad needs to survive through the next parliamentary election in March 2012 and the presidential election in June 2013, despite Khamenei’s determination to marginalize him.
Regardless of whether Khamenei was aware of the plot against al-Jubeir, its purpose was to delegitimize Ahmadinejad’s foreign-policy agenda.
So, if Khamenei really was unaware of the plot, it means that some elements in the government or the Revolutionary Guards are acting on their own, which is deeply troubling in its own right.
If there are elements powerful enough to plan such a plot –&#160;even an unsuccessful one – they could do it again in the future.
That raises an even more troubling question: If such “independent” decision-makers exist, are they able to affect Iran’s nuclear policy, too?&#160;
The Domestic Wars of Hosni Mubarak
The decision by Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak’s government to try two senior judges for blowing the whistle on vote rigging in last autumn’s parliamentary elections has rocked the country.
Massive crowds have gathered to support the judges – and have caught Mubarak’s regime completely unaware.
Mubarak’s government now seems to be backtracking as fast as it can.
Judge Mahmoud Mekki has been acquitted, and Judge Hisham al-Bastawisy, who suffered a heart attack the night before, has merely been reprimanded.
Yet Cairo remains restless, and the government fears another outpouring of support for democracy, as the judges have called for renewed nationwide demonstrations.
Egyptian judges have a long-standing tradition of discretion and propriety. But they feel abused by government efforts to sugarcoat the manipulation of election after election by claiming that judges supervise the voting.
What makes their struggle loom so large for a normally quiescent Egyptian public is partly that nearly all 9,000 judges are standing fast in solidarity.
Their representative body, the Judges’ Club, has long pushed for a new law to restore judicial independence.
Now the judges are insisting on their independence by themselves.
The Mubarak regime is adamantly opposed, and resorts to extra-judicial means, such as emergency courts and national security and military courts, which do not observe international standards.
Contrary to his campaign promises during his run for a fifth term as President, Mubarak has requested (and his rubber-stamp parliament has granted) a two-year extension of the Emergency Law by which Egypt has been ruled throughout his presidency.
It is to this law, above all, that the judges and Egypt’s civil society object.
The Emergency Law has been in force since the assassination of President Anwar Sadat in October 1981, and Mubarak claims that he needs another extension to combat terrorism.
But, according to a recent human rights report, despite the Emergency Law, 89 people were killed and 236 wounded in terrorist attacks in Egypt during the previous 12 months.
In neighboring Israel, which is still in a struggle with the Palestinians, only 18 were killed and 25 wounded in similar attacks during the same period. Yet Israelis do not live under an emergency law.
Consider, moreover, that at the height of the Arab-Israeli conflict in 1973, Egypt’s armed forces stood at one million troops.
Now only 350,000 serve in the military, while the internal security police recently hit the one-million mark.
Mubarak’s first internal war was with Islamic militants during his early years in power, but he now finds himself caught in three more domestic wars.
The battle with the judges has incited enough popular unrest to warrant Mubarak’s deployment of thousands of black-uniformed central security forces in the heart of Cairo.
This deployment, lasting three weeks so far, is already longer than the combined duration of the last two wars with Israel.
Another domestic war, with the Egyptian Bedouins of Sinai, broke out two years ago.
Taking their cue from their Palestinian neighbors, if not from al-Qaeda, alienated young Bedouins apparently decided to rebel against their treatment as third-class citizens.
All around them, but especially in the ebullient resorts of southern Sinai, billions are spent on roads, airports, and beaches; sizeable parcels of land are allocated generously to rich Egyptians from the Nile Valley and to foreigners, but not to Sinai natives.
Indeed, Sinai Bedouins have the right of use but not ownership of land, because a lethargic, occasionally corrupt bureaucracy still deems the Sinai a military zone and its natives’ loyalty questionable.
Two years ago, on the anniversary of the war of October 1973, young Sinai militants bombed the Taba Hilton. Last July, on another national holiday, they hit three tourist spots not far from the Mubarak family compound in Sharm el-Sheikh.
These symbolic as well as lethal warnings to a family that has grown Pharaonic in scale, style, and power have gone unheeded.
The third recent domestic war, this one over Christian Coptic citizenship rights, has been brewing for years.
Copts are the original Egyptians, and they were the majority population until the tenth century.
As Egypt was Arabized and Islamized, the Copts became a minority in their original homeland.