It could even be called an approximate synonym for “bubbly.”
The term “awash with liquidity” was last in vogue just before the US stock market crash of October 19, 1987, the biggest one-day price drop in world history.
The reasons for that crash are complex, but, as I discovered in my questionnaire survey a week later, it would appear that people ultimately did not trust the market’s level.
As a result, they were interested in strategies – such as the portfolio insurance strategies that were popular at the time – that would allow them to exit the market fast.
The term “awash with liquidity” was also used often in 1999 and 2000, just before the major peak in the stock market.
So its popular use seems not to reflect anything we can put our finger on, but instead a general feeling that markets are bubbly and a lack of confidence in their levels.
Under this interpretation, the term’s popularity is a source of concern: it may indicate a market psychology that could lead to downward volatility in prices.
The Logic of the Informal Economy
CAMBRIDGE – A specter is haunting the world’s developing countries – the specter of the “informal” economy.
For some, the informal sector includes all businesses that have not been registered with the authorities.
For others, it refers to businesses that escape taxation.
The International Labor Organization defines it as comprising firms that are small enough to fall outside the labor code.
Whatever the definition, what has concerned many economists and gained policymakers’ attention is that the size distribution of firms in developing countries has a long tail.
Compared to developed countries, an unusually large number of small, unproductive firms coexist with a small number of large, productive firms.
According to standard economic reasoning, this is inefficient.
If the small, unproductive firms closed down and the larger, more productive firms hired their workers, total output and well-being would rise.
This should happen automatically through the invisible hand of competition, because the more productive firms should be able to deliver a better product at a lower price, while luring workers with higher wages.
So, why doesn’t this happen routinely in developing countries?
Why do the inefficient firms survive, trapping resources in low-productivity activities?
What is preventing the market from working its magic and making everyone better off?
For some, the problem is that government regulations make compliance too onerous for small firms.
Others claim that tax evasion creates an unfair advantage for informal firms, or that family-wide health care gives households no incentive to have more than one member pay social-security taxes.
For still others, programs that target the informal sector distort the playing field.
In an effort to address the problem, governments in Colombia, Mexico, Peru, South Africa, and elsewhere have been busy changing their tax codes, redesigning their registration systems, and exploring the potentially perverse incentive problems associated with social-welfare programs.
While the jury is still out on the effectiveness of any of these initiatives, I would bet against their success.
It requires many years of training and abstract economic thinking to miss the obvious.
The salient characteristic of modern production is that it mobilizes a lot of knowhow – too much to fit in the head of any single person.
Efficient production requires a division of labor among those who know about technology, marketing, finance, logistics, human-resource management, contracts, regulations, distribution, customer service, and much else.
It requires manual and intellectual skills that must be used in tandem.
Just think of the different specialized skills (many of them recognized by the Oscars) that must come together to make a single film.
To bring these skills together, people have to be integrated into cooperative arrangements in the same firm or within clusters of related firms.
But, in order to get together to work, people have to travel from their homes to production sites.
How do they do that?
In the typical developing-country city, they do so with difficulty.
Daily commute times for low-income formal-sector workers often exceed three hours, and the average direct cost of transportation is equivalent to roughly two hours of work at the minimum wage.
An eight-hour shift becomes an 11-hour shift for which net pay is only six hours.
This implies an effective tax rate of 45% on low-income formal-sector workers.
Add to this the inconvenience of travel and the potential problems caused by being far from home in case of a family emergency.
With these considerations in mind, it becomes easier to understand why people would prefer to do something useful near home rather than where modern production takes place.
But in the shantytowns where developing countries’ urban poor live, there are few varieties of skill that people can mix with their own to make things productively.
As a result, the only feasible forms of production use very few low-skilled workers – and thus operate at low productivity.
They specialize in food preparation, retail, construction, repairs, Internet cafes, and myriad other activities that can be carried out at home and sold to neighbors (often through a window facing the street).
Economists and policymakers have disregarded the physical aspects of urban life.
Housing policy is typically discussed with blatant disregard for urban transport and the locations where industrial and business zones are authorized.
When planners designed Punta Cana – the very successful tourist destination in the Dominican Republic – or the giant Fiat plant in Betim, Brazil, they forgot to plan for their workers’ housing.
Not surprisingly, shantytowns quickly developed.
The informal sector is mostly a consequence of the fact that people are disconnected from modern production networks – an inefficiency that will not be resolved simply by reducing the cost of registering a business or forcing small firms to pay taxes.
What is required is a redesign of urban space, including subways and dedicated bus lanes, and a more integrated approach to housing, social services, and production areas.
Governments will have to start doing some good things, not just stop doing some bad ones.
Beggar Thy Currency Or Thy Self?
NEWPORT BEACH – Not many countries nowadays seek a strong exchange rate; a few, including systemically important ones, are already actively weakening their currencies.
Yet, because an exchange rate is a relative price, all currencies cannot weaken simultaneously.
How the world resolves this basic inconsistency over the next few years will have a major impact on prospects for growth, employment, income distribution, and the functioning of the global economy.
Japan is the latest country to say enough is enough.
Having seen its currency appreciate dramatically in recent years, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s new government is taking steps to alter the country’s exchange-rate dynamic – and is succeeding.
In just over two months, the yen has weakened by more than 10% against the dollar and close to 20% against the euro.
European leaders have already expressed reservations about Japan’s moves.
The US auto industry is up in arms.
And, a few days ago, Jens Weidmann, the president of the Bundesbank, publicly warned that the world risks a harmful and ultimately futile round of competitive exchange-rate depreciations – or, more bluntly, a “currency war” (a term used previously by Brazil to express similar concerns).
Of course, Japan is not the first country to go down this path.
Several advanced and emerging economies preceded it, and I suspect that quite a few will follow it.
It is just over a year since Switzerland surprised many when it announced, and strictly implemented, a threshold beyond which its currency would not be allowed to appreciate against the euro.
And, remember, the country’s operating model for centuries has been to provide a safe haven for foreign capital.
One need not be an economist to figure out that, while all currencies can (and do) depreciate against something else (like gold, land, and other real assets), by definition they cannot all weaken against each other.
In order for some currencies to depreciate, others must appreciate.
Here is where things get interesting, complex, and potentially dangerous.
In today’s world, no significant group of countries is looking for currency strength.
Some resist appreciation actively and openly; others do so in a less visible manner.
Only the eurozone seems to accept being on the receiving end of other countries’ actions.
None of this is unprecedented, and there is a lot of scholarship demonstrating why such beggar-thy-neighbor approaches result in bad collective outcomes.
Indeed, multilateral agreements are in place to minimize this risk, including at the International Monetary Fund and the World Trade Organization.
Yet, when push comes to shove, country after country is being dragged into abetting a potentially harmful outcome for the global economy as a whole.
Worse, this process has not yet registered seriously on the multilateral policy agenda.
There are many reasons for this, ranging from the rather debilitated state of multilateral governance to the urgency of domestic issues currently commanding national policymakers’ attention.
But there is also something else at work: The causes of today’s predicament are difficult to comprehend and counter effectively.
Unlike the old days, the threat of currency wars is not directly related to trade imbalances and balance-of-payments crises.
Rather, an important driver is major central banks’ pursuit of experimental measures in order to compensate for policy inadequacies and political dysfunction elsewhere.
If the world is to avoid serious harm, it is important to understand the dynamics at work.
A simplified description runs as follows: Facing low growth and high unemployment, and with other policymakers stuck on the sideline, a central bank like the US Federal Reserve feels that it has no choice but to adopt a highly accommodating monetary policy.
As policy interest rates are already floored at zero, it is compelled to venture ever deeper into the uncharted realm of “unconventional policies.”
The aim, as Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke said again in December, is to “push” investors to take more risk.
Specifically, it is hoped that an artificial surge in asset prices will make people feel richer and more optimistic, thus triggering “wealth effects” and “animal spirits” that stimulate consumption and investment spending, bolster job creation, and, in the process, “validate” the artificial asset pricing.
In practice, the strategy has proved not to be so straightforward.
Moreover, part of the liquidity that the Fed injects finds its way into other countries’ financial markets.
Witness the surge in capital flows to emerging markets as investors chase higher financial returns.
Complicating matters even more, these inflows have become less and less connected to the recipient countries’ economic and financial fundamentals.
Many investors also feel the need to balance increasingly speculative investments (“satellite positioning”) with much safer investments (“core positioning”).
To meet the latter objective, they turn to prudently managed countries, placing upward pressure on their currencies, too – and, again, beyond what would be warranted by domestic fundamentals.
It is no wonder that more and more governments are worried about exchange-rate appreciation.
In addition to short-term policy headaches, stronger currencies carry potentially significant costs in terms of hollowing out industrial and service sectors.
So, after a varying mix of tolerance and “heterodox” responses, officials are pulled into loosening their own monetary policy in order to weaken their countries’ currencies or, at a minimum, limit the pace of appreciation.
This period of expanding policy inconsistencies could prove to be temporary and reversible if central banks succeed in jolting economies out of their malaise, and if countries come to recognize that greater cross-border policy coordination is urgently needed.
The risk is that the phenomenon leads to widespread disruptions, as increasingly difficult national policy challenges stoke regional tensions and the multilateral system proves unable to reconcile imbalances safely.
If policymakers are not careful – and lucky – the magnitude of this risk will increase significantly in the years ahead.
The Long March in Nepal
KATMANDU – Confounding everyone except themselves, Nepal’s hard-line Maoists have taken a commanding role following the country’s landmark elections.
The people of Nepal have more than one reason to celebrate.
The first nationwide poll in nearly a decade passed off relatively well and was endorsed by Nepali officials as well as the hundreds of international election observers.
According to former US President Jimmy Carter, the election was the most “transformational” of the many polls he has observed around the world.
The high voter turnout, coupled with the relatively peaceful manner in which the election took place, is a testament to the Nepali people’s desire to cement the peace process and contribute in determining the political future of the country.
The Maoists, former rebels who until two years ago were waging a brutal “people’s” war, will soon lead the next government in Nepal.
The former rebels have received the maximum number of seats in the constituencies where counting is complete.
Surprisingly, both local and international analysts had predicted them to finish third, behind the Nepali Congress (NC) and the United Marxist-Leninists (UML), the two largest parties that have been at the helm since multi-party democracy was restored in Nepal in 1990.
While experts are busy trying to explain the Maoists’ unprecedented triumph, much hope rests on the newly elected members of the 601-seat Constituent Assembly. 
The Assembly’s first responsibility will be to draft a new constitution that can help reunify Nepal’s disparate communities.
A second priority will be to decide the fate of Nepal’s centuries-old monarchy.
The Maoists ran on an anti-royalist platform, and it is widely anticipated that the first meeting of the Assembly will abolish the monarchy and declare Nepal a “people’s republic.”
But the king still has some support, though clearly far short of a majority.
Nepal has had a long history of monarchy, spanning close to two and a half centuries, and bringing an end to this tradition might prove to be more difficult than expected.
The Maoists’ willingness and ability to display a degree of sympathy and respect for their opponents will go a long way toward determining their success in office.
It would certainly behoove the Assembly to give serious and immediate consideration to the country’s deplorable socioeconomic conditions.
Nepal is one of the world’s poorest countries, ranking near the bottom even in the South Asian region.
The incoming members of the Assembly therefore must address everyday issues – employment, healthcare, education, social justice, minority rights, security, etc.
Suffice it to say that there Nepal faces a multitude of flashpoints, as well as a large number of detractors who would like to see this historic process derailed.
The success or failure of the Constituent Assembly will rest on whether the presumptive winner, the Communist Party of Nepal (Maoists), will work collaboratively with the other parties rather than trying to push its own agenda exclusively.
The main challenge for the Assembly is to forge onward, keeping in mind that the road ahead is full of seemingly insurmountable challenges.
Nepal’s earlier experiments with democratic governance were not very successful; democratically elected governments (in the late 1950’s and the 1990’s) were unceremoniously replaced by prolonged autocratic rule.
So, leaving responsibility solely to political leaders and policymakers this time would be a grave mistake.
Every Nepali has a role to play to ensure that the country’s dark political history does not repeat itself, and thus to help move the country in the right direction.  
Voting for change has sent a clear message; making sure that Nepal’s leaders follow the will of the people is an altogether different challenge.
It is to be hoped that Nepal’s newly elected Maoists have the wisdom to listen to their newly empowered electorate.   
The Full Value of Childhood Vaccines
GENEVA – If you want to know the value of vaccines, just spend some time in a clinic in Africa.
The faces of the mothers and fathers say it all: vaccines prevent illness and save lives.
But what these parents probably do not realize is that the story does not end there.
As they leave the clinic and head home, they have already taken steps to improve not just their child’s health, but also his or her educational prospects and long-term future.
What’s more, they will have also helped to improve their own lives and enhance the economic prospects of their wider community.
The reasons are simple.
We know that children who are healthier do not require medical treatment or care, both of which cost time and money.
So, by avoiding illness, infants have a greater chance of growing into healthier children who are able to attend school and become more productive members of society.
Meanwhile, instead of caring for a sick child, parents can work, thereby increasing their ability to earn.
So, rather than spending money on medical bills, they are boosting their income and spending capacity, both of which help the economy to grow.
All of this intuitively makes sense, and there is a growing body of scientific evidence to back it up.
It has been shown, for example, that vaccinated children not only do better at school, but also that, through the prevention of damage that can be caused by infectious diseases and resulting nutritional imbalances, they appear to benefit in terms of cognitive development.
Similarly, vaccination has been shown to lead to wage gains across populations, while improvements in child survival rates are associated with lower fertility rates.
And, in terms of the wider gains, one study found that a five-year improvement in life expectancy can translate into a 0.5-percentage-point increase in annual per capita income growth.
What all of this means is that by measuring the effectiveness of vaccines merely in terms of “lives saved,” we could be seriously underestimating the full extent of the benefits that they offer.
As things stand, in terms of the cost effectiveness of health interventions, vaccines are already considered one of public policy’s “best buys.”
Indeed, it has been calculated that the work being done to expand vaccine coverage in developing countries by my organization, the GAVI Alliance, should yield an 18% return on investment by 2020.
But now, as more evidence is gathered, it looks likely that even this may not do justice to the full value of vaccines.
Given the progress made in expanding vaccination programs in recent years, this revelation represents a unique opportunity for the global community, particularly as we begin to close the lid on polio.
With poliovirus now endemic in just three remaining countries, we are already beginning to use the momentum that has carried eradication efforts so far to broaden the scope of routine immunization to reach more of the poorest children.
Now the same health systems and strong immunization services can act as a platform to help fight poverty, too.
But, with current estimates indicating that, by 2030, only half the world’s children will be fully immunized with the 11 vaccines recommended globally by the World Health Organization, we clearly still have some way to go.
For our part, we are helping to change that.
Since it was formed in 2000, GAVI has already helped to immunize more than 370 million children against a range of deadly diseases.
As a result, we have prevented 5.5 million deaths, and we aim to immunize a further 245 million children and save five million more lives by 2015.
At the same time, we now know that the value of vaccines extends far beyond the number of lives saved.
Investment in vaccines is not about short-term savings, either in terms of lives or economic costs; it is about providing children with lifetime protection and the ability to realize their full potential.
So, while reducing mortality is already reason enough to want to immunize every child on the planet, now we have the added motivation that we are not just saving lives, but also helping to improve many more lives in the process.
The Looming Crisis with Iran
NEW YORK – When Barack Obama takes office in January, he will be greeted by many difficult challenges, beginning with the acute economic crisis.
But he will not have the luxury of focusing on this exclusively. He will also have to contend with an array of foreign policy challenges.
Of these, Iran and its nuclear program may well constitute the Obama administration’s first foreign policy crisis.
The reason is simple. Iran is well down the path to being able to enrich uranium on a large enough scale to produce a nuclear weapon.
The International Atomic Energy Agency just reported that Iran may well reach this point in 2009.
An Iran with a nuclear weapon or the ability to produce one or more bombs in short order poses a true danger.
Still, one path for the new American administration would be to adopt the “North Korea” option and live with the threat.
The risk is that doing so would make an already unstable and conflict-prone Middle East even more so.
Iran is already one of the Middle East’s most powerful countries.
A nuclear Iran would likely act more aggressively throughout the region in the belief that its nuclear capability afforded it considerable protection.
A second policy option would be for the US, Israel, or both to attack Iran’s known nuclear installations.
Such a preemptive attack would certainly destroy some or even most of Iran’s existing nuclear facilities and materials.
But some capability would likely survive, and the nuclear program could be rebuilt over several years in a manner that would make a second attack much more difficult.
There would also be serious consequences long before then.
It is highly unlikely that Iran would simply absorb a US or Israeli military strike.
Instead, it could be expected to retaliate by attacking US forces in Afghanistan and Iraq, unleashing terrorist attacks throughout the region and the world, and interrupting the flow of tanker traffic through the Strait of Hormuz.
The last thing the world economy needs is a $200 barrel of oil, but this could be the result. 
What is certain is that both options – living with a nuclear Iran or attacking it – involve serious risks and costs.
The best outcome would be one in which Iran was persuaded to freeze or suspend its nuclear efforts or, better yet, give up an independent capability to enrich uranium.
It is conceivable that Iran could be allowed a symbolic “right” to enrich, but any enrichment program would have to be extremely small so as not to pose a strategic threat.
It would also need to be subject to highly intrusive inspections, so that the world could be confident that Iran was not secretly enriching uranium and developing nuclear weapons.
What would it take to essentially eliminate Iran’s uranium enrichment effort?
To begin with, it would entail putting together a diplomatic package that offered Iran access to nuclear energy but not physical control over nuclear materials.
Economic sanctions that are hurting Iran’s troubled economy could be eased.
Security assurances could be provided to Iran and normal diplomatic relations between Iran and the US and others could be established.
There is no guarantee that Iran would accept such an offer.
But it might, especially now that the price of oil has fallen below $50 a barrel, a level that leaves Iran’s inefficient economy in worse shape than ever.
What would also help would be to make clear that Iran would face additional sanctions, including constraints on its ability to import refined petroleum, if it refused to accept a fair and reasonable compromise.
Convincing Russia and China to support a package of requirements, incentives, and penalties would be important.
In addition, the odds Iran would accept such an offer might increase if the details were made public.
The Iranian people may well choose leaders in their June 2009 elections who can deliver a much higher standard of living over those who would run the country into the ground.
But it is possible that Iran will reject any diplomatic compromise, even one put forward directly by the US.
Obama and the world would then have to choose between tolerating an Iran with nuclear weapons (or the ability to produce them quickly) and using military force to prevent this outcome.
It is the worst sort of choice, as neither option is attractive.
For that reason, it is all the more important that diplomacy be recast and given one last chance.
The Lost Wealth of Nations
The phrase “sustainable development” is commonplace, but economic commentators offer no guidance on how we are to judge whether a nation’s economic development is, indeed, sustainable.
The famous Brundtland Commission Report of 1987 defined sustainable development as “... development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.”
Sustainable development therefore requires that, relative to their populations, each generation should bequeath to its successor at least as large a productive base as it inherited.
But how is a generation to judge whether it is leaving behind an adequate productive base?
Economists argue that the correct measure of an economy’s productive base is wealth, which includes not only the value of manufactured assets (buildings, machinery, roads), but also “human” capital (knowledge, skills, and health), natural capital (ecosystems, minerals, and fossil fuels), and institutions (government, civil society, the rule of law).
Development is sustainable so long as an economy’s wealth relative to its population is maintained over time.
In other words, economic growth should be viewed as growth in wealth, not growth in GNP.
There is a big difference between the two.
There are many circumstances in which a nation’s GNP (per capita) increases even while its wealth (per capita) declines.
In broad terms, these circumstances involve growing markets in certain classes of goods and services (natural-resource intensive products), concomitant with absent markets and collective policies for natural capital (ecosystem services).
As global environmental problems frequently create additional stresses on the local resource bases of the world’s poorest people, GNP growth in rich countries can fuel downward pressure on the wealth of the poor.
Of course, a situation where GNP increases while wealth declines can’t last forever.
When an economy eats into its productive base in order to raise current production, eventually GNP will decline, too, unless policies were to so change that wealth begins to accumulate.
For example, using World Bank data on the depreciation of a number of natural resources at the national level, economists estimate that, although GNP per capita has increased in the Indian sub-continent over the past three decades, wealth per capita has declined somewhat.
The decline has occurred because, relative to population growth, fixed-capital investment, knowledge and skills, and improvements in institutions have not compensated for the degradation of natural capital.
In sub-Saharan Africa, both GNP per capita and wealth per capita have declined.
Economists have also found that in the world’s poorest regions (Africa and the Indian sub-continent), areas that have experienced higher population growth have also lost wealth per capita at a faster rate.
The economies of China and the OECD countries, by contrast, have grown both in terms of GNP per capita and wealth per capita.
The latter regions have more than substituted for the decline in natural capital by accumulating other capital assets.
In other words, during the past three decades the rich world seems to have enjoyed “sustainable development,” while development in the poor world (barring China) has been unsustainable.
These are early days in the quantitative study of sustainable development.
Even so, one can argue that current estimates of wealth are biased.
As for natural capital, the World Bank has so far limited itself to the atmosphere as a sink for carbon dioxide, oil, and natural gas, and forests as sources of timber.
Many types of natural capital, however, have not been included: fresh water, soil, forests as providers of ecosystem services, and the atmosphere as a sink for such pollution as particulates and nitrogen and sulphur oxides.
If these missing items were included, the poor world’s economic performance over the past three decades, including China’s, would look far worse.
But the estimates of wealth accumulation in recent years in the rich world are biased upward too.
Empirical studies by earth scientists have revealed all too often that the capacity of natural systems to absorb disturbances is not unlimited.
When their absorptive capacities are reached, natural systems are liable to collapse into unproductive states.
Recovery is then costly, in terms of both time and material resources.
On the other hand, if, say, the Atlantic current that keeps northern Europe warm were to shift direction or to slow down on account of global warming, the change would be essentially irreversible.
In short, we know that up to some unknown set of limits, knowledge, institutions, and manufactured capital can substitute for natural resources, so that even if an economy loses some of its natural capital, in quantity or quality, its wealth would increase if it invested sufficiently in other assets.
The remarkable increase in agricultural productivity over the past two centuries demonstrates this clearly.
But there are limits to substitutability: the costs of substitution (including human ingenuity) often increase in previously unknown ways as key resources are degraded.
Global warming is a case in point.
When the downside risks associated with such limits and thresholds are brought into estimates of sustainable development, the growth in wealth among the world’s wealthy nations will probably turn out to have been less than we now think.
The Lucifer Effect
Over the past three decades, my research and that of my colleagues has demonstrated the relative ease with which ordinary people can be led to behave in ways that qualify as evil.
We have put research participants in experiments where powerful situational forces – anonymity, group pressures, or diffusion of personal responsibility – led them blindly to obey authority and to aggress against innocent others after dehumanizing them.
My recent book 
 The Lucifer Effect: Understanding How Good People Turn Evil
 describes the radical transformations that took place among college students playing randomly assigned roles of prisoners and guards in a mock prison created at Stanford University.
It goes on to establish direct parallels with the abuses committed by American soldiers at Iraq’s Abu Ghraib prison, presenting much of the social science research illustrating the power of social situations to dominate individual dispositions.
This body of work challenges the traditional focus on the individual’s inner nature, dispositions, and personality traits as the primary – and often the sole – factors in understanding human failings.
Instead, I argue that while most people are good most of the time, they can readily be led to act anti-socially, because most people are rarely solitary figures improvising soliloquies on the empty stage of life.
On the contrary, people are often in an ensemble of different players, on a stage with various props, costumes, scripts, and stage directions from producers and directors.
Together, they comprise situational features that can dramatically influence behavior.
What individuals bring into any setting is important, but so are the situational forces that act on them, as well as the systemic forces that create and maintain situations. 
Most institutions that are invested in an individualistic orientation hold up the person as sinner, culpable, afflicted, insane, or irrational.
Programs of change follow either a medical model of rehabilitation, therapy, reeducation, and treatment, or a punitive model of incarceration and execution.
But all such programs are doomed to fail if the main causal agent is the situation or system, not the person.
As a result, two kinds of paradigm shift are required.
First, we need to adopt a public health model for prevention of violence, spouse abuse, bullying, prejudice, and more that identifies vectors of social disease to be inoculated against.
Second, legal theory must reconsider the extent to which powerful situational and systemic factors should be taken into account in punishing individuals.
Although much of 
 The Lucifer Effect
 examines how easy it is for ordinary people to be seduced into engaging in evil deeds, or to be passively indifferent to the suffering of others, the deeper message is a positive one.
It is by understanding the how and why of such deeds that we are in a better position to uncover, oppose, defy, and triumph over them.
By becoming more “evil smart,” we build up resistance to having our moral compass reset negatively.
In this sense, 
 The Lucifer Effect
 is a celebration of the human capacity to choose kindness over cruelty, caring over indifference, creativity over destructiveness, and heroism over villainy.
At the end of my narrative, I invite readers to consider fundamental strategies of resisting and challenging unwanted social influences, and I introduce the notion of “the banality of heroism.”
After all, most heroes are ordinary people who engage in extra-ordinary moral actions.
With this in mind, I propose a situational perspective for heroism, just as I do for evil: the same situation that can inflame the 
 hostile imagination
 and evil in some of us can inspire the 
 heroic imagination 
 in others.
We must teach people, especially our children, to think of themselves as “heroes-in-waiting,” ready to take heroic action in a particular situation that may occur only once in their lifetime.
The Lynching of Libya
NEW YORK – Many would say that Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi got what he deserved.
Live by the sword, die by the sword.
The Libyan tyrant happily allowed his opponents, or anyone who annoyed him, to be tortured or killed.
So it seems only right that he died with summary violence.
After being hunted down in a dirty drainpipe, he was displayed like a bloody trophy before being battered and shot by a lynch mob.
And it happened in his hometown of Sirte.
This is primitive justice, to be sure, but how else could justice be done to a mass murderer?
Yet there is something deeply disturbing about a lynching, regardless of the victim.
Even as cheering crowds in Sirte and Tripoli were rejoicing at the despot’s death, others voiced doubts over the manner of his humiliating end.
The French public intellectual Bernard-Henri Lévy, who had promoted the Libyan revolution with a strong dose of narcissistic showmanship, wrote that the lynching of Qaddafi “polluted the essential morality” of the people’s rebellion.
One might quibble with this description.
As in all violent revolutions, the morality of the dictator’s opponents was never entirely without blemish.
The rebels, who reduced Qaddafi’s birthplace to rubble, were in some cases as ruthlessly brutal as the men against whom they were fighting.
But there is something else wrong with Lévy’s critique.
To talk about the pollution of morality is to miss the point.
The problem with rough justice, in the form of revenge, is not that it is immoral.
Many of us can see the appeal of the Old Testament principle of “an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth.”
We want a person who made others suffer to suffer as well, preferably in equal measure.
Justice almost always contains an element of revenge.
The problem with revenge, however, is that it provokes further revenge, setting in motion a cycle of violence and counter-violence – the culture of vendetta.
And vendetta is by definition not so much immoral, or even unjust, as it is lawless.
It thrives in societies that are not bound by laws that apply equally to all, or even by any formal laws at all.
Codes of honor are not the same as the rule of law.
While the rule of law does not necessarily satisfy everyone’s sense of justice, it does stop the cycle of violent retribution.
The ancient Greeks understood this well.
The greatest play about the tension between law and justice is Aeschylus’s The Eumenides, a story of murder and vengeance in which the furies represent justice.
They drive people to avenge terrible misdeeds, saying:&#160;“We claim we represent true justice….Blood avengers, always in pursuit, we chase them to the end.”&#160;So it is that the furies help Orestes to wreak vengeance on his mother, Clytaemnestra, for killing his father, Agamemnon.
Orestes murders her, thus continuing the cycle of violence.
Athena, the Goddess of Wisdom and patron of Athens, decides that only a fair trial, with a jury of twelve men, can pacify the furies and restore peace.
But trials are rarely perfect.
In this case, the jury is evenly divided, forcing Athena to give the verdict, which is to acquit Orestes.
This may not have served the rough justice demanded by the furies, but it established the rule of law, which civilized Athens.
To be sure, Athenian democracy was not much like our modern democracies, nor is ancient Athens much like Tripoli today.
Even so, The Eumenides holds an important lesson that remains valid: violence, unchecked by law, will not end.
Revolutions born in bloodshed almost always create more bad blood.
This was true 2,500 years ago, and it is true today.
Few people have understood this better than the Polish democratic activist and thinker Adam Michnik, one of the heroes who in the 1980’s helped to end the Communist dictatorship in his country.
While other Poles demanded vengeful rough justice against the Communist rulers and their accomplices, Michnik counseled negotiation, compromise, and reconciliation, even with former oppressors.
Michnik admits that all revolutions are incomplete in the sense that not all sinners are punished, and not all virtuous people are rewarded.
But, he says, that outcome would mean further violence: “The compensation for suffered harm invariably brings new harm, often more cruel than what came before.”
This is why Qaddafi’s lynching party is a dangerous omen for Libya.
It would have been far better if he had been handed over alive to be judged in a court of law.
A criminal trial in Libya might have been difficult.
A 42-year dictatorship does not exactly provide fertile ground for the learning and experience needed to create an impartial court.
And it is probably impossible for a former dictator’s victims to judge him without prejudice.
That is precisely why the International Criminal Court in The Hague was established.
Putting Qaddafi on trial probably would not have satisfied every Libyan’s feeling of injustice, but it might have helped to instill in Libyans greater respect for the rule of law.
Perhaps a trial of Qaddafi’s son, Saif al-Islam, will have this effect.
If so, standing trial in The Hague would be the best service he could render to his country.
The Lynchpin of Asia
NEW DELHI – Isolated and impoverished by decades of international sanctions, Myanmar (Burma) has emerged in recent months as both a beacon of hope and a potential new Asian flashpoint.
With Nobel laureate Aung San Suu Kyi freed from two decades of house arrest to campaign vigorously for a seat in parliament in the special election to be held on April 1, Burma’s commitment to rejoining the international community appears to be genuine.
But this opening has other consequences, most importantly setting the stage for a new “great game” of strategic competition.
No one should be surprised that Burma is a locus of interest for great powers.
After all, it is larger than France and with a similar population size.
In his recent book Monsoon, Robert Kaplan notes that in the Middle Ages three kingdoms lay between Thailand (then called Siam) and India. One was Myanmar, which means “that which is central.”
Centuries later, Burma remains central, not only in matters of Asian security, but also for the country’s vast and still mostly untapped natural wealth.
Burma’s strategic importance reflects, first and foremost, its geographic location between India, China, Thailand, and Southeast Asia.
Ringed in the north by the southern ridges of the Himalayas, to the east by foothills of dense teak forests, and to the west and south by the Bay of Bengal and Indian Ocean, Burma’s geography has always shaped the country’s history and politics.
In 1885, during an earlier era of great power competition in Asia, Lord Randolph Churchill, Winston Churchill’s father, impulsively annexed Burma to the British Raj in India following the Third Anglo-Burmese War.
Thant Myint-U, a leading historian of contemporary Burma (and the son of former United Nations Secretary-General U Thant), likened Churchill’s move to “throwing Burma off a cliff.”
Only in 1937, by a decree of the British viceroy, was Burma finally separated from British India.
But the Japanese invasion five years later subjugated Burma and its people to colonial rule once again, with the conquering sweep of the Imperial Japanese Army checked only at Imphal, in India’s Manipur state.
The end of the British Empire in 1947 gave Burma its freedom, but did not end its travails.
The assassination of Aung San (Suu Kyi’s father and the leader of Burma’s independence movement) destabilized the country, paving the way for the army to take over.
Under its long-serving military junta, Burma shut itself off from the world, internalized its problems, and stagnated as the rest of Asia boomed.
The world reciprocated, isolating Burma economically and diplomatically.
It was to this Burma that I journeyed from Imphal some 10 years ago, the first Indian foreign minister to travel overland to its neighbor since independence.
India’s Border Roads Organization had recently completed the first all-weather road connecting the two countries since WWII.
Journeying on this “road to fabled Mandalay,” I recorded in my diary, was a highlight of “one of the most memorable, satisfying, and happy foreign visits in my experience as Foreign Minister.”
China, too, has endeavored for centuries to bind Burma to itself, mostly in search of a southern route to India and the Indian Ocean.
In recent decades, China took advantage of the international community’s shunning of Burma to secure its own strategic interests, building highways, railways, ports, and pipelines that connect southern and western China to the Indian Ocean.
But trade has not been China’s only motivation for investing so heavily in Burma. China also views Burma as vital to its quest for security, as well as to the regional expansion of Chinese power.
Reflecting its fears about the potential for Chinese encirclement, democratic India, after early hiccups of doubt, set aside its scruples about Burma’s military regime.
India’s cultural, economical, social, and sometimes military ties with Burma – indeed, with the entire region – are older than China’s.
So, for reasons of Realpolitik, India expanded its activities and investments in Burma throughout the last two decades of the junta’s rule.
Sometimes the competition with China is direct.
At the Shwe gas fields along the Burmese cost, estimated to be among the largest reserves in the world, two pipelines are to be constructed: one to China from the nearby port of Kyauk Phru, and the other to India from the port of Sittwe.
For Thant, this strategic competition is worrying.
The “crossroads through Burma,” he argues, cannot “be a simple joining up of countries,” because the regions of “China and India that are being drawn together over Burma are among the most far-flung parts of the two giant states, regions of unparalleled ethnic and linguistic diversity….isolated upland societies that were, until recently, beyond the control of Delhi or Beijing.”
While China seeks strategic depth in Burma, India’s interests there are now reanimated by the international community’s opening to a country that appears to yearn for the same democratic freedoms that Indians possess.
And, in Aung San Suu Kyi, who studied in New Delhi (as did her mother, Daw Khin Kyi, who was Ambassador to India and Nepal in 1960), Burma possesses a charismatic moral leader who reminds Indians of their country’s own founders.
As a result, Realpolitik and economic interest alone will no longer shape the great game playing out in Burma.
Ideals and the quest for freedom will also play a critical role.
The Machine That Ate Jobs
Insecurity about jobs is a defining characteristic of our age.
Two worries arise most often: globalization, which makes jobs migrate to poorer regions, and computer technology, which can make them disappear altogether.
These worries plague people of all incomes, ages, and in all countries.
As shown by Mexico's laments about job losses to China, people in emerging countries worry as much as those in advanced countries.
In response, politicians propose various job retraining or education programs, but rarely confront the real long-term issues.
Worries about globalization and the computer revolution ultimately boil down to the same thing, because globalization is mostly a consequence of new information technology.
Computers and the Internet made it possible to send information almost costlessly, and to do business across cultures and continents.
The worry is that information technology is now on the bend of a "hockey stick" curve, where it will suddenly take off at much greater speed than before.
The resulting changes will not all be welcome in economic terms.
Hockey stick curves often occur in nature.
Exponential growth at a fixed percentage rate can look like a hockey stick.
Five percent per year of $1 is only five cents, 5% of $10 is only 50 cents, and the curve appears flat for a while.
But then the growth becomes massive: five percent of a billion is $50 million.
Information technology is growing at a faster pace than 5%.
According to "Moore's Law" -- named after the president of Intel, who formulated it in 1975 -- the amount of components on a computer chip doubles every two years.
That is about a 40% annual growth rate.
The economic impact of such an exponential growth path, starting from small beginnings and viewed over decades, will certainly look like one very large hockey stick.
Fears about computers eliminating jobs are, of course, not new.
Fifty years ago, Norbert Wiener of MIT, a great 20th century mathematician and pioneer of computer science, warned of the threat that computers posed to jobs.
The economic problems that Wiener worried about have not materialized so far .
A half-century later, nothing really bad happened to any major segment of our population that can be blamed on computers.
But that is because computers started from small beginnings, so that we have up to now only been on the flat part of the hockey stick.
Now that a critical mass has been reached, will we see a dramatically different effect on employment?
Of course, on average, advances in computer technology must be good news.
Not only are computers productive, but they serve people, rather than being their competitors.
Powerful new computers will make the human race as a whole better off.
The problem is that real people are not just "average," so the real question concerns how the benefits derived from computers are distributed.
The core problem with information technology is that its economic benefits might be concentrated and that the wealth it creates may accrue predominantly to people who have subtle skills that computers can't duplicate, or who have the first-mover advantage, or who have the right business connections.
Older information technology has already created "winner-take-all" effects in some occupations.
Phonograph records (an early example of information technology) created musical superstars who sell their services to millions of people, putting out of business countless local performers who found their talents obsolete.
Television (another older form of information technology) did the same thing for actors and athletes.
But phonographs and television are limited compared to what is possible now - or may be possible soon.
In the new economic world, many more occupations may follow the route of discarded local musicians, resulting in wealth concentrations on a vastly greater scale than before.
The risks created by computer technology are real and frightening.
They will not be seriously changed by retraining and reeducation programs, which will not give most people the skills they need to remain more efficient than the new machines.
Instead, these risks must be dealt with by fundamental changes - changes that will not make individuals more productive than machines, but will allow society to manage risks better and to redistribute them.
For example, as the difference in rewards provided by the market to those with and without special skills grows, a progressive tax system to subsidize low-wage jobs becomes more necessary.
Other likely steps include broadening the scope of private insurance policies, so that they cover some risks that generate inequality, such as the loss of the market value of human capital or of one's home.
Borrowing and lending institutions will need to change, so that they better cushion people against the risk of personal bankruptcy.
Financial markets will have to be broadened, so that people and businesses can better hedge their risks.
It is important to start thinking about what changes lay ahead, because it may be harder to agree later on.
As long as people remain under a relative "veil of ignorance," in the sense that they do not yet know how they will personally be affected, they may find it easier to agree that progressive taxes should be used to subsidize low-wage earners.
When greater income inequality is a fait accompli, principled discussion may give way to naked class struggle between the new super-rich and those who have only their misery to lose.
The Maghreb’s Modern Islamists
FEZ – Just over a year ago, the Arab Spring sparked dramatic change throughout the Arab world.
Popular movements have brought a range of avowedly Islamist political parties to power, replacing the largely secular former regimes.
What that will mean for these countries, and for the region, is one of today’s central geopolitical questions.
In North Africa, two Islamist parties have come fully to power via democratic elections: al-Nahda (Renaissance) in Tunisia, where the Arab Spring began, and the Justice and Development Party (PJD) in Morocco, both of which now lead new coalition governments.
Whereas a popular revolution produced regime change in Tunisia, Morocco underwent a peaceful transformation that left the monarchy in place.
Last July, Moroccans voted overwhelmingly to approve a new constitution that shifts executive power from the king to the prime minister, who will now be fully responsible for the cabinet, the civil service, and the implementation of government policies.
The king retains some prerogatives, such as the authority to select the prime minister (from the parliament’s majority party) and the head of the army.
Furthermore, like heads of state in other parliamentary systems, he has the right to appoint the government ministers and ambassadors, dissolve the parliament, and dismiss the cabinet.
While the PJD’s success was based on institution-building within a constitutional monarchy, al-Nahda has revolutionized the Tunisian system.
But both parties won after running on a moderate platform of constitutionalism, separation of powers, civil liberties, and women’s rights.
This new political reality in the Maghreb will bring Europe –&nbsp;particularly France, the region’s old colonial master – face-to-face with Islamist governments determined to promote a new type of relationship.
But these governments have much work to do at home first.
Currently, the Maghreb countries suffer from soaring unemployment, poverty, and high prices for basic commodities. In response, both al-Nahda and the PJD are emphasizing job creation, free trade, foreign investment, and a crackdown on the corruption that has plagued their countries’ economies.
These governments’ first major test of economic stewardship will be how they treat the tourism industry.
Although Western tourism is a critically important source of employment and foreign currency in both countries, some Muslims have criticized the industry for promoting alcohol and other relaxed social conventions that threaten Islamic values.
So far, both al-Nahda and the PJD have taken a pragmatic stance.
They recognize that, while their supporters may be devout Muslims, they also need to earn a living; empty hotels and beaches would be economically disastrous.
Thus, tourism professionals in both countries have received strong government assurances that business will continue as usual.
Some European analysts predict that, over the longer term, greater stability will follow the political changes in the Maghreb, with perhaps more than a million unemployed Moroccan and Tunisian immigrants returning home if their countries’ economies improve.
That remains very much an open question.
Islamist parties will now have enormous influence on economic policy, after decades of official separation of mosque and state.
Islamic banking, for example, may soon be introduced, though some local and foreign investors argue that sharia regulations could drive away much-needed foreign investment.
There are also concerns about inexperienced Islamist officials’ ability to run finance ministries.
But the region’s Islamist parties appear to be conscious of these risks, and determined to mitigate them.
They know that they need economic growth to curb unemployment and pay for social services, so they are working to bolster the private sector.
In many cases, they are even advocating the kind of free-market policies that their secular predecessors favored.
Those policies should include trade liberalization.
Until now, less than 2% of the Maghreb countries’ foreign trade has remained within the region.
If the region’s new leaders can integrate their economies, a market of more than 75 million consumers would attract more foreign investment and trade with the rest of the world.
Before an economically unified Maghreb can be realized, however, inter-state conflicts such as the Algerian-Moroccan dispute over the “Western” Sahara must be resolved.
Otherwise, it will be difficult even to conceive a common future – without which the economic grievances that fueled the Maghreb’s revolutions are likely to continue.
Much like the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, al-Nahda and the PJD will have to marginalize Islamic extremists in their movements, such as the Salafis, and adopt a pragmatic approach.
To succeed economically, they will need Western support – and the West will not be eager to fund radical Islamist governments.
As they negotiate the realities of modern economic life, the Maghreb’s Islamist ruling parties are likely to lose some supporters.
But, unless they are willing to break with the past, they will not succeed in the present.
Autumn’s Known Unknowns
NEW YORK – During the height of the Iraq war, then-US Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld spoke of “known unknowns” – foreseeable risks whose realization is uncertain.
Today, the global economy is facing many known unknowns, most of which stem from policy uncertainty.
In the United States, three sources of policy uncertainty will come to a head this autumn.
For starters, it remains unclear whether the Federal Reserve will begin to “taper” its open-ended quantitative easing (QE) in September or later, how fast it will reduce its purchases of long-term assets, and when and how fast it will start to raise interest rates from their current zero level.
There is also the question of who will succeed Ben Bernanke as Fed Chairman.
Finally, yet another partisan struggle over America’s debt ceiling could increase the risk of a government shutdown if the Republican-controlled House of Representatives and President Barack Obama and his Democratic allies cannot agree on a budget.
The first two sources of uncertainty have already affected markets.
The rise in US long-term interest rates – from a low of 1.6% in May to recent peaks above 2.9% – has been driven by market fears that the Fed will taper QE too soon and too fast, and by the uncertainty surrounding Bernanke’s successor.
So far, investors have been complacent about the risks posed by the looming budget fight.
They believe that – as in the past – the fiscal showdown will end with a midnight compromise that avoids both default and a government shutdown.
But investors seem to underestimate how dysfunctional US national politics has become.
With a majority of the Republican Party on a jihad against government spending, fiscal explosions this autumn cannot be ruled out.
Uncertainties abound in other advanced economies as well.
Germany’s general election appears likely to produce a repeat of the current government coalition of Chancellor Angela Merkel’s Christian Democratic Union and the Free Democrats, with opinion polls suggesting that a grand coalition between the CDU and the Social Democrats is less likely.
In the former case, current German policies toward the eurozone crisis will not change, despite austerity fatigue in the eurozone’s periphery and bailout fatigue in its core.
Political risks in the eurozone’s periphery include the collapse of Italy’s government and a fresh election as a result of former Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi’s criminal conviction.
Greece’s ruling coalition could collapse as well, and political tensions may rise even higher in Spain and Portugal.
On monetary policy, the European Central Bank’s forward guidance – the commitment to keep interest rates at a low level for a long time – is too little too late and has not prevented a rise in short- and long-term borrowing costs, which could stifle the eurozone’s already-anemic economic recovery.
Whether the ECB will ease policy more aggressively is also uncertain.
Outside of the eurozone, the strength of the United Kingdom’s recovery and the Bank of England’s soft forward guidance have led to similar “unwarranted” increases in interest rates, which the BoE, like the ECB, seems unable to prevent in the absence of more muscular action.
In Japan, the policy uncertainty concerns whether the third arrow of Abenomics – structural reforms and trade liberalization to boost potential growth – will be implemented, and whether the expected rise in the consumption tax in 2014 will choke economic recovery.
In China, November’s Third Plenum of the Communist Party Central Committee will show whether China is serious about reforms aimed at shifting from investment-led to consumption-led growth.
Meanwhile, China’s slowdown has contributed to the end of the commodity super-cycle, which, together with the sharp rise in long-term interest rates (owing to the scare of an early Fed exit from QE), has led to economic and financial stresses in many emerging-market economies.
These economies – the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) and others – were overhyped for too long.
Favorable external conditions – the effect of China’s strong growth on higher commodity prices and easy money from yield-hungry advanced-economy investors – led to a partly artificial boom.
Now that the party is over, the hangover is setting in.
This is especially true in India, Brazil, Turkey, South Africa, and Indonesia, all of which suffer from multiple macroeconomic and policy weaknesses – large current-account deficits, wide fiscal deficits, slowing growth, and above-target inflation – as well as growing social protest and political uncertainty ahead of elections in the next 12-18 months.
There are no easy choices: defending the currency by hiking interest rates would kill growth and harm banks and corporate firms; loosening monetary policy to boost growth might push their currencies into free-fall, causing a spike in inflation and jeopardizing their ability to attract capital to finance their external deficits.
There are two major geopolitical uncertainties as well.
First, will the looming military strikes by the US and its allies against Syria be limited in scope and time, or will they trigger a wider military confrontation?
The last thing that a fragile global economy needs now is another round of peak oil prices.
Second, a year ago the US convinced Israel to give its non-military approach to Iran’s nuclear-weapons ambitions time to bear fruit.
But, after a year of economic sanctions and negotiations with no result, Israel’s patience on what it regards as an existential issue is wearing thin.
Even short of an actual military conflict – which could double oil prices overnight – the resumption of saber-rattling by Israel and the war of words between the two sides could lead to a sharp rise in energy costs.
The looming known unknowns are plentiful.
Some outcomes may be more positive, or at least less damaging, than expected.
But the realization this autumn of even some of the risks described here could derail the global economy’s still-wobbly recovery.
And the meta-risk of policy mistakes and accidents remains very high.
The Making of a Murder in Pakistan
The assassination of Benazir Bhutto, the first Muslim woman to lead a Muslim country, is a serious blow to Pakistan’s prospects for democracy and, indeed, its viability as a state.
As chaos and confusion set in, we should not lose sight of President Pervez Musharraf’s partial responsibility for this turn of events.
At the very least, he cannot be absolved from his government’s failure to provide Bhutto with adequate security.
Instead, Bhutto had to pay with her life for courageously challenging extremists of all stripes – from Al-Qaeda and Taliban to the country’s religious political parties and military hardliners.
As heir to Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, the legendary democratic leader who was hanged by General Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq’s government in 1979, Benazir emerged as a symbol of resistance at a young age – but languished in jails and exile in the 1980’s.
Z. A. Bhutto’s legacy was empowerment of the impoverished and defense of ordinary people’s rights amid feudalistic politics and military rule.
Rather than bowing to the military junta, he embraced the gallows.
Hours before his hanging, Benazir was allowed to see her father for the last time, writing in her autobiography: “I told him on my oath in his death cell, I would carry on his work.”
She largely lived up to the promise.
Her first stint as prime minister (1988-90) was brief and disorganized.
Lt. Gen. Hamid Gul, the former Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) chief, confirmed that he sponsored an alliance of right-wing political parties to stop her from getting a parliamentary majority.
Information about Pakistan’s nuclear program and ISI operations in Afghanistan were out of her domain.
Her second term in office (1993-96) was longer and better, but her government again fell early, owing to charges of mismanagement and corruption.
In reality, machinations by the intelligence agencies also played a part.
The military had developed an entrenched distrust of her, given her position as a popularly supported pro-Western leader who wanted peace with India.
After almost a decade in self-imposed exile, Bhutoo’s return to Pakistan in October gave her a fresh political start.
Pakistan had changed, as military dictatorship and religious extremism in the north played havoc with the fabric of society.
A tentative arrangement with Musharraf, together with Western support – particularly from the United Kingdom and the United States – eased her return, which hundreds of thousands of people welcomed, though terrorists greeted her with a string of suicide bombings.
Bhutto’s contacts with Mushararf’s military government drew criticism, but she remained adamant that a return to democracy was possible only through a transition in which Musharraf would give up his military post, become a civilian head of state, and conduct free and fair elections.
To the dismay of some democratic forces, Bhutto stayed the course even after Musharraf imposed emergency rule on November 3 and removed the country’s top judges to ensure his re-election.
Indeed, she even persuaded other important political leaders to participate in the planned January 8 election, which she viewed as an opportunity to challenge religious extremist forces in the public square.
She seized that opportunity by bravely traveling throughout the country, despite serious threats to her life, arguing for a democratic and pluralistic Pakistan.
One can understand why religious extremists like Al-Qaeda and Taliban would target her, and the government claims that it is impossible to defend against a suicide attack.
But Bhutto was reportedly killed by a sharp shooter before the terrorist blew himself up.
So, in the eyes of Pakistan’s people, and especially of Bhutto’s supporters, the intelligence services, either alone or in collaboration with extremists, finally decided to eliminate her.
Whether or not the government was involved, the fact remains that Pakistan has lost a desperately needed leader.
With Pakistan’s future in the balance, the West’s help and support will be crucial, but that means recognizing that Musharraf is not the only leader who can resolve Pakistan’s myriad problems and manage the war on terror.
On the contrary, by nurturing the current environment of instability and uncertainty, Musharraf himself must be regarded as one of Pakistan’s biggest problems.
The Making of Great Communicators
CAMBRIDGE – Perhaps the most impressive current example of leadership based on the ability to communicate is Barack Obama, who has given three times as many interviews as George W. Bush and held four times as many prime press conferences as Bill Clinton at this stage in their presidencies.
Some critics are now wondering if all this talking is too much of a good thing.
All inspirational leaders communicate effectively.
Winston Churchill often attributed his success to his mastery of the English sentence.
The ancient Greeks had schools of rhetoric to hone their skills for the assembly.
Cicero made his mark in the Roman Senate after studying oratory.
Good rhetorical skills help to generate soft power.
Woodrow Wilson was not a gifted student as a child, but he taught himself oratory because he regarded it as essential for leadership.
Martin Luther King, Jr. benefited from growing up in an African-American church tradition rich in the rhythms of the spoken word.
Clinton was able to combine a sense of theater with narrative stories and an overall ability to convey an argument.