Fromm remains relevant: The flight into the embrace of a virulent movement like the Islamic State is also an escape from&nbsp;freedom by its discontents.
Some of the jihadis’ statements make the connection explicitly: “The cure for depression is jihad,” one Western recruit declares in an Islamic State video.
“Feel the honor we are feeling.
Feel the happiness we are feeling.”
Another one simply states: “No to democracy.”
Democratic ennui creates the conditions for radicalization, and the extreme Islamist movements know very well how to exploit it.
The seductive call of extremism will not be silenced with pleas to fundamentalist imams in European mosques to stop indoctrinating young Muslim men.
Initiation into Islamist ideology needs to be countered by a much stronger initiation into the culture of democracy and its fundamental values – and by a much stronger affirmation of these values within our political discourse.
It is through increased confidence and conviction, rather than bland tolerance, that democratic societies can counter the appeal of fanatical causes and their charismatic leaders.
Only renewed commitment to the idea of democracy can address the widespread disaffection and disengagement plaguing Western societies, of which the Islamic State jihadis are just the most disturbing and dangerous symptom.
Militant Islamism and Vaccine Skepticism
LONDON – We know how to eradicate polio.
Since the 1980s, an international vaccination effort led by the World Health Organization has driven the virus to the cusp of extinction.
A disease that killed or paralyzed a half-million people annually now infects only a few hundred.
What is standing in the way of the virus’s eradication is not medical or technical constraints, but political resistance to the vaccination effort.
Indeed, the few areas where the virus continues to hold out share worrying similarities.
Since 2012, 95% of polio cases have occurred in five countries – Afghanistan, Pakistan, Nigeria, Somalia, and Syria – all of which are affected by Islamist insurgencies.
In order to eradicate polio, we must understand this linkage.
Islamist opposition to vaccination programs is often attributed to the belief that vaccines are a Western conspiracy to harm Muslims, and that the vaccines sterilize children, are infected with HIV, or contain pork.
But it is important to note that jihadists in Syria and Afghanistan have been largely supportive of polio vaccination campaigns.
If the virus is to be defeated, we will have to move beyond caricatures of Islamists as violent zealots opposed to Western science and look closely at the specific political contexts in which the eradication effort has so far been unsuccessful.
In Nigeria, for example, the extremist group Boko Haram’s animosity toward vaccination campaigns stems from an intra-Muslim conflict rooted in the colonial era, when the United Kingdom ruled northern Nigeria indirectly through a pro-British indigenous elite.
The descendants of the colonial elite continue to dominate the region’s state governments, which are responsible for implementing the vaccination programs.
Boko Haram’s opposition to the effort reflects its broader antipathy to what it regards as a corrupt and Westernized political class.
Similarly, in southern Somalia, attempts by outsiders to impose a stable centralized government have generated resentment toward polio vaccination programs.
Since the early 1990s, interventions by the United Nations and the African Union in Somalia have included troops from the United States and from the country’s predominantly Christian neighbors, Kenya and Ethiopia.
This has resulted in widespread discontent and has fueled support for Islamist militants, whom many Somalis view as the main bulwark against foreign interference.
In recent years, al-Shabaab militants have attacked aid workers, making it very difficult to undertake public-health programs in insurgent-controlled areas.
Médecins Sans Frontières, for example, had to close its Somali programs in 2013.
In Pakistan, opposition to the vaccination effort has its roots in Pashtun communities’ resistance to the national government.
Broadly speaking, the Pakistani Taliban is a Pashtun movement, concentrated in the semi-autonomous Federally Administered Tribal Areas in the northwest of the country.
This mountainous region was never ruled directly by the British, and the Pashtun have fiercely resisted attempts by the Pakistani state to expand its power.
Thus, external interventions like the vaccination program are viewed as a stalking horse for deeper government encroachment into Pashtun areas.
The Pakistani Taliban’s hostility has been further hardened by US interventions in the country, including the use of a fake hepatitis vaccination campaign to gather DNA from Osama bin Laden’s relatives prior to his assassination.
For Islamist militants, this confirmed that polio immunization efforts are a cover for gathering intelligence to identify targets for drone attacks.
The importance of local politics – rather than religious ideology – can be seen in the response to polio vaccination programs on the other side of the Durand Line.
In Afghanistan, the Taliban is also a largely Pashtun movement, but its attitude toward the polio eradication effort could not be more different.
When the Taliban ruled Afghanistan, from 1996 to 2001, it supported the vaccination effort, and indeed it continues to do so; a recent Taliban statement urged its Mujahedeen to provide polio workers with “all necessary support.”
This difference reflects the political position of Pashtuns in the two countries.
In Afghanistan, Pashtun are the majority; as a result, they have a much stronger influence in national politics than their counterparts in Pakistan – and thus view the state with less suspicion.
In Syria, the biggest obstacle to the vaccination effort has been the central government.
The refusal of President Bashar al-Assad’s regime to allow WHO to carry out vaccination programs in insurgent-controlled areas directly resulted in a polio outbreak in 2013.
Moderate opposition groups like the Free Syrian Army, with the help of the Turkish authorities and local non-governmental organizations, have organized their own vaccination program in areas outside Syrian government control.
Islamist militants, including the Islamic State and the al-Nusra Front, have allowed these immunization programs to operate in areas under their control as well, as they are not associated with the Assad regime.
The stance Islamist insurgents take toward polio vaccination campaigns has less to do with anti-Western zealotry than with the specific dynamics of the conflict in which they are involved.
This has important implications for public-health policy.
Only by understanding the political context in which vaccination programs operate will those committed to eradicating polio succeed.
Islam’s Democratic Imperative
Mahmoud Abbas’s election in Palestine and the forthcoming vote in Iraq on January 30 have pushed the question of Islam’s compatibility with democracy to the center of the world’s agenda.
Sheik Dia al-Shakarchi, a leading Shi’ite theologian, argues that democracy is not only compatible with Islam, but is essential to it.
During the last 25 years, Islam has played an increasingly influential role in politics, and not only in the Islamic world, with political Islam frequently expressing itself in radicalism and terror.
Both Muslims and non-Muslims have not always agreed on the extent to which this is compatible with genuine Islam.
How Islam is understood varies widely among devout, moderately religious, and non-observant Muslims, as well as among Islamic scholars, political parties, and organizations.
Even western experts and critics of Islam hold different views.
Overall, there are two conflicting images of Islam: a peaceful Islam, which is ready for dialogue and coexistence, and a fundamentalist Islam, which is militant and even terrorist.
There is a widespread misperception that Islam’s holy texts are written in a way that can justify both interpretations.
But, in my opinion, the reason for different – and frequently contradictory – interpretations is an incompetent and incomplete approach that detaches individual texts from their context and construes them without a thorough understanding of the true spirit of the Koran.
This approach to Islamic texts – coming from both secular and religiously oriented Muslims, as well as from non-Muslims with an interest in the subject – calls into question the compatibility of Islam and democracy, and also whether Islam is capable with peace and moderation.
But, based on more than a decade of study and debate, I am convinced of the compatibility between Islam and democracy.
Indeed, in my view, democracy is not only permitted by Islam, but can be regarded as a religious rule.
My understanding is drawn from a principle contained by the basic Islamic theory of legal reasoning, which asserts that when strong religious interests can be realized only through a particular path of action, that path itself is no longer a matter of choice.
It also becomes a religious rule. Thus, if we can establish that democracy is the means to realize the strong interests of the Muslim community – and I believe we can do this – then democracy may be declared a religious duty in Islam.
Even if democracy might be viewed primarily as an evil from an Islamic point of view, there is another principle of interpretation of religious laws in Islam, according to which minor evils – even if religiously impermissible or not recommended at first – become permissible, recommended, and even mandatory if they alone can prevent major evils.
The Muslim interest in democracy is best understood through a clear perception of the reality of how Muslims live.
A country like Iraq, for example, is home to a diverse and varied population: Arab and Kurd, Sunni and Shi’ite, not to mention minorities of other religions and ethnic groups.
Moreover, not all Muslims practice Islam, nor do those who practice do so in the same way.
So religion cannot be imposed; individuals must practice it according to their own decisions.
Any enforcement of religious practice only creates hostility toward religion.
Thus, I believe that a political system that best serves free choice – including the choice of people to be practicing Muslims – is the best system for Islam.
Of course, the problem of Islam’s compatibility with democracy may be analyzed from different points of view.
One possible approach is purely practical, comparing democracy with all other conceivable alternatives.
In my opinion, there are only five conceivable alternatives in a Muslim country.
The first is secular dictatorship.
This is unacceptable for two reasons.
First, dictatorship itself is ugly and unacceptable; second, secular dictatorship excludes Islamic parties from participating normally in the political system.
We have considerable experience of this in the Middle East.
Of course, an Islamic dictatorship is also possible.
But this, too, is unacceptable.
As with a secular dictatorship, Islamic dictatorship is ugly and destructive.
Such a dictatorship would damage Islam by associating Islam with unjust rule and creating enemies for Islam.
A third alternative is democracy, but with secular restrictions on religious parties.
In fact, this would be a pseudo-democracy, and would infringe on the rights of religious people to full participation.
Likewise, an Islamic democracy with restrictions on non-religious parties would be a mockery of democracy and harmful to Islam.
This would also be unrealistic, because in the current age of globalization, any claims to democracy would be exposed as obviously false.
So, in my view, true democracy is the only alternative, because it is realistic and promotes peace.
Call this ideology-free democracy: a political system that tolerates restrictions imposed only from within, never from outside, the democratic process itself.
We must recognize that democracy has proved its worth around the world.
It is the best way of organizing a society based on reality and not ideals.
Why shouldn’t Iraqis benefit from the proven experience of other peoples?
Islam\u0027s Electoral Divide
How to reform the Islamic world will be among the topics NATO's leaders will discuss in Turkey next week.
Both President Bush and the European Union have proposed bold democratization initiatives in the region. Can such initiatives succeed?
Islam and democracy are frequently presumed to be bitter antagonists.
A careful study of the world's 47 Muslim-majority states, however, shows that Islam and democracy can and do co-exist.
The real gap is narrower: it is the Arab world, not Islam, which seems at loggerheads with democracy.
This conclusion is based on comparing Muslim countries' "electoral competitiveness."
If a government sprang from reasonably fair elections and the elected government is able to fill the most important political offices, the country is deemed "electorally competitive."
Electorally competitive countries are not necessarily democratic: some do not fully control the state's territory; others violate both their constitutions and human rights.
But electoral competitiveness is always a necessary condition for democracy - and therefore a central consideration when evaluating a country's prospects for democratization.
Two initiatives - the Polity Project, founded by political scientist Ted Gurr, and Freedom House's annual Freedom in the World surveys - gauge political rights in almost every country.
The differences between Arab and non-Arab Muslim countries are striking.
Of 29 non-Arab Muslim countries evaluated by Polity IV , 11 enjoyed significant political rights for at least three consecutive years in the period from 1972 to 2000, while eight experienced at least five consecutive years of political rights.
The Freedom House scores are remarkably similar: 12 of 31 non-Arab Muslim countries had relatively high scores for at least three consecutive years, and eight for five consecutive years.
Both research teams rate Albania, Bangladesh, the Gambia, Malaysia, Mali, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, and Turkey as meeting the three-year criterion, with all but Albania and Niger meeting the five-year criterion.
But on the Arab side, only Lebanon had three consecutive years of relatively strong political rights - before the 15-year civil war that began in 1975 - and no country experienced five consecutive years of strong rights.
A non-Arab Muslim country in the period from 1972 to 2000 was almost 20 times more likely to be electorally competitive than an Arab Muslim-majority country.
In the non-Arab Muslim-majority subset, both Polity IV and Freedom House rate nine countries as having experienced at least three consecutive years of substantial political rights.
Strikingly, seven of them are clear "overachievers," because they also have low per capita GDP levels. Indeed, five of the nine qualify as "great overachievers" - significant political rights despite annual per capita income of less than $1,500.
By contrast, none of the 16 Arab Muslim-majority countries is an overachiever.
Seven had annual per capita income levels exceeding $5,500 in the period from 1972 to 2000 but no significant political rights for three consecutive years.
These states are electoral "underachievers" - weak political rights despite relative affluence.
Elections do occur in the Arab world, and they vary in frequency and significance.
In the complete autocracies - Saudi Arabia, Libya, Syria, Tunisia, Iraq under Saddam, and the United Arab Emirates - there have been no meaningful elections to fill the most important offices.
The UAE, a somewhat decentralized and consensual federation, is not as dictatorial as the others, but only seven voters - the traditional rulers of the federation's seven emirates - elect the president.
Elections have begun to play a greater role in Qatar, Kuwait, Bahrain, and Oman, but none uses free and fair elections to fill the most important and powerful political offices.
Traditional monarchs still have broad powers of appointment and decree.
Finally, some Arab countries are not electorally competitive now but once did use free and fair elections to fill the state's most politically powerful offices (Lebanon).
Others seemed close to doing so (Yemen, Morocco, and Jordan) or had a possible political opening but are now substantially farther away from being electorally competitive (Egypt and, arguably, Algeria).
It makes intuitive sense that Islam cannot by itself explain such differences.
All of the world's religions contain some doctrines and practices that are potentially harmful to the emergence of democracy, and others that are potentially beneficial.
A beneficial Islamic doctrine is the Koranic injunction that "there shall be no compulsion in matters of religion."
Others include shura (consultation), ijtihad (independent reasoning), and ijma (consensus).
Perhaps religious and political leaders in electorally overachieving states such as Senegal, Mali, Bangladesh, and Indonesia draw upon some of these concepts.
Most political cultures can and do change over time, because to some extent they are socially constructed by new opportunities, threats, and contexts generally.
Witness Catholicism's pro-democratic transformation.
Unless Arab political culture is shown to be uniquely and permanently inimical to electoral competitiveness, it makes more sense to understand the democratic divide in the Muslim world in terms of the political - as opposed to the ethnic or religious - particularities of the Middle East and North Africa.
One such particularity is that many contemporary Arab states were established with relatively new and arbitrary boundaries, and were then occupied and often reconfigured as European colonies.
The linguistic dominance of Arabic throughout the Middle East and North Africa, together with pan-Arabism, reinforced weak national identities.
Anyone even remotely familiar with the region knows how common is the phrase "the Arab nation" ( watan ).
Furthermore, unlike Latin America, Africa, and elsewhere, Middle East democrats have not benefited from the Cold War's end.
The US continues to subsidize authoritarian Arab regimes, such as Egypt (which receives at least $2 billion a year), because it buys peace with Israel and maintains US geopolitical influence in the Arab-Israeli conflict.
Resolving that conflict - itself a key aspect of Arab political identity - might enable Arab political culture to change.
But NATO's leaders should bear in mind that, viewed in comparative and historical perspective, such change will be less an imposition from outside and more the result of internal pressures and initiatives.
Islam’s European Hope
MADRID – Mohamed Merah’s killing spree in and around Toulouse in March, like the 2004 Madrid train bombings and the 2005 suicide attacks in London’s Underground, has highlighted once again the dilemmas that Europe faces with regard to its growing Muslim minority.
No social-integration model has proven to be free of flaws.
But is the picture really so bleak as those who despair of an emerging “Eurabia” would have us believe?
Neither the multicultural ethos (respect for “cultural diversity in an atmosphere of mutual tolerance,” as British Labor Minister Roy Jenkins put it in 1966), nor official indifference to religious identities (as in France, where the state, as the nineteenth-century historian Jules Michelet put it, “takes the place of God”) has worked as planned.
Multiculturalism in Britain has entrenched almost self-contained Muslim communities and turned Islam into a badge of identity to counteract exclusion.
Similarly, imposed laïcité(France’s strict republican secularism) seems to have deepened French Muslims’ attachment to their religious identity.
Devastatingly high unemployment rates among European Muslims (three times higher than the national average in most countries) aggravate their social marginalization and cultural self-segregation.
Isolated, destitute, and in a state of permanent rage, the French banlieues and immigrant ghettos of British cities have turned into powder kegs where young Muslims easily fall prey to radical religious preaching and political extremism.
At least 85 sharia courts are now operating in Britain’s parallel Muslim society, while the number of mosques (1,689) now almost equals the number of Anglican churches that have recently closed (1,700).
Mohammed is the most popular name for baby boys in Britain.
For Prime Minister David Cameron, all of this, as he implied at the 2011 Munich Security Conference, represents the spoiled fruit of multiculturalism.
In fact, it should come as no surprise that enthusiasm for religious self-assertion is strongest among young, second-generation immigrants.
Their parents, still influenced by life under the repressive autocracies from which they fled, tend to be submissive to the powers that be.
Younger generations rebel precisely because they have internalized the values of freedom and choice offered by democracy.
In a way, their rebellion is the hallmark of their Britishness or Frenchness.
True, some young European Muslims have traveled to Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Iraq; some went as far as Yemen and Somalia, and came back as hardened radicals, soldiers in a war against a West that, in their view, dishonors Islam.
As the young Muslim Briton Mohammed Sidique Khan put it (speaking in a heavy Yorkshire accent), he participated in the London Underground bombings “to avenge my Muslim brothers and sisters.”
But becoming a murderous fanatic like Merah or Sidique Khan is the personal choice of a pathological mind, not the trend of a generation.
Social rejection has not turned young French and British Muslims into mass murderers, and the infatuation of many with al-Qaeda has not overwhelmed their desire to fit in.
The massive influx of Muslims into Europe in the last two generations, it should be remembered, is the largest encounter between Islam and modernity in human history, and it has yielded invaluable benefits, such as a growing Muslim middle class, an emerging intelligentsia, and greater freedom for Muslim women.
Polls in France – where the rate of intermarriages is the highest in Europe – have shown that the majority of Muslims do accept laïcité, gender equality, and other key republican values.
Moreover, sizeable segments of the Muslim community are upwardly mobile in socioeconomic terms.
About 30% of those born before 1968 have become middle or senior managers.
More broadly, Islam has failed to supersede other identity patterns, such as class and economic status.
In Britain, too, immigrants have been changing the ethnic profile of the middle and professional classes.
Increasingly educated and financially successful, Pakistani Britons are also actively engaged in political life, with more than 200 representing the main political parties in local councils.
In the 2010 election, the number of British Muslim members of the House of Commons doubled, to 16.
The most influential Muslim woman in British politics, Baroness Sayeeda Warsi (also the Conservative Party chairperson), joined other Muslims in the House of Lords, such as Lord Ahmed, the most senior Labour peer, and Baroness Kishwer Falkner, a Liberal Democrat.
To consider Islam as a civilization that is not susceptible to change is an historical fallacy.
Religious moderation, if not secularization, remains the key not only to social integration, but also to Muslims’ opportunity to influence Europe’s future.
The example of European Jewry is not entirely irrelevant.
An oppressed tribe of Ostjuden, destitute immigrants from the shattered communities of Eastern Europe, was transformed in just two generations from God-fearing shoemakers, tailors, and wandering peddlers into a community of writers, philosophers, scientists, and tycoons.
That happened precisely because they reformed their Judaism in the light of Western values.
They knew that there was no other way to seize the opportunities for human improvement presented by the West.
Reform Judaism in Germany resulted in religious and cultural particularism yielding to a far greater degree of universalism than was envisaged at any time in the Jewish past.
Any religious minority in quest of a place in the European project would do well to reflect on that theological shift.
Islam’s Forsaken Renaissance
Children often play a game where they sit in a circle.
One whispers something to his neighbor, who then whispers that information to the next child, and so on, around the circle.
By the time the last child whispers the information to the first, it is totally different from what was originally said.
Something like that seems to have happened within Islam.
The Prophet of Islam, Muhammad, brought one – and only one – religion.
Yet today we have perhaps a thousand religions that all claim to be Islam.
Divided by their different interpretations, Muslims do not play the role they once did in the world; instead, they are weakened and victimized.
The Shia/Sunni schism is so deep that each side condemns followers of the other as apostates, kafir.
The belief that the other’s religion is not Islam, and its followers not Muslim, has underpinned internecine wars in which millions have died – and continue to die.
Even among the Sunnis and Shias there are further divisions.
The Sunnis have four imams and the Shias have twelve; their teachings all differ.
Then there are other divisions, including the Druze, the Alawites, and the Wahabis.
We are also taught by our ulamas (religious instructors) that their teachings must not be questioned.
Islam is a faith.
It must be believed.
Logic and reason play no part in it.
But what is it that we must believe when each branch of Islam thinks the other one is wrong?
The Koran, after all, is one book, not two or three, or a thousand.
According to the Koran, a Muslim is anyone who bears witness that “there is no God (Allah) but Allah, and that Muhammad is his Rasul (Messenger).”
If no other qualification is added, then all those who subscribe to these precepts must be regarded as Muslims.
But because we Muslims like to add qualifications that often derive from sources other than the Koran, our religion’s unity has been broken.
But perhaps the greatest problem is the progressive isolation of Islamic scholarship – and much of Islamic life – from the rest of the modern world.
We live in an age of science in which people can see around corners, hear and see things happening in outer space, and clone animals.
And all of these things seem to contradict our belief in the Koran.
This is so because those who interpret the Koran are learned only in religion, in its laws and practices, and thus are usually unable to understand today’s scientific miracles.
The fatwas (legal opinions concerning Islamic law) that they issue appear unreasonable and cannot be accepted by those with scientific knowledge.
One learned religious teacher, for example, refused to believe that a man had landed on the moon.
Others assert that the world was created 2,000 years ago.
The age of the universe and its size measured in light years – these are things that the purely religiously trained ulamas cannot comprehend.
This failure is largely responsible for the sad plight of so many Muslims.
Today’s oppression, the killings and the humiliations of Muslims, occurs because we are weak, unlike the Muslims of the past.
We can feel victimized and criticize the oppressors, but to stop them we need to look at ourselves.
We must change for our own good.
We cannot ask our detractors to change, so that Muslims benefit.
So what do we need to do?
In the past, Muslims were strong because they were learned.
Muhammad’s injunction was to read, but the Koran does not say what to read.
Indeed, there was no “Muslim scholarship” at the time, so to read meant to read whatever was available.
The early Muslims read the works of the great Greek scientists, mathematicians, and philosophers.
They also studied the works of the Persians, the Indians, and the Chinese.
The result was a flowering of science and mathematics.
Muslim scholars added to the body of knowledge and developed new disciplines, such as astronomy, geography, and new branches of mathematics.
They introduced numerals, enabling simple and limitless calculations.
But around the fifteenth century, the learned in Islam began to curb scientific study.
They began to study religion alone, insisting that only those who study religion – particularly Islamic jurisprudence – gain merit in the afterlife. The result was intellectual regression at the very moment that Europe began embracing scientific and mathematical knowledge.
And so, as Muslims were intellectually regressing, Europeans began their renaissance, developing improved ways of meeting their needs, including the manufacture of weapons that eventually allowed them to dominate the world.
By contrast, Muslims fatally weakened their ability to defend themselves by neglecting, even rejecting, the study of allegedly secular science and mathematics, and this myopia remains a fundamental source of the oppression suffered by Muslims today.
Many Muslims still condemn the founder of modern Turkey, Mustafa Kamal, because he tried to modernize his country.
But would Turkey be Muslim today without Ataturk?
Mustafa Kamal’s clear-sightedness saved Islam in Turkey and saved Turkey for Islam.
Failure to understand and interpret the true and fundamental message of the Koran has brought only misfortune to Muslims.
By limiting our reading to religious works and neglecting modern science, we destroyed Islamic civilization and lost our way in the world.
The Koran says that “Allah will not change our unfortunate situation unless we make the effort to change it.”
Many Muslims continue to ignore this and, instead, merely pray to Allah to save us, to bring back our lost glory.
But the Koran is not a talisman to be hung around the neck for protection against evil.
Allah helps those who improve their minds.
Jalur Islam menuju Pembaruan
UPPSALA – Banyak orang dalam komunitas Muslim yang sejak lama menentang Deklarasi Universal PBB tentang Hak Asasi Manusia (Universal Declaration of Human Rights).
Para pengkritik menegaskan bahwa deklarasi ini dibuat oleh kekuasaan kolonial yang memiliki sejarah panjang pelanggaran HAM berat dan ini setara dengan bentuk tindakan lain yang diupayakan oleh beberapa pelaku di dunia Barat untuk memaksakan kehendaknya di negara-negara yang mayoritas penduduknya beragama Islam.
Kaum Muslim konservatif dan fundamentalis bersikap lebih esktrim, mereka menyatakan bahwa tidak ada satu pun ciptaan manusia yang sama – apalagi bisa menggantikan – hukum syariah, yang sama dengan firman Allah.
Benturan antara standar-standar HAM sekuler PBB dan doktrin agama Islam mencerminkan konflik yang lebih luas antara Islam dan modernitas – konflik yang mengakibatkan banyak warga di negara-negara Muslim, termasuk perempuan dan anak-anak, menjadi sangat rentan.
Untungnya, sebuah mazhab yang sedang berkembang menanggapi isu ini dengan cara baru, menekankan bahwa Al-Qur’an, seperti teks agama lainnya, harus ditafsirkan – dan penafsiran tersebut dapat berubah dari waktu ke waktu.
Faktanya adalah Al-Qur’an sesungguhnya membela prinsip-prinsip seperti kebebasan, imparsialitas, dan kebenaran, yang menunjukkan penghormatan besar terhadap keadilan dan martabat manusia.
Masalahnya, sebagaimana ditekankan oleh teolog asal Iran Mohsen Kadivar, ialah sebagian besar hukum syariah terkait dengan struktur sosial pra-modern, yang tidak memberikan perlindungan yang setara kepada perempuan atau non-Muslim dibandingkan dengan laki-laki Muslim.
Selain itu, Abdulaziz Sachedina dari George Mason University tidak membantu ketika ia mengutarakan bahwa kaum pria yang selalu menafsirkan teks-teks suci Islam.
Justru hal ini, bukan kandungan ayat-ayat di dalamnya, yang menjadi akar penyebab masalah diskriminasi hukum terhadap perempuan di negara-negara Muslim.
Teolog Ayatollah Mohammad Taqi Fazel Meybodi menyampaikan bahwa hukum Islam mengenai hukuman – yang mencakup praktik brutal seperti rajam dan amputasi – berasal dari Perjanjian Lama.
Islam tidak menciptakan jenis hukuman tersebut, itu hanya praktik umum yang berlaku saat itu.
Ketika masyarakat maju dan berkembang, aturan dan standar yang mengatur masyarakat juga harus mengalami proses yang sama.
Teolog asal Iran, Mohammad Mojtahed Shabestari dari University of Tehran, menekankan bahwa banyak gagasan yang berhubungan dengan keadilan dan HAM, seperti yang kita pahami sekarang, “tidak terpikirkan” sama sekali pada masa pra-modern.
Tetapi kaum Muslim tidak bisa mengabaikan ide-ide yang ada sekarang hanya karena manusia tidak mengembangkannya pada masa Al-Qur’an diturunkan.
Dengan ditinggalkan gagasan usang tentang keadilan berjenjang dan pengakuan atas kebebasan dan martabak manusia, Shabestari percaya akan menjadi mungkin bagi kita untuk mewujudkan pesan-pesan Al-Qur’an bahwa seharusnya tidak ada paksaan dalam agama.
Keputusan keagamaan masyarakat harus didorong oleh rasa iman dan bukan keinginan untuk mempertahankan hak-hak sipil mereka.
Menurut filsuf Abdolkarim Soroush, pembedaan antara keyakinan beragama dan hak-hak sipil harus jelas.
Namun penafsiran hukum Islam selama ini secara tradisional terlalu berfokus pada pertanyaan-pertanyaan tentang berbagai kewajiban manusia sehingga mereka gagal mengetahuinya.
Akan tetapi bagi Soroush, pelanggaran HAM berdasarkan “keyakinan tertentu atau tidak beragamanya seseorang” adalah suatu bentuk “kejahatan”.
Mazhab dalam Islam yang dipopulerkan oleh para ulama tersebut, yang berasal dari latar belakang Sunni dan Syiah, menawarkan jalan ke depan untuk Islam.
Penganutnya tahu bahwa konsep-konsep, kepercayaan, norma-norma, dan nilai-nilai Islam yang utama dapat diselaraskan dengan struktur sosial modern dan pemahaman atas keadilan dan HAM.
Dengan merekomendasikan cara melakukannya, mereka menegaskan kembali kekuatan dan daya tahan tradisi Islam yang utama.
Menurut istilah yang digunakan filsuf asal Jerman Jürgen Habermas, para ulama ini melakukan “saving translations,” dimana bahasa, alat-alat konseptual, dan sistem sosial diperbarui agar mencerminkan kemajuan dalam kemampuan berpikir logis dan rasional.
Praktik “saving tanslations” dalam Islam sudah berkembang sejak lama.
Memang benar, penulis dan filsuf asal Iran, almarhum Ayatollah Hussein-Ali Montazeri, berdebat dengan Pemimpin Tertinggi Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini setelah ditunjuk sebagai penggantinya, tentang kebijakan yang menurutnya melanggar hak-hak dan kebebasan fundamental masyarakat.
Dalam membela kebebasan berpendapat, Montazeri merujuk salah satu ayat Al-Qur’an yang menyatakan bahwa Allah mengajarkan manusia untuk mengekspresikan diri.
“Bagaimana mungkin Allah, di satu sisi mengajarkan manusia kemampuan berekspresi tetapi di sisi lain membatasinya?”, ujarnya.
Kesimpulan jelasnya, menurut Montazeri, adalah “seseorang tidak boleh dihukum melakukan suatu perbuatan sesat, fitnah, atau  penghinaan hanya karena ia menyatakan pendapatnya.”
Montazeri, seperti pemikir inovatif Muslim saat ini, memilih untuk terbuka dengan penafsiran alternatif terhadap Al-Qur’an, daripada terperangkap dalam tradisi yang diterima.
Praktik “saving translations” yang dilakukan tokoh-tokoh ini menunjukkan bahwa norma-norma global yang modern seperti Deklarasi Universal tentang HAM tidak hanya sejalan dengan Islam; tapi justru tertanam di dalamnya.
Penafsiran ulang – atau bahkan meninggalkan – aturan-aturan kuno yang berasal dari struktur sosial yang usang tidak berarti kita menggantikan firman Allah.
Sebaliknya, ini membuktikan kedalaman sebenarnya atas teks-teks suci Islam.
Islam\u0027s Reformist Tradition
The "clash of civilizations" supposedly underway between the West and the Muslim world, which many see as manifested in Iraq, as well as in Saudi Arabia's growing violence, in fact masks other conflicts - disputes that will probably prove to be far more significant in the long term.
One of these struggles is taking place among Muslims themselves over the shape of reform within their own societies.
The Muslim reformist tradition - the search for an authentic path that links Islam's traditions to the modern world - has deep roots, stretching back to the middle of the 19th century.
Back then, Muslim thinkers contrasted the decline of their own societies with Europe's dynamism, a particularly painful distinction in light of European successes in colonizing large parts of the Muslim world.
Then, too, Muslim intellectuals focused on the "decadence" of Muslim societies, their debilitating political and social corruption.
Many early Muslim reformists were clerics or senior bureaucrats, who had seen first hand how diminished their societies had become.
More importantly, they were members of a tiny minority that had been educated in the written heritage of Islam.
Far beyond Koranic recitation, these men aspired to participate in the centuries-long discussions among Muslim scholars about the proper ordering of Muslim life.
This training enabled them to compare the debased state of affairs of their time with the norms and aspirations of earlier generations of clerics and thinkers.
Their judgment was clear: Muslims had sunk far below what their religion required them to be, and lagged far behind the accomplishments of their ancestors.
For the reformers, normality meant the progressive development of Muslim societies, and they tied this to the interaction of Islamic teaching with relevant, worldly ideas of the time.
So these first reformers sought to engage with the ideas that they saw emerging from Europe: rationality, tolerance and ethically determined behavior.
These early reformers, among them Muhammad Abduh and Jamaleddin al-Afghani, did not ignite the mass mobilization they hoped for, and were not able to redress social ills through better implementation of religious prescriptions.
But their influence was powerful and lasting, and extended in directions that they could not have anticipated.
The paradox here is that the open-minded reformism they espoused helped stir conservative trends among Islamic thinkers, who seized on the reformists' revival of Islamic norms to urge a return to the "purity" of the first Islamic societies.
This conservative trend did not follow-up on the reformists' engagement with the modern ideas of the European Enlightenment, arguing instead that these represented a further estrangement from authentic Islamic values.
Thus, the most lasting effect of the first reformist wave was the establishment of a " salafi " (traditionalist) trend and eventually the emergence of an even more radical fundamentalism.
Both conservative traditionalists and radical fundamentalists were drawn to political activism and came to regard the modern state as a means to liberate Muslims from foreign domination and to re-Islamicize society through a revival of Islam's original norms.
Today, we can see the force of this ideology, but it would be a mistake to assume that the spirit of the original Muslim reformists has vanished.
Out of the spotlight, countless Muslim scholars and academics have continued to probe the connections between Islamic thought and modern values.
Drawing on critical scholarship in history and theology, they have detailed the ways in which Muslims have changed - and continue to change - their traditions, in different times and places.
Thus, a sharp, focused challenge to the assertions of religious orthodoxy has emerged in the work of such important thinkers as Abdolkarim Soroush (Iran), Abdelmajid Charfi (Tunisia), Fazlur Rahman (Pakistan), and Mahmud Muhammad Taha (Sudan).
While their work encounters great resistance from traditionalist and fundamentalist circles (whose views are widely covered in mainstream Muslim and Western media), these contemporary reformers - and the questions they have raised - have had a big impact on a rising generation of Muslim intellectuals around the world.
Of course, listeners must strain to hear the voices of reformists amidst the din of those calling for resistance to the enemy and a return to the pure sources of Islam.
However, the seeds of a new wave of "reform" have taken root, and await an early thaw to sprout.
The reformists of the first wave attempted to "reopen the doors of Ijtihad (religious interpretation)" in order to adapt the inherited systems of Islamic thinking to new conditions.
Today's reformists are subjecting these traditional frameworks to scrutiny and attempting to separate the core ethical principles of Islam from the various historical adaptations that conservatives have enshrined as sacred.
Adapting Islam to modern conditions was the purpose of the first generation of reformers.
By engaging fully with the main currents of modern thinking, their contemporary successors seek to better understand how universal principles can be expressed through Muslim tradition.
Islam Versus Islam
LAHORE – Turmoil has seized much of the Muslim world.
In Syria, a brutal war has already taken 250,000 lives, displaced half of the country’s 21 million people, and sent a million refugees to Europe seeking asylum.
In Yemen, the Houthi tribe has risen up against the government, and are now facing Saudi-led airstrikes.
Conflicts like these reflect a number of factors, the most prominent of which are the conflicts between Islam’s two sects, Sunni and Shia, and between fundamentalists and reformists.
Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s Alawite regime enjoys the support of Shia powers, especially Iran, whose regional influence depends on a Shia regime remaining in power.
And that is precisely why Sunni powers – most prominently Saudi Arabia – are committed to toppling that regime.
Yemen’s government, by contrast, is Sunni-led, and thus has Saudi Arabia’s support, hence the bombings of the Iran-backed Shia Houthis.
Unsurprisingly, tensions between Iran and Saudi Arabia have intensified lately, a trend that culminated in the severing of diplomatic relations over Saudi Arabia’s execution of a popular Shia cleric.
The chaos fueled by these conflicts – and by instability in other countries in the region, such as Afghanistan and Iraq –has enabled the rise of some truly contemptible forces, beginning with the Islamic State (ISIS).
That group has gained so much influence that US generals have asked President Barack Obama to authorize additional troops to join the fight against it.
Moreover, there are reports that the United States may postpone the withdrawal of its troops from Afghanistan, where an increasingly brutal war against the government has enabled the Taliban to gain territory and created an opening for ISIS to become active.
ISIS has also penetrated Pakistan.
The religious element of the conflicts raging in the Middle East today is a major reason why they have been so difficult to defuse.
The Sunni-Shia schism goes back to the year 632, when the Prophet Muhammad died without indicating how the fast-growing Islamic community should pick his successor.
Those who became the Shia believed that the position should remain in the prophet’s immediate family and supported the selection of Ali ibn Abi Talib, the prophet’s cousin and son-in-law.
Those who became the Sunni supported the choice of the community’s senior members: Abu Bakr, who had served as a close adviser to Muhammad.
Today, most of the world’s 1.6 billion Muslims are Sunnis.
They are widely dispersed, spread over a vast swath stretching from Morocco to Indonesia.
After decades of migration to Europe and North America, there are also strong Sunni communities in several Western countries.
The Shia number 225 million and are geographically much more concentrated.
Iran, with 83 million, is the world’s largest Shia-majority country, followed by Pakistan with 30 million and India with 25 million.
The “Shia crescent” – including Iran and its immediate neighbors Afghanistan, Azerbaijan, Iraq, Pakistan, and Turkey – accounts for 70% of the sect’s total population.
This geographic distribution is the result of a series of historical accidents, a combination of conquests and (often forced) conversions.
Though Islam arrived in Iran by way of conquest in 637-651, the country did not officially adopt Shi’ism for nearly another millennium, with Shah Ismail I of the Safavid dynasty undertaking in 1501 the forcible conversion of the country’s Sunni population.
Shi’ism spread through South Asia as a result of repeated military incursions by Persia’s rulers into Afghanistan and India.
Today, that region’s Shia population is concentrated in urban areas, and largely comprises the descendants of the soldiers and other state functionaries who stayed behind in the conquered territories.
Sunni Islam, for its part, was first spread through South Asia by the Sufi saints, most of whom came from Central Asia and preached a more tolerant and inclusive form of Islam than that of the Arabian Peninsula.
But the rising influence of Saudi Arabia after the 1970s, when skyrocketing oil prices boosted the country’s wealth considerably, helped to spur the spread of the Kingdom’s dominant and austere Wahhabi sect.
Beyond attracting millions of Muslim workers from South Asia, Saudi Arabia financed the establishment of Wahabbi madrassas along the Afghanistan-Pakistan border.
The Taliban (which, in Arabic, means “students”) in both Afghanistan and Pakistan are the products of these seminaries, as are militias like Lashkar-e-Taiba and Lashkar-e-Jhangvi, which have mounted attacks on religious sites in India.
Today’s turmoil reflects a clash of worldviews that is both theological and political.
Conservative Sunnis, such as those who adhere to fundamentalist Wahhabism, favor theocratic authoritarian rule, whereas more moderate Sufi Sunnis would prefer liberal and inclusive political systems.
The same is true of the Shia.
Iran has long stuck to theocratic rule, but now seems to be looking toward reform.
Whether the sectarian divide can ever be bridged most likely depends on whether reformists can gain sufficient influence in both camps.
If not, the conflict will continue to rage, accelerating the breakdown of regional order we now see.
Islands of Isolation
PARIS – The Japanese and the British may seem very different, but a closer look reveals something akin to a parallel destiny for these two island peoples.
With their old imperial ambitions and widespread distaste for the great continents from which the narrowest of seas divide them, both the British and the Japanese are vulnerable to the siren song of isolationism.
Unfortunately, both now appear to be succumbing to that dangerous temptation.
Perhaps geography is destiny.
As islanders, Britons and Japanese have had wary relations with – and often a superiority complex toward – their great continental neighbors, Europe and China, respectively.
Both historically compensated for their isolation with strong central governments, powerful navies, dynamic entrepreneurship, vibrant culture, and imperial ambition.
Today, Japan and the United Kingdom pretend to be open societies, and to be stakeholders in the globalization process.
In reality, both remain mostly inward looking and preoccupied with the disintegration of their original culture.
Both try desperately to keep immigrants at bay, whether through cultural segregation in the UK or, in Japan’s case, by mere rejection.
The more civilizations become intertwined in the new world order, the more the Japanese and British are tempted to remain aloof and apart.
In Japan, the isolationist temptation is expressed in the current nostalgia for the Edo period, from 1600 to 1868, before Emperor Meiji opened Japan to the world.
“Back to Edo” has become a dominant mood and theme in public debates, promoted by writers, pundits, and historians like Inose Naoki (who is also Vice Governor of Tokyo), who argue that the Japanese were much happier within their closed world, blissfully insulated from the quest for material success and international status.
This “Back to Edo” discourse translates into the refusal of young Japanese to learn a foreign language or travel abroad.
Indeed, in Europe, North America, and elsewhere, the omnipresent Japanese tourists of the 1970’s have been replaced by Chinese and Koreans.
The number of Japanese studying abroad is at a new low at the very moment when South Koreans and Chinese are swarming into European and North American universities.
Even the world’s great universities, from Harvard to Oxford, are seeing fewer Japanese students.
Here the British are very much mimicking the Japanese: fewer and fewer are learning foreign languages, studying abroad, and following the old path of working in Hong Kong, Singapore, or Australia.
So prevalent is this “little England” mood that Prime Minister David Cameron’s government is now tempted to hold a referendum to ask the British whether they want to remain within the European Union, a vote that even that arch euro-skeptic, Margaret Thatcher, never risked.
The prospect of a referendum reflects the overwhelming mood among the Tories, who sometimes mention Norway – a non-EU member whose main role in global affairs is to award the Nobel Peace Prize – as a model for Britain’s role in the world.
Of course, Norway has the world’s highest per capita income.
But that is not the relevant standard against which the UK or other Western countries should measure themselves, because Norway has a tiny, homogeneous, population and sits on vast – and well-managed – natural resources.
If asked in a referendum, the British might well leave the EU, which they never liked.
This would have the unintended consequence of strengthening the federalists on the continent, thereby accelerating the integration dynamic that the British now want to stop.
Indeed, the British would leave just when Iceland, Serbia, Turkey, and Ukraine, despite Europe’s current crisis, are trying to get in.
And, while the eurozone may be in crisis, Poland, among others, still want to join in the near future.
The British may turn their nose up at the euro – to which even the supposedly independent Swiss franc is pegged – but it will almost certainly remain the currency of nearly 300 million Europeans.
Isolationism, whether in Japan or the UK, is not only a short-sighted choice; especially for Japan, it may also be a perilous one, given the rise of China next door.
Both Japan and the UK, much as they may not wish to admit it, depend on the global market.
Isolationism would leave their citizens ill prepared to confront competition and their governments excluded from decisions that impact the global economy and trade.
Nor can isolationism guarantee national security at a time of rising threats from terrorist groups and rising ambitions on the part of China and Russia.
The Edo nostalgia in Japan and the Norway model’s appeal in the UK are not rational choices.
They merely channel national wariness at a time of global competition between cultures, economies, and emerging strategic ambitions.
Sometimes nations, like individuals, grow tired and long for their idealized youth – a recurrent phenomenon that historians call “declinism.”
Whether one calls it that or a desire for a holiday from history, Japan and the UK today seem to be choosing a path that will only accelerate decline.
Islands of Nationalism
BEIJING – If the recent tension between China and Japan over disputed islands in the East China Sea is any indication, relations between the world’s second and third largest economies will not be smooth for some time to come, despite ever-increasing bilateral trade and investment.
That is because both countries’ latest rush to affirm their sovereignty over the islands – called Senkaku in Japanese and Diaoyu in Chinese – reflects a sense of insecurity and a perception that the other side is taking an aggressive stand, which means that the issue is unlikely to be resolved in the foreseeable future.
On the Japanese side, there is growing anxiety over China’s increasing economic and military prowess, such that some nationalists would like to “settle” the matter in Japan’s favor as soon as possible.
Tokyo Governor Shintaro Ishihara’s recent call for Japan’s government to “purchase” the islands from “private” Japanese owners can be explained in this context.
On the Chinese side, the maritime quarrels with Japan – and with Brunei, Malaysia, Vietnam, and the Philippines in the South China Sea – have reignited a national debate about whether China’s foreign policy is too weak in terms of asserting the country’s interests.
America’s “pivot” to Asia, viewed by many Chinese as an effort by the United States to reassert itself in Asia by supporting other Asian states in “containing” China’s rise, has fueled a siege mentality among Chinese nationalists.
Their response is to call for tough military action in the South China Sea, and to stage symbolic landings on the Diaoyu/Senkaku islands, such as those staged by Hong Kong activists on August 15.
Japan arrested the activists, but deported them soon after, thus avoiding a prolonged confrontation with China.
The Japanese authorities clearly learned a lesson from their detention of a Chinese fishing boat captain two years ago, when they eventually acceded to Chinese pressure – which included a range of harsh, and escalating, political and economic measures– to release him.
Soon after the Hong Kong activists' protest landing on the disputed islands, Japanese citizens, including local assembly members, staged their own landing there.
Moreover, the Japanese government, while rejecting a further appeal from Ishihara to provide land on the isles to the Tokyo municipality, is, however, raising money to purchase some of the islands from their supposedly bankrupt Japanese owner.
Such mixed signals have further inflamed nationalist sentiments in China, and anti-Japanese demonstrations have broken out in many Chinese cities, including an attack on the Japanese ambassador’s official vehicle.
Both sides urgently need to cool off, especially in order to contain their extremist elements and prevent them from taking over the issue and setting the policy agenda.
In the short term, China’s government should discourage further anti-Japanese demonstrations.
Well-educated Chinese should understand that destroying Japanese cars (which are made in China) and similar behavior are not rational ways to express an opinion about a territorial dispute with Japan.
And China’s government should work with the Hong Kong authorities to prevent another attempt by Chinese activists to land on Senkaku/Diaoyu again in October.
For its part, Japan should suspend its plan to buy the islands, an effort that is certain to make matters worse if it goes ahead.
The status quo is that the Chinese government has not challenged Japan’s de facto control of the islands, so further action to force China’s hand would be extremely unwise.
In the medium term, the two governments should work out a formula for coping with scenarios that now play out regularly.
A crisis-management team, composed of representatives of both countries’ foreign ministries, coast guards, and militaries, should not only meet regularly, but should also consult each other in emergency situations, thereby minimizing the risk that matters get out of control.
Moreover, such a formula should bar provocative actions by either side, including military exercises, such as those staged recently by China and, jointly, by the US and Japan.
It should also contain a standard procedure for managing the aftermath when behavior by citizens of either country forces the two governments into unexpected situations.
In the long run, the best outcome is a peaceful resolution to the sovereignty issue, or, barring that, a compromise that satisfies both sides’ core interests.
Joint development of the area’s resources, which both countries need, should be returned to the bilateral agenda.
China’s former leader Deng Xiaoping famously proposed that, for the sake of better Sino-Japanese relations, the two countries should shelve the Diaoyu/Senkaku dispute for future generations to resolve.
That wisdom remains the best advice to date, especially given that the consequences of a worsening bilateral relationship would extend far beyond China and Japan.
Is Liquidity Enough?
Every week more liquidity is injected into the global banking system by the United States Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank.
The average interest rate paid for overnight reserves in the US has been well below the 5.25% per year that the Fed still publicly says is its target.
But the market for overnight reserves now appears to be divided into three segments.
Banks known to be healthy can borrow at much less than 5.25%.
But banks facing possible liquidity problems – which the Fed wants to be able to borrow at 5.25% – are borrowing from the Fed itself at 5.75%, as are a few big banks that want more liquidity but don’t believe they could get it without disrupting the market.
Such a difference in the prices charged to “regulated banks” in financial markets is a sign of a potential breakdown.
To date, the premiums charged are small: for an overnight loan of $100 million, even a one-percentage-point spread in the interest rate is only $3000.
That reflects the small probability that the market is assigning to the occurrence of a full-blown financial crisis with bankruptcies and bank failures.
In normal times, however, there is no such premium at all.
The fact that there is even a small liquidity crunch for banks implies larger liquidity crunches for less intensively regulated financial institutions, and even greater liquidity crunches for manufacturing and real-estate companies.
It is hard to imagine that manufacturers are not now postponing orders of capitals goods, and that new home sales in America are not dropping right now.
How does the Fed deal with such a situation?
Gingerly.
A decade ago, Alan Greenspan likened his problems of monetary management to driving a new car, having it suddenly stop, opening the hood, and not understanding a thing about what he saw.
The changes in finance had been that great.
The Fed’s actions have involved what former Fed governor Larry Meyer calls “liquidity tools,” as opposed to interest rate-based monetary policy.
The Fed hopes that it can handle the current situation without being forced to rescue market liquidity by cutting interest rates and thus giving what it fears would be an unhealthy boost to spending.
The Fed still hopes that liquidity and confidence can be restored quickly, and that the summer of 2007 will serve future economists as an example of how de-linked financial markets can be from the flows of spending and production in the real economy.
I think that the Fed is wrong: the fallout from the current liquidity panic means that a year from now we are likely to wish that the Fed had given a boost to spending this month.
The reason is that healthy spending and production no longer depend only on the soundness of the banking system and public confidence in its stability.
Nowadays, the banking system is much larger than the set of institutions formally called “banks” that are intensively regulated by central banks and treasuries.
A bank, at bottom, is something that (a) takes deposits, (b) provides loans, (c) pretends to its depositors that their money (its liabilities) are more liquid than its assets, (d) collects net interest as a result, and (e) gets away with it almost all the time.
In all these cases, the liability holders – i.e., the depositors – have been promised liquidity, yet that promise cannot be kept if it is ever doubted.
It is being doubted now.
Central banks should not focus only on keeping markets liquid.
In the future, even liquid markets will be willing to intermediate fewer transactions than they were two months ago.
So central banks must also focus on how the fall in the volume of money flowing through financial markets will affect spending, and on how much they should cut interest rates and expand money supply to offset these effects.
Is Mexico Disintegrating?
MEXICO CITY – Shortly before America’s elections last November, then vice-presidential candidate Joseph Biden was widely criticized for predicting that an Obama administration would almost certainly be tested by what he called a “generated” international crisis, in much the way that the Soviet Union “tested” John F. Kennedy shortly after he assumed office.
Biden did not point to a specific region of the world, but mentioned the Middle East, the Indian sub-continent, and Russia as the likeliest sources of trouble for the new president.
Impolitic or not, Biden’s anxieties seem to have informed several of the administration’s early foreign policy decisions.
These include Biden’s own extension of an olive branch to Russia at the recent Munich Security Conference, and Barack Obama’s appointment of Richard Holbrooke as special envoy for Pakistan and Afghanistan and of George Mitchell to a similar post for Israel-Palestine.
But, as pressing as the Middle East, south Asia, and Russia (as well as Iran and North Korea) are, another crisis far closer to home could create as much peril as a nuclear-armed Iran, an aggressively resurgent Russia, or even an Islamist-dominated Pakistan.
That crisis is located in Mexico, which is in freefall, its state institutions under threat as they have not been since at least the Cristero Uprising of the late 1920’s and possibly since the Mexican Revolution of 1910.
While the Obama administration is obviously aware of what is happening south of the Rio Grande, the threat simply does not command the attention that its gravity requires.
The crisis consists in nothing less than an effort by the major drug cartels to tame and suborn the Mexican state, and not just in the strip along the United States border, though the epicenter of the crisis is there.
Obviously, the cartels’ leaders do not have designs on Mexico’s presidential palace.
But, through a policy of terror extending from Oaxaca in the south, through Acapulco on the Pacific coast, and up to the great border cities of Tijuana and Juarez (Mexico’s sixth and seventh most populous cities, respectively), they have made it abundantly clear that they are trying to achieve impunity.
The only recent parallel in Latin America was a similar effort fifteen years ago by the Colombian drug cartels.
That disguised coup failed – barely – and there is no guarantee that the result will be similar this time around in Mexico.
Journalists with long experience of war zones report being more worried about their safety in Mexico border than when they were in Bosnia, Afghanistan, or Iraq, though much of the violence is internecine.
Of the thousands who have been killed, often after being horribly tortured, many, if not most, have been members of the drug cartels and their families.
But it is the campaign of targeted assassination against any Mexican official who seems to pose a serious threat to the cartels’ operations that makes the crisis so dire.
First, in May 2007, the cartels killed Jose Nemesio Lugo Felix, the general coordinator of information at the National Center for Planning and Analysis to Combat Organized Crime.
Soon after, a hit man murdered Edgar Milan Gomez, Mexico’s highest-ranking Federal police official.
In November, 2008, a plane carrying Juan Camilo Mourino, Mexico’s national security advisor, crashed under mysterious circumstances.
And very recently, retired General Mauro Enrique Tello Quinones, one of the most decorated officers in the Mexican army, was abducted, tortured, and killed less than a week after assuming a new position as anti-drug chief in the resort city of Cancun.
For all the lip service paid to relations with Mexico (and, indeed, with Latin America more generally) from Franklin D. Roosevelt to Obama, the truth is that developments in Mexico have always gotten short shrift from US presidents.
Illegal immigration is a major issue, to be sure, as is the drug trade.
But the US government has always regarded them as domestic American issues rather than as key foreign-policy concerns.
It is emblematic that while Obama has received Mexican President Felipe Calderón, the White House only recently announced that one of his first foreign trips would be to Mexico.
And incoming Secretary of State Hillary Clinton was asked almost nothing about Mexico at her confirmation hearing, and she emphasized relations with Mexico neither in her own statement nor in those she has made since assuming her post.
Indeed, the conventional wisdom in the US is that Mexico policy regarding illegal immigration and drugs will be the province of the new Homeland Security secretary, Janet Napolitano (herself a former border state governor).
Meanwhile, the Treasury and Commerce departments will be handle trade policy concerning the North American Free Trade Agreement.
This is the way Mexico policy has been run for decades.
And, offensive as this has been to Mexican sensibilities – and harmful to finding long-term solutions to America’s immigration dilemma –these complacent arrangements have never presented so clear and present danger as they do today.
Is Middle East War Inevitable?
BERLIN – Fuad Siniora, Lebanon’s former prime minister, is a thoughtful man with deep experience in Middle Eastern politics.
So when he speaks of “trains with no drivers that seem to be on a collision course,” as he recently did at a private meeting in Berlin, interested parties should probably prepare for unwanted developments.
Of course, no one in the region is calling for war.
But a pre-war mood is growing.
Four factors, none of them new but each destabilizing on its own, are compounding one another: lack of hope, dangerous governmental policies, a regional power vacuum, and the absence of active external mediation.
It may be reassuring that most Palestinians and Israelis still favor a two-state solution.
It is less reassuring that most Israelis and a large majority of Palestinians have lost hope that such a solution will ever materialize.
Add to this that by September, the partial settlement freeze, which Israel’s government has accepted, will expire, and that the period set by the Arab League for the so-called proximity talks between the Palestinians and Israelis, which have not seriously begun, will also be over.
Serious direct negotiations are unlikely to begin without a freeze on settlement building, which Israel’s Prime Minister Netanyahu is unlikely to announce or implement, given resistance within his coalition government.
Syria, which until the end of 2008 was engaged in its own Turkish-mediated proximity talks with Israel, does not expect a resumption of talks with Israel anytime soon.
This may be one reason why Syrian President Bashar al-Assad mentions war as an option, as he recently did in Madrid.
Moreover, Israelis and people close to Hezbollah in Lebanon are talking about “another round,” while many pundits in the Middle East believe that a limited war could unblock a stagnant political situation.
Their point of reference is the 1973 war, which helped to bring about peace between Egypt and Israel.
But the wars that followed, and the latest wars in the region – the Lebanon war of 2006 and the Gaza war of December 2008/January 2009 – do not support this reckless theory.
Iran, whose influence in the Levant is not so much the cause of unresolved problems in the Middle East as the result of them, continues to defy the imposition of new sanctions by the United Nations Security Council.
Iranian rulers have as little trust in the West as the West has in them, and they continue to increase international suspicion by their words and actions.
Repeated calls by Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad about Israel’s eventual disappearance play into the hands of those in Israel who argue that Iran’s nuclear program must be ended militarily.
Some of the Middle East’s most important players are increasing the risks of confrontation because they have either lost a proper feeling for their regional and international environment, or seek to increase their own political power through provocation and brinkmanship.
Netanyahu’s short-sighted reluctance to give up settlements and occupied territory threatens Israel’s long-term interest to reach a fair settlement with the Palestinians.
In its deadly assault on the Gaza flotilla in May, Netanyahu’s government demonstrated a kind of political autism in its inability to realize that even Israel’s best friends no longer wish to accept the humanitarian consequences of the Gaza blockade.
In the Arab world, there is currently no dominant power able to project stability beyond its own national borders.
It will take time before Iraq will play a regional role again.
The Saudi reform agenda mainly concerns domestic issues.
Egypt’s political stagnation has reduced its regional influence.
Qatar over-estimates its own strength.
The only regional power in the Middle East today is Iran, but it is not a stabilizing force.
The Arab states are aware of this.
Much as they dislike it, they are also fearful of a war between Israel or the United States and Iran, knowing that they would have little influence over events.
Indeed, intra-regional dynamics in the Middle East today are driven by three states, none of which is Arab: Israel, Iran, and, increasingly, Turkey.
In recent years, Turkey tried to mediate between Israel and Syria, Israel and Hamas, opposing factions in Lebanon, and lately between Iran and the five permanent members of the UN Security Council plus Germany.
Turkey should continue to play this role.
But the Turkish government has increasingly allowed itself to be dragged into Middle East conflicts, rather than functioning as an honest broker.
The Obama administration has had a strong start with respect to the Middle East.
But a year and a half after his inauguration, Obama’s “outstretched hand” to Iran has turned into a fist, and his attempts to encourage Israeli-Palestinian negotiations seem stuck.
Domestic issues are likely to preoccupy Obama and his team at least up until the mid-term elections this November, thus precluding active diplomacy during the critical months ahead.
And the European Union?
There has not been much active crisis-prevention diplomacy from Brussels or from Europe’s national capitals.
None of the leading EU states’ foreign ministers seems even to have made an attempt to mediate between Europe’s two closest Mediterranean partners, Israel and Turkey.
Twenty years ago, in the weeks that preceded Iraq’s invasion of Kuwait, many observers saw signs of a looming crisis.
But Arab and Western players somehow managed to convince themselves that things would not get out of hand.
That crisis, and others before and since, showed that tensions in the Middle East rarely dissolve with the passage of time.
Sometimes they are resolved through active diplomatic intervention by regional or international players. And sometimes they are released violently.
Is Neo-Conservatism Dead?
Neo-conservatism has served as a badge of unity for those in the Bush administration advocating an aggressive foreign policy, massive military spending, disdain for international law and institutions, an assault on the welfare state, and a return to “traditional values.”
So, with the Bush era winding down in a tailspin of plummeting popularity and high-level resignations, has the neo-conservative movement, too, run its course?
Neo-conservatism began with different premises from traditional forms of conservatism.
Because reforms can become part of “our” heritage, traditional conservatives can adapt to change, even taking credit for negotiating the connection between past and future.
By contrast, neo-conservatism’s adherents are unconcerned with what Edmund Burke called the ties that bind “the dead, the living, and the yet unborn.”
On the contrary, they are revolutionaries or, rather, “counter-revolutionaries” intent upon remaking America and the world.
Indeed, in a certain sense, Irving Kristol, Norman Podhoretz, and other neo-conservative elder statesmen remain defined by the communist dogmatism they sought to oppose when they were youthful Trotskyists.
The virtue of their “party” or clique needs no complex justification: it stands for “American values,” while critics merely provide an “objective apology” for the “enemies of freedom.”
Until the 1960’s, future neo-conservatives shared the Democratic Party’s vehement anti-communism, acceptance of the Civil Rights Movement, and support for President Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal welfare-state policies.
Tellingly, the influential neo-conservative Richard Perle said in 2003 that he was still a registered Democrat, out of “nostalgia” for Henry “Scoop” Jackson, the powerful former Senator who embodied these commitments.