By 2010, real farm prices in the US had fallen only 5% from their 2008 peak, compared to the 37% decline in real home prices since their peak in 2006.
The housing-price boom of the 2000’s was little more than a construction-supply bottleneck, an inability to satisfy investment demand fast enough, and was (or in some places will be) eliminated with massive increases in supply.
By contrast, there has been no increase in the supply of farmland, and the stories that would support a contagion of enthusiasm for it are in place, just as they were in the 1970’s in the US, when a similar food-price scare generated the century’s only farmland bubble.
Still, we must always bear in mind the difficulty of forecasting bubbles.
And, for daring investors, it is not enough to find a bubble to pile into. They must also try to determine when to cash out and put their money elsewhere.
Bubble Trouble
The future of the housing boom, and the possible financial repercussions of a substantial price decline in coming years, is a matter of mounting concern among governments around the world.
I learned this first-hand while attending this year’s Jackson Hole Symposium in the remote wilderness of Wyoming, where, ironically, there are almost no homes to buy.
The howls of coyotes and bugling of elk rang out at night.
But, by day, everyone was talking about real estate.
This conference has grown to be a major international event for government monetary policymakers, with governors or deputy governors of 34 central banks attending this year.
Roughly two-thirds of these countries have had dramatic housing booms since 2000, most of which appear to be continuing, at least for the time being.
But there was no consensus on the longer-run outlook for home prices.
Of all these countries, the United States appears to be the most likely to have reached the end of the cycle.
According to the Standard &amp; Poor’s/Case-Shiller US National Home Price Index, US home prices increased 86% in real, inflation-corrected, terms from 1996 to 2006, but have since fallen 6.5% – and the rate of decrease has been accelerating.
That looks like the beginning of the end of the boom, though, of course, one can never be sure.
I presented a bearish long-run view, which many challenged, but no one obviously won the argument.
Nevertheless, an outside observer might have been struck by the weight given to the possibility that the decade-long boom might well suffer a real reversal, followed by serious declines.
There seems to be a general recognition of substantial downside risk, as the current credit crisis seems to be related to the decline in US home prices that we have already seen.
The boom, and the widespread conviction that home prices could only go higher, led to a weakening of lending standards.
Mortgage lenders seem to have believed that home buyers would not default, because rising prices would make keeping up with their payments very attractive.
Moreover, the boom resulted in a number of financial innovations, which may have been good ideas intrinsically, but which were sometimes applied too aggressively, given the risk of falling prices.
Mortgage-backed securities were urged onto investors for whom they were too risky.
As with homebuyers, all would be well, the reasoning went, on the premise that home prices continue to rise at a healthy pace.
At the Jackson Hole conference, Paul McCulley of PIMCO, the world’s largest bond fund, argued that in the past month or two we have been witnessing a run on what he calls the “shadow banking system,” which consists of all the levered investment conduits, vehicles and structures that have sprung up along with the housing boom.
The shadow banking system, which is beyond the reach of bank regulators and deposit insurance, fed the boom in home prices by helping provide more credit to buyers.
Bank runs occur when people, worried that their deposits will not be honored, hastily withdraw their money, thereby creating the very bankruptcy that they feared.
It is no coincidence that this new kind of bank run originated in the US, which is the clearest example of falling home prices in the world today.
When home prices stop rising, recent homebuyers may lose the enthusiasm to continue paying their mortgages – and investors lose faith in mortgage-backed securities.
The US Federal Reserve is sometimes blamed for the current mortgage crisis, because excessively loose monetary policy allegedly fueled the price boom that preceded it.
Indeed, the real (inflation-corrected) federal funds rate was negative for 31 months, from October 2002 to April 2005.
The only precedent for this since 1950 was the 37-month period from September 1974 to September 1977, which launched the worst inflation the US has seen in the last century.
What then helped produce a boom in consumer prices now contributed to a boom in home prices.
But loose monetary policy is not the whole story.
The unusually low real funds rate came after the US housing boom was already well underway.
According to the Standard &amp; Poor’s/Case-Shiller US National Home Price Index, home prices were already rising at almost 10% a year in 2000 – a time when the Fed was raising the federal funds rate, which peaked at 6.5%.
The rapid increase thus appears to be mostly the result of speculative momentum that occurred before the interest-rate cuts.
Alan Greenspan, the former Fed chairman, recently said that he now believes that speculative bubbles are important driving forces in our economy, but that, at the same time, the world’s monetary authorities cannot control bubbles.
He is mostly right: the best thing that monetary authorities could have done, given their other priorities and concerns, is to lean against the real estate bubble, not stop it from inflating.
The current decline in home prices is associated just as clearly with waning speculative enthusiasm among investors, which is likewise largely unrelated to monetary policy.
The world’s monetary authorities will have trouble stopping this decline, and much of the attendant problems, just as they would have had trouble stopping the ascent that preceded it.
Building a Progressive International
ATHENS – Politics in the advanced economies of the West is in the throes of a political shakeup unseen since the 1930s.
The Great Deflation now gripping both sides of the Atlantic is reviving political forces that had lain dormant since the end of World War II.
Passion is returning to politics, but not in the manner many of us had hoped it would.
The right has become animated by an anti-establishment fervor that was, until recently, the preserve of the left.
In the United States, Donald Trump, the Republican presidential nominee, is taking Hillary Clinton, his Democratic opponent, to task – quite credibly – for her close ties to Wall Street, eagerness to invade foreign lands, and readiness to embrace free-trade agreements that have undermined millions of workers’ living standards.
In the United Kingdom, Brexit has cast ardent Thatcherites in the role of enthusiastic defenders of the National Health Service.
This shift is not unprecedented.
The populist right has traditionally adopted quasi-leftist rhetoric in times of deflation.
Anyone who can stomach revisiting the speeches of leading fascists and Nazis of the 1920s and 1930s will find appeals – Benito Mussolini’s paeans to social security or Joseph Goebbels’ stinging criticism of the financial sector – that seem, at first glance, indistinguishable from progressive goals.
What we are experiencing today is the natural repercussion of the implosion of centrist politics, owing to a crisis of global capitalism in which a financial crash led to a Great Recession and then to today’s Great Deflation.
The right is simply repeating its old trick of drawing upon the righteous anger and frustrated aspirations of the victims to advance its own repugnant agenda.
It all began with the death of the international monetary system established at Bretton Woods in 1944, which had forged a post-war political consensus based on a “mixed” economy, limits on inequality, and strong financial regulation.
That “golden era” ended with the so-called Nixon shock in 1971, when America lost the surpluses that, recycled internationally, kept global capitalism stable.
Remarkably, America’s hegemony grew in this second post-war phase, in parallel with its trade and budget deficits.
But to keep financing these deficits, bankers had to be unleashed from their New Deal and Bretton Woods restraints.
Only then would they encourage and manage the inward capital flows needed to finance America’s twin fiscal and current-account deficits.
Financialization of the economy was the goal, neoliberalism was its ideological cloak, the Paul Volcker-era Federal Reserve’s interest-rate hikes were its trigger, and President Bill Clinton was the ultimate closer of the Faustian bargain.
And the timing couldn’t have been more congenial: the Soviet empire’s collapse and China’s opening generated a surge of labor supply for global capitalism – a billion additional workers – that boosted profits and stifled wage growth throughout the West.
The result of extreme financialization was enormous inequality and profound vulnerability.
But at least the West’s working class had access to cheap loans and inflated house prices to offset the impact of stagnant wages and declining fiscal transfers.
Then came the crash of 2008, which in the US and Europe produced a massive excess supply of both money and people.
As their number grows, traditional political parties are fading into irrelevance, supplanted by the emergence of two new political blocs.
One bloc represents the old troika of liberalization, globalization, and financialization.
It may still be in power, but its stock is falling fast, as David Cameron, Europe’s social democrats, Hillary Clinton, the European Commission, and even Greece’s post-capitulation Syriza government can attest.
Trump, Le Pen, Britain’s right-wing Brexiteers, Poland’s and Hungary’s illiberal governments, and Russian President Vladimir Putin are forming the second bloc.
Theirs is a nationalist international – a classic creature of a deflationary period – united by contempt for liberal democracy and the ability to mobilize those who would crush it.
The clash between these two blocs is both real and misleading.
Clinton vs. Trump constitutes a genuine battle, for example, as does the European Union vs. the Brexiteers; but the combatants are accomplices, not foes, in perpetuating an endless loop of mutual reinforcement, with each side defined by – and mobilizing its supporters on the basis of – what it opposes.
The only way out of this political trap is progressive internationalism, based on solidarity among large majorities around the world who are prepared to rekindle democratic politics on a planetary scale.
If this sounds Utopian, it is worth emphasizing that the raw materials are already available.
Bernie Sanders’s “political revolution” in the US, Jeremy Corbyn’s leadership of the UK’s Labour Party, DiEM25 (the Democracy in Europe Movement) on the continent: these are the harbingers of an international progressive movement that can define the intellectual terrain upon which democratic politics must build.
But we are at an early stage and face a remarkable backlash from the global troika: witness Sanders’ treatment by the Democratic National Committee, the run against Corbyn by a former pharmaceutical lobbyist, and the attempt to have me indicted for daring to oppose the EU’s plan for Greece.
The Great Deflation poses a great question: can humanity design and implement a new, technologically advanced, “green” Bretton Woods – a system that makes our planet ecologically and economically sustainable – without the mass pain and destruction preceding the original Bretton Woods?
If we – progressive internationalists – won’t answer that question, who will?
Neither of the two political blocs now vying for power in the West even wants it to be posed.
Building a Safe Nanotechnology Future
We are living – according to some – on the brink of a nanotechnology revolution, where matter is engineered at a scale thousands of times smaller than the eye can see, and familiar materials behave in unexpected ways.
This revolution, if successful, will turn our world upside down.
Nanotechnology gives us increasing control over the material world, providing opportunities to enhance existing technologies and develop new ones.
The opportunities seem endless, from building stronger, lighter materials and manufacturing tremendously powerful yet incredibly small computers, to developing new sustainable energy sources and devising personalized cures for cancer.
More than 500 manufacturer-identified nanotechnology consumer products are now on the market, from cosmetics to car parts to tableware. By 2014 an estimated $2.6 trillion in manufactured goods around the world (or 15% of total global output) will use this technology, building on the research of scientists in some 100 nations around the world.
If current projections are right, nanotechnology has the potential to have an impact on nearly every industry and virtually every aspect of our lives.
Yet nanotechnology is also shaking up our understanding of what makes something harmful.
At the nanometer scale (about 50,000 times smaller than the width of a human hair), matter behaves in unusual ways: weak materials become strong, inert materials become active, and benign materials become harmful.
In the same way that iron can be made into products as different as skillets and swords, the usefulness or harmfulness of nanotechnology products depends on how they are crafted at the nanometer scale.
As a result, we can no longer rely on conventional ways of managing risk that are based on the raw materials alone.
As the number of products using nanotechnology continues to grow, we need new scientific information on the risks that they might present.
Experts in government, industry, academia, and elsewhere agree that a long list of questions needs to be addressed if we are to develop nanotechnology as safely as possible.
The challenge we face is to find answers that will enable producers and regulators to make sound, science-based decisions, and to develop an oversight system that inspires consumer confidence.
Unfortunately, the global response to this challenge has not been overwhelming.
In 2005, the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars Project on Emerging Nanotechnologies looked closely at government-funded research addressing the environmental, health, and safety impact of nanotechnology.
Investment in highly relevant research was low: in the United States, it was only an estimated 1% of the $1.1 billion federal investment in nanotechnology research and development.
More worrying was the apparent absence of any strategy behind the research being funded.
Even the small handful of relevant studies exploring possible risks lacked a guiding focus, giving no indication that the information developed would help decision-makers ensure that nanotechnology is developed safely over the long term.
The US has been tremendously successful in promoting research strategies that support the use of nanotechnology, and has served as a model that is being duplicated around the world.
But the same strategies that work for developing nanotechnology applications will not help answer the growing list of questions about its possible impact that governments and industry are asking today.
Pressing risk-related questions require deliberate action on an international scale.
They will be answered only by matching research efforts and funding levels to the information needed to steer toward a safe future for nanotechnology applications.
In 2006, five research grand challenges for developing safe nanotechnology were published in the scientific journal Nature:
· finding ways to measure the amount of nanomaterials in the air and water;
· learning how to assess how harmful nanomaterials are;
· developing ways to predict – and prevent – harm from new nanomaterials;
· becoming skilled at evaluating the potential impact of nanotechnology products from cradle to grave;
· and establishing strategies and funding to support the research needed to meet these challenges.
Some nations and regions are beginning to develop research agendas that respond to these five challenges.
For example, the European Union has recently announced a €3.6 billion nanotechnology research program, which includes environment, health, and safety goals that align with these challenges.
Likewise, in March 2007, the British government’s top advisory body on science and technology warned that the country’s lead in nanotechnology is fading, because the government has not invested enough in research necessary for understanding and effectively managing possible health and environmental effects.
There is still a long way to go.
If sustainable nanotechnology is to be built on sound science, global research strategies must be supported by innovative policies and accompanied by sufficient funds to do the job.
In the US alone, estimates of the necessary funding levels for goal-oriented nanotechnology risk research are between $50 million and $100 million per year – five to ten times the amount invested in 2005.
We cannot afford to drive blind into the nanotechnology future.
Despite a good start, many countries are developing these twenty-first century technologies within an old and blinkered mindset.
If we do not develop the ways and means to spot and navigate around possible new risks, the outlook for this exciting new technology will be uncertain.
We must wake up to the need for future nanotechnology applications to be based on a sound understanding of the possible impact.
In the global race for nanotechnology leadership, the winners will be those who understand the risks and support the research necessary to minimize them.
Paths to Sustainable Power
NEW YORK – The surest bet on the future of energy is the need for low-carbon energy supplies.
Around 80% of the world’s primary energy today is carbon based: coal, oil, and gas.
First, higher levels of CO2 are making the world’s oceans acidic.
If we continue with business as usual, we will end up destroying a vast amount of marine life, severely damaging the food chains on which we rely.
Second, CO2 is dangerously changing the world’s climate, even if many Big Oil interests would have us believe otherwise.
(So, too, did the tobacco companies spend vast sums on political lobbying and bogus science to deny the links between smoking and lung cancer.)
Third, we face steeply rising prices for fossil fuels, as developing countries’ growth drives up demand and conventional supplies of coal, oil, and gas are depleted.
Sure, we can find more fossil fuels, but at much higher cost and at much greater environmental risk from industrial spills, waste products, leaks, and other damage.
Even the much-heralded shale-gas revolution is a lot of hype –&#160;similar to the gold rushes and stock bubbles of the past.
Shale-gas wells deplete far more rapidly than conventional fields do. And they are environmentally dirty to boot.
The United States has developed many new low-carbon energy technologies, but other countries are currently far more intent, far-sighted, and decisive than the US to put these technologies to large-scale use.
Politically, America is still the land of Big Oil.
Americans are bombarded by industry-funded media downplaying climate change, while countries that are much poorer in fossil fuels are already making the necessary transition to a low-carbon future.
Two neighbors in Europe, Germany and France, are showing the way forward – or, more precisely, the alternative ways forward – to a low-carbon future.
They are going about it in ways that reflect their different resource endowments, industrial histories, and political pressures.
Germany is undertaking the Energiewende, or transition to sustainable energy – a remarkable effort (indeed, unprecedented for a large advanced economy) to meet the country’s entire energy demand with renewable energy, especially solar and wind power.
Meanwhile, France relies heavily on low-carbon nuclear power, and is switching rapidly to electric vehicles, such as the pioneering Renault-Nissan Leaf.
Of the two approaches, Germany’s is the more unusual bet.
After Japan’s nuclear disaster at Fukushima, Germany decided to shut down its entire nuclear power industry and shift entirely to a strategy based on greater energy efficiency (lower energy input per unit of national income) and renewables.
There really is no clear roadmap for such a huge energy transformation, and Germany almost surely will need to rely on a European-wide electricity grid to share clean energy, and eventually on imported solar power from North Africa and the Middle East.
France’s bet on nuclear power is a more proven option.
After all, most of France’s electricity has come from nuclear power for many years.
And, though anti-nuclear sentiment is very strong in Europe – and, increasingly, even in France – nuclear power will remain part of the global energy mix for decades to come, simply because much of Asia (including China, India, South Korea, and Japan) will remain major users of it.
The key point is that France and Germany, and many other European countries – including the Scandinavian countries, with their considerable wind and hydropower potential – are all recognizing that the world as a whole will have to move away from a fossil-fuel-based energy system.
That is the right calculation.
Many will no doubt argue about which alternative – France’s bet on nuclear power or Germany’s solar pathway – is wiser.
But both strategies are probably correct.
Most studies show that deep de-carbonization of the world economy from now to mid-century, a time horizon mandated by environmental realities, will require that all low-carbon options – including greater efficiency and renewables –&#160;be scaled up massively.
One of the highest priorities of the new Sustainable Development Solutions Network, which I direct on behalf of United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, will be to elaborate alternative pathways to a low-carbon economy, taking into account the specific conditions of countries around the world.
Different countries will choose different strategies, but we will all need to get to the same place: a new energy system built on low-carbon sources, electrification of vehicles, and smart, energy-efficient buildings and cities.
Early movers may pay a slightly higher price today for these strategies, but they and the world will reap long-term economic and environmental benefits.
By embracing truly sustainable technologies, France, Germany, and others are creating the energy system that will increasingly support the world economy throughout this century.
Reality has disappointed.
Compared to the five years before the euro’s launch in 1999, productivity growth has since slowed in Italy, Germany, Spain, and the Netherlands, while over the same period it accelerated or remained constant in Denmark, Sweden, and the UK, the European Union members that remained out.
Indeed, with the main exception of France, the euro does not seem to have been a blessing for the countries that adopted it. 
Why this disappointment?
Have the expected benefits of the new currency failed to materialize?
Several recent economic studies addressed this question, looking at a variety of indicators. 
Here is what emerges:
· The single currency 
 has
 boosted international trade within the euro area, by about 10%.
Although a larger effect was expected, it remains too early for a complete assessment.
In any case, this is an important positive outcome, because international trade is generally regarded as a key determinant of faster growth and higher efficiency.
· The euro was expected to increase price transparency, thereby strengthening competition in product markets.
No evidence exists that this happened.
Prices did converge during the implementation of the Single Market program, in the early 1990’s, but then price convergence stopped.
· Cross-border investment towards the euro area has increased, although here it is more difficult to disentangle the effect of the single currency from other concomitant events (such as privatizations or corporate mergers).
· Money and bond markets are now fully integrated in the euro area, implying a reduction in the cost of capital for large corporate borrowers.
Retail banking, however, remains segmented by national borders, so that households and smaller producers have not been much affected.
· The euro was expected to acquire an international role, eventually improving Europe’s resilience in the face of economic shocks.
There has been a surge in euro-denominated international bonds, but the liquidity of foreign-exchange markets is no higher for the euro compared to the national currencies it replaced, and the euro remains a long way from challenging the supremacy of the dollar.
Of course, the euro was never just an economic project.
One of its backers’ main motives was to boost Europe’s political integration.
Indeed, the euro has quickly become a symbol of European unity.
When asked, “What does the EU mean to you personally,” 50% of citizens in the 15 countries that were EU members before enlargement in May 2004 say “the euro” – the second most common response (just behind “the ability to travel, study, and work anywhere in the EU”).
Yet, this symbol has not made the EU or the euro area any more popular.
Support for EU membership within the pre-enlargement EU-15 remains where it was in the mid-1990’s (and below the peak reached in 1990), while support for the euro is no higher now than it was in 1997.
To be sure, the introduction of the euro was a true revolution, and we cannot yet see all its effects.
But what is clear is that the revolution took place on shaky national economic foundations, transforming the upper floors of the European economy – financial markets and macroeconomic policy institutions – while leaving intact the 
 ancien
 underpinnings of supply-side distortions induced by misguided national policies in the 1970’s and 1980’s. 
These distortions, not any shortcomings of the single currency, account for the euro area’s dismal economic performance.
The countries that adopted the euro had poor labor-market institutions, bloated pension systems, high taxes on labor income, and inefficient service sectors in the late 1990’s, and they still do now.
The more fundamental problem with the euro is that its adoption has not pushed countries to address these underlying deficiencies.
It was expected that full integration of product and financial markets would expose inefficiencies, steering investment flows away from laggards towards the more efficient countries.
Yet, while reform efforts intensified throughout Europe in the late 1990’s both inside and outside of the euro area, there is little evidence that “ins” enacted more far-reaching and significant supply-side reforms than the “outs.”
Larry Summers, the former US Treasury Secretary and now president of Harvard University, once called the single European currency a “distraction” from the serious supply-side reforms Europe needed to confront.
This judgment may be too harsh, because we do not know whether the EU and the single market would have survived without the single currency.
But one thing is certain: Europe cannot afford other “distractions.”
Overhauling Europe’s shaky supply-side foundations is the key challenge facing the euro revolution, and it is a challenge that needs to be addressed at its national-level roots.
Building on the Global Recovery
The world is a study in contrasts nowadays. We are haunted by images of terror and warfare.
Yet every region of the globe has experienced some of the strongest economic growth seen in years, inflation remains subdued despite surging oil prices, and financial markets are doing well.
Several economies that recently faced financial crises are rebounding strongly.
At the same time, much more needs to be done to help prevent future crises and reduce poverty.
This year marks the sixtieth anniversary of the Bretton Woods Conference that established those two organizations as pillars of international economic cooperation.
As IMF Managing Director, my message was one of vigilance and action.
Simply put, the international community must take advantage of the current recovery to broaden efforts to ensure financial and economic stability, and help those countries with limited prospects.
Periods of strong economic growth allow countries to put in place defenses to reduce the likelihood and severity of future downturns.
But such opportunities are all too easy to squander.
In an era of globalized financial markets, when countries can find it hard to cope with rapid cross-border capital flows, there is no time for complacency.
A lesson of the 1990's is that vulnerabilities must be dealt with before they become crises.
The world's rapid economic growth in 2004 shows that the efforts to shore up our defenses since the 1990's has paid off.
But growth has been unbalanced: Europe and Japan - despite some recent gains - are far from reaching their potential, and the United States and China have continued largely to drive the world economy.
One priority is to reduce global payments imbalances.
The US must move to reduce its budget deficit in the medium-term.
Europe and Japan can increase their growth by stepping up the pace of structural reform.
Moves toward increased exchange rate flexibility in China and other Asian countries, supported by financial sector reform, will have domestic and global benefits.
Emerging market countries elsewhere have made considerable reform progress of late, but they must sustain the momentum to guard against potential shocks.
Other challenges loom.
Issues that we once regarded as "medium-term" are becoming more urgent.
Aging populations are forcing many countries to address pressures on their budgets and social security systems.
The problem is imminent in North America, the Euro Area, and Japan.
But, before long, many developing countries will also have to face up to it, and in many cases without a cushion of affluence.
Then there is the energy issue.
High oil prices have resurrected an old vulnerability.
Countries need to reformulate their energy policies - including by boosting production and refining capacity, diversifying energy sources, and giving new impetus to conservation.
A better balance between production and consumption would avoid large swings in oil prices.
The IMF focuses on crisis prevention, and in the past decade encouraged greater transparency and stronger financial systems.
The Fund also actively monitors capital market developments, and is implementing a more systematic assessment of debt sustainability.
There will always be ways to strengthen our work so that we provide well-articulated advice based on a clear understanding and the best analysis of each country.
We need to communicate our positions clearly to policymakers and reinforce incentives for countries to take appropriate corrective actions.
But in the end, the effectiveness of our advice hinges on countries' willingness to act on our recommendations.
Poverty also threatens economic stability.
For all the successes of recent decades, the fact remains that 20% of the world's population still lives on less than $1 a day, while HIV/AIDS and other communicable diseases are ravaging many societies.
Other social indicators offer a bleak picture.
Indeed, most developing countries are likely to fall short of the international community's target of halving poverty by 2015.
In 2002, at the Monterrey Conference, the international community agreed on a framework for reaching that goal.
Developing countries would implement sound economic policies accompanied by good governance.
Industrial countries would increase aid levels and lower trade barriers. The IMF and World Bank would offer advice, expertise, and financing, with the Fund concentrating on the macroeconomic and financial stability that is crucial to fostering durable growth and poverty reduction.
Some progress has been made on this "Monterrey Consensus."
But international support is falling far below promised levels.
Strong political commitments are needed to provide the aid that is needed to accelerate progress, and to secure success for the Doha trade round that is so crucial for developing countries' longer-term prospects.
The resilience of the global economy in the face of political and economic shocks demonstrates the central relevance of the reform process - and underlines the importance of continuing along this path.
Governments and institutions like the IMF must keep this in mind as they seek to ensure a durable economic recovery that will benefit all of the world's people.
Resilient Pakistan?
ISLAMABAD – Since mid-December, Pakistan has experienced political and economic volatility that is extraordinary even by Pakistani standards.
The fragile political structure that began to be erected following the resumption of civilian government in 2008 is now shaking.
A key source of this unrest is Tahirul Qadri, a Toronto-based Muslim cleric who arrived in Lahore in early December.
Ten days later, he addressed a mammoth public meeting at the city’s Minar-e-Pakistan grounds, where, a year earlier, the cricketer-turned-politician Imran Khan had launched what he not very appropriately termed a political tsunami.
Qadri issued a 20-day ultimatum to the government in Islamabad to purge the political system of rampant corruption, reconstitute the Election Commission, and appoint a caretaker administration to oversee the upcoming vote.
The caretakers, he said, should include technocrats, retired military officers, and judges – and could remain in office longer than the constitutionally permitted 90 days.
Unless the government took these steps, he would lead a million-man march on the capital.
When the government did not oblige, 50,000 people set out on the fabled Grand Trunk Road to Islamabad, taking 36 hours to complete the 300-kilometer trek.
Qadri addressed the marchers repeatedly; liberally mixing political metaphors, he called himself a latter-day Mao Zedong on a journey to launch a system-cleansing jihad and initiate a Pakistani version of the Arab Spring.
On January 10, while Qadri was planning his march, two suicide bombers sent by the extremist Lashkar-e-Jhangvi, a banned Sunni group, attacked the Shia Hazara community in Quetta, killing almost a hundred people.
The Hazaras reacted to the attack by making the coffins of the dead a symbol of protest.
They lined up the dead on Alamdaar Street, which runs through the city’s Shia community, and refused to bury them until the government dismissed inept and corrupt local officials, led by a local nawab who spent more time abroad or in Islamabad than in the provincial capital.
The government succumbed and removed the chief minister and his cabinet, placing the troubled province under the care of the provincial governor.
Five days later, Pakistan’s ever-active Supreme Court ordered the arrest of Prime Minister Raja Pervez Ashraf and 16 other senior government officials for alleged involvement in what was called the “rental power” case.
The case dates back to 2008-2011, when Ashraf, who was Minister of Water and Power at the time, oversaw large contracts to rent power generators, which were needed to ease an electricity shortage that was costing the economy up to 5% of GDP.
Several reports in the print and electronic media suggested that the contracts awarded by Ashraf’s ministry were tainted.
The finance ministry called in the Asian Development Bank, which confirmed that a large amount of money had leaked from the agreements, and that many of the rental units generated much less power than promised.
The Supreme Court took note of the ADB’s findings and started proceedings against Ashraf and other senior officials, including several from the finance ministry.
Ashraf resigned from the cabinet, only to be brought back later as Prime Minister.
In earlier times, crises of much lesser intensity would have brought the military rushing onto the political stage, as happened in 1958, 1969, 1977, and 1999.
Indeed, the army has ruled Pakistan for a total of 33 years since independence in 1947.
But this time the soldiers have remained in their barracks, for the simple reason that an awakened populace, an active civil society, and a free and vibrant media would not tolerate another venture into politics by the army.
After almost five years of democratic rule, Pakistan is on its way to establishing a durable and representative political order.
While it has not produced clean and efficient government, there seems to be considerable comfort in the popular belief that, by working together, Pakistanis will find a way out of the mess in which the country finds itself.
A late-evening meeting of most opposition parties in Lahore on January 16 rejected Qadri’s demands, while telling the government to stay the course toward the general election.
A day later, the government found a face-saving formula to send the preacher-politician – and, more important, his followers – home, promising that the Election Commission will be given the time to determine candidates’ eligibility under the relevant constitutional provisions.
So, in a way, Qadri’s arrival in Pakistan and his intense political activism have served a purpose: he has reinforced the people’s faith in a system that they are continuing to build.
Building Palestine From the Bottom Up
JERUSALEM – As President Barack Obama’s special Middle East envoy, former US Senator George Mitchell, learned during his visit to the region, America’s efforts at Israeli-Palestinian peace-making are running up against three major obstacles.
They will, no doubt, also arise in Obama’s upcoming meetings with the region’s leaders.
The first obstacle – indeed, the issue that stands front and center today – is the ongoing Palestinian civil war, with Hamas controlling the Gaza Strip in defiance of Abu Mazen’s Fatah-led Palestinian Authority.
The Palestinians’ basic failure at nation-building makes any meaningful peace talks with Israel – let alone an agreement – almost impossible at the moment.
With Palestinians unable to agree among themselves on a minimal national consensus, how can peace be established between them and Israel?
Second, with Likud’s Benjamin Netanyahu as prime minister, Israel now has a government which is far less likely to be willing – or able – to make major concessions and evacuate hundreds of thousands of Israeli settlers from the West Bank.
Third, and most significantly, the 1993 Israel-PLO agreement has until now failed to achieve its aim.
Attempts to revive the Oslo peace process – the “Road Map” and the Annapolis process – have similarly failed to achieve more than vacuous declarations and hollow photo opportunities.
The causes of these 15 years of failure should be considered, so that Mitchell’s mission does not become another stillborn effort.
Both the Palestinians and Israel can easily and rightly be blamed for the failure of the Oslo process.
But there is a more fundamental cause at stake, and it should not be overlooked.
The Oslo process tried to build a Palestinian state from the top down: create a Palestinian national authority, hand over territory to it, give it increasing power, arm it and finance it, hold elections, and a Palestinian state would emerge.
Instead, the consequence was a corrupt, militarized Palestinian Authority, with competing security services proved incapable of providing security.
Nor could it conduct credible negotiations with Israel or deliver necessary services to ordinary Palestinians.
Two reasons for this failure stand out: the institutional weakness of Palestinian civil society, which lacks the infrastructure necessary for nation-building; and the impossibility of simultaneous nation-building and peace-making.
There is no precedent anywhere in the world that suggests that such a two-tier process can succeed.
A fundamental change of paradigm is needed: the effort should shift to building a Palestinian state from the bottom up, for which there are encouraging signs, even in the midst of the failure of the top-down process.
But, until now, it has been the only approach proven to succeed, while everything else has failed.
As Blair recently put it, such a bottom-up process may even go hand-in-hand with Netanyahu’s goal of an “economic peace,” though it would eventually have to go beyond it.
That such an approach would have to include a total halt to Israeli settlement activities goes without saying.
If carefully crafted, it may even be implicitly accepted, albeit without much enthusiasm, by the Israeli government.
The Oslo process has failed; an attempt to revive it – say, by way of the Beirut Arab peace initiative – will merely bring into the open all of the existing disagreements between the two sides, and will not overcome the Palestinian failure at nation-building.
After all the breakdowns in efforts to create a Palestinian state from the top down, only the old-fashioned way – from the bottom up – remains viable.
Building Pax Asia-Pacifica
MANILA – One of the main sources of tension in Asia nowadays are the Spratly Islands in the South China Sea, where the Philippines, Vietnam, China, and others have conflicting claims.
In Chinese media reports, the heightened “unfriendliness” in the region has allegedly arisen from “bad rumors and speculations” on the part of Filipino commentators.
But the reality is starker: the intrusions by Chinese aircraft into Filipino airspace in May; Chinese patrol boats cruising in March in the Recto (Reed) Bank, 85 miles west of the Filipino island of Palawan; and, most serious of all, a Chinese missile frigate firing at Filipino fishing boats in February near Palawan’s Quirino atoll.
Will armed conflict result from these recurring – and, it seems, escalating – disputes between the Philippines and Vietnam on one side, and China on the other?
War, of course, is in no one’s interest. But the risk posed by these disputes is growing, because China’s relations with both the Philippines and Vietnam are at their lowest point in decades.
Given these tensions, it is no surprise that the issue of disputed sovereignty in the South China Sea is almost certain to claim center stage at this month’s ASEAN Regional Forum, and at the East Asia summit in Bali that will follow it.
Last June, I gave the keynote speech at the celebrations marking the 36th anniversary of the establishment of Philippines-China diplomatic relations and the 10th anniversary of Philippines-China “Friendship Day” in the presence of 5,000 of my countrymen and a smattering of Chinese officials.
Yet on that same day, the headlines in Chinese papers were blasting the Philippines for its historic claim to ownership of the Spratly Islands.
Of course, the governments of both countries recognize the need to maintain the stability and cooperation that have made East Asia the world’s fastest growing region.
The same is true of Vietnam’s government and that of the United States.
But there is no institutionalized means to discuss and resolve the dispute, which is taking on greater significance almost daily, owing to the belief that vast mineral and energy resources lay on the sea bed around the Spratlys.
Now is the time for China, the Philippines, Vietnam, other claimants, and the US to take action to begin to diminish these tensions.
What is needed, above all, is a covenant among the leaders of the Asia/Pacific region that will make peaceful dispute resolution binding on all stakeholders, big or small.
Only such a pledge can provide the type of certainty that investors – any investors – will need if the Spratly resources are to be developed.
The US, for example, should be made welcome to participate – or continue to participate – in peacekeeping and security cooperation.
But how is Asia to reach consensus on this point?
Ever since 1994, when Vietnam’s President Le Duc Anh held the presidency of ASEAN, I have proposed to ASEAN leaders that the Spratlys be demilitarized as a first step toward building trust.
The UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) and associated international commitments must become the basis for productive dialogues leading to binding covenants. Joint exploration and development of the resources within and beneath the archipelago could then begin.
More broadly, the urgent task for Asian statesmen over the next 5-10 years will be to replace the region’s Pax Americana, which has guaranteed regional stability for decades, with a more comprehensive Pax Asia-Pacifica that is built on inclusiveness and burden-sharing.
But such an Asia-Pacific peace will be durable only if it is based on a balance of mutual benefits rather than on the balance of power.
Clearly, this concept implies burden-sharing by all Asia-Pacific countries to ensure the region’s harmony and security.
Pax Asia-Pacifica’s institutions will need to be built, as Europe’s peace was built after World War II, on strong, cooperative undertakings among the most powerful countries and regional blocs – the US, China, Japan, India, South Korea, Russia, and the ASEAN 10.
The region’s continued economic growth and progress require that we Asians contain our rivalries and avoid the arms buildups that, unfortunately, now seem to be underway.
Tips for the TTIP
MADRID – Three years ago, the United States and the European Union launched negotiations on the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP), promising to complete them on “one tank of gas.”
But now the talks are running on fumes, with sniping on both sides and the political window for an agreement closing fast.
The obstacles that the TTIP negotiations have run up against are not exclusive to that agreement.
They reflect a broader trend – one that demands a fundamental rethink of the prevailing approach to trade and free-trade agreements.
It is no secret that the backlash against such agreements has been gaining traction in recent years.
In the US, both presumptive nominees for the presidency – the Democrats’ Hillary Clinton and the Republicans’ Donald Trump – have espoused anti-trade views, with Trump projecting a mercantilist approach unseen in mainstream US political debate since before World War II.
Moreover, it looks increasingly unlikely that the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which the US has negotiated with 11 other Pacific Rim countries, will receive congressional support.
Politicians in Europe are also following voters in turning against the TTIP.
French President François Hollande, in particular, has intensified his opposition to the agreement in the run-up to next year’s presidential election.
Support for the agreement has weakened so significantly, in fact, that European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker has called for leaders to reaffirm their commitment to the deal at this month’s European Council.
Driving this trend is the sense that globalization has gone too far, and is now squeezing ordinary citizens, while enriching a select few.
And that sense is not unreasonable; some groups do reap higher rewards from economic liberalization while others suffer.
But the reality is that free trade, guided by international rules and standards, has a net positive macroeconomic impact.
To avoid losing these benefits, much more must be done to recapture public support for growth-enhancing deals like the TTIP.
The key will be to smooth out free trade’s negative impacts and prepare societies better for increasing economic openness.
Placing a high priority on support programs – trade adjustment assistance in the US and the European Globalization Adjustment Fund in the EU – with a focus on groups that are negatively affected by agreements is one obvious imperative.
But these are just stopgaps.
Given the fundamental challenges to society posed by the free flow of goods, services, and capital – and compounded by rapid technological progress, most immediately in robotics – structural reforms must also be undertaken.
One area that will require special attention is education.
With entire industries coming under threat, workers increasingly face the need to switch careers.
In this context, curricula that have defined education for the last half-century must be rethought, with a view toward ensuring that workers are equipped with higher-level “meta-skills” that can be adapted easily to a broad array of industries.
Given the political pushback, there have been rumblings that US and EU leaders will settle on a narrow TTIP, covering only areas where there has already been agreement.
Such a deal would be a missed opportunity, because the TTIP has the potential to do much more.
A TTIP with wider regulatory convergence could facilitate a significant increase in trade.
Moreover, a TTIP that establishes a joint project in which the EU and the US (with GDPs of $18.5 trillion and $17.5 trillion, respectively) are essentially equal partners could reinvigorate the bilateral relationship.
For Europe, the deal would be even more beneficial, as it would amplify the EU’s voice in global standard setting at a time when it is increasingly being talked over.
A limited agreement would not only fail to bring these benefits; it could actually undercut the weight and influence of the transatlantic community, by signaling weakness and ceding rulemaking to other forums.
Given current political constraints, developing a TTIP with maximum impact will not be easy, and it will require some creative thinking – like that which facilitated the Paris climate agreement last December.
That deal represented a leap forward in how international agreements are made, as it wove together hard rules, non-binding pledges, and overarching frameworks to enable an agreement among 195 countries.
Taking inspiration from this innovative approach, the US and the EU should move on from areas in which they have already agreed on binding standards, and adopt broad principles and frameworks for ongoing negotiations on knottier issues, such as health and food safety.
Such a mechanism is already envisioned in the TTIP, in a proposed chapter on regulatory cooperation, but in an indefinite and limited way.
While an approach that rests more heavily on non-binding cooperation would have a weaker immediate impact, it could be the key to overcoming immediate political hurdles, without giving up on the TTIP’s longer-term potential.
Furthermore, it could help to reinforce America’s place at the forefront of international rulemaking, while propelling Europe back to America’s side.
After three years of negotiating, the TTIP is simply not where it needs to be – and, without public support, it never will be.
Shifting popular opinion will take a lot more than slick messaging; it will require changes in how trade is conducted and how society adjusts to openness and progress.
That will take time.
The US and the EU should find a gas station.
Building the India-US Partnership
WASHINGTON, DC – President Barack Obama’s first presidential visit to India offers a unique opportunity to cement a global partnership with a rapidly emerging power. Set to become the world’s third or fourth largest economy by 2030, India could become America’s most important strategic partner.
For its part, the Obama administration should take a number of steps to reaffirm its support for India’s rise, its democratic achievements, and its struggle for security.
Notably, the US should reaffirm its support for a larger Indian role in international organizations and help integrate India into the global non-proliferation regime.
In this context, the Obama administration should endorse India’s quest for a permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council.
Obama should also support India’s membership in key non-proliferation organizations like the Nuclear Suppliers Group and the Missile Technology Control Regime.
India, too, must do its part.
It can begin by creating greater opportunities for US firms – including from the nuclear industry – to invest in India’s economic success. It can expand defense cooperation beyond purchases of American-made military equipment by deepening its diplomatic engagement with the US to help find solutions to the difficult problems stemming from Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Iran.
In short, India’s government should look for ways to sustain America’s interest in India during difficult times.
Both countries should consolidate their cooperation in other areas already agreed upon: agriculture, education, health care, energy, and science and technology.
Obama’s trip offers an opportunity for taking stock, expanding initiatives that have matured, and announcing new projects that will provide global benefits.
The latter include developing an international food security initiative, cooperating to increase vocational training in fragile states, expanding clean-energy research, investing in global disease-detection systems, and collaborating to explore shale-gas extraction.
In addition, the US and India should create innovation partnerships, which would not only yield direct returns to both countries, but would also demonstrate how a strong bilateral relationship can improve the international system.
The US and India should expand cooperation on other multilateral issues as well.
The global economic crisis and new fears of US protectionism have motivated India to rethink its attitude toward the Doha Development Round.
If Obama can weather domestic resistance to new international trade negotiations and modify America’s current position on sectoral tariff reduction by developing countries, the US and India will have an opportunity to break the impasse that has stymied the Doha Round’s successful conclusion.
Ultimately, a strong US-Indian partnership is in both countries’ strategic interest.
Their societies are already intertwined – and will be even more so in the future – by various personal, economic, and social links.
Moreover, Obama should resist the urge to approach the bilateral relationship purely in transactional terms, but instead should seek to strengthen India’s long-term capacity to be a productive partner with the US.
In short, Obama ought not to ask, “What will India do for us?”, but rather, “Is a strong, democratic and independent India in America’s national interest?”
If the answer to this question is yes – as it should be – then the US should focus on how it can help India’s power continue to grow.
By reaffirming the US commitment to aid India’s rise, and by emphasizing America’s fellowship with India, Obama can help bring the two countries together on the basis of shared interests, and move their relationship forward significantly.
That effort must start now.
Building the Markets We Need
VIENNA – The greatest challenge of the current global financial crisis is the seeming impossibility of comprehending and managing its diversity.
Indeed, the way problems are proliferating appears almost uncontrollable.
Plans to meet the crisis, in country after country, have been revamped and restructured time and again.
The old models about how to understand the economy have had their day.
Across the globe, governments are facing fundamental decisions about the future nature of their economies and societies.
This anxiety is reinforced by the general lack of funds among large groups of people who had nothing to do with creating today’s crisis but are bearing the pain of it.
These social anxieties are not being addressed because financial-sector bailouts, stimulus packages, and help for distressed industries with strong lobbies are testing many governments’ financial limits.
That the advocates of unconditional privatization are now crying out for state support would be cause for cynical laughter if the danger were not as big as it is.
For the brutal question governments must now face is this: is there an alternative to the Icelandic crash course?
In the past, when state economic decision-making reached such an impasse, wars and/or revolutions were the inevitable result.
As we face the type of turning-point decisions not seen since the darkest days of the 1930’s, can we avoid such an outcome?
If we are to avoid the worst, fundamental change is not only necessary, but unavoidable. So politicians everywhere must do their duty and exercise responsible leadership.
A combination of steely calm and bold experimentation is the only way that political and social harmony will be preserved.
To make the European Central Bank a lender of last resort for all of the euro-zone countries, for example, would give distressed European governments some added breathing space.
But it will require global monetary reform of a fundamental order to right the imbalances between surplus and deficit countries, between happy savers and those who lived beyond their means, and between rich and poor.
Achieving this will not come without suffering.
Some of those who brought the world to this perilous point with their toxic financial instruments and unscrupulous speculation may even turn out to profit from these reforms.
So be it: a moral, and perhaps legal, reckoning must await the return of economic growth.
As governments move into uncharted territory, they will need to question themselves constantly.
All assumptions will need to be assessed and reassessed, starting points found and re-found, and new tools developed and perfected.
The mechanics of the welfare state will need to be strengthened; public policy must stop deferring to the financial sector, regardless of the need for bailout packages.
As governments embark on their necessary and bold experiments, they must remember to take their citizens with them.
For, unless these experiments in economic rejuvenation are transparent, they will lead to domestic political fights.
There is a wide difference between pragmatic and opportunistic politics, and governments had better keep this distinction in mind in the months and years ahead.
That domestic transparency and pragmatism will need to be carried over into international economic diplomacy.
For, unless today’s global imbalances are redressed, the next crash will be upon us before we have recovered from this one.
Today’s globalized markets need rules that take into account the public good in every country and region of the world. That much is clear.
But the decision we are actually faced with is much more fundamental: global monetary and economic reform, or war and revolution.
Twenty years after the world supposedly reached “the end of history,” we are instead at another historical turning point.
Either we will write this history ourselves, or we will suffer through a dark era that could have been avoided.
Rouhani’s Lost Chance
ISTANBUL – Iranian President Hassan Rouhani’s charm offensive has stalled.
It worked well in the United Nations General Assembly last September, when he had something solid to offer – a deal on his country’s nuclear program – raising hopes that Iran’s hardline foreign-policy stance would finally soften.
But UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon’s withdrawal of Iran’s invitation to the Geneva II conference on Syria suggests that Rouhani will need more than charm – or even a visit by Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan to Tehran – to end his country’s isolation.
Rouhani has been largely successful in putting his predecessor Mahmoud Ahmadinejad’s tone-deaf leadership firmly in the past.
The Iranian establishment has supported his attempts to open the country up to its regional neighbors, court foreign investment, call for moderation in religious and cultural matters, and even pursue the nuclear deal with the West.
In fact, the nuclear agreement – which seems close to completion – is likely to be Iran’s most important diplomatic achievement since the Islamic Revolution in 1979, providing it with considerable relief both domestically and internationally.
The fact that Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei personally backed the effort makes it all the more promising.
Nonetheless, the regime’s possible rapprochement with the United States remains a source of concern in the Middle East, because it would empower Iran at a time when the US is gradually disengaging from the region.
The question now is whether Rouhani’s moderation toward the West will be accompanied by a change in Iran’s Middle East policy, with all eyes on its policy toward Syria.
Ban rescinded Iran’s invitation to Geneva II under pressure from the US and the Syrian opposition.
After all, since the civil war began in 2011, Iran has provided essential financial and military support for Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s regime, while mobilizing its Lebanese proxy, the powerful Hezbollah militia, to fight against the rebels in Syria.
Whatever concerns the opposition has about Iran’s allegiances, the country is undoubtedly part of the Syrian equation; indeed, its involvement is critical to reaching any accord.
But Rouhani’s failure to make a decisive statement on Syria – even after a series of leaked photographs of systematic torture and massacre raised the ire of the international community – has not helped the case for keeping Iran in the fold.
Rouhani recently had an opportunity to discuss Iran’s stance.
But, addressing the World Economic Forum in Davos, he squandered it, sticking to platitudes about the need for governments in the region to listen to their citizens and provide young people with “jobs and hope.”
On the subject of despotic rulers, Rouhani offered only the benign observation that they lack the ability to connect with and understand their people.
Rouhani’s recent rhetoric, however positive, falls far short of the expectations that his diplomacy has raised since his UN address last September.
In Davos, the world expected a decisive statement on Syria and other regional problems – not hackneyed nationalist rhetoric about eliminating “biases” against Iran.
Rouhani must have known that his failure to address the humanitarian disaster in Syria would damage his diplomatic strategy, which suggests that he must have had a strong reason.
Two possibilities stand out: either there is no consensus within the Iranian elite for a policy change, or the elite remain united in their determination to continue backing Assad.
Neither alternative is particularly charming, which would explain why he preferred to obscure his country’s position.
To be sure, Erdoğan’s visit to Tehran this week could help to defuse tensions over Syria – a subject on which Turkey and Iran have diametrically opposing views.
But it is unlikely to smooth the divisions among Iran’s elite, much less convince hardliners to stop backing Assad, leaving the visit’s significance uncertain, at best.
In refusing to take a strong position on Syria, Rouhani – like so many other world leaders – is placing his own interests above those of the 2.3 million registered Syrian refugees, the millions more who have been internally displaced, the estimated 130,000 people killed, and the rest of Syria’s long-suffering population.
Worse, he has refused to acknowledge Iran’s own role in the tragedy.
When he said in Davos, “we cannot be indifferent to the pain and suffering of our fellow brethren in the region,” he might as well have been referring to the Assad regime and its partners in crime.
What Syria needs is not rhetoric or charisma; it needs action.
Iran appears incapable of providing it.
That is why Rouhani’s charm offensive will not be enough to persuade Iran’s adversaries that the Islamic Republic is ready to come in from the cold.
The Gulf States’ Widening Gulf
ISTANBUL – President Barack Obama is arriving in Saudi Arabia at a critical moment for the country.
Its recent decision to withdraw its ambassador from Qatar has revealed the gravity of the crisis in the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), composed of the Kingdom’s most immediate neighbors.
Indeed, Gulf politics is shifting toward a new balance in the wake of the Saudi-UAE rapprochement and the recent attempt to isolate Qatar.
The UAE and Bahrain have joined Saudi Arabia in downgrading relations with Qatar.
This is an unusual move, considering the Gulf states’ tradition of treating political disagreements as a family matter, to be handled behind the scenes.
Oman is keeping its distance from the situation, while Kuwait has attempted to mediate between Saudi Arabia and Qatar.
Several factors are driving Saudi Arabia’s moves against Qatar, which include a ban prohibiting Saudi intellectuals from contributing to Qatari newspapers.
There is Qatar’s support for the Muslim Brotherhood (in Egypt and elsewhere); the speeches by the Islamic theologian Yusuf al-Qardawi and the broadcasting policy of Qatar-funded Al Jazeera since the Arab Spring; and the credence given to the view that Qatar is hosting Western institutions with the intent of orchestrating a coup in the Kingdom.
That view reflects Saudi Arabia’s tough stance against the Muslim Brotherhood, which it has declared a terrorist organization.
The Kingdom perceives the Brotherhood’s influence in Arab countries, particularly the Gulf states, as a serious threat to its internal stability and survival.
The voluntary abdication by Qatar’s Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani in June 2013, and his replacement as Emir by his son Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani, failed to satisfy Saudi expectations of change in Qatari foreign policy.
And now the Kingdom has made it clear that it has reached the limits of its patience.
But Saudi Arabia’s attitude toward Qatar may generate some difficulties for its own policy.
There is considerable transnational movement of goods and services, and billions of dollars of cross-border investment, across the Gulf – economic activity that would be endangered by the GCC’s further disintegration.
The Muslim Brotherhood is not a violent organization, and it has not engaged in illegal activities in the Gulf countries.
Other GCC states, eager to avoid escalating political tensions in their own countries, are unlikely to declare it a terrorist organization.
Even Saudi Arabia’s special relationship with Jordan will not push its government to adopt such a declaration.
For the time being, harsh policies toward the Muslim Brotherhood are likely to be confined to Egypt and Saudi Arabia.
Making matters worse, it is clear that disagreements within the GCC can no longer be resolved behind closed doors, and that member states are unable to air them publicly without risking a diplomatic rupture.
Across the region, minorities are feeling more empowered and citizens are making ever-stronger demands for better government.
There is a burgeoning desire for a future that dispenses with traditional policies based on fear and anger.
In this context, Saudi policy seems to be stuck in the past, and the Kingdom has chosen to adopt a strategy of self-help in order to isolate itself from problems outside its borders, though it continues to regard itself as the region’s power broker.
The sudden rapprochement between Saudi Arabia and the UAE resulted not from the attractiveness of Saudi policy, but from their rulers’ shared perception that there is a dearth of political options.
It would, of course, be wiser to address the real problems facing GCC governments, which range from embittered minorities to economies that are unable to create enough jobs for young people.
But resolving these issues would require an inclusive and accommodating approach, both domestically and regionally, and Saudi Arabia, in particular, is not prepared to take that route.
The Gulf impasse will exacerbate the already-fragile situation in the Middle East.
Regional political realities, transnational interaction, and the common search for a better future should, eventually, prevail over policies geared for repression, discipline, and order.
The GCC should be accustomed to conflicting perspectives on regional design and differing degrees of cooperation across regional actors, and it should draw on these differences as a source of strength.
This crisis may create an opportunity to rethink and recalibrate GCC strategies, based on a more realistic view of regional interdependence, common security, and shared decision-making.
A new mentality in GCC governance could result in the creation of mechanisms of constructive engagement in the region, while maintaining cooperation with international actors.
Clearly, this policy would be more constructive than Saudi Arabia’s desire for a lone-wolf role that merely results in a deadlock within and around the Gulf.
Bulgaria’s Betrayal of Europe
When Bulgaria joined the European Union this past January, I believed that my country had finally left its repressive past behind.
But the recent arrest and threatened deportation of Annadurdy Hadjiev, a dissident from Turkmenistan who sought refuge here, suggests that some things never change.
If Bulgaria sends this man back to Turkmenistan – where he faces certain torture and the threat of a brutal death – our claim to be part of a democratic, rights-respecting Europe will ring hollow.
Moreover, the EU’s image as a defender of human rights around the world will be tarnished by its inability to hold member states to its own standards.
The case evokes memories of the days when the KGB’s influence was pervasive, and dissidents across Eastern Europe and Soviet lands like Turkmenistan lived in fear.
Hadjiev and his family fled to Europe in 2001, escaping one of the world’s most repressive regimes: the absolutist dictatorship of the late Saparmurat Niyazov, who fancied himself “Turkmenbashi,” the father of all Turkmen.
A former deputy chairman of the Central Bank of Turkmenistan and later an outspoken critic of Turkmenbashi’s government, Hadjiev, a senior member of the exiled Watan (Republican) Party, received “humanitarian parole” – a protected category of individuals that falls short of refugee status – when he reached Bulgaria.
But he has since been subjected to violent and arbitrary reprisals in this supposed “safe haven.”
And, although Turkmenbashi died in December, his successor, Gurbanguly Berdymukhammedov, has continued to imprison dissidents, stifle freedom of expression, and scoff at democracy, as February’s rigged elections demonstrate.
Bulgaria’s persecution adds to the anguish and injustice that has befallen Hadjiev and his family.
Last summer, Hadjiev’s brother and sister were arrested after they collaborated on a documentary about Turkmenistan, and were tried on trumped-up charges of weapons possession.
After a perfunctory closed trial, they were sentenced to seven and six years in prison, respectively.
Hadjiev’s sister, the journalist Olgusapar Muradova, died in prison several weeks later, under suspicious circumstances.
Her grown children, who viewed her body, told relatives that they saw evidence of torture and that she had sustained a severe head wound.
(A state-controlled autopsy implied that she had committed suicide.)
Hadjiev’s two other brothers, as well as his brother-in-law and sister-in-law, have been in Turkmenistan’s notorious penal gulag since 2002, when they were sentenced to lengthy prison terms.
In 2003, his elderly father-in-law was beaten by police agents and forced into internal exile.
On February 19, the Bulgarian police arrested Hadjiev with the intention of sending him back to face a similar fate.
This is not the first time he has been arrested in Bulgaria.
After first arriving, Hadjiev and his wife were arbitrarily detained for several days, leaving their 13-year-old daughter without supervision or access to her parents.
The police arrested Hadjiev again in 2002, in response to a Turkmen extradition request.
After the Varna City Court refused to allow the extradition, ruling that the charges were politically motivated, the Bulgarian authorities threatened to deport him.
In 2005, the Hadjievs’ car was incinerated by a bomb-like device, which they interpreted as a warning to cease their defiant challenges to the Bulgarian – and possibly Turkmen – authorities.
The authorities that arrested Hadjiev last month made no pretense of due process: they offered no arrest warrant, and have repeatedly refused him access to relatives and legal counsel.
Moreover, the court has given no explanation of why it is allowing him to be tried on the same embezzlement charge that of which he was acquitted in 2003.
Fortunately, Hadjiev is a fighter.
Since the beginning of his travails in Bulgaria, he has battled the system by confronting the government branches responsible for his persecution.
Indeed, he has sued the very prosecutor in whose hands his current extradition now rests – an act that may be jeopardizing his right to a fair hearing.
My government has pledged its willingness live up to the legal norms that are the core of European Union membership.
By releasing Annadurdy Hadjiev from jail and withdrawing the threat of extradition to Turkmenistan, Bulgaria would unequivocally demonstrate its commitment to fulfilling its obligations.
By granting him political asylum, we can make a resounding statement that authoritarian regimes can no longer count on support within Europe’s borders.
Twin Tests for the EU
MUNICH – June is shaping up to be a fateful month for the European Union.
On June 21, the German Constitutional Court will rule on a challenge to a bond-buying program that is central to the European Central Bank’s response to the continent’s debt crisis.
Two days later, voters in the United Kingdom will decide whether the UK should exit the EU.