Moreover, Italy now has one of the youngest governments among advanced countries (only France does better).
And Prime Minister Matteo Renzi, at age 41, is Italy’s youngest prime minister ever.
Nonetheless, young Italians remain deeply dissatisfied with the state of their country and the economic opportunities it can provide.
Indeed, despite Renzi’s promise to implement reforms aimed at rejuvenating the country’s economy and institutions – the platform on which he won power in 2014 – some 90,000 Italians under the age of 40 have since left.
Renzi’s message, while skillfully crafted and optimistic, cannot mask the harsh economic reality in Italy today.
Most jarring, youth unemployment stands at 39% – one of the highest rates in the EU and well above the bloc’s average of 20%.
With 26% of people under the age of 30 not in school, employment, or training – the second-highest rate in the EU, behind only Greece – structural youth unemployment will prove difficult to correct.
Even those who have jobs have reasons to be unhappy.
According to Eurostat, Italy’s young people are among the most dissatisfied with their jobs, with many convinced that the best jobs are reserved for the well connected.
And, indeed, corruption still poses a major challenge for Italy; Rome’s last two mayors, for example, were forced out of office for malfeasance.
In last year’s Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index, Italy was ranked 61st, trailing all other advanced economies.
Making matters worse, Italy’s economy has been stagnant for years.
To be sure, it remains the world’s eighth-largest economy, with a per capita income of roughly €26,000 ($29,300) and a relatively high gross savings rate of 18% of GDP.
But for the most skilled and best qualified, the chances of building a career in their chosen field abroad are significantly higher than in Italy.
Not surprisingly, it is Italy’s most qualified who are most likely to leave.
This trend began in the late 1980s, with PhDs and researchers who could not find a place at local universities, which are hierarchically controlled, prone to corruption, and starved of funding.
Since then many other professionals, from doctors and health-care practitioners to librarians and software specialists, have joined them.
With 30% of foreign workers believing that they are overqualified for the job they perform, Italy is losing its appeal, especially to skilled professionals.
As a result, since 2007, the number of immigrants arriving each year has fallen by half, while the number of emigrants has tripled.
Those who remain in Italy – Italian or foreign – tend to be the least skilled.
Some 41% of Italy’s population has only a basic education, a considerably higher share than in most other European countries (with the exceptions of Portugal, Malta, and Spain).
Moreover, 17% of Italy’s population leaves education prematurely, and only 22% of young people receive tertiary education.
The good news is that Italy, along with its EU partners, has already committed to improving these education outcomes.
The European Commission’s Europe 2020 growth strategy – aimed at creating “a smart, sustainable, and inclusive economy” – demands that countries reduce by 2020 the share of early school leavers to below 10% and ensure that at least 40% of people aged 30-34 have completed some form of higher education.
But these goals represent just one feature of an effective strategy for revitalizing Italy’s economy and capacity to attract top talent.
Italy’s government must also fulfill its promise of further improving labor-market flexibility and fighting corruption, including in the form of nepotism.
Given the headwinds of a sluggish world economy and the legacy of a long recession, however, reforms will be difficult to implement.
At the very least, they will take time.
In the meantime, young Italians will continue to try to build their future elsewhere.
Not even a young, buoyant prime minister can persuade them to stay.
Ivy League Investors
Yale University, where I teach, has entrusted its endowment portfolio to one man, David Swensen, for over 20 years.
During this period, the portfolio has grown from just over $1 billion to $18 billion – an average return of more than 16% a year, which appears to be the highest of any major university.
And it shows no signs of diminishing: in the latest fiscal year ending in June, the return was 22.9%.
Presidents of Yale have come and gone, but Swensen stays on.
He has done more for the university than any president, or anyone else.
In a university, ideas count more than money, but $18 billion dollars can create an environment for many new ideas.
With 11,500 students, that is more than $1.5 million per student (not including the university’s buildings and art collection, each worth many billions of dollars more).
How did this happen?
How did Swensen make so much money?
Everyone is wondering – not least those of us at Yale.
After all, many people here have been teaching the “efficient markets hypothesis” that financial markets around the world have become so competitive that it is impossible to make more than a normal return from investing.
Anyone who beats the market must simply be lucky.
Studies seem to confirm this.
For example, a 2004 study by Brad Barber and Terrance Odean of the University of California and Yi-Tsung Lee and Yiu-Jane Liu at National Chengchi University acquired trade-by-trade data on individual day traders on the Taiwan Stock Exchange.
The study found that only the top 1% of day traders made a profit – after deducting trading costs – in two consecutive six-month periods, and the median profit was hardly worth the effort: only about US$4000.
It is easy to conclude that there is just no point in even trying to beat the market.
But then one remembers people like Swensen.
Can his consistent performance really be attributed to luck?
Robert Kiyosaki, author of the Rich Dad, Poor Dad series of popular investment books, bases his books’ titles and themes on a comparison of his own highly-educated father with his friend’s father, an eighth-grade dropout.
According to Kiyosaki, his poor but scholarly dad tended to be pessimistic about one’s ability to achieve anything in the real world, so he discouraged his son from even trying.
By contrast, the friend’s dad relished trying to achieve something big.
Is it just a coincidence that he was rich?
Kiyosaki may try too hard to be inspirational, but I often think of him when I hear finance professors opine on the efficiency of markets and the futility of making money by trading in them.
Maybe many academics find it difficult to take the initiative to achieve in the real world – I have yet to meet another professor who has mentioned having read Kiyosaki.
But Swensen is an academic, with a Ph.D. in economics.
He is surrounded by academics.
Somehow, all this talk about efficient markets has not discouraged him from trying, and succeeding.
There seems to be a pattern.
Two similar universities, Harvard and Princeton, have had nearly the same success.
The Harvard endowment, under Jack Meyer, earned a 15.2% average annual return over the last ten years, compared to Swensen’s 17.2% average, while the Princeton endowment, under Andrew Golden, earned an average of 15.6% per year.
In fact, Golden worked under Swensen at Yale from 1988 until 1993.
Swensen has written two books about investing, one for professionals and one for the general public.
I did not come away from reading them with a feeling that I know how to do what he did.
But a couple of things stand out.
One is his long-term focus.
Yale lets Swensen invest for the very long term, and does not bother him about quarterly performance.
Maybe this allows him to focus more on long-term fundamentals – and thus to make investments that may not perform well in the short run.
But, in fact, he has done consistently well in both the short term and the long term.
Part of the reason for Swensen’s success is “absolute return,” a term – now widely quoted in the investment community – that he coined for unusual investment strategies involving such things as merger arbitrage and distressed securities.
He also has invested in non-traditional asset classes, including real estate, oil, timber, private equity, and venture capital and buyout firms.
These assets are generally not followed by multiple analysts, and are not easily understood, giving him a greater advantage in applying his intellectual skills and the skills of others around him.
In these senses, Swensen is completely different from day traders, who are both investing for the short term and trying to beat the most crowded market – the market for exchange-listed securities.
But I also think that the phenomenal success of Swensen and others like him reflects the environment that Kiyosaki criticizes.
The problem is a defeatist attitude, not scholarship.
When an analytical mind, a mind that is trained to search rigorously for the truth and as part of a community of such people is set free from self-doubt, it can do amazing things.
Knowing David Swensen, I can attest that he is not a lonely day trader trying to beat the market.
He is a good listener, is supportive of people he trusts, and is surrounded by a lot of good people with a wide array of skills.
And he is certainly not a defeatist.
Europe’s Red-Tape Economy
WARSAW – Over the past 60 years, the project of European integration has confronted many challenges: post-war economic hardships, the heavy yoke of communism, and the uncertain footing of the post-Cold War world.
But, while it has overcome them all, with the European Union now comprising 28 states, many of which now share a common currency, the EU faces another, equally important challenge – that of reducing the burden of regulation weighing down its major industries.
European business is bound up in rules and regulations, many of which originate from unelected officials in Brussels, whose laudable intention to harmonize business conditions across the EU is instead sapping the continent’s commercial creativity and dynamism.
As a result, economic performance has become sluggish as competitiveness declines and unemployment, especially among young people, remains stubbornly high.
EU institutions issue thousands of regulations, directives, and decisions every year.
In 2012, 1,799 laws were enacted; in 2011, there were 2,062.
Some laws, enacted long ago for a European Community of six founding members, are still on the books.
It is this thicket of red tape that hampers business and deters entrepreneurs.
One small but important example of this is the average cost of setting up a business, which is €158 ($212) in Canada, €664 in the US, and €2,285 in the EU (and as much as €4,141 in Italy).
The sheer cost of getting started is as big a deterrent as one can imagine for a young entrepreneur trying to escape the bounds of unemployment.
European industry is afflicted by similar problems.
The refining and petrochemical sector supplies the EU with a large proportion of its fuel, and is also a major source of tax revenue.
The downstream sector, together with fuels distribution, contributes a total of around €240 billion annually to treasury coffers.
By any reckoning, this is an important industry that should not suffer from overregulation.
But, while the industry faces the threat of inflated gas prices from around the world, its concerns closer to home are the abundance of EU and national energy regulations.
Excessive law-making has pushed up prices and pushed out investors, not only from refining and petrochemicals, but from all energy-intensive sectors, including aluminum, steel, and cement.
In some EU states, electricity prices for industrial customers are twice what their North American counterparts pay.
Overly complex climate regulations, political resistance to shale-gas development, and energy policies that favor expensive, ineffective technologies are largely to blame.
Some policymakers in Brussels are gradually beginning to recognize that lower energy prices might be good for the economy.
But most still believe that protecting society and the environment from the wider effects of the energy business should take priority over the industry’s development and broader economic growth.
They assume that robust recovery and job creation will emerge simply of their own accord; as a result, rather than enjoying sustainable growth, Europe is heading toward a model for which a new term – “sustainable stagnation” – might be appropriate.
This approach is a colossal waste of money.
As Bjørn Lomborg of the Copenhagen Consensus Center notes, “The European Union will pay $250 billion for its current climate policies each and every year for 87 years.
For almost $20 trillion, temperatures by the end of the century will have been reduced by a negligible 0.05ºC.”
By contrast, the EU is allocating a paltry €8 billion over seven years to alleviate youth unemployment, which currently runs close to 60% in some member states.
But Europe’s economy will not grow, and a sufficient number of jobs will not be created, if such vital industries as aluminum, steel, fuels, plastics, and cement are not allowed to thrive.
This outcome would be bad not only for the economy, but also for the environment, because these industries will simply continue relocating to markets with far worse environmental records.
The problem is not a lack of investment capital.
In 2011, Europe’s publicly traded firms had an estimated €750 billion in cash sitting on their balance sheets, equivalent to twice the decline in private-sector investment in the EU from 2007 to 2011.
But, despite the dire state of public finances, the desperate need for growth and jobs, and historically low interest rates, the authorities are doing nothing to encourage investment.
Europe’s governments urgently need to undertake a root-and-branch review of the regulatory environment, especially in those industries that have the greatest impact on the wider economy.
The EU cannot be the inclusive, thriving, and democratic home that millions dream of if red tape is allowed to strangle the industries that are crucial to European prosperity.
Inflation, the Fed, and the Big Picture
CAMBRIDGE – Inflation – its causes and its connection to monetary policy and financial crises – was the theme of this year’s international conference of central bankers and academics in Jackson Hole, Wyoming.
But, while policymakers’ desire to be prepared for potential future risks to price stability is understandable, they did not place these concerns in the context of recent inflation developments at the global level – or within historical perspective.
For the 189 countries for which data are available, median inflation for 2015 is running just below 2%, slightly lower than in 2014 and, in most cases, below the International Monetary Fund’s projections in its April World Economic Outlook.
As the figure below shows, inflation in nearly half of all countries (advanced and emerging, large and small) is now at or below 2% (which is how most central bankers define price stability).
Most of the other half are not doing badly, either.
In the period following the oil shocks of the 1970s until the early 1980s, almost two-thirds of the countries recorded inflation rates above 10%.
According to the latest data, which runs through July or August for most countries, there are “only” 14 cases of high inflation (the red line in the figure).
Venezuela (which has not published official inflation statistics this year) and Argentina (which has not released reliable inflation data for several years) figure prominently in this group.
Iran, Russia, Syria, Ukraine, and a handful of African countries comprise the rest.
The share of countries recording outright deflation in consumer prices (the green line) is higher in 2015 than that of countries experiencing double-digit inflation (7% of the total).
Whatever nasty surprises may lurk in the future, the global inflation environment is the tamest since the early 1960s.
Indeed, the risk for the world economy is actually tilted toward deflation for the 23 advanced economies in the sample, even eight years after the onset of the global financial crisis.
For this group, the median inflation rate is 0.2% – the lowest since 1933.
The only advanced economy with an inflation rate above 2% is Iceland (where the latest 12-month reading is 2.2%).
While we do not know what might have happened were policies different, one can easily imagine that, absent quantitative easing in the United States, Europe, and Japan, those economies would have been mired in a deflationary post-crisis landscape akin to that of the 1930s.
Early in that terrible decade, deflation became a reality for nearly all countries and for all of the advanced economies.
In the last two years, at least six of the advanced economies – and as many as eight – have been coping with deflation.
Falling prices mean a rise in the real value of existing debts and an increase in the debt-service burden, owing to higher real interest rates.
As a result, defaults, bankruptcies, and economic decline become more likely, putting further downward pressures on prices.
Irving Fisher’s prescient warning in 1933 about such a debt-deflation spiral resonates strongly today, given that public and private debt levels are at or near historic highs in many countries.
Especially instructive is the 2.2% price decline in Greece for the 12 months ending in July – the most severe example of ongoing deflation in the advanced countries and counterproductive to an orderly solution to the country’s problems.
Median inflation rates for emerging-market and developing economies, which were in double digits through the mid-1990s, are now around 2.5% and falling.
The sharp declines in oil and commodity prices during the latest supercycle have helped mitigate inflationary pressures, while the generalized slowdown in economic activity in the emerging world may have contributed as well.
But it is too early to conclude that inflation is a problem of the past, because other external factors are working in the opposite direction.
As Rodrigo Vergara, Governor of the Central Bank of Chile, observed in his prepared remarks at Jackson Hole, large currency depreciations in many emerging markets (most notably some oil and commodity producers) since the spring of 2013 have been associated with a rise in inflationary pressures in the face of wider output gaps.
The analysis presented by Gita Gopinath, which establishes a connection between the price pass-through to prices from exchange-rate changes and the currency in which trade is invoiced, speaks plainly to this issue.
Given that most emerging-market countries’ trade is conducted in dollars, currency depreciation should push up import prices almost one for one.
At the end of the day, the US Federal Reserve will base its interest-rate decisions primarily on domestic considerations.
While there is more than the usual degree of uncertainty regarding the magnitude of America’s output gap since the financial crisis, there is comparatively less ambiguity now that domestic inflation is subdued.
The rest of the world shares that benign inflation environment.
As the Fed prepares for its September meeting, its policymakers would do well not to ignore what was overlooked in Jackson Hole: the need to place domestic trends in global and historical context.
For now, such a perspective favors policy gradualism.
Jailing the Messengers
WASHINGTON, DC – As China’s clout in global affairs grows, the world is watching more closely than ever to see what kind of great power it will become.
Next month, when jailed Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo receives the Nobel Peace Prize, attention will be drawn away from the more encouraging aspects of what China’s leaders like to call their country’s “rise,” and toward their persistent mistreatment of its most outspoken citizens.
Already, Chinese officials’ ham-handed response to the award has undercut their cherished – and lavishly financed – mission to project China’s “soft power” around the globe.
Liu won the prize because his lifelong commitment to political activism makes him exceptional.
But we ought to pay equally close attention to another jailed Chinese activist, one whose plight at the hands of China’s justice system is just as troubling as Liu’s – and far more revealing of the boundaries of permissible dissent.
A Beijing court recently convicted Zhao Lianhai, a 38-year-old former advertising salesman, of “using a popular social issue to incite a mob…to seriously disrupt social order,” and sentenced him to two and a half years in prison.
Unlike Liu, Zhao had not called for change in China’s political system.
Rather, he had spent two years rallying around the almost boringly uncontroversial notion that his family and many others deserve justice from the Sanlu Dairy Group, a company that gave their children kidney stones by illegally doctoring its milk powder with the industrial chemical melamine.
Zhao did not set out to become an activist.
His three-year-old son was lucky to recover quickly after he and 300,000 other children fell ill after drinking the adulterated milk in 2008.
But some of the children urinated blood, others have suffered long-term health problems, and at least six died.
Zhao, who once worked for the government’s own product-safety watchdog and lived in the capital, saw an opportunity to help less well-positioned families.
He set up Web sites to help them exchange medical information, attract media attention, and file lawsuits demanding compensation.
Initially, the campaign seemed to succeed.
A massive recall of Chinese milk ensued, and the Sanlu Dairy Group collapsed.
Two of Sanlu’s suppliers were executed, and its chairwoman was sentenced to life in prison.
China’s National People’s Congress enacted a new food-safety law.
But, after Zhao and other parents protested that the government’s compensation plan was inadequate to cover the cost of their children’s ongoing medical care, they began to receive threats from local police.
Zhao’s Web sites were repeatedly shut down, and the group’s lawyers received phone calls from authorities urging them to drop the case.
In late 2009, Zhao was officially arrested; he has been in police custody ever since.
Zhao’s campaign had been based on the widespread belief in China that while local officials or individual businesspeople may engage in venal or criminal activities, the central government, once informed of the truth, will see to it that justice is done.
After all, the same Chinese leaders who reject Liu’s calls for political reform argue that what Chinese citizens really want are not “Western-style” rights, but basic necessities – clean water, economic opportunities, safe food – that allow their families to prosper, and which China’s own homegrown political system can adequately protect.
But Zhao’s conviction, like the mistreatment of other Chinese whistleblowers, sends the message that when faced with a perceived threat to social stability, China’s legal institutions are not up to the task of providing basic protections to its citizens.
A discussion thread on the case on Tianya, a popular Chinese Internet portal, was soon flooded with comments expressing bafflement and outrage at the verdict.
“I don’t have children of my own,” wrote one, “but reading this makes my heart hurt.”
Another wrote: “If things go on this way, our country doesn’t have a future.”
In Hong Kong, Zhao’s sentence has sparked popular protests outside of government offices and formal objections from local officials.
Reactions like these ought to be far more worrying to China’s leaders than any rebuke from a group of Norwegians.
Zhao’s allies are not out to “humiliate China.”
Rather, like those around the world who believe China deserves credit for its impressive achievements – indeed, like Liu Xiaobo himself – they want their country to develop governing institutions befitting its growing economic stature.
So do China’s neighbors and global partners – and for reasons that have as much to do with self-interest as political values.
If China is to honor its commitments on a wide range of international issues – trade, product safety, and environmental protection, to name just a few – and command genuine trust and respect at home and abroad, it will need to embrace people like Zhao, not silence them.
Taming Leviathan
STANFORD – A successful society needs effective, affordable government to perform its necessary functions well, and that includes sufficient revenue to fund those functions.
But a government that grows too large, centralized, bureaucratic, and expensive substantially impairs the private economy by eroding individual initiative and responsibility; crowding out private investment, consumption, and charity; and damaging incentives with high tax rates.
It also risks crowding out necessary government functions such as defense.
That is today’s Europe in a nutshell, with America not far behind.
The recent death of James M. Buchanan, the father of public-choice economics, is reason to reflect on his sage warnings.
Buchanan was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1986 for bringing to the study of government and the behavior of government officials the same rigorous analysis that economists had long applied to private economic decision-making.
Buchanan concluded that politicians’ pursuit of self-interest inevitably leads to poor outcomes.
Buchanan’s analysis stood in marked contrast not only to Adam Smith’s dictum that the pursuit of self-interest leads, as if “by an invisible hand,” to desirable social outcomes, but also to the prevailing approach to policy analysis, which views government as a benevolent planner, implementing textbook “solutions” to market failures.
According to this view, if markets do not fully internalize all of the costs of private action – environmental pollution is a classic example – some “optimal” tax or subsidy supposedly can correct the problem.
So, if a monopoly is restricting output and raising prices, regulate firms and industries.
When weak demand leads to recession, increase government spending and/or cut taxes by just the right amount, determined by a Keynesian multiplier, and – presto! – the economy rebounds quickly.
Buchanan considered such analysis romantic.
He showed that public officials, like everyone else, are driven by self-interest and governed by the rules and constraints operating in their economic environment.
Households have a budget constraint.
Firms have technological, competitive, and bottom-line constraints.
For politicians, the ability to exercise power – for their own interests or those of vested interests – is constrained by the need to get elected.
Buchanan predicted that, by hiding the full costs, the ability to finance public spending through deficits would lead to higher spending and lower taxes at the expense of future generations, whose members were not directly represented in current voting.
He predicted ever-larger deficits and debt – and ever-larger government as a result.
On this issue, Buchanan was, unfortunately, prescient –&#160;and well before financial crisis and deep recession led to yet another jump in the size and scope of government, accompanied by large deficits and exploding debt in the United States, Europe, and Japan.
Buchanan argued tirelessly for lower government spending, balanced budgets (even a balanced-budget amendment to the US Constitution), and streamlined regulation.
Buchanan, along with Milton Friedman and many others, correctly pointed out that government failures are as numerous as market failures.
So, even in areas like infrastructure or education, it is necessary to compare the benefits and costs of the imperfect fiscal and regulatory policies likely to be implemented by fallible, self-interested officials with potentially imperfect market outcomes.
These government failures include rent-seeking, pork-barrel spending, social engineering, regulatory capture, and induced dependency.
Market failures or claims of unmet need are not sufficient to prescribe government intervention in the private economy, because the cure may be worse than the disease.
There are, of course, important, successful government programs.
In America, the post-World War II G.I. Bill financed higher education for demobilized soldiers, and was a highly beneficial public investment in human capital.
Social Security has helped reduce poverty among the elderly.
The military has kept the US safe and free.
But the gap between textbook solutions drawn up in universities and think tanks and the reality on the ground can be vast.
More spending or regulation does not always lead to better outcomes.
Government spending is no less subject to diminishing returns than anything else.
Programs become entrenched, develop powerful constituencies, and are hard to shrink.
Few programs are targeted carefully enough to real needs – or to the really needy – as politicians buy votes by spreading coverage far beyond what is needed to achieve programs’ stated goals.
Hence Buchanan’s disdain for romanticizing government action.
In country after country, one casualty of the ongoing debate over spending, taxes, deficits, and debt has been efforts to make government more effective and efficient.
In most areas of government, from defense to entitlements, better outcomes can be achieved at much lower cost, which should please both the left and the right.
For example, America’s federal government has 47 separate job-training programs in nine different agencies, costing almost $20 billion a year, most of which the Government Accountability Office reckons are ineffective or poorly run.
President Barack Obama added the 47th – for green-energy job training – in 2009.
The success rate was so poor (a tiny percentage of participants got targeted jobs) that the Labor Department’s Inspector General recommended shutting it down – and this at a time of massive unemployment, with firms listing millions of job openings but unable to find workers with the required skills.
WASHINGTON, DC – As territorial frictions involving China and many of its neighbors persist in the East and South China Seas, the United States needs a clearer regional strategy.
America must simultaneously uphold its interests and alliance commitments and avoid counterproductive confrontation, or even conflict.
Doing so will be difficult, especially because it is not clear whose claims to the region’s disputed islands and outcroppings should be recognized, and the US has no intention of trying to impose a solution.
At the same time, the US must modernize its armed forces in response to new challenges – particularly China’s rise.
As China develops advanced precision weapons to create a so-called anti-access/area-denial capability, the US must consider how to respond to the growing vulnerability of its bases and naval forces in the region.
There is no easy answer to these challenges.
What is needed is a nuanced approach, which is what we develop in our new book Strategic Reassurance and Resolve.
Our approach is an adaptation of America’s longstanding “engage but hedge” strategy, through which the US and its allies have used economic, diplomatic, and sometimes military instruments to give China incentives to rise peacefully, while maintaining robust military capabilities in case engagement proves unsuccessful.
The problem is that hedging has typically been interpreted to mean sustaining overwhelming US military superiority.
But China’s development and acquisition of advanced weapons, including precision anti-ship missiles, makes it implausible that the US can maintain its forces’ decades-long invulnerability in the region, including the ability to operate with impunity near China’s shores.
Given China’s own history of vulnerability to foreign intervention, unilateral US efforts to maintain overwhelming offensive superiority would only trigger an increasingly destabilizing arms race.
Some American strategists advocate a largely technological solution to this dilemma.
Their approach, a concept called “Air-Sea Battle,” implies a mix of defensive and offensive tools to address the new challenges posed by the proliferation of precision-strike weaponry.
Officially, the Pentagon does not direct the concept of “Air-Sea Battle” against any particular country.
For example, Iran’s possession of precision-strike capabilities – and a much more hostile relationship with America – would warrant new US initiatives to cope with growing security vulnerabilities.
But it is clearly China, which has the resources to develop a credible anti-access/area-denial strategy, that most worries US military planners.
Some Air-Sea Battle proponents propose tactical preemptive strikes on missile launchers, radars, command centers, and perhaps also air bases and submarine ports.
Moreover, many of these attacks would be carried out with long-range weapons based on US territory, rather than at sea or on the territory of regional allies, because these assets would be less vulnerable to preemptive attacks themselves.
Unfortunately, Air-Sea Battle’s underlying logic poses serious risks of miscalculation – beginning with the name.
Air-Sea Battle is, obviously, a concept for battle.
Though the US clearly needs war plans, it also needs to be wary of sending China and regional partners the message that its hottest new military ideas base deterrence primarily on the ability to win a war quickly and decisively through large-scale escalation early in a conflict.
Air-Sea Battle recalls the AirLand Battle idea that NATO adopted in the late 1970s and early 1980s to counter the growing Soviet threat to Europe.
But China is not the Soviet Union, and America’s relationship with it needs to avoid Cold War echoes.
“Air-Sea Operations” would be a much more appropriate name for a more effective approach.
Such a doctrine could include classified war plans; but it should center on a much broader range of twenty-first-century maritime activities, some of which should include China (such as the ongoing counter-piracy patrols in the Gulf of Aden and some military exercises in the Pacific).
Moreover, war plans need to avoid depending on early escalation, particularly against strategic assets on the Chinese mainland and elsewhere.
If a skirmish erupts over a disputed island or waterway, the US needs to have a strategy that enables a favorable resolution short of all-out war.
Indeed, in the broader context of Sino-American relations, even “victory” in such an encounter might be costly, because it could trigger a Chinese military buildup designed to ensure a different outcome in any subsequent skirmish.
Instead, the US and its partners need a broader range of responses that would enable them to adopt effective measures that are proportionate to the stakes involved – measures that demonstrate a willingness to impose meaningful costs without triggering counterproductive escalation.
Likewise, America’s military modernization agenda needs balance.
Responding to the threat that China’s growing arsenal of advanced weapons poses to many of its assets does not require greatly expanding America’s long-range strike platforms.
In fact, doing so would inevitably create incentives for US war planners to emphasize preemptive options in contingency plans and deemphasize American forces’ day-to-day presence in forward areas near China, where they contribute significantly to maintaining deterrence.
And it would create a powerful incentive for Chinese war planners to develop further their country’s anti-access/area-denial capabilities.
Continued US engagement in the region requires it to heed the lesson of the Cold War: No technological fix will provide complete invulnerability.
Economic and political measures, as well as a sustained US military presence, would be more effective than reliance solely on offensive escalation should the US need to counter Chinese actions that threatened important American interests.
Indeed, relying on the capacity to attack the Chinese mainland to defend freedom of navigation and alliance commitments in East Asia could tempt China’s leaders to test America’s willingness to risk Los Angeles to defend the Senkaku Islands.
A more balanced US strategy to increase regional stability requires a judicious combination of resolve and reassurance, and a military posture that reflects this mix.
This approach would give the US the best chance to induce China’s leaders to adopt a more cooperative approach to the region’s territorial disputes.
Europe’s Digital Reactionaries
BRUSSELS – Many European politicians praise the Internet.
Unfortunately, their lofty rhetoric often rings hollow.
While calling for a strong digital agenda in one breath, the same politicians, supported by protectionist interests at home, often argue for putting a brake on the Internet’s “disruption” by imposing strict new regulation.
Such double-talk is misguided.
If Europe is to prosper in the twenty-first century, its newly elected leaders need to embrace a positive, concrete pro-Internet agenda.
That means signing digital free-trade agreements and creating a true European digital single market out of today’s fragmented 28 national jurisdictions.
Long-outdated copyright and licensing laws must be overhauled.
New privacy rules must protect citizens and allow innovation; calls for mandatory data localization and local versions of the “Internet” must be resisted.
If carried out, this substantive digital agenda could provide what Europe needs most after the financial crisis: economic growth.
According to the OECD, the Internet now accounts for up to 13% of economic output in the US.
Every type of business now depends on the digital economy.
With a few keystrokes, small companies selling Polish antiques, traditional Bavarian costumes, and Spanish shoes have burst out of their home markets and reached consumers around the globe.
By unleashing the Internet, financially strapped Europe can create new jobs without taking on new debt.
European Commission figures suggest that Europe’s so-called “app-economy” workforce will rise to 4.8 million by 2018, from 1.8 million in 2013, with revenues more than tripling, to €63 billion ($86 billion).
We also know that some 90% of jobs by 2020 will require workers to have skills in information and communication technologies.
Such success requires breaking down resistance by Europe’s market incumbents and embracing rather than blocking new entrants.
Under the European Union’s current fragmented regulatory regimes, companies must obtain separate permission to sell in each of the 28 national markets.
It takes even large companies like Apple and Google years of work to open local stores and launch new offerings.
The growth of small European innovators, such as Spotify, has been stunted.
Many new services that allow us to swap, rent, and share everything from taxi rides to second-hand designer dresses are struggling to get off the ground.
Internet skeptics could also scuttle potentially transformative transatlantic free-trade talks, launched with great fanfare last year.
A growing volume of trade is conducted in bits and bytes that flow over the Internet.
A new study by McKinsey finds that digital-driven, knowledge-intensive goods today comprise a full 50% of total global cross-border trade – and are growing at least 1.3 times as fast as other types of trade.
If current trends persist, the volume of such goods could triple by 2025.
Yet many Europeans talk of imposing draconian privacy or data-localization rules as a precondition for signing any new free-trade deal.
Such requirements would be diametrically opposed to the Internet’s founding principles of frictionless, borderless access to information.
Like Russia and China, Europe would be blocked from the rest of the global Internet, because new services that are unable to build European data centers would be locked out.
In this context, the European Court of Justice’s recent ruling, which recognizes a “right to be forgotten” – and thus requires Google to remove search information, even when legal, on demand – represents a significant danger.
By requiring every search service, including those of university libraries, to make it difficult to find legal information, we risk opening the door to large-scale private censorship.
Such unintended consequences pervade EU competition policy as well.
European policymakers are considering a regulation that would require Internet platforms like app stores, social networks, search engines, and ecommerce sites to meet certain publicly specified criteria to achieve economic, social, or political ends.
Such regulation, it is argued, would facilitate the emergence of European Internet platforms and guarantee “open access” to users.
In fact, these moves might create new barriers to entry, entrenching market leaders and undermining innovation.
Internet markets are typified by dramatic change.
Witness how Facebook overtook MySpace in social networks, or how Apple upended the market for smartphones – or how new services and markets are constantly being invented.
Twitter has displaced no one; rather, it supplements and competes with all other modes of communication.
By contrast, EU competition investigations drag on and on.
It took ten years to reach a settlement with Microsoft; it may end up taking that long with Google.
By that point, the fast-paced Internet environment may well have evolved beyond recognition.
European authorities should avoid shackling digital progress.
Europe’s consumers should be able to buy online songs, watch online video, and shop online for whatever products they choose, and Europe’s businesses should be able to benefit fully from the EU’s giant market.
Indeed, letting the Internet blossom not only makes good business sense; it might also help to restore voters’ waning faith in the European project.
Boards on Their Backs
WASHINGTON, DC – The recent governance controversy at JPMorgan Chase has masked a much larger issue.
Regardless of Jamie Dimon’s victory in retaining his dual role as CEO and chairman of the board, the more important failure on display was that of the board of directors itself – a problem that affects almost all of the world’s megabanks.
This is completely obvious at JPMorgan Chase.
The report of the recent bipartisan investigation, led by US Senators Carl Levin and John McCain, into the infamous “London Whale” trades provides just one example.
There is also the litany of complaints and legal cases now surrounding the firm.
It is difficult to see JPMorgan Chase escaping its past anytime soon.
But the problem is much broader: Not a single global megabank has a well-functioning board.
Their members kowtow to CEOs, do not examine management decisions closely, and, with very few exceptions, rubber-stamp compensation requests.
Big banks’ boards are supine for three main reasons.
First, and most important, there is no market for control over the biggest banks.
One cannot build up a significant shareholding and use it to put pressure on boards – let alone pursue a hostile takeover.
The London Whale is a case in point.
The pressure brought to bear on JPMorgan Chase was completely inconsequential – nothing significant will change.
This is primarily because regulators – despite what they may claim – effectively protect megabanks from market discipline.
“Systemic importance” has become an excuse for maintaining impenetrable entry barriers (yet another reason why executives want their firms to be regarded as too big to fail).
Second, most board members lack sufficient relevant expertise.
Who on the current board of JPMorgan or Citigroup has real experience running a giant complex trading operation (which is what will make or break these companies over the next decade)?
Who among them understands macroeconomic risks not in terms of the platitudes of the prevailing consensus, but as the tail risks – the low-probability, high-impact events – that always wag the dog of financial crisis?
Unqualified board members do not ask hard questions.
And, five years after the largest financial crisis in almost 80 years, one can count the number of properly qualified board members – across all megabanks – on the fingers of one hand.
As a result, megabanks’ senior managers are not pressed to remove layers of opaqueness that shield their risk-taking from effective scrutiny.
This helps to keep board members in the dark – and gives them a convenient excuse for not really understanding how the business works.
Effective governance is possible under various formal arrangements.
In principle, a strong outside lead director can be just as effective as an independent chairman – a fair point that has been made in recent weeks.
But which huge banking conglomerate has such a lead director today?
Which board members are willing and able to stand up to CEOs?
That has certainly not been the recent experience at JPMorgan Chase.
Finally, regulators, too, have been rendered docile in the face of the megabanks’ CEOs.
Regulators have the power to require that boards become more powerful – or at least minimally effective.
For example, they could tighten the qualifications needed to become a bank director (in the United States, for example, the requirements are not serious).
Instead, regulators stand idly by while bank boards remain self-perpetuating clubs, with membership regarded as little more than so much social plumage.
The regulators acquiesce because, simply put, they are afraid.
Mostly, they are afraid that being tough on bank governance will somehow disrupt the flow of credit.
It is a silly and baseless fear, but that is how modern regulators think and act – in a state of constant, irrational anxiety.
The banks in question are so large and so central to the functioning of economies that each of them is too big to regulate.
Whenever small groups of individuals acquire that much power relative to the state and the rest of us, there is big trouble ahead.
Power corrupts, and financial power corrupts the financial system.
The biggest banks were badly run in the years leading up to the crisis of 2008 – exhibiting a toxic mixture of hubris, incompetence, and excessive leverage – and their governance problems today are worse than they were in 2005 or 2007.
The 2008 crisis was followed by a long, hard recession; we should not expect a different scenario now.
Back to the Future in Ukraine and Asia
NEW YORK – With Russian troops occupying Ukrainian territory and the Chinese Navy inhabiting Philippine territorial waters in the South China Sea, the world is now entering a dangerous time warp.
In geopolitical terms, Russia and China are reenacting the norms of the nineteenth-century, when states competed by amassing hard power in a system of unbridled nationalism and rigid state sovereignty.
Indeed, Russian President Vladimir Putin seems to be trying to reassemble the nineteenth-century map of Czarist Russia by holding on to Crimea, Abkhazia, South Ossetia, and other parts of the old empire at all costs.
Similarly, China is staking its claim to the South China Sea in full violation of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea on the basis of vague histories of bygone empires.
Both countries are now behaving as if power is a zero-sum game dictated by the old rules of realpolitik.
But, despite US Secretary of State John Kerry’s admonition that Russia’s occupation of Crimea “is not twenty-first-century, G-8, major-nation behavior,” the United States and its allies are struggling to hold on to the postwar twentieth-century world.
For the US, the destruction wrought by Europe’s rapacious nationalisms, reflected in colonialism and two world wars, had to end in 1945.
America’s postwar planners concluded that if excessive nationalism was the problem, transnationalism was the answer.
The US took the lead in building a system of international law, creating the UN, and fostering free trade and open markets around the world, while maintaining the security umbrella that allowed transnational institutions like the European Union and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations to develop.
The US was far from consistent or perfect in this process, sometime to murderous effect in places like Vietnam.
But its steadfast defense of an international system that was more mutually beneficial than any that had preceded it ushered in seven decades of the greatest innovation, growth, and improvement our species has ever known.
Now, however, with China rising, global power rebalancing, and the US worn down by two decade-long wars that have eroded its credibility, the postwar international order is under intense strain.
Contemporary Japan, a stalwart supporter of the US-led postwar system, was also transformed by it.
When US Commodore Matthew Perry blasted his way into Tokyo harbor in 1854, he found a weak, isolated, and technologically backward country.
Fourteen years later, Japan began a massive modernization drive under Emperor Meiji; thirty-seven years after that, its victory in the Russo-Japanese war shocked the world.
Rapidly appropriating the lessons of nineteenth-century Europe, Japan in 1894 launched a brutal five-decade effort to dominate Asia and secure its resources, stopping only when America’s atomic bombs flattened Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
After the war, under America’s protection and initial guidance, Japan emerged as a champion of a rule-based international system.
It financed the UN to a greater degree in relative terms than any other country, engaged meaningfully in other international institutions, and supported the development of its Asian neighbors, including China.
But, with China’s leaders now aggressively demonizing Japan and pressing disputed territorial and maritime claims more assertively than ever before, the country is being thrust in a direction that Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, with his penchant for historical revisionism and highlighting Japan’s nationalist past, may in some ways have already favored: back to the nineteenth century.
Europe, too, embraced the postwar international system.
With security outsourced to America, European governments shifted their focus and expenditures to social welfare and set about building a twenty-first-century post-sovereign utopia that has blurred national divisions and replaced aggression and hostility with negotiation and compromise.
The EU’s twenty-first-century dream now confronts the nineteenth-century Czarist bear, flashing its atavistic claws on the Russia-Ukraine border.
And, just as ASEAN has been unable and unwilling to stand up to China over its encroachment in the South China Sea, the EU is already discovering the limits of its soft-power, consensus-driven approach to Russia.
If a twenty-first-century post-sovereign system remains an unreachable dream in our Hobbesian world, and reverting to nineteenth-century norms by acquiescing to aggressive behavior by Russia and China is unpalatable, defending the postwar international system may be the best option we have.
Ironically, a nineteenth-century response, featuring balance-of-power politics and the rearmament of Europe and Japan, may be part of what is required to do it.
Syria’s Humanitarian Lifelines
NEW YORK – After more than a thousand days of death and misery, two important recent public statements show why policy toward Syria must enter a new phase of intensity and focus.
Last month, US President Barack Obama, in setting out his broader foreign-policy stance, spoke of Syria’s three evils – brutal military tactics, the terrorist threat from the opposition, and the need to support refugees.
A week earlier, the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs reported excruciating details of Syria’s humanitarian crisis, including citizens under fire from all sides, sustained government barrel-bomb attacks, and shortages of food and medicine.
Over the past three years, at least 160,000 people have been killed, nine million displaced, and three million refugees have flooded into neighboring countries.
Many have suffered untold horrors, from repeated chemical weapons attacks to the bombing of hospitals and bread lines.
Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, growing ever stronger, is acting with impunity.
The opposition is fragmented, comprising more than a thousand armed groups.
And Syria’s neighbors are struggling to cope with the conflict’s spillover.
Three years ago, few would have believed that the world would do so little to prevent such a situation.
But diplomatic efforts during this time have been lamentable.
Indeed, the UN still has not replaced Lakhdar Brahimi, who recently resigned as its peace envoy to Syria.
With little hope for a political solution, we must focus on relieving the humanitarian crisis.
The Norwegian Refugee Council and the International Rescue Committee, for example, are doing important work, delivering cross-border humanitarian supplies into Syria and helping refugees and host communities in four countries.
They currently aid more than 1.5 million Syrian refugees, including a half-million who are internally displaced, traumatized, angry, and bewildered by the lack of outside assistance.
More can and must be done.
First, we must focus on the four million civilians trapped inside Syria and cut off from aid.
Some are being starved into submission, while others are being subjected to unspeakable atrocities.
Aleppo is our “Srebrenica” – the site of Serbian forces’ 1995 genocidal massacre of Bosnian Muslims – except that in Aleppo, more lives are at stake and no international witnesses are there to report on what is happening.
Despite the UN’s ill-fated observer mission, the Security Council must seek ways to increase the international community’s presence on the ground.
Second, we need to address the Security Council’s insufficient attention to the humanitarian situation, and specifically its failure to implement Resolution 2139.
We propose that the Council’s permanent members, along with key Middle Eastern states, appoint humanitarian envoys whose sole purpose would be to secure access to those in need.
The envoys would be senior diplomats and politicians who could tap the highest levels of government to challenge abuses of international law, cut red tape, and apply pressure on warring parties to agree to local ceasefires.
Third, we must intensify cross-border operations.
Of course, there will be concerns over sovereignty and consent, but there are millions of desperate people within just a couple of hours of those borders.
Simple measures –including easier registration, swifter visa procedures, improved information-sharing with Damascus-based aid workers, and predictable funding mechanisms – would allow colleagues in the field to concentrate on reaching those in greatest need.
This would make a huge difference, especially when coordinated with aid packages that are delivered to border crossings.
Finally, we must recognize that the refugee crisis is a collective international responsibility.
Jordan has more than 600,000 registered refugees, and a similar number who are unregistered; it expects a half-million more this year.
Lebanon has more than one million, the world’s highest refugee population per capita – equivalent to the combined populations of Germany and France migrating to the US.
Turkey, Egypt, and Iraq are also severely affected.
However, only 26% of the funds needed to support Syria’s neighbors have been pledged, resulting in a patchwork of short-term aid.
As resources dwindle and tensions rise, these countries need help to ensure that refugee assistance is aligned with longer-term national development plans, such as Jordan’s National Resilience Plan and Lebanon’s Stabilization Plan.
Half-funded, half-coordinated, and half-committed international responses not only threaten regional stability, but also endanger millions of lives.
Syria’s seemingly endless civil war, waged without regard for international law, has left countless civilians at fate’s mercy.
We should have done more to prevent this disaster; now it has become this generation’s greatest humanitarian challenge.
Erdoğan and the Paradox of Populism
VIENNA – The triumph of Recep Tayyip Erdoğan in Turkey’s first direct presidential election is no surprise.
Erdoğan is popular, and, as Prime Minister since 2003, he has been riding a wave of economic success.
But he is also a populist, who has steadily tightened his grip on the state and the media, demonizing all critics (including former allies such as the expatriate cleric Fethullah Gülen) in the process.
As with other populist leaders, such as Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán or the late Hugo Chávez in Venezuela, reconciling Erdoğan’s electoral promises and his performance in office is a puzzle.
Such figures start out attacking their opponents’ corruption and accuse them of hijacking the state for a self-serving political establishment that excludes the interests of ordinary people.
Yet, when in power, they end up behaving exactly the same, treating the state as their or their party’s property and engaging in, or at least condoning, corruption.
Usually, this apparent hypocrisy does not hurt populists’ electoral prospects, as Erdoğan’s success has just dramatically demonstrated.
Why?
Contrary to much conventional wisdom, populism is not defined by a particular electoral constituency – such as the lower middle class – or by simplistic policies pandering to the masses, as liberal observers often argue.
Rather, populism is a thoroughly moralized conception of politics, and a populist is a politician who claims that he or she – and only he or she – truly represents the people, thus relegating all political opponents to the role of iniquitous pretenders.
Behind this claim stands the further assumption that the people have one common will that genuinely aims at the common good, and that the people’s authentic leader – such as Erdoğan, who campaigned under the slogan “National Will, National Power” – can identify and implement it.
Populists, then, are not only anti-elitist; they are necessarily anti-pluralist and hence anti-liberal.
Their politics is always polarizing, splitting the actual citizenry into a pure, moral people and the immoral others – whom Erdoğan has often simply called “traitors.”
In the eyes of the populist, there cannot be anything like a legitimate opposition.
Whoever is against the leader is automatically against the people.
And, according to this logic, whoever is against the people cannot truly belong to the people.
This explains Erdoğan’s accusation that the protesters in Gezi Park last summer, who demonstrated against his government’s plans to erect a shopping center, were not proper Turks at all.
And it explains his astonishing pronouncement earlier this year when he accepted his Justice and Development Party’s nomination to be its presidential candidate: “We are the people.
Who are you?”
It is often said that populists cannot govern, or will be exposed as incompetent, when elected to office.
According to this view, populist parties are essentially protest parties, and protest cannot govern, because it is impossible to protest against oneself.
But things are not that simple.
Populists typically adopt a governing style that mirrors the very accusations that they leveled against the previous political establishment.
They grab whatever power they can, disable checks and balances, fill all state offices with cronies, and reward their supporters (and only their supporters) with benefits in exchange for their loyalty – what political scientists call “mass clientelism.”
Austrian arch-populist Jörg Haider, for example, would literally hand out €100 ($134) bills to “his people” on the street.
Of course, all parties seek to take care of their constituencies first.
What is peculiar about populist politicians is that they can do so openly and with a clean conscience.
After all, if only their supporters are really “the people,” everyone else is undeserving.
In the same vein, populist parties tend to colonize the state with alacrity.
If only one party truly represents the people, why should the state not become the instrument of the people?
And when populists have an opportunity to write a new constitution, why should they not ride roughshod over any opposition, which, by definition, must comprise the enemies of the people (who often are accused of being foreign agents)?
This explains why populist governments’ clientelism and corruption do not erode their leaders’ core support among the electorate.
Such practices are perceived as serving a moral “us” at the expense of the immoral or foreign “them.”
Thus, liberals’ belief that they have only to expose the populists’ corruption to discredit them is a vain hope.
They also have to show that for the vast majority of citizens, clientilism yields no benefits, and that a lack of democratic accountability, a dysfunctional bureaucracy, and erosion of the rule of law will in the long run hurt the people – all of them.
Should Extremist Parties Be Banned?
PRINCETON – The Greek government’s crackdown on the country’s far-right Golden Dawn party has revived a vexing question that seemed to have disappeared with the Cold War’s end: Is there a place within liberal democracies for apparently anti-democratic parties?
To be sure, liberal democracies have felt threatened since communism collapsed in 1989 – but mostly by foreign terrorists, who tend not to form political parties and sit in these countries’ parliaments.
So, should extremist parties that seek to compete within the democratic framework be outlawed, or would such a restriction on freedom of speech and association itself undermine this framework?
Above all, it is crucial that such decisions be entrusted to non-partisan institutions such as constitutional courts, not other political parties, whose leaders will always be tempted to ban their competitors.
Unfortunately, the moves against Golden Dawn are mostly identified with the government’s interests, rather than being perceived as the result of careful, independent judgment.
As another US Supreme Court justice, Oliver Wendell Holmes, put it, “if my fellow citizens want to go to Hell, I will help them.
It’s my job.”
So it seems that democracies are damned if they ban and damned if they do not ban.
Or, in the more elevated language of the twentieth century’s most influential liberal philosopher, John Rawls, this appears to be a “practical dilemma which philosophy alone cannot resolve.”
History offers no clear lessons, though many people like to think otherwise.
In retrospect, it appears obvious that the Weimar Republic might have been saved had the Nazi Party been banned in time.
Joseph Goebbels, Hitler’s propaganda minister, famously gloated after the Nazis’ legal Machtergreifung (seizure of power): “It will always remain one of the best jokes of democracy that it provided its mortal enemies with the means through which it was annihilated.”
But a ban might not have halted the German people’s general disenchantment with liberal democracy, and an authoritarian regime still might have followed.
Indeed, whereas West Germany banned a neo-Nazi party and the Communist Party in the 1950’s, some countries –particularly in Southern and Eastern Europe, where dictatorship came to be associated with the suppression of pluralism – have drawn precisely the opposite lesson about preventing authoritarianism.
That is one reason why Greece, for example, has no legal provisions for banning parties.
The fact that Greece nonetheless is effectively trying to destroy Golden Dawn – the parliament just voted to freeze the party’s state funding – suggests that, in the end, most democracies will want to draw the line somewhere.
But just where, exactly, should it be drawn?
For starters, it is important to recognize that the line needs to be clearly visible before extremist parties even arise.
If the rule of law is to be upheld, democratic self-defense must not appear ad hoc or arbitrary.
Thus the criteria for bans should be spelled out in advance.
One criterion that seems universally accepted is a party’s use, encouragement, or at least condoning of violence – as was evidently the case with Golden Dawn’s role in attacks on immigrants in Athens.
There is less consensus about parties that incite hatred and are committed to destroying core democratic principles – especially because many extremist parties in Europe go out of their way to emphasize that they are not against democracy; on the contrary, they are fighting for “the people.”
But parties that seek to exclude or subordinate a part of “the people” – for example, legal immigrants and their descendants – are violating core democratic principles.
Even if Golden Dawn – a neo-Nazi party in appearance and content – had not engaged in violence, its extreme anti-immigrant stance and its incitement of hatred at a moment of great social and economic turmoil would have made it a plausible candidate for a ban.
Critics warn of a slippery slope.
Any disagreement with a government’s immigration policy, for example, might eventually be deemed “racist,” resulting in curtailment of freedom of speech.
Something like the classic American standard – the speech in question must pose a “clear and present danger” of violence – is therefore essential.
Marginal parties that are not connected to political violence and do not incite hatred should probably be left in peace – distasteful as their rhetoric may be.
But parties that are closer to assuming power are a different matter, even if banning them might automatically appear undemocratic (after all, they will already have deputies in parliaments).
In one famous case, the European Court of Human Rights agreed with the banning of Turkey’s Welfare Party while it was the senior member of a governing coalition.
It is a myth that bans turn leaders of extremist parties into martyrs.
Very few people can remember who led the postwar German neo-Nazis and Communists.
Nor is it always the case that mainstream parties can cut off support for extremists by selectively coopting their complaints and demands.
Sometimes this approach works, and sometimes it does not; but it always amounts to playing with fire.
Banning parties does not have to mean silencing citizens who are tempted to vote for extremists.
Their concerns should be heard and debated; and sometimes banning is best combined with renewed efforts at civic education, emphasizing, for example, that immigrants did not cause Greece’s woes.
True, such measures might come across as patronizing – but such forms of public engagement are the only way to avoid making anti-extremism look like extremism itself.
An Asian Community Can Wait
TOKYO – In the world of international finance, conflicting monetary and exchange-rate policies compete for advantage and countries battle for influence over the rules of the game.
After all, just as investors compete to maximize their profits, countries compete to ensure that international rules and norms are agreeable to them.
That is why agreeing to an international economic regime – say, establishing a fixed exchange rate, or adopting a common currency – is a deeply political decision.
And today’s Asia faces many such decisions.
Economic integration is a hot topic in the region.
From the negotiation of the mega-regional Trans-Pacific Partnership to the establishment of China-led investment platforms – including the Silk Road Fund and, most recently, the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) – Asia is becoming more interconnected than ever.
As a result, some observers may find the notion of increased monetary integration – even the establishment of a fixed exchange-rate regime based on, say, the Chinese renminbi or the Japanese yen – highly appealing.
But I would argue that the flexible exchange rates that prevail today remain Asia’s best bet for boosting prosperity and protecting it from shocks.
To understand the advantage of maintaining a flexible exchange rate, one need look no further than the recent growth trajectories of the advanced economies.
After the 2008 economic crisis, the United States and the United Kingdom were able to employ unconventional monetary policies to escape recession.
Japan adopted similar policies in late 2012 to escape two decades of stagnation.
Members of the eurozone, however, lacked such an option.
European Central Bank President Mario Draghi was eventually able to pursue policies aimed at devaluing the common currency, but not before years of painful austerity, deep recession, social strife, and political instability in many eurozone member countries.
Against this background, it seems anachronistic to consider the possibility of establishing anything like a unified currency in Asia, where institutional disparities are far deeper, and the variety of economic shocks far greater, than in Europe.
To hope for a unified currency in Asia seems almost like hoping for the region’s own Greek crisis.
This has important implications for new multilateral institutions like the AIIB.
Other developing countries have joined because they believe that the existing international monetary order, underpinned by the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, is excessively oriented toward the advanced economies.
Even the Asian Development Bank, in which Japan enjoys considerable influence, is said not to heed developing-country voices adequately at times.
Moreover, Asian countries recognize that their continued development requires more advanced and reliable infrastructure, which cannot be built without new financing platforms.
The AIIB seems to offer an ideal solution.
And, indeed, it does not appeal only to developing Asian countries.
France, Germany, Italy, and the UK have joined more than 30 other countries as founding members.
The US and Japan, however, still have their doubts.
Should they join?