Moreover, in a normal situation, governments – even the US government and those in Western Europe – cannot run up the national debt and still pay a real interest rate of 1%, or even 3%.
Normally, the math of increasing government purchases tells us that a small or dubious boost to output today brings a heavier financing burden in the future, which makes debt-financed fiscal expansion a bad idea.
But the situation today is not usual at all.
Today the global economy is, as Ricardo Cabellero of MIT stresses, still desperately short of safe assets.
Investors worldwide are willing to pay extraordinarily high prices for, and accept extraordinarily low interest rates on, core-economy debt, for they value as an extraordinary benefit having a safe asset that they can use as collateral.
Right now, investors’ preference for safety makes financing additional government debt abnormally cheap, while the long-run shadows cast by prolonged subnormal production and employment make the current sluggish recovery predictably costly.
Given the need to mobilize idle resources in the short run in order to maintain productive potential in the long run, a larger national debt would be, as Alexander Hamilton, the first US treasury secretary, put it, a national blessing.
The Value of a Pale Blue Dot
Melbourne – The eighteenth-century German philosopher Immanuel Kant wrote: “Two things fill the heart with ever renewed and increasing awe and reverence, the more often and more steadily we meditate upon them: the starry firmament above and the moral law within.”
This year, the 400th anniversary of Galileo’s first use of a telescope, has been declared the International Year of Astronomy, so this seems a good time to ponder Kant’s first source of “awe and reverence.”
Indeed, the goal of the commemoration – to help the world’s citizens “rediscover their place in the universe” – now has the incidental benefit of distracting us from nasty things nearer to home, like swine flu and the global financial crisis.
What does astronomy tell us about “the starry firmament above”?
By expanding our grasp of the vastness of the universe, science has, if anything, increased the awe and reverence we feel when we look up on a starry night (assuming, that is, that we have got far enough away from air pollution and excessive street lighting to see the stars properly).
But, at the same time, our greater knowledge surely forces us to acknowledge that our place in the universe is not particularly significant.
In his essay “Dreams and Facts,” the philosopher Bertrand Russell wrote that our entire Milky Way galaxy is a tiny fragment of the universe, and within this fragment our solar system is “an infinitesimal speck,” and within this speck “our planet is a microscopic dot.”
Today, we don’t need to rely on such verbal descriptions of our planet’s insignificance against the background of our galaxy.
The astronomer Carl Sagan suggested that the Voyager space probe capture an image of earth as it reached the outer reaches of our solar system.
It did so, in 1990, and Earth shows up in a grainy image as a pale blue dot.
If you go to YouTube and search for “Carl Sagan – Pale Blue Dot,” you can see it, and hear Sagan himself telling us that we must cherish our world because everything humans have ever valued exists only on that pale blue dot.
That is a moving experience, but what should we learn from it?
Russell sometimes wrote as if the fact that we are a mere speck in a vast universe showed that we don’t really matter all that much: “On this dot, tiny lumps of impure carbon and water, of complicated structure, with somewhat unusual physical and chemical properties, crawl about for a few years, until they are dissolved again into the elements of which they are compounded.”
But no such nihilistic view of our existence follows from the size of our planetary home, and Russell himself was no nihilist.
Sagan took a similar view.
While seeing the Earth as a whole diminishes the importance of things like national boundaries that divide us, he said, it also “underscores our responsibility to deal more kindly with one another, and to preserve and cherish the pale blue dot, the only home we've ever known.”
Al Gore used the “pale blue dot” image at the end of his film, An Inconvenient Truth, suggesting that if we wreck this planet, we have nowhere else to go.
That’s probably true, even though scientists are now discovering other planets outside our solar system.
Perhaps one day we will find that we are not the only intelligent beings in the universe, and perhaps we will be able to discuss issues of interspecies ethics with such beings.
This brings us back to Kant’s other object of reverence and awe, the moral law within.  What would beings with a completely different evolutionary origin from us – perhaps not even carbon-based life forms – think of our moral law?
The Value of Being Undervalued
The paramount policy dilemma that emerging markets face nowadays is this: on the one hand, sustained economic growth requires a competitive (read “undervalued”) currency.
On the other hand, any good news is immediately followed by currency appreciation, making the task of remaining competitive that much harder.
So, you finally passed that crucial piece of legislation?
Your fiscally responsible political party just won the election?
Or your commodity exports hit the jackpot?
Good for you!
But the currency appreciation that follows will likely set off an unsustainable consumption boom, wreak havoc with your export sector, create unemployment, and sap your growth potential.
Success brings its reward in the form of immediate punishment!
In response, central banks may intervene in currency markets to prevent appreciation, at the cost of accumulating low-yield foreign reserves and diverting themselves from their primary goal of price stability.
This is the strategy followed by countries such as China and Argentina.
Or the central bank lets the markets go where they will, at the cost of drawing the ire of business, labor, the rest of the government, and, in fact, practically everyone except financial types.
This is the strategy pursued by countries such as Turkey and South Africa, which have adopted more conventional “inflation targeting” regimes.
The first strategy is problematic because it is unsustainable.
The second is undesirable because it buys stability at the cost of growth.
The importance of a competitive currency for economic growth is undeniable.
Virtually every instance of sustained high growth has been accompanied by a significantly depreciated real exchange rate.
This is as true of South Korea and Taiwan in the 1960’s and 1970’s, as it is of Argentina today.
Chile made its transition to high growth in the 1980’s on the back of a large depreciation.
Since the 1990’s, both China and India have received a huge boost from their undervalued currencies.
These are just some of the better-known examples.
Looking at the experience of more than 100 countries, I have found in my research that each 10% undervaluation adds 0.3 percentage points to growth.
Currency undervaluation is such a potent instrument for growth for the simple reason that it creates incentives for the economy’s growth-promoting sectors.
It increases the profitability of manufacturing and non-traditional agricultural sectors, which are the activities with both the highest level of labor productivity and with the most rapid rates of productivity increase.
An undervalued currency enables an economy to integrate into the world economy on the basis of strong export performance.
It stimulates production (and hence employment), unlike overvaluation, which stimulates consumption.
So what should policymakers do?
First, it is important to realize that a strong and overly volatile currency is not just the central bank’s problem to fix.
While the central bank bears a good part of the responsibility, it needs support from other parts of the government, most notably from the finance ministry.
Maintaining a competitive currency requires a rise in domestic saving relative to investment, or a reduction in national expenditure relative to income.
Otherwise, the competitiveness gains would be offset by rising inflation.
This means that the fiscal authorities have a big responsibility: to target a structural fiscal surplus that is high enough to generate the space needed for real exchange rate depreciation.
This may not be popular, especially in an economic downturn.
But no one has the right to complain about the central bank’s “high-interest rate, appreciated currency” policy when fiscal policy remains too lax for interest rates to be reduced without risking price stability.
There are other instruments available for increasing domestic saving and reducing consumption besides the fiscal balance.
Government policies can target private saving directly, by creating incentives for saving through appropriate tax and pension policies.
Even more importantly, policies can discourage foreign-borrowing-led consumption booms by taxing capital inflows (Chilean-style) or increasing financial intermediaries’ liquidity requirements.
There is little to be gained from letting hot money flow into an economy freely.
With such policies in place, the comfort zone for central banks is enlarged sufficiently to loosen monetary policy.
Equally important, the central bank needs to signal to the public that it now cares about the real exchange rate, because it is important to exports, jobs, and sustainable growth.
This can be done without announcing a specific target level for the exchange rate.
There is huge room to maneuver between the extremes of targeting a specific level of the real exchange rate and disowning any interest in the real exchange rate.
The central bank does need to have a view, updated over time, about the exchange rate’s appropriate range, and it should signal when it thinks the currency is moving in the wrong direction.
Once the monetary rules of the game incorporate the real exchange rate, and assuming that fiscal policy remains supportive, investors can look forward to a less volatile and more competitive currency.
This will mean more investment in tradable industries, more employment overall, and faster growth.
You will know you have succeeded when the United States’ Treasury Secretary comes knocking on your door saying that you are guilty of manipulating your currency.
Race-Based Medicine?
PALO ALTO – Race can undoubtedly be a tricky subject, with any suggestion of genetic differences among racial groups – beyond superficial characteristics like skin color – potentially invoking memories of the nineteenth-century eugenics movement and its eventual role in Nazi ideology.
Now, with drug companies increasingly seeking to develop medications that target particular racial groups, the long-taboo subject of racial genetics has reemerged.
Much of the current debate centers on whether race should be a criterion for inclusion in clinical trials – and, by extension, whether drug labeling should mention race specifically.
Although the issues are complicated, the solution is simple: follow the data.
In fact, clinical trials are not intended to demonstrate the effectiveness of a treatment (drug, medical device, or other intervention) in a completely random sample from the general population. Rather, researchers “enrich” the study population by using a characteristic, such as age or laboratory-test results, to select a subset of patients in whom the intervention’s effects will likely be easier to detect than they would be in an unfiltered population.
In recent years, “biomarkers,” such as certain DNA sequences or the presence of a particular drug receptor, have become increasingly important indicators for determining eligibility for clinical trials.
This approach is not new.
For example, scientists have known for decades that certain drugs can cause severe and precipitous anemia in people with a genetic deficiency of the enzyme G6PD.
More recently, researchers have learned that certain cancer drugs are ineffective in fighting tumors containing the mutated variant of the gene KRAS.
Such discoveries have enhanced researchers’ ability to enrich study populations with patients who are likely to benefit from the drug, while sparing from any possible side effects of exposure those patients who are unlikely to benefit.
Enrichment thus enables researchers to strengthen clinical trials’ “statistical power,” that is, the probability of detecting differences, if any exist, between study groups.
Given that a larger number of subjects or iterations enhances an experiment’s ability to detect all of the relevant effects, which bolsters confidence in the result, outcomes of small studies tend to imply significant uncertainty – unless the intervention’s effects are potent.
Enrichment allows researchers to perform smaller, more informative trials by helping them to design studies that will show a high “relative treatment difference” between the drug and whatever it is being compared to (often a placebo, but sometimes another treatment).
In the 1980’s, a biomarker contributed to the success of the small but seminal clinical trial of human growth hormone in children who were unable to produce it naturally.
Some children lose the ability to make growth hormone due to injury or tumors; others lack normal growth-hormone activity from birth, owing to a genetic mutation; and others are missing the gene that codes for the hormone altogether.
Giving the latter group exogenous growth hormone is futile, because their immune systems react to the “foreign” protein by producing antibodies.
Although the hormone may stimulate growth for a short period, the antibodies soon bind and neutralize it.
By limiting the study population to children in the other two groups, for whom exogenous growth hormone stimulates normal growth, researchers achieved a 100% relative treatment difference.
In other words, every subject who received the active drug responded, and none of those who received the placebo did.
Given this result, US regulators approved the treatment for marketing based on a trial of only 28 patients.
Clearly, genetic markers are useful in designing clinical trials.
But are more subjective factors like race or ethnicity also relevant?
For the cardiac drug BiDil (a combination of the vasodilators hydralazine and isosorbide dinitrate), the answer is yes.
In 1996, inconclusive clinical trials led US regulators to reject the drug.
But when more detailed analysis of the data revealed potentially elevated benefits for black patients, a new trial was performed on 1,050 self-identified “black” patients with severe heart failure for whom available treatments had proved ineffective.
The results – a 43% reduction in mortality and a 39% decrease in hospital visits among patients who received BiDil – were so striking that the study was concluded early.
Although BiDil has not been a great commercial success since its approval in 2009, it remains on the market.
Some regard race-based medical treatment as necessary to reduce health disparities, while others view it as downright discriminatory.
When BiDil was approved, Francis Collins, who was Director of the US National Human Genome Research Institute at the time, warned that “we should move without delay from blurry and potentially misleading surrogates for drug response, such as race, to the more specific causes.”
Of course, Collins was correct; race is a crude and incomplete mechanism for understanding genetic differences.
But we must fight illness with the data we have, not the data we wish we had.
Political and ethical sensitivities notwithstanding, drug testing, approval, and labeling must go wherever the evidence leads.
The Vanished Intellectual
This spring marks the centenary of the birth of two all-round intellectuals, those ideological avatars of the Cold War era, Raymond Aron and Jean-Paul Sartre.
Aron was born on March 14, 1905, Sartre on June 21.
Sartre and Aron began their 50-year acquaintance with a shared elite French education that included a formative period in Germany just before the rise of Nazism.
Each in his inimitable way displayed the contrariness both loved and loathed in intellectuals: Aron fancied Anglo-American liberalism before it became fashionable, while Sartre remained a Communist sympathiser after the fashion had passed.
Aron wrote cool, sleek prose about the most heated geopolitical conflicts, while Sartre could turn any triviality into an existential crisis.
Yet they often stood together against the French political establishment.
Both joined the Resistance when France was a Nazi puppet state, and both called for Algerian independence after France regained its sovereignty.
Unfortunately, Sartre and Aron are also joined in death: both have been disowned, ignored, or underrated by all the academic disciplines – philosophy, literature, sociology, politics – to which their voluminous works might be thought to have contributed.
Silenced by death, Sartre and Aron are remembered more for the attitudes they brought to whatever they wrote about than for what they actually said.
Theirs is a fate perennially suffered by intellectuals.
Great intellectuals like Abelard, Erasmus, Galileo, Voltaire, Zola, and Russell each challenged the pieties of his era, and we now regard their success as a good thing.
But most of us are likely to recoil at the methods they used in their work as intellectuals: caricature, deception, and even fabrication.
Consider three examples.
Abelard is credited with the introduction of theology as a critical discipline in Christianity.
Yet, he did so by juxtaposing contradictory quotes taken out of context, showing that neither the Bible nor the Church fathers speak in one voice and that readers must decide for themselves.
Similarly, Galileo is now known to have committed what we now call “research fraud” in his famed physical experiments. Assuming he conducted them at all, they very probably did not produce the neat results that he used to assail his opponents.
As for Zola, who defended Captain Alfred Dreyfus from charges of treason fueled by anti-Semitism, he was easily convicted for libel because he merely questioned the motives of witnesses without offering any new evidence.
All three were subsequently vindicated – sometimes in their lifetimes, sometimes not.
What they shared is a paradoxical ethic common to all intellectuals: the end cause of truth justifies whatever means happens to be at your disposal. This is because the whole truth is rarely what passes for the truth at any moment.
Such an ethic is abhorrent in today’s world, where knowledge is parceled out to academic disciplines like bits of real estate.
To an intellectual, an academic may look like someone who mistakes the means of inquiry for its end. But to academics, intellectuals look like ramblers freely trespassing on other people’s property, picking the fruits and despoiling the soil.
Intellectuals differ from ordinary academics in holding that the truth is best approached not by producing new knowledge, but by destroying old belief.
When the Enlightenment philosophers renovated the old Christian slogan, “The truth shall set you free,” they imagined a process of opening doors, not building barricades.
In short, intellectuals want their audiences to think for themselves, not simply shift allegiances from one expert to another.
The intellectual’s ethic is both exhilarating and harsh, for it places responsibility for thinking squarely on the thinker’s shoulders.
Every act of deference thus becomes an abdication of one’s own intellectual authority.
The slogan “Knowledge is power” may be familiar, but only intellectuals see its full implications.
Obviously, greater knowledge enhances our capacity to act.
What is much less obvious is that such empowerment requires the destruction of socially sanctioned knowledge.
Only then is a society’s space for decision opened up, enabling its members to move in many more directions than previously deemed possible.
Aron and Sartre developed contrasting, but equally controversial, styles of destroying received belief.
Aron preferred demonizing fellow intellectuals as alarmists than conceding that the Cold War might eventuate in a nuclear holocaust.
Sartre castigated those who failed to resist oppression when they could have, while excusing those who enforced oppression given the chance.
Aron exaggerated the power of reason, while Sartre inflated the power of action.
Each wanted to take French society in radically different directions, but both never ceased being critical of the status quo.
In the end, the two appear to have thought both in and out of their time.
While this makes them awkward candidates for any academic discipline, such is the ambivalence of any intellectual’s legacy.
The Vanishing Bomb
Security rested on a balance of fear, as reflected in the concept of mutually assured destruction.
In that bipolar world, nuclear weapons were held by only five global powers, all permanent members of the UN Security Council.
Today, the global picture is different.
Sparked by Poland’s Solidarity movement, the Warsaw Pact dissolved, the Soviet Union disintegrated, and the bipolar world and its East-West divide vanished.
An order based on the dangerous doctrine of mutual deterrence, was not, however, replaced with a system founded on cooperation and interdependence.
Destabilization and chaos followed, accompanied by a sense of uncertainty and unpredictability.
Nuclear weapons are now also held by three states engaged in conflicts: India, Pakistan, and Israel. Given the development of the nuclear programs in North Korea and Iran, they, too, may become nuclear-weapon states.
There is also a real danger that this group may expand further to include states where governments will not always be guided by rational considerations.
There is also the risk that nuclear weapons may fall into the hands of non-state actors, such as terrorist groups.
An effective non-proliferation regime will not be possible unless the major nuclear powers, especially the United States and Russia, take urgent steps toward nuclear disarmament.
Together, they hold nearly 25,000 nuclear warheads – 96% of the global nuclear arsenal.
It gives us hope that US President Barack Obama recognizes these dangers.
We note with satisfaction that the new US administration has not turned a deaf ear to responsible statesmen and scientists who are calling for the abolition of nuclear weapons.
Indeed, the goal of a nuclear-free world was incorporated in the US administration’s arms control and disarmament agenda.
We appreciate the proposals from the United Kingdom, France, and Germany as well, while Russia also signaled recently in Geneva its readiness to embark upon nuclear disarmament.
Opponents of nuclear disarmament used to argue that this goal was unattainable in the absence of an effective system of control and verification.
But, today, appropriate means of control are available to the international community.
Of key importance are the nuclear safeguards of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
The world must have guarantees that civilian nuclear reactors will not be used for military purposes – a condition for non-nuclear-weapon states’ unrestricted access to nuclear technologies, as proposed recently by UK Prime Minister Gordon Brown in his initiative on a global nuclear bargain for our times.
This is especially urgent now, with the search for new energy sources and a “renaissance” of nuclear power.
The 2010 Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference calls for an urgent formulation of priorities.
The Preparatory Committee will meet in New York this May, and this is where the necessary decisions should be made.
The main expectations are for a reduction of nuclear armaments, a cutback in the number of launch-ready warheads (de-alerting), negotiations on a Fissile Materials Cut-off Treaty, ratification of the Comprehensive Test-Ban Treaty, and other means of strengthening practical implementation of the Non-Proliferation Treaty, especially its universal adoption.
The time has come for a fundamental change in the proceedings of the Geneva-based Disarmament Conference, which for years has failed to meet the international community’s expectations.
We share the view expressed by the academics, politicians, and experts of the international Warsaw Reflection Group that consideration should be given to the zero option as a basis for a future multilateral nuclear disarmament agreement.
The Group’s report, Arms Control Revisited: Non-proliferation and Denuclearization , elaborated under the chairmanship of Adam D. Rotfeld of Poland and drafted by the British scholar Ian Anthony of SIPRI, was based on contributions by security analysts from nuclear powers and Poland, as well as from countries previously in possession of nuclear weapons (South Africa) and post-Soviet countries where they were once stored (Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Ukraine).
The fact that these states were denuclearized as part of the Safe and Secure Disarmament program provides a valuable lesson.
The process of gradual nuclear disarmament must be set in motion.
It will not produce results overnight, but it would give us a sense of direction, a chance to strengthen non-proliferation mechanisms, and an opportunity to establish a global, cooperative non-nuclear security system.
The deadliest threat to global security comes from a qualitatively new wave of nuclear proliferation.
The heaviest responsibility is shouldered by the powers that hold the largest arsenals.
We trust that the US and Russian presidents, and leaders of all other nuclear powers, will show statesmanlike wisdom and courage and begin the process of freeing the world from the nuclear menace.
But as important as this goal is for international order and security, of equal importance is respect for human rights and the rights of minorities, as well as the establishment, on a global scale, of democracy and the rule of law.
The Varieties of Unemployment
BERKELEY – We hear from surprisingly many quarters these days that governments in Europe and North America, and their central banks, should give up on the expansionary policies they have pursued to try to create jobs.
The high unemployment currently afflicting the North Atlantic, critics of government stimulus maintain, is not cyclical but “structural,” and thus cannot be alleviated by policies that boost aggregate demand.
Let me be the first to say that structural unemployment is a true and severe danger.
When people who in other circumstances could be happy, healthy, and productive members of the workforce lack the skills, confidence, social networks, and experience needed to find work worth paying for, we obviously have a problem.
And if unemployment in Europe and North America stays elevated for two or three more years, it is highly likely that we will have to face it.
For nothing converts cyclical unemployment into structural unemployment more certainly than prolonged unemployment.
But is that true today?
Does it look right now as if the biggest problem facing the economies of Europe and North America is structural unemployment?
It does not.
Let us remember what structural unemployment looks like.
The economy is depressed and unemployment is high not because of slack aggregate demand generated by a collapse in spending, but instead because “structural” factors have produced a mismatch between the skills of the labor force and the distribution of demand.
The structure of demand by consumers is different from the jobs that workers are capable of filling.
For example, suppose that you have many workers qualified and skilled to work in construction, but households have decided that their houses are more than large enough, and wish to fill them with manufactured goods.
This would produce structural unemployment to the extent that the ex-construction workers could not do things in manufacturing that would make it worthwhile for manufacturing firms to hire them.
In that case, we would expect to see construction depressed: firms closed, capital goods idle, and workers unemployed.
But we would also expect to see manufacturing plants running at double shifts – the money not spent on construction has to go somewhere, and, remember, the problem is not a lack of aggregate demand.
We would expect to see manufacturers holding job fairs, and when not enough workers showed up, we would expect to see manufacturers offering higher wages to attract workers into their plants, and then raising prices to cover their higher costs.
The size and duration of the excess unemployment of ex-construction workers might be substantial and long lasting.
It might require significant time to retrain construction workers and plug them into social networks in which they become good manufacturing workers.
We might see prolonged and high unemployment in the construction sector, and in regions that had seen the biggest previous construction booms.
But depression in the construction sector and unemployment among its ex-workers would be balanced by exuberance in the manufacturing sector, rising prices for manufactured goods, and long hours and high wages for manufacturing workers
That is what “mismatch” structural unemployment looks like – and it is not what we have today, at least not in Europe and North America.
In the past three years, employment in construction has shrunk, but so has employment in manufacturing, wholesale trade, retail trade, transportation and warehousing, information distribution and communications, professional and business services, educational services, leisure and hospitality, and in the public sector.
Employment is up in health care, Internet-related businesses, and perhaps in logging and mining.
In the United States, the past three years have seen employment fall from 137.8 million people in July 2007 to slightly less than 130 million in July 2010 – a decline of 7.9 million during a period in which the adult population grew by six million.
What we have witnessed is not a shift in demand into sectors lacking an adequate number of qualified and productive workers, but rather a collapse in the level of aggregate demand.
This may well look like structural unemployment in three years.
In three years, we may well see labor shortages, rising wages, and increasing prices in expanding sectors, accompanied by high unemployment elsewhere in the economy.
But that is not our problem now. Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.
The Velvet Delusion
COLLEGE STATION, TEXAS – With the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 and the relatively non-violent overthrow of communism throughout Central and Eastern Europe, optimists predicted a new golden age of a world filled with peaceful democracies.
History, for some, seemed to have come to an end.
But the optimists have proved to be misguided, as the world’s powers, great and small, drew their own, often conflicting, lessons from the past.
For Americans, 1989 validated everything they already believed.
They had won the Cold War, or so they perceived, through hard force and conviction.
They saw demonstrators in East European capitals and Chinese crowds in Tiananmen Square chanting for freedom, and believed that those throngs wanted to be American.
As George H.W. Bush declared, “We know how to secure a more just and prosperous life for man on Earth: through free markets, free speech, free elections, and the exercise of free will unhampered by the state.”
Subsequent events seemed to validate this American recipe.
The Gulf War confirmed American military might and the age-old perils of appeasement.
The Clinton era gave us active democracy-promotion as the principle tool of American foreign policy, which George W. Bush’s administration took to unprecedented extremes.
Cold War victory provided the answer for each.  “America’s resolve and American ideals so clearly articulated by Ronald Reagan,” Clinton said, “helped to bring the Wall down.”
The lesson was clear: “we achieve our aims by defending our values and leading the forces of freedom.” 
But the rest of the world learned different lessons.
European strategists largely dismissed America’s interpretation that force had won the Cold War, believing that cooperation had triumphed precisely because force was absent.
They heard in pleas for freedom from behind the Iron Curtain not a desire to become American, but to join the remarkably successful European experiment in collective security and prosperity that emerged after World War II.
For today’s European leaders, the central lesson of 1989 is that force is counterproductive; what matters is consensus.
Russian leaders, not surprisingly, also drew their own conclusions.
When Mikhail Gorbachev spoke of a “Europe from the Atlantic to the Urals,” his conception was not of a continent under Soviet domination, as Josef Stalin once threatened.
Having demonstrated remarkable restraint in 1989, Russian leaders expected to be embraced by the West.
Instead, NATO expanded to Russia’s doorstep, the European Union barred its doors, and membership in the World Trade Organization seemed out of reach.
The post-Soviet economy crumbled, crime skyrocketed, and life expectancy declined.
Russia’s voice in global affairs lost authority.
For Russian leaders, 1989’s lesson was clear: trusting the West was foolish at best, dangerous at worst.
Gorbachev’s vision of European inclusion neglected centuries of Russian history; the West did not want Russian participation.
Better that Russians rely on their own power, develop their own resources, and police their own borders.
The Kremlin trusted the West in 1989.  Subsequent Russian leaders refuse to be duped again.
Chinese leaders embraced 1989’s most puzzling legacy. They recoiled at the Soviet bloc’s disintegration.
“Every effort should be made to prevent changes in Eastern Europe from influencing China’s internal development,” party officials concluded in March 1989, and within months they violently crushed democratic protesters.
China took from 1989 the lesson that state stability was paramount.
Yet China’s leaders also recognized that they ignored popular demands at great peril.
The government thus made an implicit deal with its citizens: political dissent would not be tolerated, but, in exchange, the state would guarantee economic growth.
No one could question the government’s legitimacy so long as prosperity expanded.
Chinese foreign policy also prioritized legitimacy after 1989, with the regime hoping to reassert its authority globally by expanding China’s participation in international organizations.
Chinese leaders embraced the cooperative nature of the post-1945 European process, but simultaneously took the Russian lesson to heart: the West would not yield merely to good intentions.
But, unlike Russia, China de-emphasized the relevance of traditional hard power to achieve its goals.
In fact, Chinese leaders have spent remarkably little, relative to China’s growing GDP, on the military.
Chinese power today comes not from its ability to match America’s blue-water navy, but from its holdings in US Treasury bonds.
The legacy of 1989 echoes even in Iran, whose leaders seem clearly to have learned from Tiananmen Square and the collapse of the Iron Curtain that a committed government can, indeed, demobilize a public demanding reform.
The world would not soon forget the horrors of Tiananmen, global protestors promised in 1989.
But it did – and with extraordinary speed.
In looking back at 1989, we are, in effect, looking forward from that year’s momentous events at the very different legacies that they produced.
The Virtual Enemy
Five years have passed since the terrorist attacks on New York and Washington of September, 2001, yet it seems that policymakers have learned little about how terrorist cells operate, and what their weaknesses are.
The Bush administration still uses the phrase “war on terror” and behaves as though it really is a war, the ordinary kind where one government fights another.
Yet after five years of military exertions, strategies based on targeting a united aggressor have only made the situation worse.
It is time to understand the new, emerging model of conflict.
In order to make the “war” paradigm fit, the Bush administration alludes to al-Qaeda as a centrally directed enemy.
In fact, there is now no master planner or funder of terrorist activities.
The Madrid, London, and Bali attacks, as well as several thwarted operations in the United States and Britain, were all characterized by their dispersed organization.
Independently generated plots emerged and used ad hoc resources, often within the target country.
Those small operations also lacked a common internal design.
Terrorist motivations differ from cell to cell, even from person to person.
Individuals can be involved for profit and power, or for political and religious reasons, while others participate for hate or thrills.
Moreover, there are vast differences in terms of risks, rewards, and imperatives as one moves up the organizational chain, or jumps from cell to cell.
Conventional military models are geared to decapitate something that, in this case, has no head.
The characteristics of this new structure have already been studied in a very different context.
Terrorism is a violent version of an “agile virtual enterprise.” A virtual enterprise is any small group that self-assembles into an organization that is just large enough to accomplish the collective intention.
Virtual enterprises are unusually innovative, and, in the business sector, they are possibly the only system that can build a one-off product well.
A conspicuous example already exists in the movie production industry.
In fact, they are probably the commercial model of the future.
The benefits of virtual enterprises stem from their lightness over stability.
At present, most of the price of any product supports the huge, inefficient organization that assembled it.
Nearly all the creativity and problem solving occurs in small companies and is later “integrated” by mega-corporations, which have an expensive and vulnerable infrastructure, and keep most of the profit.
This model is the current basis of the business world, just as centralization has also been the favored defense strategy.
When you buy a car from General Motors, 80 cents from each dollar goes to GM, which mostly only manages itself.
The small suppliers actually provide you with 80% of the value and innovation but only receive 20% of the reward.
Ironically, extensive research into alternative models was funded through the US Department of Defense, which, as the world’s largest buyer of complex machinery, wanted better, cheaper and more tailored goods.
The research noted the conditions and triggers needed to facilitate the self-assembly of small opportunistic groups and enable them to act like large companies.
Unfortunately, the research program was cancelled before its findings could be applied in the business world, almost certainly because it threatened large companies.
It is often forgotten that US Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld emerged from a comfortable retirement to reorganize the American military into a smaller, more agile force, using some of these same insights.
But the planning for the Iraq invasion, in which Rumsfeld advocated the use of fewer troops than advised, suggests a poor understanding of distributed systems.
While the forces were deployed for a flexible entry and withdrawal, the Bush administration ended up using them for an old-fashioned occupation.
Terrorists have been better at capitalizing on models of distributed operation.
Scores of texts are appearing in the Muslim world on jihadi strategic studies. The best known in the West is The Management of Savagery , but only because it was translated and made public.
These books (and the trends they indicate) are becoming less dogmatic and increasingly sophisticated in the adoption of modern management techniques.
Their research surely includes the young science of virtual enterprise management: how to nurture and support self-organizing cells.
Perhaps the first lesson for Western policymakers is that virtual enterprises run on a culture of trust.
Some kinds of trust can be based on an artificial notion of “not us” rather than on real values and direct experience.
That is why the Bush administration’s actions actually strengthen the virtual terrorist enterprise dynamic.
Bush’s “us and them” rhetoric clearly defines an “other” and positions it as a cohesive enemy.
His “war” approach is making it easier for Islamist terrorists to view the West as an equally united and malevolent force.
In the future, the virtual enterprise model will shape how business is conducted, wars will be fought and probably how government services will be administered.
It promises to decouple the management of finance from that of production, implying faster innovation and economic growth.
However, if Western governments do not develop a deep understanding of how these structures operate, they stand no chance of combating the agile terrorist enterprise.
The Wages of Economic Ignorance
LONDON – Politicians are masters at “passing the buck.”
Everything good that happens reflects their exceptional talents and efforts; everything bad is caused by someone or something else.
The economy is a classic field for this strategy.
Three years after the global economy’s near-collapse, the feeble recovery has already petered out in most developed countries, whose economic inertia will drag down the rest.
Pundits decry a “double-dip” recession, but in some countries the first dip never ended: Greek GDP has been dipping for three years.
When we ask politicians to explain these deplorable results, they reply in unison: “It’s not our fault.”
Recovery, goes the refrain, has been “derailed” by the eurozone crisis.
But this is to turn the matter on its head.
The eurozone crisis did not derail recovery; it is the result of a lack of recovery.
It is the natural, predictable, and (by many) predicted result of the main European countries’ deliberate policy of repressing aggregate demand.
That policy was destined to produce a financial crisis, because it was bound to leave governments and banks with depleted assets and larger debts.
Despite austerity, the forecast of this year’s UK structural deficit has increased from 6.5% to 8% – requiring an extra £22 billion ($34.6 billion) in cuts a year.
Prime Minister David Cameron and Chancellor George Osborne blame the eurozone crisis; in fact, their own economic illiteracy is to blame.
Unfortunately for all of us, the explanation bears repeating nowadays.
Depressions, recessions, contractions – call them what you will – occur because the private-sector spends less than it did previously.
This means that its income falls, because spending by one firm or household is income for another.
In this situation, government deficits rise naturally, as tax revenues decline and spending on unemployment insurance and other benefits rises.
These “automatic stabilizers” plug part of the private-sector spending gap.
But if the government starts reducing its own deficit before private-sector spending recovers, the net result will be a further decline in total spending, and hence in total income, causing the government’s deficit to widen, rather than narrow.
True, if governments stop spending altogether, deficits will eventually fall to zero.
People will starve to death in the interim, but the budget will be balanced.
That is the crazy logic of current economic policy in much of Europe (and elsewhere).
Of course, it will not be carried through to the bitter end.
Too much will crack along the way – the banks, the monetary system, social cohesion, the legitimacy of the political regime.
Our leaders may be intellectually challenged, but they are not suicidal.
Deficit reduction eventually will be put into cold storage, either openly, as I would prefer, or surreptitiously, as is politicians’ way.
In the United Kingdom, there is already talk of Plan A +.
Those who see the need for such a growth strategy, but who also want to help their friends, like the idea of tax cuts – especially for the rich.
This knocks a hole in current deficit-reduction plans, but, provided government continues to cut spending, it has the benefit (from a conservative’s point of view) of shrinking the state’s role over time.
Apart from questions of fairness, cutting top tax rates is an inferior way to increase spending, because the rich have a higher propensity to save.
Tax reductions should be targeted specifically at the poor if one wants the money to be spent to stimulate the economy.
In fact, the best option of all is for the government to spend the money itself.
Governments can do this consistently with a medium-term deficit-reduction plan by making a crucial distinction between their budgets’ current and capital accounts.
The current account covers spending on services and perishable goods that produce no assets.
The capital account is for buying or building durable assets that give a prospective future return.
The first is a charge on taxation; the second is not.
If today’s accounting rules are too insensitive to make this distinction, a separate entity could do the investing.
A national investment bank would be capitalized by the government, borrow from the private sector, and invest in infrastructure, housing, and “greening” the economy.
This would simultaneously plug a hole in demand and improve the economy’s long-term growth prospects.
There are signs that officials in the UK and the United States are starting to move in this direction.
If nothing works, it will be time to sprinkle the country with what Milton Friedman called “helicopter money” – that is, put purchasing power directly into people’s pockets, by giving every household a spending voucher with an expiration date.
This would at least keep the economy afloat pending the development of the longer-term investment program.
It would be better if such schemes could be agreed upon by all by G-20 countries, as was briefly the case in the coordinated stimulus of April 2009.
If not, groups of countries should pursue them on their own.
The European Union desperately needs a growth strategy.
Its current bailout schemes only help countries like Greece and Italy to borrow money cheaply in the face of prohibitively high market interest rates, while the schemes’ insistence on more budget-deficit reduction in these countries will reduce European purchasing power further.
The recipient governments will have to cut their spending; the banks will have to take large losses.
In the long run, the eurozone must be recognized as a failed experiment.
It should be reconstituted with far fewer members, including only countries that do not run persistent current-account deficits.
Everything else that has been proposed to save the eurozone in its current form – a central treasury, a monetary authority that does more than target inflation, fiscal harmonization, a new treaty – is a political pipe dream.
The War Against Iraqi Women
BAGHDAD – Iraqi women’s organizations and international observers point to an escalating war against women in Iraq, aided by the widespread chaos and lawlessness under the US occupation.
In addition to violence by US troops inside and outside of prisons, women in Iraq face daily violence from militants under the guise of religion and “liberation.”
In Iraq’s second largest city, Basra, a stronghold of conservative Shia groups, as many as 133 women were killed last year for violating “Islamic teachings” and in so-called “honor killings,” according to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
The methods are brutal evidence of a backlash by previously subdued tribal forces that have been unleashed by the occupation: women strangled and beheaded, and their hands, arms and legs chopped off.
With US forces in Iraq now funding both Sunni and Shia tribal leaders in an effort to stabilize the country, conditions for women grow deadlier by the day.
Islamist leaders have imposed new restrictions on women, including prohibitions on work, bans on travel without a muhram (male guardian), and compulsory veiling.
According to the Organization of Women’s Freedom in Iraq (OWFI), formed in Baghdad in 2003, women are harassed if they appear in the streets of most Iraqi cities and towns, educational institutions, or work places.
Now there are even “no woman zones” in some southern cities controlled by Islamist parties and tribal leaders.
Honor killings of Iraqi women are justified by alleged promiscuity or adultery.
In fact, the practice targets holders of PhD’s, professionals, political activists, and office workers.
“Politically active women, those who did not follow a strict dress code, and women human rights defenders were increasingly at risk of abuse, including by armed groups and religious extremists,” Amnesty International said in its 2007 report. 
Indeed, a top police official in Basra reported that as many as 15 women are killed every month in the city.
Ambulance drivers in Basra, paid to “clean the streets” before people go to work, pick up many more bodies of women every morning.
Ironically, the forces leading this assault on women had little or no power under Saddam Hussein.
But, following the US-led invasion in 2003, southern Iraq was opened to forces known as Propagation of Virtue and Prevention of Vice (PVPV) – militant gangs and individuals committed to archaic Islamic rule and suppression of women’s rights.
Some members of these groups now serve in government, others in militias or as self-appointed vigilantes or hired guns.
The goal of the PVPV is to confine women to the domestic realm and end all female participation in public and political life.
To date, Iraqi officials have not been willing to deal with this escalating violence against women, or even to discuss it.
But, as elected representatives, they are obligated to address these crimes.
So must the US.
Under the Fourth Geneva Convention, the responsibility for protecting civilian populations in an occupied country belongs to the occupying forces, which, in this case, are clearly failing to protect Iraqi women.
Two measures are urgently needed.
First, the Iraqi government must immediately establish “Protection of Women” security patrols in Iraq’s southern cities.
These patrols must receive gender-sensitive training and prioritize women’s security over tribal or fundamentalist religious values.
Second, pursuant to its obligations under the Geneva Convention, the US must immediately take steps to protect the lives and freedoms of Iraqi civilians. Unless the US does so, it must withdraw from Iraq, because the occupation would merely continue to sustain a breeding ground for violence against women.
The timetable for action is not subject to debate.
It must begin today.
The War Against Iraq’s Children
Iraq’s children have suffered more than just successive wars and economic sanctions.
The loss of parents and family resources has boosted child labor, homelessness, and inclinations towards violence and rebellion.
They often now live in homes where 25 people live in a space of 40 square meters.
Even intact families may comprise parents and five children in a single six-meter room.
The increase in child labor reflects families’ dire economic situation: children are frequently a family’s only breadwinners, and they work cheap.
Contractors in municipal services, for example, prefer to use children in order to cut costs.
Here, a child may be used for agricultural labor or for janitorial work.
Many work in piles of garbage, either removing them to another place or collecting empty bottles and cans to sell.
Other children load and transport items in the markets, where they must pull carts weighing 60-70 kilograms and carry boxes weighing 15 kilograms in temperatures of 50 degrees centigrade.
Two children may unload a truck carrying 1,000 kilograms of food items.
Not surprisingly, Iraq’s child workers suffer from a wide array of serious health problems.
Children who work in the garbage dumps are prone to skin and respiratory problems, while those who work with paints eventually become addicted to the intoxicants that they inhale.
And all working children are vulnerable to malnutrition, as their diet typically lacks the items necessary to build body tissues.
Nor is there any official authority to protect children and defend their rights in case of incapacitation or sickness.
On the contrary, children are often beaten by family members if they do not provide the daily wage expected of them, or by their bosses when they are inattentive or make a mistake.
Indeed, Iraqi children are exposed to beating without regard for their age and for myriad reasons, thus growing up insecure, hostile, and violent.
Moreover, they are prone to being kidnapped by criminal gangs, trained to steal or pickpocket, or, worse, placed at the mercy of terrorists for use in attacks.
The deterioration of families’ financial situation has also left poor children deprived of educational opportunity.
For many children, even when they do attend school, the collapse of infrastructure, the unavailability of electricity and water, and high temperatures in the summer are hardly conducive to successful study.
The small number of schools, the poor condition of buildings, and the collapse of relationships between students and teachers is also at fault.
Older children sit in classrooms with much younger children, growing frustrated and violent, rather than becoming role models for others to emulate.
Iraqi girls suffer no less than boys – and often more.
At one end of the spectrum of deprivation, their opportunities are more constrained.
When a family’s income is insufficient to pay school fees for every child, girls are typically denied an education, owing to the traditional belief that marriage is a girl’s final destiny.
They must perform household chores and are subject to beating if they do not carry out orders issued by male family members.
In poor households, they are also likely to receive less food than boys, placing their physical health and development at even greater risk.
At the other end of the spectrum, rape, adultery, early child bearing, and abortion have become ordinary matters.
Increasingly, Iraqi girls interpret anything given to them as a means to have sex with them.
Orphans, whose number has increased sharply over the past quarter-century as a result of wars, economic sanctions, and terrorism, are especially vulnerable to the cruelest type of physical and psychological violence.
Having lost their homes and parents, they sleep in alleys, sell cigarettes or newspapers, and beg.
Grandparents are often unable or unwilling to care for them, and the pathological education given to them by criminal gangs often puts them beyond the reach of any institution’s ability to rehabilitate them.
Simply put, children in Iraq have been reduced from human beings worthy of care to tools of production and instruments of violence.
We are quite literally breeding a new generation of disorder.
The War on “Democratization”
The wars in Lebanon and Gaza constitute a grave threat to democratic reform in the southern Mediterranean.
These wars are inflicting heavy punishment on precisely those peoples who have held fully free and fair elections in the region, while eroding the legitimacy of Israel’s democracy.
At the time of its “Cedar Revolution” last year, Lebanon was held up as the best example so far of democratization in the Arab world.
The enthusiasm with which the international community welcomed those changes now seems all but forgotten, which is also true of recent elections in Palestine – another longstanding international demand.
The signal being sent is clear: it is preferable that Israel, the only state in the region that abides by the rule of law, be surrounded by authoritarian regimes where political outcomes are predictable than by democratic states where Islamists may well rise to power.
It happened in Palestine, and it could well happen in Egypt if free and fair free elections were held.
As a result, Arab nationalist governments feel justified in resisting serious political reform and vindicated in repressing all domestic opposition, particularly the swelling Islamist movements.
But it should now be clear to everyone that democratization in the southern Mediterranean cannot bypass Islamist movements, and that the success of that process largely depends on the degree to which their full participation in the political arena is ensured.
Of course, this requires their renouncing violence as a means of achieving power.
Repressing political Islam, or attempting to “erase” Islamists militarily with total disregard for national political processes (not to mention human life), is not the answer, because it won’t persuade electorates to turn away from Islamist movements.
The efforts of reformist governments in the region to integrate such movements into the public sphere have been dealt a severe blow.
Democracies have long known that extreme and indiscriminate punishment – which by definition affects friend and foe, combatant and civilian alike – is a grave violation of international law, as the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Louise Arbour, has pointed out.
They also know that such action fuels radicalism, leading to the kind of tragic consequences that are all too familiar nowadays.
Hezbollah is, after all, a creature of Lebanon’s resistance to Israel’s 1982 invasion, now trying to reassert its influence at home and in the wider region by portraying itself as a champion of the Arab-Islamic cause, namely in Palestine.
Any reinforcement of its power will necessarily weaken Lebanon and the region’s democratic forces.
The prolonged absence of the United States from truly active engagement in the Middle East peace process is partly to blame for the current situation.
For almost six years, there has been no significant US diplomatic initiative to resolve the Palestinian question or to pursue the Syrian track (Israel still occupies the Golan Heights).
Moreover, just when we were beginning to think that the Iraqi tragedy had made the limits of unilateralism and preemptive military strategies clear to all, the Bush administration encourages Israel’s military action – this time against a country that has painfully been attempting to consolidate democratic reform and to reafirm its sovereignty in relation to Syria .
Bush’s most promising initiative, promoting democracy across the Middle East, was already dealt a crippling blow by US intervention in Iraq and the ensuing civil war there.
Now the project is buried under the weight of America’s inability to protect Lebanon’s fragile democracy and Palestine’s democratic experiment.
The European Union’s feeble response to the warfare in Gaza and Lebanon has oscillated between understanding and condemnation of the disproportionate use of force by Israel (described as “ten eyes for one” by the Finnish presidency), thereby betraying its dependence on the US to end the violence.
Europeans will have learned nothing from the damaging disunity, and thus weakness, that they displayed during the Iraq war if this conflict does not compel them to speak with one voice.
What is needed is a European initiative that is backed by a credible military deterrent, consisting of forces from the EU, Turkey, and Arab countries, to be dispatched under a UN mandate to Lebanon and Gaza.
Europe must not only put forward a clear demand for an immediate cease-fire and the end to Syrian and Iranian meddling in Lebanon, it must also provide the means to enforce it as well as massive support for Lebanon’s reconstruction.
The EU should decisively back the end of the embargo on Palestine and the urgent creation of a Palestinian state.
A common European front could persuade the US to give Lebanon and Palestine enough time to consolidate their national democratic processes, thus isolating the radical elements of Hamas and steering Hezbollah to dissolution of its private army.
With the US project in ruins, a credible European policy to delegitimize war and support democratization in its neighborhood has become essential.
The Water Hegemon
NEW DELHI – International discussion about China’s rise has focused on its increasing trade muscle, growing maritime ambitions, and expanding capacity to project military power.
One critical issue, however, usually escapes attention: China’s rise as a hydro-hegemon with no modern historical parallel.
No other country has ever managed to assume such unchallenged riparian preeminence on a continent by controlling the headwaters of multiple international rivers and manipulating their cross-border flows.
China, the world’s biggest dam builder – with slightly more than half of the approximately 50,000 large dams on the planet – is rapidly accumulating leverage against its neighbors by undertaking massive hydro-engineering projects on transnational rivers.
Asia’s water map fundamentally changed after the 1949 Communist victory in China.
Most of Asia’s important international rivers originate in territories that were forcibly annexed to the People’s Republic of China. The Tibetan Plateau, for example, is the world’s largest freshwater repository and the source of Asia’s greatest rivers, including those that are the lifeblood for mainland China and South and Southeast Asia.
Other such Chinese territories contain the headwaters of rivers like the Irtysh, Illy, and Amur, which flow to Russia and Central Asia.
This makes China the source of cross-border water flows to the largest number of countries in the world.
Yet China rejects the very notion of water sharing or institutionalized cooperation with downriver countries.
Whereas riparian neighbors in Southeast and South Asia are bound by water pacts that they have negotiated between themselves, China does not have a single water treaty with any co-riparian country.
Indeed, having its cake and eating it, China is a dialogue partner but not a member of the Mekong River Commission, underscoring its intent not to abide by the Mekong basin community’s rules or take on any legal obligations.
Worse, while promoting multilateralism on the world stage, China has given the cold shoulder to multilateral cooperation among river-basin states.
The lower-Mekong countries, for example, view China’s strategy as an attempt to “divide and conquer.”
Although China publicly favors bilateral initiatives over multilateral institutions in addressing water issues, it has not shown any real enthusiasm for meaningful bilateral action.
As a result, water has increasingly become a new political divide in the country’s relations with neighbors like India, Russia, Kazakhstan, and Nepal.
China deflects attention from its refusal to share water, or to enter into institutionalized cooperation to manage common rivers sustainably, by flaunting the accords that it has signed on sharing flow statistics with riparian neighbors.
These are not agreements to cooperate on shared resources, but rather commercial accords to sell hydrological data that other upstream countries provide free to downriver states.
In fact, by shifting its frenzied dam building from internal rivers to international rivers, China is now locked in water disputes with almost all co-riparian states.
Those disputes are bound to worsen, given China’s new focus on erecting mega-dams, best symbolized by its latest addition on the Mekong – the 4,200-megawatt Xiaowan Dam, which dwarfs Paris’s Eiffel Tower in height – and a 38,000-megawatt dam planned on the Brahmaputra at Metog, close to the disputed border with India.
The Metog Dam will be twice as large as the 18,300-megawatt Three Gorges Dam, currently the world’s largest, construction of which uprooted at least 1.7 million Chinese.
In addition, China has identified another mega-dam site on the Brahmaputra at Daduqia, which, like Metog, is to harness the force of a nearly 3,000-meter drop in the river’s height as it takes a sharp southerly turn from the Himalayan range into India, forming the world’s longest and steepest canyon.
The Brahmaputra Canyon – twice as deep as the Grand Canyon in the United States – holds Asia’s greatest untapped water reserves.
The countries likely to bear the brunt of such massive diversion of waters are those located farthest downstream on rivers like the Brahmaputra and Mekong – Bangladesh, whose very future is threatened by climate and environmental change, and Vietnam, a rice bowl of Asia.
China’s water appropriations from the Illy River threaten to turn Kazakhstan’s Lake Balkhash into another Aral Sea, which has shrunk to less than half its original size.
In addition, China has planned the “Great Western Route,” the proposed third leg of the Great South-North Water Diversion Project – the most ambitious inter-river and inter-basin transfer program ever conceived – whose first two legs, involving internal rivers in China’s ethnic Han heartland, are scheduled to be completed within three years.
The Great Western Route, centered on the Tibetan Plateau, is designed to divert waters, including from international rivers, to the Yellow River, the main river of water-stressed northern China, which also originates in Tibet.
With its industry now dominating the global hydropower-equipment market, China has also emerged as the largest dam builder overseas.
From Pakistani-held Kashmir to Burma’s troubled Kachin and Shan states, China has widened its dam building to disputed or insurgency-torn areas, despite local backlashes.
For example, units of the People’s Liberation Army are engaged in dam and other strategic projects in the restive, Shia-majority region of Gilgit-Baltistan in Pakistan-held Kashmir.
And China’s dam building inside Burma to generate power for export to Chinese provinces has contributed to renewed bloody fighting recently, ending a 17-year ceasefire between the Kachin Independence Army and the government.
As with its territorial and maritime disputes with India, Vietnam, Japan, and others, China is seeking to disrupt the status quo on international-river flows.
Persuading it to halt further unilateral appropriation of shared waters has thus become pivotal to Asian peace and stability.
Otherwise, China is likely to emerge as the master of Asia’s water taps, thereby acquiring tremendous leverage over its neighbors’ behavior.
The Way Ahead on Climate Change
NEW YORK – The financial crisis has been uppermost in the minds of most world leaders.
Yet, however high the price of a global bail-out, we know one thing: it pales next to the enormous costs – and profound human consequences – of delaying action on climate change.
There is a sort of beauty in this predicament: if we act wisely, we can tackle both crises at once.
Climate change negotiations over the next year offer an unprecedented opportunity to build a more profitable, safer, and sustainable global economy.  
Today’s challenges – finance, food, and energy, for example – are many.
Yet they share a root cause, whereby speculative and often narrow interests have superseded the common interest, common responsibilities, and common sense.
This same short-term thinking characterizes the world’s dependence on fossil fuels.
We cannot break that dependence overnight.
Yet we recognize that continuing to pour trillions of dollars into carbon-based infrastructure and fossil-fuel subsidies is like investing in sub-prime real estate.
In essence, we are mortgaging our children’s future to pay for an inherently unsustainable and inequitable way of life.
The greatest risk we face lies in continuing down this path.
So how do we begin to tackle the massive challenge of retooling our global economy, preserving the planet, and lifting billions out of poverty?
The answer is to deal seriously with climate change.
And this is the time to do it – not in spite of the financial crisis, but because of it.
As the saying goes, a crisis is a terrible thing to waste.
This week’s gathering in Poznan is an important step.
We have only 12 short months to hammer out the elements of a global climate change accord before world leaders convene next December in Copenhagen.
If we work together, guided by a sense of urgency and common destiny, these negotiations can help steer the ship of the global economy toward less turbulent, greener waters and into a safe harbor.
We believe that the best investment in our collective future is to scale up the green, low-carbon economy.
It is an investment with enormous potential for prosperity and profit.
But it requires us to put in place a new climate change agreement now – one that all countries can accept.
It must be comprehensive and ambitious, and it must set clear targets for emission reductions, adaptation, financing, and technology transfer.
In Poznan, developed and developing nations must find a shared vision of how this will work, striking a deal whereby rich countries lead by example in cutting emissions while providing the developing world with resources and know-how to ramp up their own climate change efforts.
Energy investment decisions made today will lock in the world’s emissions profile for years to come.
Meanwhile, the clock is ticking.
Potentially catastrophic consequences await, not just for polar bears, but for millions of people.
Adaptation must be a vital part of the negotiations.
So must mitigation.
In the cruel calculus of disasters, those least responsible for causing climate change will suffer first and worst from its inevitable effects.
Developing nations will need increased financial support to protect the poorest and most vulnerable.