Elections are managed with biometrics, forests are monitored by satellite imagery, banking has migrated from branch offices to smartphones, and medical x-rays are examined halfway around the world.
With a bit of investment and foresight, spelled out in a new report, prepared by the UN Sustainable Development Solutions Network (SDSN), on Data for Development, the data revolution can drive a sustainable development revolution, and accelerate progress toward ending poverty, promoting social inclusion, and protecting the environment.
The world’s governments will adopt the new Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) at a special United Nations summit on September 25.
The occasion will likely be the largest gathering of world leaders in history, as some 170 heads of state and government adopt shared goals that will guide global development efforts until 2030.
Of course, goals are easier to adopt than to achieve.
So we will need new tools, including new data systems, to turn the SDGs into reality by 2030.
In developing these new data systems, governments, businesses, and civil-society groups should promote four distinct purposes.
The first, and most important, is data for service delivery.
The data revolution gives governments and businesses new and greatly improved ways to deliver services, fight corruption, cut red tape, and guarantee access in previously isolated places.
Information technology is already revolutionizing the delivery of health care, education, governance, infrastructure (for example, prepaid electricity), banking, emergency response, and much more.
The second purpose is data for public management.
Officials can now maintain real-time dashboards informing them of the current state of government facilities, transport networks, emergency relief operations, public health surveillance, violent crimes, and much more.
Citizen feedback can also improve functioning, such as by crowd-sourcing traffic information from drivers.
Geographic information systems (GIS) allow for real-time monitoring across local governments and districts in far-flung regions.
The third purpose is data for accountability of governments and businesses.
It is a truism that government bureaucracies cut corners, hide gaps in service delivery, exaggerate performance, or, in the worst cases, simply steal when they can get away with it.
Many businesses are no better.
The data revolution can help to ensure that verifiable data are accessible to the general public and the intended recipients of public and private services.
When services do not arrive on schedule (owing to, say, a bottleneck in construction or corruption in the supply chain), the data system will enable the public to pinpoint problems and hold governments and businesses to account.
Finally, the data revolution should enable the public to know whether or not a global goal or target has actually been achieved.
The Millennium Development Goals, which were set in the year 2000, established quantitative targets for the year 2015.
But, although we are now in the MDGs’ final year, we still lack precise knowledge of whether certain MDG targets have been achieved, owing to the absence of high-quality, timely data.
Some of the most important MDG targets are reported with a lag of several years.
The World Bank, for example, has not published detailed poverty data since 2010.
The data revolution can end the long lags and dramatically improve the quality of the data.
For example, rather than relying on household surveys every few years to calculate the mortality rate, systems of civil registration and vital statistics can collect mortality data in real time, with the added benefit of information on cause of death.
Likewise, poverty data could be collected at relatively low cost and with much higher frequency than today, by using smart phones to replace paper-based surveys.
Some analysts have suggested that the use of mobile phones could bring down the cost of surveys by up to 60% in some East African countries over a ten-year period.
Private companies, such as Gallup International, could work alongside the more traditional public-sector statistical offices to accelerate data collection.
The data revolution offers a breakthrough opportunity for service delivery, management, accountability, and validation, thanks to a dense ecosystem of technologies that collect information in multiple ways: remote sensing and satellite imagery, biometric data, GIS tracking, facilities-based data, household surveys, social media, crowd-sourcing, and other channels.
To support the SDGs, such data should be publicly available for all countries at high frequency – at least within one year for key targets, and in real time in sectors where service delivery is vital (health, education, and the like).
Private companies, including telecoms, social marketing companies, systems designers, survey firms, and other information providers, should all be integrated into the data “ecosystem.”
In preparing the new report, the SDSN teamed up with several partner agencies to prepare a “needs assessment” on how to launch the data revolution for the SDGs.
The report offers an action plan that builds on partnerships between national statistical systems and private information firms and other non-governmental data providers.
As the report emphasizes, low-income and lower-middle-income countries will need financial help to create these new data systems.
While the cost estimates are necessarily provisional, especially in this era of disruptive technological change, the new study suggests that proper data systems for the SDGs will require at least $1 billion per year to cover all of the 77 lower-income countries.
Of that sum, around half should be financed through official development assistance, which implies an increment of at least $200 million per year above current donor flows.
Now is the time for such an increased commitment of funding.
In July, the world will assemble in Addis Ababa for the International Finance for Development Conference, and just weeks after that, at UN Headquarters to adopt the SDGs in late September.
With quick action before these two summit meetings, the world will be ready to launch the SDGs with the data systems that they need to succeed.
Harnessing Disruption for Sustainability
GENEVA – After decades of reluctance on the part of world leaders, a rapid, smooth, and purposeful transition toward sustainable development seems unlikely.
Indeed, throughout human history, such major changes have more often been forced upon the world by circumstances, with leaders focusing on shorter-term concerns like political turmoil or economic stagnation until serious disruptions to their economies and societies arise.
But this need not be the case.
Policymakers can develop solutions that leverage immediate challenges to guide the shift toward a more sustainable, inclusive future.
This year, which has been dubbed “the year of sustainable development,” provides an ideal opportunity in this regard.
At high-level meetings in Sendai, Japan, in March and in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, in July, world leaders will pursue closer collaboration on disaster-risk reduction and on mobilizing finance for development, respectively.
In September, the United Nations will launch its Sustainable Development Goals, to serve as the framework for global development efforts until 2030.
Moreover, global climate negotiations will reach a critical point in December, when world leaders meet for the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Paris.
And the agendas of the forthcoming G-7 and G-20 summits will both feature measures to combat climate change.
Such multilateral frameworks catalyze progress.
Indeed, agreements like last year’s deal between China and the United States to reduce carbon-dioxide emissions – not to mention initiatives to mobilize business, such as We Mean Business – are unlikely to happen without them.
Nonetheless, as Mancur Olson famously observed, it is the individual interests of the parties that drive collective success.
For example, China’s recent embrace of sustainable development, which will serve the planet’s long-term interests, is driven by the domestic challenges posed by air, water, and land pollution.
Rather than agonize over growing disruptions, China’s government has decided to hasten the shift toward a dynamic green economy, even if it means stranding assets and allowing businesses that do not suit China’s shifting needs to fail – an approach that will deliver a long-term competitive advantage.
The rest of the world should recognize the benefits of allowing short-term disruptions to drive, not distract from, the sustainability agenda.
One area where such an opportunity is already apparent is financial reform.
Today’s historically low interest rates should encourage long-term investment, as they lower the current cost of capital.
But new financial regulatory frameworks – such as Basel III, which aims to reduce risk in the banking sector, and Solvency II, the European Union’s equivalent for insurance companies – are inadvertently discouraging such investment.
This undermines both short-term efforts to boost employment and the long-term objective of sustainable growth.
It does not have to be this way.
As the UN Environment Programme emphasized in a briefing at the World Economic Forum in Davos, saving the financial sector from itself can accelerate the transition to sustainable development.
For example, effective risk management and longer-term policy objectives would be better aligned if regulators reduced capital requirements for banks that extend loans for climate-resilient and environmentally friendly investments.
Similarly, central banks’ inflated balance sheets – the result of short-term crisis-response measures – could, through refinancing arrangements, be used to boost green investment.
Further quantitative easing, such as by the European Central Bank, could be directed toward greener asset-backed securities.
Even perverse signals can be mitigated and leveraged.
Instead of allowing low oil prices to encourage consumption, governments could take the opportunity to impose a small, politically acceptable energy or carbon-equivalent tax – an approach advocated by many economists and development specialists, including Jeffrey Sachs, Lawrence Summers, and Kemal Derviş.
Such a tax would not only sustain the price signals needed to steer societies onto a more sustainable energy path; it would also provide revenues that could be channeled toward employment creation and long-term green investments, thereby leveraging private capital.
Likewise, central banks’ macro-prudential activities, which evolved largely in response to the global financial crisis, could focus on longer-term risks to the financial sector, including the cumulative impact of climate change, environmental policies, and disruptive clean technologies.
Bank of England Governor Mark Carney has taken the lead in initiating a prudential review of the impact of climate change on the United Kingdom’s insurance sector.
Other institutions – including multilateral bodies like the Bank of International Settlements, the Financial Stability Board, and the G-20 – should follow suit.
What the world needs now are leaders who are willing to bridge the gap between daunting short-term demands and desirable long-term outcomes.
Instead of remaining preoccupied with the present, world leaders should view 2015 as an opportunity to ensure that today’s disruptive crises provide the foundation for tomorrow’s sustainable prosperity.
Menggapai Masa Depan Berkelanjutan
BEIJING – Untuk pertama kalinya dalam sejarah, tingginya harapan dan optimisme kini layak dipertimbangkan.
Ekonomi global – meskipun terdapat sejumlah persoalan – akhirnya mampu bergerak keluar dari krisis keuangan.
Terobosan teknologi menempatkan energi terbarukan dalam posisi untuk berkompetisi dengan bahan bakar fosil.
Komunitas internasional pun nampak yakin untuk menempa perjanjian-perjanjian kritis mengenai pembangunan berkelanjutan dan perjuangan melawan perubahan iklim.
Akan tetapi masih ada risiko bahwa kemajuan ini akan terbuang begitu saja, sebab pembuat kebijakan, pemimpin bisnis, dan investor berfokus pada kekhawatiran jangka panjang dan mengabaikan besarnya ancaman terhadap ekonomi global.
Jika kita ingin mempertahankan tingkat kemajuan yang ada sekarang, kita perlu memperbaiki kegagalan dalam sistem keuangan sampai ke akarnya dan memberlakukan standar, peraturan, dan praktik yang menjadikan sistem ini selaras dengan kebutuhan jangka panjang akan perekonomian yang lebih inklusif dan berkelanjutan.
Tahun ini kita memiliki potensi melakukan upaya tersebut.
Transisi menuju ekonomi hijau adalah hal yang pasti, bukan lagi harapan semata, seiring dengan meningkatnya dukungan publik dan kemajuan teknologi sehingga membuat investasi energi bersih semakin mudah dilaksanakan.
Di tahun 2014, investasi global dalam energi terbarukan meningkat 17%, bahkan dengan merosotnya harga minyak dunia, berdasarkan laporan terkini yang dirumuskan oleh United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP).
Trend ini dipicu oleh lonjakan tenaga surya di Tiongkok dan Jepang dan peningkatan investasi negara-negara Eropa untuk pembangkit tenaga angin di laut.
Perdagangan di bursa efek dari Shanghai hingga São Paolo menetapkan persyaratan pelaporan untuk memberitahu investor mengenai cara perusahaan memasukkan isu keberlanjutan ke dalam strategi mereka.
Obligasi hijau (green bonds) mulai diterapkan dengan nilai melebihi $40miliar diterbitkan di tahun 2014 dan jenis obligasi ini dapat menjadi lebih populer seiring dengan penetapan standar dan peraturan yang lebih jelas.
Bahkan bank sentral telah mengalihkan perhatiannya kepada isu lingkungan hidup.
People’s Bank of China telah bergabung dengan UNEP untuk mengidentifikasi langkah-langkah praktis guna menjamin pelaksanaan reformasi pasar keuangan yang “hijau”, dan Bank of England (BoE) telah memulai tinjauan mendalam dengan penuh kehati-hatian mengenai risiko-risiko sistemik sebagai akibat dari perubahan iklim yang berdampak pada sektor asuransi di Kerajaan Bersatu Britania Raya dan Irlandia Utara (UK).
Bulan September ini menandai peluncuran Sustainable Development Goals oleh PBB yang merupakan tujuan pembangunan yang pertama di dunia yang mencakup target-target yang dapat diukur dan bersifat universal mengenai pengentasan kemiskinan dan kelaparan, serta di saat yang sama melindungi lingkungan hidup dan sumber daya alam di bumi.
Nantinya di akhir tahun ini komunitas internasional diharapkan dapat menyepakati sejumlah komitmen yang mengikat mereka dalam upaya menurunkan emisi dan mendanai perjuangan melawan perubahan iklim.
Akan tetapi, walaupun semua pertanda ini mengarah pada jalur yang benar, kita masih jauh dari keberhasilan.
Kemajuan ini bisa pudar jika momentum ini tidak diwujudkan.
Tantangan utamanya disini adalah waktu, dan kerusakan yang tidak dapat diubah yang mungkin timbul jika kita terlambat mengatasinya.
Lebih dari 80% dari total 140 negara yang disurvei dalam laporan “Inclusive Wealth” yang diterbitkan oleh UNEP mencatat penurunan jumlah cadangan modal alam.
Kerugian ekonomi akibat degradasi lingkungan hidup diperkirakan mencapai $7 triliun per tahun, sebagian besarnya adalah kerusakan yang tidak dapat diubah.
Semakin lama ditunda, permasalahan yang ada akan memburuk.
Perlu ada upaya internasional yang signifikan untuk menyelaraskan kembali pasar keuangan dan pasar modal melalui cara yang mendukung pembangunan berkelanjutan.
Rancangan sistem keuangan kita yang sekarang tidak menjamin kondisi yang disebut Gubernur Bank of England, Mark Carney, sebagai “tragedy of horizons” – kegagalan pada pasar yang diakibatkan oleh ketidakmampuan investor, perusahaan, dan pemerintah dalam menyelesaikan permasalahan seperti perubahan iklim, sehingga menciptakan konsekuensi yang baru akan dirasakan jauh di masa depan – tidak akan terjadi.
Pembuat kebijakan dan pemimpin bisnis memiliki berbagai alasan mengapa mereka lebih fokus pada kekhawatiran yang bersifat lebih mendesak.
Memang benar bahwa tindakan kebijakan sangat diperlukan untuk mengurangi risiko terjadinya krisis keuangan lain yang memaksa bank dan pengelola aset memberikan pinjaman dan melakukan investasi jangka pendek, sehingga seringkali melewatkan peluang yang lebih menguntungkan, meskipun bersifat kurang likuid dan lebih berjangka panjang.
Tekanan jangka pendek selalu muncul namun dapat dihadapi dengan perangkat yang sesuai: perbaikan pricing pada risiko lingkungan hidup, penetapan credit rating yang ramah iklim, tanggung jawab pemberi pinjaman di bidang lingkungan hidup, dan upaya-upaya mitigasi risiko lingkungan hidup terhadap stabilitas keuangan.
Masa depan berkelanjutan akan berada dalam genggaman kita, namun kondisi ini hanya akan terwujud jika kita menerapkan kebijakan yang tepat.
Tidak Meninggalkan Jejak bagi Anak-anak Kita
STOCKHOLM – Generasi kita memiliki kesempatan unik.
Jika kita bersungguh-sungguh, kita dapat menjadi generasi pertama dalam sejarah yang tidak meninggalkan bekas apapun bagi anak-anak kita: tanpa emisi gas rumah kaca, tanpa kemiskinan, dan tanpa kerusakan pada keanekaragaman hayati.
Hal ini tentu menjadi sasaran yang ditetapkan pemimpin dunia ketika mereka bertemu di markas besar PBB di New York pada 25 September untuk mengadopsi Tujuan Pembangunan Berkelanjutan (Sustainable Development Goals/SDGs).
17 tujuan ini berkisar dari pengentasan kemiskinan dan peningkatan layanan kesehatan hingga perlindungan biosfer planet dan penyediaan energi untuk semua.
Rumusan tujuan ini dihasilkan dari pertemuan terbesar dalam sejarah PBB, konferensi “Rio+20” di tahun 2012, dilanjutkan dengan konsultasi terbesar yang pernah dilakukan PBB.
Berbeda dengan pendahulunya, Tujuan Pembangunan Milenium (Millenium Development Goals/MDGs), yang berfokus semata-mata hanya pada negara-negara berkembang, tujuan global yang baru ini bersifat universal dan berlaku sama bagi semua negara.
Pemberlakuan tujuan baru ini menunjukkan penerimaan secara luas atas fakta bahwa semua negara berbagi tanggung jawab yang sama untuk menjaga stabilitas jangka panjang siklus alami bumi, dimana kemampuan planet untuk mendukung kehidupan kita bergantung padanya.
Memang benar bahwa SDGs adalah kerangka pembangunan pertama yang mengakui perubahan mendasar dalam hal hubungan kita dengan planet.
Untuk pertama kalinya dalam sejarah selama 4,5 miliar tahun usia bumi, faktor utama yang menentukan stabilitas sistem bumi bukan lagi jarak planet dari matahari atau kekuatan atau frekuensi letusan gunung berapi, melainkan ekonomi, politik, dan teknologi.
Dalam 12.000 tahun terakhir, pada sebagian besar waktunya iklim bumi relatif stabil dan biosfer juga memiliki ketahanan dan kekuatan.
Ahli geologi menyebut periode ini Holocene.
Baru-baru ini, kita telah memasuki zaman yang sering disebut Anthropocene, era dimana perubahan iklim yang diakibatkan manusia semakin sulit diperkirakan.
Pergeseran mendasar ini mengharuskan adanya model ekonomi baru.
Kita tidak lagi bisa berasumsi – layaknya pemikiran ekonomi yang berlaku – bahwa ketersediaan sumber daya tidak terbatas.
Kita mungkin dulunya adalah masyarakat kecil di sebuah planet. Sekarang kita adalah masyarakat yang besar pada planet kecil.
Namun, jauh dari berpikiran utopis, SDGs dapat dicapai pada tahun 2030.
Beberapa negara, termasuk Denmark, Finlandia, Norwegia, dan Swedia kini dalam upaya mewujudkan sebagian besar tujuan tersebut dan banyak kemajuan tengah terjadi di banyak negara.
Dalam beberapa dekade terakhir, angka kemiskinan berhasil dikurangi setengahnya.
Walaupun sering menjadi berita utama, konflik kekerasan semakin berkurang. Penyakit sedang diberantas.
Populasi global akan distabilkan.
Lapisan ozon menunjukkan tanda-tanda pemulihan.
Dan revolusi digital mengacaukan keseluruhan industri yang bisa dianggap sebagai keuntungan bagi planet ini.
Pengentasan kemiskinan yang ekstrim berada dalam jangkauan kita.
Kini sekitar 800 juta orang hidup dengan kurang dari $1,25 per hari.
Menurut laporan Bank Dunia baru-baru ini, sekitar 30% dari penduduk ini tinggal di India, seperti raksasa yang sedang tidur dan menunggu industrialisasi, jika diberikan insentif yang tepat.
Kemiskinan menurun di negara-negara lain, termasuk Nigeria (dimana terdapat 10% dari penduduk termiskin), Tiongkok (8%), dan Bangladesh (6%).
Sumber utama keraguan menyangkut komitmen negara-negara kaya untuk membantu negara-negara berkembang mengurangi emisi gas rumah kaca adalah upaya pengentasan kemiskinan.
Tanpa bantuan yang tepat, negara-negara miskin berisiko menjadi terjebak dalam ketergantungan pada batubara dan minyak untuk setidaknya satu generasi mendatang, menempatkan seluruh planet dalam bahaya perubahan iklim yang di luar kendali.
Para pemimpin dunia harus menyadari bahwa biaya mengubah sistem energi global jauh lebih rendah dibandingkan mengatasi dampak pembakaran bahan bakar fosil yang tersisa di planet ini.
Penelitian yang diterbitkan bulan ini menyimpulkan bahwa menghabiskan seluruh hidrokarbon yang tersisa akan mengakibatkan mencairnya seluruh lapisan es Antartika, yang berpotensi menaikkan permukaan air laut sebanyak 58 meter.
Dan kenaikan permukaan air laut hanya satu potensi ancaman.
Kekeringan dan gagal panen akibat perubahan iklim, misalnya, bisa memicu konflik kekerasan.
Untungnya, ada banyak bukti bahwa negara-negara dan industri dapat berkembang tanpa berkontribusi terhadap perubahan iklim.
Pada tahun 2030 nanti, besar kemungkinan beberapa negara dapat melepaskan diri dari bahan bakar fosil, dimana negara seperti Swedia, Prancis, dan Jerman akan memimpin.
Negara-negara ini akan memiliki lebih sedikit polusi udara, peningkatan kesehatan dan kesejahteraan, dan pertumbuhan ekonomi.
Mereka juga akan menempatkan sedikit tekanan pada biosfer.
Berdasarkan beberapa perkiraan, kehidupan di Bumi tidak pernah sebegitu beragamnya.
Nilai keanekaragaman hayati adalah menjadikan ekosistem kita lebih tangguh, yang merupakan prasyarat terbentuknya masyarakat yang stabil; perusakan yang sewenang-wenang terhadap keanekaragaman hayati sama dengan menyulut api pada sekoci penolong.
Pengentasan kemiskinan dan penurunan tingkat emisi, termasuk pengelolaan hak guna lahan secara efektif dan pemberantasan deforestasi, akan berdampak positif untuk menghentikan tren dan memutarbalikkan kerusakan.
Perusahaan seperti Ikea dan Unilever memimpin dengan upaya-upaya tulus untuk bertanggung jawab atas iklim, sumber daya, dan ekosistem bumi.
Salah satu alasannya adalah bertambahnya kesadaran konsumen menjadikan degradasi ekosistem berdampak buruk bagi bisnis.
Pada saat yang sama, semua industri, dari teknologi informasi hingga pertanian, bergantung pada layanan yang disediakan oleh alam.
Mengelola hutan, sungai, padang rumput, dan terumbu karang secara berkelanjutan membuat mereka lebih tangguh dan meningkatkan kemampuan mereka untuk menyerap gas rumah kaca, yang baik untuk bisnis.
Kita adalah generasi pertama yang dapat membuat informed choice tentang arah pembangunan.
Apakah kita akan meninggalkan keturunan kita dengan anugerah akan terhapuskannya kemiskinan, nihil penggunaan bahan bakar fosil, dan nihil kerusakan pada keanekaragaman hayati, atau kita justru meninggalkan mereka harus membayar tagihan pajak dari Bumi yang bisa memusnahkan mereka.
Another Great Leap Forward for Development
MADRID – Next month, the world will achieve a milestone for global development efforts.
The United Nations General Assembly will adopt the Sustainable Development Goals, an ambitious set of global objectives expected to improve the lives of millions of people by 2030.
The fact that the SDGs are being established on the UN’s 70th anniversary could not be more appropriate.
Though the UN’s record over the last seven decades has not been perfect, with many instances of inadequate responses, its success in engaging the world in the pursuit of shared objectives like development has been impressive.
In 2000, the UN adopted a development agenda underpinned by the so-called Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and guided by the principle that no one should have to suffer the consequences of extreme poverty.
At that time, very few people believed that the goals could be attained by the 2015 target date.
But, although poverty has not been eliminated, there has been significant progress – and some major victories.
Since 1990 (the reference year for measuring improvement), the number of people living in extreme poverty (living on less than $1.25 a day) has fallen by 33%, from 1.9 billion to 836 million worldwide, with most of that progress coming after the MDGs entered into effect.
The number of people with access to safe drinking water has increased by 15%, to 1.9 billion.
Infant mortality has been cut by more than half, and maternal mortality by 45%.
Likewise, primary-school enrollment rates have risen from 83% to 91% since 2000.
The number of new HIV/AIDS infections has dropped by 40%.
And official development assistance from developed countries has risen by 66%.
These figures show that, with well-defined objectives and real action, it is possible to bring about big changes.
This idea was instrumental in designing the post-2015 development agenda.
The SDGs build on the MDGs’ success, while adding a new dimension: sustainability.
World leaders now recognize that efforts to meet development needs today must not jeopardize future generations’ prospects.
The sustainability dimension brings with it a universality that was lacking from the MDGs.
Developed countries are no longer just enablers of progress, earmarking a percentage of their GDP to support the efforts of developing countries to reduce poverty, improve health, and raise living standards.
Instead, they must be committed and active participants in the effort to achieve the agreed goals, in some cases even modifying their own domestic policies.
In this sense, the SDGs more clearly reflect the conviction, upheld by the UN, that all of us are global citizens.
This conviction lies behind the establishment of international humanitarian law and the supranational courts that address violations of it.
And it underpinned the adoption of the “responsibility to protect” principle, which demands that the international community defend a country’s people from mass-atrocity crimes when their own government fails to do so.
It comes down to personal dignity.
No matter who you are or where you were born, you have a basic right to be protected from brutal crimes like genocide or the undue suffering of extreme poverty.
Future generations, too, deserve personal dignity – including that afforded by a clean and healthy environment.
UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has emphasized personal dignity in the discussions leading to the adoption of the SDGs, even asking Pope Francis to address the General Assembly on the subject at its next meeting.
So what exactly is on the next development agenda?
The draft agenda, on which agreement was reached at the beginning of this month, contains 17 goals – including ending poverty in all its forms, achieving food security, promoting sustainable agriculture, providing quality education to all, ensuring access to energy and clean water, and adopting urgent measures to combat climate change – backed by 169 targets.
Fulfilling this ambitious agenda will require realistic and effective evaluation mechanisms that help reveal the best policies and keep countries’ efforts on track.
According to the draft agenda, the monitoring procedures will be directed by individual countries, so that each government can tailor them according to national priorities.
But it is up to the international community to ensure that all governments establish specific goals and deadlines for meeting them.
Without strong accountability mechanisms, the SDGs will amount to little more than an exercise in raising awareness, effectively subordinating the health, dignity, and prosperity of all humanity to short-term national interests.
The upcoming SDG summit, which will bring together the largest concentration of heads of state and government in the history of the UN, presents the ideal opportunity to establish such mechanisms.
The SDGs are extremely ambitious.
With a sustained commitment from all countries, developed and developing alike, the world can ensure that it celebrates another great leap forward in 2030.
Development’s Digital Divide
STOCKHOLM – On September 25, world leaders will gather in New York to adopt the new Sustainable Development Goals.
The SDGs, comprising 17 goals and 169 related targets, are the result of extensive political negotiations, and will set the benchmarks over the next 15 years for achieving the international community’s overarching objective: to “end poverty in all its forms everywhere.”
The SDGs are noble and certainly ambitious.
And yet, in a time of profound scientific and technological change, they remain remarkably conventional.
Information technology – this century’s defining social and economic development – receives only a brief mention (in one of the sub-targets).
Nowhere in the document is there even a hint of the revolutionary role that the nascent explosion in connectivity, information, and data could play in ending poverty.
There can be no doubting the impact that information technology will have on economic growth.
Governments, politicians, and international organizations must harness the potential of the Internet to serve global development and individual empowerment.
Issues concerning security and governance have dominated discussions of cyber policy over the past few years.
This is to some extent justifiable: The breadth of topics is staggering, ranging from international norms for state behavior in cyberspace to challenges like cybercrime and growing censorship.
But it is also clear that the countries that will gain the most from the ongoing information revolution are those that manage to keep their eyes on the real prize: using this explosion in technology to strengthen their economies and improve the lives of their citizens.
A 2009 study by the World Bank found that a 10% increase in fixed broadband penetration boosts a developing economy’s GDP by about 1.4%.
These findings likely vastly understate the impact of the technology; after all, much of the developing world is seeing a rapid rollout of mobile broadband, with much higher capacity than what was available at the time of the study.
The phenomenon is most evident in Asia and Africa – which together account for three-quarters of the global growth in smartphone use this year.
As smartphone subscriptions increase from 2.9 billion to 7.7 billion worldwide in the next five years, 80% of the new accounts are expected to be opened by users on these two continents.
The widespread adoption of information technology in the developing world opens up myriad possibilities; we are only at the beginning.
Data analysis has been used to fight Ebola in West Africa, and mobile phone networks have been used to bring modern banking to unserved populations throughout the developing world.
These new technologies empower people – most notably the rapidly growing youth population – and create new avenues for economic and social development.
Indeed, mobile connectivity may turn out to be the most important development tool ever for the billions of people in emerging Africa and Asia.
Of course, there will still be a digital divide.
But, increasingly, it will be generational rather than geographical.
Within a decade, the majority of young people in Africa will likely be as well connected as those in Europe or North America.
This will change the world profoundly.
The big question is whether governments are aware of the potential power of this development.
If the SDGs are any indication, it is likely that they are not.
The goals and targets that the world is about to embrace do not adequately reflect the significance of this epochal change.
The absence of awareness is also reflected in the preparations for a high-level UN meeting on international policy concerning the Internet and development that will take place in December.
The event, a review of the progress made since the 2005 World Summit on the Information Society, is the culmination of a three-year negotiation process.
Unfortunately, political wrangling over issues of Internet governance and cybersecurity have dominated the preparations for the meeting, and there has been little discussion of the revolutionary possibilities that an open, dynamic, and free Internet can provide.
Governments are being left behind as entrepreneurs and innovators race ahead.
But maximizing the potential of the new technology requires the stable and predictable operating environment, as well as the support for basic research, that only governments can provide.
It is time for world leaders to put the potential of the Internet at the top of the development agenda.
Tahun Pemulihan Laut
OXFORD – Keutamaan laut di dunia tidak dapat dikesampingkan.
Laut menyediakan 50% oksigen yang kita hirup, pangan bagi miliaran orang, dan penghidupan bagi jutaan penduduk lainnya.
Laut berfungsi sebagai ‘pompa biologis’ yang penting dalam menjaga stabilitas atmosfer dan distribusi panas. Selain itu laut memegang peranan vital dalam mitigasi dampak perubahan iklim.
Singkatnya, laut ibarat sekutu terdekat dan kita harus mengerahkan segala daya upaya untuk melindunginya.
Upaya ini semakin diperlukan, mengingat berbagai ancaman yang tidak terduga dan belum pernah terjadi sebelumnya yang tengah kita hadapi.
Meskipun laut merupakan faktor penting dalam memperlambat perubahan iklim, menyerap lebih dari 30% emisi gas rumah kaca dan 90% kelebihan panas yang dihasilkan sejak Revolusi Industri, kerugian yang dialami sangat besar.
Pengasaman laut dan pemanasan terjadi pada laju yang mengkhawatirkan dan sudah berdampak buruk pada ekosistem laut yang paling berharga – dampak negatif yang akan meluas.
Kini, banyak negara mengalami fenomena yang kemungkinan adalah peristiwa El Niño terkuat dalam sejarah.
Cuaca buruk akibat fenomena ini – berasal dari Pasifik tapi mempengaruhi seluruh perairan dunia – diperkirakan mempengaruhi lebih dari 60 juta penduduk tahun ini dan memperparah penderitaan yang terjadi tahun lalu.
Keadaan ini menjadi pengingat serius atas kerentanan kita terhadap guncangan, baik itu alami dan dipicu manusia (human-induced) pada sistem bumi.
Sekalipun demikian, kita masih saja merusak laut dengan perusakan tanpa henti terhadap habitat dan keanekaragaman hayati, termasuk penangkapan ikan berlebihan (overfishing) dan pencemaran.
Bahkan lebih parahnya, laporan terkini menunjukkan terdapat satu kilogram plastik dalam setiap tiga kilogram ikan di laut pada akhir tahun 2025.
Tindakan perusakan ini dipermudah akibat kegagalan tata kelola global yang kronis; contohnya, seperlima hasil tangkapan ikan di laut diperoleh dari penangkapan ikan secara liar.
Aksi mendesak harus diterapkan tidak hanya untuk mengatasi perubahan iklim secara luas dengan menurunkan emisi gas rumah kaca, tapi juga meningkatkan ketahanan laut.
Untungnya, di tahun 2015 – tahun yang menandakan perubahan komitmen global – para pemimpin dunia menetapkan konservasi dan restorasi laut sebagai komponen utama dalam agenda pembangunan PBB, disokong oleh 17 tujuan yang dikenal sebagai Tujuan Pembangunan Berkelanjutan (Sustainable Development Goals atau SDG).
Secara khusus, Tujuan 14 menuntut pemimpin dunia untuk mengakhiri penangkapan ikan yang berlebihan, menghapus praktik penangkapan ikan yang tidak sah, menetapkan lebih banyak kawasan konservasi laut, mengurangi sampah plastik dan sumber pencemaran laut, dan meningkatkan ketahanan laut terhadap pengasaman.
The Global Ocean Commission merayakan dorongan kuat yang menyerukan tindakan urgen demi perlindungan laut, yang erat mencerminkan kumpulan proposal termuat dalam laporan the Global Ocean Commission berjudul  From Decline to Recovery: A Rescue Package for the Global Ocean.
Jadi dunia sekarang memiliki roadmap pemulihan laut yang telah disepakati.
Namun seberapa jauh dan cepat kita mencapainya belum dapat dipastikan.
Tugas ke depan – untuk menerjemahkan komitmen ambisius dan terpuji ini menjadi tindakan kolaboratif yang efektif di tingkat lokal, nasional, dan internasional – sangat besar.
Tantangan ini diperburuk dengan tata kelola laut global yang lemah dan masih terpisah.
Berbeda dengan tujuan-tujuan lainnya dalam SDG – misalnya terkait kesehatan, pendidikan, atau penghapusan kelaparan – tidak ada satu pun badan internasional yang bertanggung jawab untuk memajukan penerapan SDG tentang laut.
Akibatnya, tidak ada kejelasan tentang siapa pihak yang bertanggung jawab untuk memantau dan mengukur kemajuan dan memastikan akuntabilitas.
Demi memastikan bahwa Tujuan 14 tidak gagal, pemerintah Fiji dan Swedia mengusulkan penyelenggaraan konferensi tingkat tinggi PBB tentang laut dan samudra di Fiji, dengan dukungan Swedia, pada bulan Juni 2017.
Usulan ini lalu didukung 95 negara dan disetujui dengan suara bulat dalam resolusi Majelis Umum PBB.
Bertujuan menarik perhatian kepada kemajuan yang dicapai dalam pemenuhan sasaran-sasaran SDG14 dan menyoroti bidang-bidang yang hasilnya lambat, konferensi ini akan menciptakan “momen akuntabilitas” yang sangat diperlukan.
Pada waktu yang sama, dengan menghadirkan pemangku kepentingan terkait, konferensi ini dapat mempercepat kerja sama lebih erat antar pemerintah, masyarakat sipil, dan sektor swasta.
Ini merupakan langkah yang menjanjikan, mencerminkan momentum besar bahwa upaya-upaya perlindungan laut telah menguat selama beberapa tahun terakhir.
Ketika tugas the Global Ocean Commission berakhir, mitra dan pendukungnya akan bekerja keras memelihara momentum ini, memastikan agar penguatan daya tahan laut tetap menjadi prioritas global sampai tujuan ini terwujud.
Kunci keberhasilan, menurut laporan akhir the Global Ocean Commission, adalah pembentukan mekanisme independen dan transparan untuk mengawasi, mengukur, dan melaporan tindakan-tindakan esensial guna mencapai sasaran-sasaran SDG 14, serta pelaksanaan konferensi PBB lainnya dimulai sekarang hingga tahun 2030.
Generasi sekarang dan masa depan sama-sama membutuhkan – dan layak mendapatkan – laut yang kuat.
Bertambahnya kesadaran – dan komitmen kuat – untuk mengatasi tantangan-tantangan yang ada sungguh menggembirakan.
Namun itu baru permulaan.
Kita berharap agar tahun 2016 menjadi tahun ketika dunia memasuki era baru pemulihan laut.  
Alasan Pentingnya Tujuan Pembangunan Berkelanjutan
ROMA – Menindaklanjuti keberhasilan yang dicapai oleh Millennium Development Goals (Tujuan Pembangunan Milenium) (MDGs), yang mempedomani upaya pembangunan global selama periode 2000-2015, pemerintah negara-negara di dunia sedang merundingkan seperangkat Sustainable Development Goals (Tujuan Pembangunan Berkelanjutan) (SDGs) untuk periode 2016-2030.
MDGs akan meneruskan upaya pengentasan kemiskinan, serta menambahkan tantangan guna memastikan pemerataan pembangunan dan keberlanjutan lingkungan hidup, khususnya sasaran utama untuk meminimalisasi bahaya perubahan iklim yang disebabkan manusia.
Tetapi apakah seperangkat tujuan yang baru akan bermanfaat untuk mendorong pergeseran dari jalur business-as-usual yang berbahaya menuju pembangunan berkelanjutan yang nyata di dunia ini?
Apakah tujuan-tujuan PBB dapat menciptakan perbedaan?
Fakta-fakta yang berasal dari MDGs menunjukkan kekuatan besar dan memberikan semangat.
Pada bulan September 2000, Majelis Umum PBB mengadopsi “Millennium Declaration (Deklarasi Milenium),” yang mencakup MDGs.
Kedelapan tujuan tersebut menjadi inti upaya pembangunan bagi negara-negara miskin di dunia.
Apakah tujuan-tujuan tersebut berhasil membuat perbedaan?
Nampaknya jawabannya adalah ya.
Terdapat sejumlah contoh kemajuan dalam pengentasan kemiskinan, pengendalian penyakit dan peningkatan akses kepada sekolah dan infrastruktur di negara-negara termiskin di dunia, khususnya di Afrika, yang merupakan hasil dari MDGs.
Tujuan global membantu membangkitkan upaya global.
Bagaimana cara mereka mampu berhasil?
Mengapa tujuan itu penting?
Belum pernah ada seorang pun yang mampu menyampaikan argumentasi tentang keberhasilan berdasarkan tujuan sebaik rumusan John F. Kennedy 50 tahun yang lalu.
Dalam salah satu pidato terbaik di sejarah kepresidenan modern Amerika Serikat, disampaikan pada bulan Juni 1963, Kennedy berkata: “Saat kita bisa mendefinisikan tujuan dengan lebih jelas, menjadikannya lebih mudah diatur dan diterapkan, kita akan membuatnya terlihat nyata bagi semua orang sehingga mereka mampu merajut harapan dan melangkah menuju pencapaian tanpa halangan apapun.”
Terdapat sejumlah alasan penting untuk menetapkan tujuan.
Pertama, tujuan penting untuk mobilisasi sosial.
Dunia ini perlu diarahkan menuju satu arah untuk memberantas kemiskinan atau membantu pencapaian pembangunan berkelanjutan, namun akan sangat sulit dilakukan dalam situasi dunia yang rumit, berbeda, terpisah, ramai, padat, mudah dialihkan, dan seringkali membuat kewalahan agar dapat menunjang upaya konsisten untuk mencapai tujuan bersama.
Mengadopsi tujuan global akan membantu individu, lembaga, dan pemerintah di seluruh dunia untuk menyepakati arah tersebut – pada intinya, berfokus pada hal-hal yang betul-betul bermanfaat bagi masa depan kita.
Fungsi kedua dengan adanya tujuan ialah menciptakan tekanan sejawat.
Dengan mengadopsi MDGs, setiap langkah yang diambil pemimpin politik untuk mengentaskan kemiskinan akan senantiasa dipertanyakan, baik di depan umum maupun secara tertutup.
Alasan ketiga yang menunjukkan pentingnya memiliki tujuan ialah memacu komunitas epistemik – jaringan keahlian, pengetahuan, dan praktik – menuju tindakan untuk mengatasi kesulitan pembangunan berkelanjutan.
Ketika tujuan-tujuan yang kokoh sudah ditetapkan, maka sekelompok pengetahuan dan praktik akan bangkit bersama untuk merekomendasikan jalur yang praktis untuk mencapai hasil.
Terakhir, tujuan dapat memobilisasi jaringan pemangku kepentingan.
Pemimpin masyarakat, politisi, kementerian, komunitas ilmiah, lembaga swadaya masyarakat yang terkemuka, kelompok agama, lembaga internasional, lembaga donor, dan yayasan semuanya akan terdorong untuk bergabung ke dalam tujuan bersama.
Proses multi-stakeholder ini sangat penting untuk mengatasi tantanga-tantangan kompleks dalam pembangunan berkelanjutan dan upaya melawan kemiskinan, kelaparan, dan penyakit.
Kennedy sendiri menunjukkan kepemimpinan melalui penetapan tujuan sekitar setengah abad yang lalu dalam percariannya demi mewujudkan perdamaian dengan Uni Soviet pada puncak Perang Dingin.
Dalam serangkaian pidato yang dimulai dengan pidato terkenal beliau ketika wisuda di American University, Washington DC, Kennedy memulai kampanye perdamaian menggunakan gabungan antara visi dan tindakan pragmatis, menekankan pada perjanjian yang mengakhiri uji coba nuklir.
Tujuh minggu setelah pidato perdamaian tersebut, Amerika Serikat dan Uni Soviet menandatangani Traktat Pelarangan Uji Coba Terbatas (Limited Test Ban Treaty), perjanjian yang menjadi tonggak sejarah yang menahan laju arms race selama Perang Dingin, suatu kondisi yang beberapa bulan sebelumnya bahkan tidak terbayangkan bisa terjadi.
Meskipun Traktat Pelarangan Uji Coba Terbatas tidak mengakhiri Perang Dingin, namun traktat tersebut memberikan bukti bahwa perundingan dan perjanjian dapat diwujudkan dan menetapkan landasan bagi kesepakatan di masa depan.
Sebetulnya pencapaian hasil berskala besar tidak terhindarkan lagi apabila kita mampu menetapkan satu atau sejumlah tujuan.
Penetapan tujuan hanya langkah awal untuk menerapkan rencana aksi.
Rumusan kebijakan yang baik, pendanaan yang memadai, dan lembaga-lembaga baru yang mengawasi pelaksanaan tindakan harus mengikuti tujuan yang sudah ditetapkan.
Kemudian hasil-hasil yang timbul harus diukur dan strategi yang ada harus dipikirkan ulang dan diterapkan ke dalam siklus rekomendasi kebijakan yang berkesinambungan dimana semuanya berada di bawah tekanan dan motivasi berdasarkan tujuan dan jangka waktu yang jelas.
Seiring dengan kemajuan luar biasa yang dicapai dunia dengan MDGs, kita bisa menemukan cara untuk mewujudkan SDGs.
Meskipun terdapat sinisme, kebingungan, dan politik menghalangi-halangi yang muncul di tengah upaya memberantas kemiskinan, ketidaksetaraan, dan degradasi lingkungan hidup, masih dimungkinkan timbulnya terobosan baru, Negara-negara berkekuatan besar di dunia mungkin terlihat tidak responsif, namun mereka dapat berubah.
Gagasan memiliki pengaruh.
Gagasan dapat mempengaruhi kebijakan publik jauh lebih besar dan lebih cepat dibandingkan dengan yang diperkirakan para pencela.
Dalam pidato terakhirnya di PBB pada bulan September 1963, Kennedy memaparkan tentang penciptaan perdamaian kontemporer dengan mengutip Archimedes; “konon ketika menjelaskan prinsip kerja tuas (pengungkit), Archimedes berkata kepada rekan-rekannya: ‘Berikan saya satu tempat untuk berpijak dan saya akan mengangkat bumi.’”
Lima puluh tahun kemudian, tiba waktu bagi generasi kita untuk mengarahkan dunia menuju pembangunan berkelanjutan.
Globalizing Sustainable Development
WASHINGTON, DC – The question of how the world can end extreme poverty and improve human wellbeing will take on new urgency in 2015, as the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) expire and a new set of goals – the proposed Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) – are finalized.
United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon’s “Synthesis Report,” outlining the main elements of the post-2015 agenda, provides strong guidance regarding what sustainable development should look like and what world leaders must do over the next 15 years to achieve it.
After two years of crafting the “what” of sustainable development, the year ahead must focus on how to get it done.
The central ambition is bold: the eradication of extreme poverty by 2030.
To make that happen, the SDGs will need to shift away from the twentieth-century model of development, in which rich countries gave money to poor countries, mostly to feed the hungry and improve health and education.
The MDGs were remarkably successful in several of these areas.
But the picture has changed significantly since then.
A new set of emerging economies – including China, India, Brazil, and South Africa – is racing to modernize.
The private sector is assuming a greater role in economic development.
And environmental degradation is threatening the gains of recent decades.
The SDGs will have to transcend the idea of a planet divided starkly between those who give aid and those who receive it.
The new goals must account for a world undergoing rapid globalization, in which all countries have assets as well as needs.
Today’s challenges go beyond health, food, and education.
The SDGs will have to integrate these concerns with the demands of the growing global middle class, the effects of shifting political and economic power, and the challenges of environmental sustainability, including climate change.
Three ingredients will be essential to achieving the goals: financing mechanisms, trade, and partnerships.
Forty years after rich countries promised to dedicate 0.7% of GDP to aid, their commitments remain at less than half that level.
Though most emerging economies no longer rely on aid, it remains crucially important for low-income countries.
That said, even if aid targets were met, the shift to sustainable development will cost much more than what aid alone can cover.
We need to look for new sources of funds, ensure that government spending is aligned with the sustainable-development agenda, and target those areas where the money can do the most good.
In much of the developing world, investing in sustainable development is complicated by the fact that tax revenues are too low to pay for what is needed.
This is not always a matter of raising tax rates; it is also often a matter of collecting what people and companies owe.
Closing loopholes and cracking down on evasion are two ways to ensure that taxes are collected.
The OECD estimates that a dollar of aid spent on improving tax collection yields an average of $350 in revenue.
A shared commitment that builds on initiatives by the G-8 would make tax evasion that relies on tax havens or money laundering harder to hide.
Governments cannot deliver a sustainable future alone.
The private sector also has an important role to play in energy, agriculture, and urban development, including transport and water systems that can drive innovation and economic opportunity.
While levels of private finance dwarf international public finance, directing these private funds to programs that reach the poorest and protect the environment requires the right policy incentives, such as a price on carbon, regulatory certainty, and the wise use of public money.
Trade boosts domestic production and generates revenue that can help pay for development.
There have been important gains in market access in the past 15 years: 80% of developing countries’ exports to developed countries are now tariff-free, while average tariffs are down overall.
But non-tariff barriers can cost exporting countries more than tariffs do.
What is needed is an international partnership that helps low-income countries integrate into the globalized marketplace while improving environmental and labor standards.
The SDGs can create political momentum for these efforts, which could then be framed by the World Trade Organization in December 2015.
Making development sustainable will also require accelerated innovation and diffusion of technology between now and 2030.
A global partnership could spur investment in research and development and ease the flow of information among scientists, business people, and policymakers.
Such new and creative partnerships can make progress on complex problems that governments, civil society, or the private sector cannot or will not solve alone.
For example, the GAVI Alliance (formerly the Global Alliance on Vaccines and Immunization), a partnership comprising international organizations, philanthropies, governments, companies, and research organizations, has immunized 440 million children since 2000 and helped avert more than six million deaths.
We must improve and expand these types of partnerships to other challenges, such as infrastructure, agriculture, and energy.
Between now and September 2015, when heads of state will gather for the UN General Assembly, we have a historic chance to set the world on a more sustainable path that will eradicate poverty and enhance prosperity for all.
Ambitious goals provide a firm foundation for a brighter future.
Over the coming months, however, leaders must work together to set the world on the right course to realize this vision.
Energi Berkelanjutan Mulai Sekarang
WASHINGTON, DC – Dunia ini akhirnya mampu mendekati impian mencapai masa depan energi yang lebih berkelanjutan dan aman.
Energi terbarukan dari tenaga angin dan surya mampu bersaing dengan pembangkit listrik tenaga yang berasal dari bahan bakar fosil serta harga minyak merosot tajam yang belum pernah dialami pada tahun-tahun sebelumnya.
Perkembangan ini menempatkan kita pada jalur transformasi energi global – selama kita mampu menetapkan langkah-langkah berikutnya dengan tepat.
Sejumlah negara sudah memanfaatkan momen ini.
Dengan penurunan harga minyak yang dimulai pada pertengahan tahun 2014, prioritas pertama menjadi jelas: melakukan reformasi subsidi bahan bakar minyak sebelum harga kembali naik.
Subsidi ini melemahkan anggaran pemerintah, menganjurkan penggunaan energi yang berlebihan, dan meningkatkan polusi dan emisi karbon dioksida.
India telah mencabut pengendalian harga solar.
Indonesia telah beralih dari subsidi minyak.
Negara lain pun menerapkan tindakan yang serupa.
Dana yang disimpan dari pencabutan subsidi dapat digunakan untuk menciptakan safety nets (jaring pengaman) yang melindungi penduduk miskin ketika terjadi kenaikan harga energi.
Tetapi penghapusan subsidi bahan bahan minyak secara bertahap meskipun sangat penting, hanya merupakan langkah awal dalam arah yang tepat.
Dengan memanfaatkan teknologi baru yang saat ini tersedia dengan harga yang terjangkau, seluruh negara akhirnya dapat bergerak menuju keamanan energi jangka panjang dan menjauh dari ketidakstabilan pasar minyak yang tidak dapat dipisahkan.
Bagi negara-negara berpendapatan ekonomi rendah, hal ini berarti mengurangi penggunaan minyak impor untuk menghasilkan listrik.
Kenya, sebagai contoh, bergantung pada heavy fuel oil dan solar atas 21% produksi listrik di negaranya; gambaran yang serupa di Senegal mencapai angka yang luar biasa sebesar 85%; dan sejumlah negara kepulauan menggunakan solar yang diimpor untuk seluruh kebutuhan listriknya.
Bagi sejumlah negara, ini menjadi satu-satu pilihan yang layak, namun dalam jangka panjang ketergantungan ini dapat menciptakan biaya energi yang lebih tinggi dan kerentanan terhadap ketidakstabilan harga dan goncangan pada pasokan.
Melalui kebijakan yang tepat dan dukungan internasional, negara-negara ini dapat berinvestasi pada infrastruktur yang dibutuhkan untuk mewujudkan pilihan energi yang lebih beragam.
Bagi banyak negara, langkah berikutnya adalah mempersiapkan jaringan (kabel) listrik untuk menyatukan beragam energi terbarukan pada tingkat tinggi seperti tenaga surya dan angin.
Berkat penurunan harga panel surya dan turbin angin, kedua sumber tenaga ini berkembang dengan laju lebih cepat jauh di luar perkiraan.
Berdasarkan laporan Bank Dunia yang baru, per tahun 2014, terdapat 144 negara yang sudah menetapkan rencana nasional untuk meningkatkan energi terbarukan dan hampir 100 negara telah menetapkan target dan insentif yang spesifik.
Dalam tujuh tahun saja, dari tahun 2006 hingga 2014, kapasitas tenaga angin di dunia yang sudah terpasang meningkat empat kali lipat, sementara itu penggunaan sistem fotovoltaik bertambah hampir 20 kali lipat.
Semua gambaran ini menunjukkan bahwa kecepatan penggunaan meningkat.
Kekhawatiran terdahulu tentang penyatuan tenaga angin dan surya ke dalam sistem ketenagalistrikan tradisional mulai terhapuskan.
Di Meksiko, proyek-proyek energi terbarukan yang ambisius dan umumnya terdapat di pelosok – seperti tenaga air, surya dan angin – akan terhubung dengan jaringan.
Tiongkok, yang memiliki kapasitas instalasi energi terbarukan yang terbesar di dunia, sedang mempelajari kebutuhan dan biaya peningkatan jaringan untuk mewujudkan penyebaran tenaga surya pada tingkatan lebih tinggi.
Sebagaimana dirumuskan dalam laporan Bank Dunia, melalui investasi dan kebijakan yang tepat, banyak negara kini mampu memenuhi sebagian besar kebutuhan listriknya dari beragam energi terbarukan tanpa mengurangi keandalan jaringan atau keterjangkauan listrik.
Investasi ini meliputi penyimpanan energi, perbaikan sistem perkiraan dan smart grids – yang seluruhnya memperoleh manfaat dari terobosan-terobosan teknologi dan penurunan harga.
Barangkali yang terpenting ialah pasar energi harus terbuka untuk pemain-pemain baru.
Bagi wilayah terpencil yang lebih miskin, berarti menciptakan lingkungan yang produktif bagi pengusaha dan produsen tenaga skala kecil untuk mengembangkan mini-grids – umumnya berasal dari tenaga surya, air pada skala kecil, atau gabungan surya-diesel – yang mampu menghasilkan listrik bagi masyarakat, dimana apabila opsi ini tidak tersedia sama sekali maka mereka harus menunggu tahunan untuk memperoleh koneksi jaringan.
Di Tanzania, produsen tenaga skala kecil sekarang ini mampu menjual listrik kepada konsumen tanpa harus melalui proses perizinan yang terlalu panjang.
Di India, menara seluler di pelosok, yang seharusnya bersumber dari generator diesel, bertindak layaknya sebagai “anchor customer” bagi mini-grids baru.
Pembangkit listrik tenaga nasional harus cekatan – bersedia bekerja dengan produsen tenaga yang mandiri dan individual – dan menjadikan smart grids mampu mengelola pasokan dan permintaan lebih baik.
Hal ini merupakan tantangan bahkan bagi negara-negara berpendapatan tinggi seperti Jerman dan Amerika Serikat, dimana beberapa pembangkit listrik mengalami usahanya merosot seiring dengan konsumen menjual kembali tenaga listrik kepada jaringan.
Dalam hal ini, negara-negara berkembang, dengan investasi lebih sedikit pada business model tradisional dan menghadapi kebutuhan mendesak untuk pasokan tenaga listrik, mungkin akan dapat melampaui negara-negara maju, sama halnya dengan kemajuan yang mereka capai pada telepon genggam.
Istilah “energi berkelanjutan” (sustainable energy) dan “energi terbarukan” (renewable energy) seringkali dipersamakan, namun barangkali pengertiannya perlu diperluas.
Energi berkelanjutan yang sebenarnya tidak hanya bersih, sedikit dampaknya pada polusi dan emisi karbon dioksida.
Energi ini harus terjangkau bagi pemerintah dan penduduk; dapat dipercaya, berasal dari sumber-sumber yang dapat diandalkan untuk beberapa dekade mendatang; dan berkontribusi pada kemakmuran bersama, memberikan layanan dan manfaat bagi seluruh masyarakat.
Berkat penurunan harga minyak, inovasi dan skala ekonomis dalam sektor energi terbarukan, kini visi tersebut dapat menjadi kenyataan.
The Future Global Economy
WASHINGTON, DC – As the world enters yet another year in the shadow of continued financial and economic crisis, a broader view of the contours of the future global economy is required.
The longer-term trends are clear.
Dynamic emerging markets from Asia to Latin America are rising in prominence.
The United States and Japan remain important drivers of the global economy but face major debt and deficit challenges.
Europe is going through a difficult but historic process of re-engineering and integration.
The Middle East is transforming before our eyes.
Sub-Saharan Africa is breaking through to sustained development – creating a new frontier of growth after decades of stagnation.
These changes are shaping our future in a positive way.
Yet there are still considerable roadblocks to overcome.
The global economic recovery remains too weak.
With more than 200 million unemployed around the world, prospects for job creation are still too dim.
And the gap between rich and poor, exacerbated by the crisis, is still too wide.
There is a tough road ahead if we are to turn optimism into reality.
I see three key milestones.
First, and most obviously, we need to put the crisis behind us, once and for all.
And we know how to do that: accommodative monetary policy; fiscal adjustment in all advanced economies that includes concrete and realistic plans to reduce debt over the medium term, but does not undercut short-term growth; completing the banking-sector cleanup; and reforms to boost productivity and growth potential.
All of this should be complemented by a rebalancing of global demand toward dynamic markets, including emerging economies.
Perhaps the greatest obstacle will be the huge legacy of public debt, which now averages about 110% of GDP in the advanced economies – the highest level since World War&#160;II.
This leaves governments highly exposed to subtle shifts in confidence. It also ties their hands, especially as they seek to build the physical and institutional infrastructure of the twenty-first century while respecting social promises.
The needs of aging populations will add to these pressures.
History offers two clear lessons: reducing public debt is incredibly difficult without growth, and increasing growth is incredibly difficult with a huge burden of public debt.
So we face a twofold imperative – securing growth while reducing debt.
The key now is not only to move from deliberation to action on the policies that we know are needed, but to move together and on all fronts.
The second milestone is a better global financial system.
We need to move beyond the system that gave us the crisis – a financial sector in which some, as the ancient Greeks might say, toyed with hubris and unleashed nemesis.
Of course, there has been important progress, especially on the Basel III agenda to create more resilient capital and liquidity buffers.
But momentum is flagging, both on implementing the agreed reforms and on progress in areas like derivatives and shadow banking.
As a result, the system as a whole is not yet much safer than it was in September 2008, when Lehman Brothers collapsed.
It is still too complex; activities are still too concentrated in large institutions; and the specter of “too big to fail” remains.
Continuing excesses and repeated scandals show that the culture of finance has not really changed.
Many in the financial-services industry are concerned about the costs of new regulations.
A recent IMF study shows that better regulation would indeed nudge banks’ lending rates up, but by relatively little.
We also found that increasing capital buffers to appropriate levels helps, rather than hurts, economic growth.
Reforming financial-sector taxation would also help to reduce excessive risk-taking and leverage.
The bottom line is that the costs of reform are affordable. The costs of complacency are not.
The third milestone relates to the quality and inclusiveness of growth.
While growth is essential for the future global economy, it must be a different kind of growth – inclusive and not simply the fallout of unfettered globalization.
The policy implications of such a reorientation are profound.
It requires a fiscal policy that focuses not only on efficiency, but also on equity – particularly on fairness in sharing the burden of adjustment, and on protecting the weak and vulnerable.
It means expanding access to credit and financial services everywhere.
And it means more transparency and better governance.
Achieving these milestones presupposes greater global cooperation.
A world that is bound closely together must be a world that works closely together if it is to prosper together.
There is simply no other choice.
We are multiple players, but we are engaged in a single game – a game that must be cooperative, not simply competitive.
In such a world, multilateral institutions like the International Monetary Fund play a vital role in boosting economic cooperation.
The year 2013 offers the chance to put the economic crisis behind us and to shape the world for the better.
Policymakers must seize this chance.
The IMF will support them in building a fairer and more prosperous future.
Sustainable Humanity
ADDIS ABABA – Sustainable development means achieving economic growth that is widely shared and that protects the earth’s vital resources.
Our current global economy, however, is not sustainable, with more than one billion people left behind by economic progress and the earth’s environment suffering terrible damage from human activity.
Sustainable development requires mobilizing new technologies that are guided by shared social values.
United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has rightly declared sustainable development to be at the top of the global agenda.
We have entered a dangerous period in which a huge and growing population, combined with rapid economic growth, now threatens to have a catastrophic impact on the earth’s climate, biodiversity, and fresh-water supplies.
Scientists call this new period the Anthropocene – in which human beings have become the main causes of the earth’s physical and biological changes.&nbsp;
The Secretary-General’s Global Sustainability Panel has issued a new report that outlines a framework for sustainable development.
The GSP rightly notes that sustainable development has three pillars: ending extreme poverty; ensuring that prosperity is shared by all, including women, youth, and minorities; and protecting the natural environment.
These can be termed the economic, social, and environmental pillars of sustainable development, or, more simply, the “triple bottom line” of sustainable development.
The GSP has called for world leaders to adopt a new set of Sustainable Development Goals, or SDGs, that will help to shape global policies and actions after the 2015 target date for achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).
Whereas the MDGs focus on reducing extreme poverty, the SDGs will focus on all three pillars of sustainable development: ending extreme poverty, sharing the benefits of economic development for all of society, and protecting the Earth.
It is, of course, one thing to set SDGs and quite another to achieve them.
The problem can be seen by looking at one key challenge: climate change.
Today, there are seven billion people on the planet, and each one, on average, is responsible for the release each year of a bit more than four tons of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere.
This CO2 is emitted when we burn coal, oil, and gas to produce electricity, drive our cars, or heat our homes.
All told, humans emit roughly 30 billion tons of CO2 per year into the atmosphere, enough to change the climate sharply within a few decades.
By 2050, there will most likely be more than nine billion people.
If these people are richer than people today (and therefore using more energy per person), total emissions worldwide could double or even triple.
This is the great dilemma: we need to emit less CO2, but we are on a global path to emit much more.
We should care about that scenario, because remaining on a path of rising global emissions is almost certain to cause havoc and suffering for billions of people as they are hit by a torrent of droughts, heat waves, hurricanes, and more.
We have already experienced the onset of this misery in recent years, with a spate of devastating famines, floods, and other climate-related disasters.
So, how can the world’s people – especially its poor people – benefit from more electricity and more access to modern transportation, but in a way that saves the planet rather than destroys it?
The truth is that we can’t – unless we improve dramatically the technologies that we use.
We need to use energy far more wisely while shifting from fossil fuels to low-carbon energy sources.
Such decisive improvements are certainly possible and economically realistic.
Consider the energy inefficiency of an automobile, for example.
We currently move around 1,000 to 2,000 kilograms of machinery to transport only one or just a few people, each weighing perhaps 75 kilograms (165 lbs.).
And we do so using an internal combustion engine that utilizes only a small part of the energy released by burning the gasoline.
Most of the energy is lost as waste heat.
We could therefore achieve huge reductions in CO2 emissions by converting to small, lightweight, battery-powered vehicles running on highly efficient electric motors and charged by a low-carbon energy source such as solar power.
Even better, by shifting to electric vehicles, we would be able to use cutting-edge information technology to make them smart – even smart enough to drive themselves using advanced data-processing and positioning systems.
The benefits of information and communications technologies can be found in every area of human activity: better farming using GPS and micro-dosing of fertilizers; precision manufacturing; buildings that know how to economize on energy use; and, of course, the transformative, distance-erasing power of the Internet.
Mobile broadband is already connecting even the most distant villages in rural Africa and India, thereby cutting down significantly on the need for travel.
Banking is now done by phone, and so, too, is a growing range of medical diagnostics.
Electronic books are beamed directly to handheld devices, without the need for bookshops, travel, and the pulp and paper of physical books.
Education is increasingly online as well, and will soon enable students everywhere to receive first-rate instruction at almost a zero “marginal” cost for enrolling another student.
Yet getting from here to sustainable development will not just be a matter of technology.
It will also be a matter of market incentives, government regulations, and public support for research and development.
But, even more fundamental than policies and governance will be the challenge of values.
We must understand our shared fate, and embrace sustainable development as a common commitment to decency for all human beings, today and in the future.
Sustaining Women
NEW YORK – The United Nations “Rio+20” Earth Summit this month will be a staging ground to chart the course for inclusive economies, social equality, and environmental protection.
For that reason, it must place sustainable development at the forefront of the global agenda.
It is already clear that achieving sustainable development is not possible without sustainable energy.
Indeed, access to energy spurs development on many levels – not least in terms of women and their health, safety, and autonomy.
Recognizing this, the UN has declared 2012 the Year of Sustainable Energy for All, and UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has launched a global initiative to achieve three ambitious goals by 2030: universal access to modern energy services, a doubling of the global rate of improvement in energy efficiency, and a doubling of the share of renewable energy in the global energy mix.
These are global issues.
But, everywhere around the world, energy is a woman’s issue.
It can mean the difference between safety and fear, freedom and servitude, and even life and death.
In many places, especially in rural areas, women spend long hours each day finding fuel wherever they can in the absence of sustainable energy sources.
Globally, 1.3 billion people still lack access to electricity, and 2.7 billion people, mostly women, rely on wood, charcoal, and dung for cooking.
Whether foraging for firewood, which may expose them and their daughters to the risk of rape, or spending their scarce resources on kerosene for smoky, inefficient lighting, women make difficult decisions every day about household energy resources and usage.
It is also women who suffer the disproportionate health impacts of unsustainable energy sources.
Exposure to smoke from hazardous methods of cooking, heating, and lighting kills nearly two million people each year, 85% of whom are women and children who die from associated cancer, respiratory infections, and lung disease.
Millions more suffer from exposure-related diseases.
At the community level, a lack of energy at medical clinics impedes the ability of medical personnel to provide adequate treatment and care.
It is estimated that 200,000-400,000 healthcare facilities in developing countries lack access to reliable electricity.
This means that vaccines and blood cannot be stored safely, diagnostic equipment is often useless, and operating rooms cannot function at night.
For pregnant women, this lack of reliable electricity poses a significant risk to their own lives and those of their babies.
Worldwide, 800 women die each day from complications of pregnancy and childbirth, and the vast majority of these deaths could be averted by providing quality health services, for which electricity is usually required.
Today, the long hours of unpaid work that women perform each day searching for firewood and other energy sources rob them of time to engage in more productive activities.
That, in turn, deprives poor families of much-needed income.
It does not have to be this way.
In Kenya, improved wood-burning stoves have reduced fuel requirements by some 40%, which has not only lowered women’s burden of unpaid work and reduced deforestation, but has also freed up time that women can devote to education, training, and paid employment, which will reduce poverty.
Providing sustainable energy for all will create new opportunities for women elsewhere as well.
Solar energy can provide entire villages with lighting, pumped water, refrigeration, and the electrification of health centers, schools, and other public facilities.
Moreover, renewable energy can provide a window to the outside world, via access to mobile phones, the Internet, television, and radio, and also power small, medium, and large enterprises.
And availability of outdoor lighting can prevent violence against women and girls.
Achieving sustainable energy for all requires women’s full participation.
Evidence from India and Nepal suggests that women’s involvement in decision-making is associated with better local environmental management.
And, according to a global study, countries with higher female parliamentary representation are more prone to ratify international environmental treaties.
As the Rio Declaration, adopted at the first Earth Summit in 1992, states: “Women have a vital role in environmental management and development.
Their full participation is therefore essential to achieve sustainable development.”
Twenty years later, with the stakes even higher, we can no longer afford inaction.
That is why we are bringing the principle of gender equality to the forefront of discussions and partnerships to achieve sustainable energy for all by 2030.
Sweden’s Shame