The UN provides the mechanism for a global response, but as Kofi Annan often repeats, it does not exist apart from its member states.
It is up to those members – to all of our governments - to provide both the necessary will and the required resources.
Otherwise the UN is nothing more than a handy mechanism for outsourcing political blame.
Our commitment to bring peace to the Middle East, or Darfur, or Congo, or Kosovo, or Haiti, is not measured by our words but by our wallets.
The world gets what it pays for.
The UN Takes Charge
NEW YORK – While discussions about economic “green shoots” continue unabated in the United States, in many countries, and especially in the developing world, matters are getting worse.
The downturn in the US began with a failure in the financial system, which quickly was translated into a slowdown in the real economy.
But, in the developing world, it is just the opposite: a decline in exports, reduced remittances, lower foreign direct investment, and precipitous falls in capital flows have led to economic weakening.
As a result, even countries with good regulatory systems are now confronting problems in their financial sectors.
On June 23, a United Nations conference focusing on the global economic crisis and its impact on developing countries reached a consensus both about the causes of the downturn and why it was affecting developing countries so badly.
It outlined some of the measures that should be considered and established a working group to explore the way forward, possibly under the guidance of a newly established expert group.
The agreement was remarkable: in providing what in many ways was a clearer articulation of the crisis and what needs to be done than that offered by the G-20, the UN showed that decision-making needn’t be restricted to a self-selected club, lacking political legitimacy, and largely dominated by those who had considerable responsibility for the crisis in the first place.
Indeed, the agreement showed the value of a more inclusive approach – for example, by asking key questions that might be too politically sensitive for some of the larger countries to raise, or by pointing out concerns that resonate with the poorest, even if they are less important for the richest.
One might have thought that the United States would have taken a leadership role, since the crisis was made there.
Indeed, the US Treasury (including some officials who are currently members of President Barack Obama’s economic team) pushed capital- and financial-market liberalization, which resulted in the rapid contagion of America’s problems around the world.
While there was less American leadership than one would have hoped, indeed expected under the circumstances, many participants were simply relieved that America did not put up obstacles to reaching a global consensus, as would have been the case if George W. Bush were still president.
One might have hoped that America would be the first to offer large amounts of money to help the many innocent victims of the policies it had championed. But it did not, and Obama had to fight hard to extract even limited amounts for the International Monetary Fund from a reluctant Congress.
But many developing countries have just emerged from being overburdened with debt; they do not want to go through that again.
The implication is that they need grants, not loans.
The G-20, which turned to the IMF to provide most of the money that the developing countries need to cope with the crisis, did not take sufficient note of this; the UN conference did.
The most sensitive issue touched upon by the UN conference – too sensitive to be discussed at the G-20 – was reform of the global reserve system.
The build-up of reserves contributes to global imbalances and insufficient global aggregate demand, as countries put aside hundreds of billions of dollars as a precaution against global volatility.
Not surprisingly, America, which benefits by getting trillions of dollars of loans from developing countries – now at almost no interest – was not enthusiastic about the discussion.
But, whether the US likes it or not, the dollar reserve system is fraying; the question is only whether we move from the current system to an alternative in a haphazard way, or in a more careful and structured way.
Those with large amounts of reserves know that holding dollars is a bad deal: no or low return and a high risk of inflation or currency depreciation, either of which would diminish their holdings’ real value.
On the last day of the conference, as America was expressing its reservations about even discussing at the UN this issue which affects all countries’ well being, China was once again reiterating that the time had come to begin working on a global reserve currency.
Since a country’s currency can be a reserve currency only if others are willing to accept it as such, time may be running out for the dollar.
Emblematic of the difference between the UN and the G-20 conferences was the discussion of bank secrecy: whereas the G-20 focused on tax evasion, the UN Conference addressed corruption, too, which some experts contend gives rise to outflows from some of the poorest countries that are greater than the foreign assistance they receive.
The US and other advanced industrial countries pushed globalization.
But this crisis has shown that they have not managed globalization as well as they should have.
If globalization is to work for everyone, decisions about how to manage it must be made in a democratic and inclusive manner – with the participation of both the perpetrators and the victims of the mistakes.
The UN, notwithstanding all of its flaws, is the one inclusive international institution.
This UN conference, like an earlier one on financing for developing countries, demonstrated the key role that the UN must play in any global discussion about reforming the global financial and economic system.
The UN to the Rescue on Climate Change
PARIS – The United Nations’ General Assembly is the world’s only body in which all countries vote, with majority rule prevailing.
There is no unanimity requirement or veto in the General Assembly, which might well be why it has not been called upon in the effort to fight climate change.
Yet the General Assembly is the only place where obstruction by major countries – for example, by China and the United States at December’s global climate talks in Copenhagen – can be bypassed.
Of course, the UN has played a leading role on climate change before now.
A “Conference of Parties” (COP) has met almost every year since the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change was signed in 1992 in Rio de Janeiro.
These meetings are often technical and the discussions are usually among ambassadors.
But sometimes their preparatory work requires decisions to be taken at the ministerial level, or even by heads of state or government. This was the case in Kyoto in 1997, and again in Copenhagen at COP15.
One might recall that many delegations arrived in Kyoto resignedly willing to accept the idea of a tax on greenhouse-gas emissions, or at least on carbon dioxide, the most commonly encountered greenhouse gas.
The US delegation, dispatched by a government intent on reducing state intervention in the economy, declared itself vehemently opposed to the idea.
The US delegation suggested a totally different scheme from the one being discussed.
In the US scheme, the volume of emissions would be subject to permits or quotas, which could be traded in a market established for that purpose.
In the end, that scheme was chosen in Kyoto with the hope that the US, which had proposed it, would then ratify it.
China and India were absent at the time, and Russia was hostile to the idea.
But the US refused to ratify the Kyoto Protocol.
The European Union was the only group of nations that seriously considered implementing it.
A European quota system, limited to electricity producers and materials manufacturers, the two major sources of emissions, has been in place since 2005.
The COP15 conference in Copenhagen was supposed to forge a successor treaty that would take effect when the Kyoto Protocol expires in 2012.
But four days of discussion among world leaders resulted in a fiasco.
A four-page document was vaguely approved by acclamation but not submitted to a vote.
It expressed the hope that international action will aim at limiting global warming to two degrees Celsius in the course of the twenty-first century, but it says nothing about how to achieve this – no commitments on the quantity of emissions, and no system for global measurement or supervision.
Such a failure is extremely harmful.
With no government commitments, there can be no attempt to limit carbon emissions effectively, which implies that when the world does begin to take action, it will be that much more difficult to slow the pace of climate change and mitigate its effects.
Moreover, Europe has been left uncertain about its own system of quotas, which has not functioned particularly well in the first place.
More than half of the 43 members of the Association of Small Island States believe that the decision to do nothing, to let ocean waters rise, can be considered tantamount to approval of murder.
The smallest among them, Tuvalu, with 11,000 inhabitants, is already searching for a place to evacuate its citizens when their island is submerged.
More than half of Bangladesh’s territory, home to 100 million inhabitants, is threatened by flooding, as is the Netherlands, with 16 million people, for a quarter of its territory.
Most of the potential climate refugees will end up in huge zones of increasing dryness – the Middle East, the Mediterranean region, central China, and the US.
Some predict that this migration will take place as soon as the second half of this century.
Given the scale of the looming catastrophe, the world cannot afford to leave things as they are.
Of course, the process has not stopped. Conferences on climate change will still be held.
But the next one will probably lead to a serious settling of scores. Indeed, people and governments need to express their anger at the fact that no binding agreement was reached in Copenhagen, despite the willingness of many of those who were present.
Fortunately, enough was accomplished in Copenhagen to re-boot the process.
But that re-boot must start now, and the UN, specifically the General Assembly, is the place to begin.
Many commentators have condemned the UN for the failure in Copenhagen.
But that is a misreading of what happened.   The UN was only the tour operator in Copenhagen.
It supplied logistics, interpreters, and an address book.
Its steering bodies did not function, because they were not called upon during the talks.
It is thus time to make real use of the UN, to call upon the General Assembly to take the lead.
The UN was not responsible for the failure in Copenhagen, and it should not act as if it was.
It must now use its power as the world’s parliament to overcome the obstructions of the few.
Pakistan’s Tipping Point
LAHORE – Pakistan’s moment of political truth is fast approaching.
On May 11, some 40-50 million voters will elect a new national assembly.
The outcome, preceded by a spike in extremist violence, is likely to reverberate far and wide.
Pakistan’s homegrown terrorist groups know that the country is at a tipping point, and are attacking candidates and voters who favor a secular state.
Hundreds of people have already been killed, and more will undoubtedly die before Election Day, targeted because, if these groups prevail, they would push what is sometimes called the “idea of Pakistan” to its logical – and extreme – conclusion.
Some 70 years ago, Muhammad Ali Jinnah, Pakistan’s founding father, launched the movement to create an independent state for the Muslims of British India.
The British colonial administration finally acquiesced, creating a country out of Muslim-majority areas.
The population of what is now Pakistan was about two-thirds Muslim; the remainder were mostly Hindus and Sikhs.
That composition changed dramatically with the partition of the new states of India and Pakistan in 1947, when 14 million people moved across the newly drawn border.
Eight million Muslim refugees fled India and entered Pakistan, and six million Hindus and Sikhs moved in the opposite direction.
By the time this “ethnic cleansing” was over, Pakistan’s population was 95% Muslim.
Over time, an increasing proportion of this population began to demand the creation of an Islamic state in the areas that were now Pakistan.
The upcoming election will determine how far the country will go along this route.
Pakistan is not the only Muslim country seeking to redefine its political and economic future.
Similar processes are playing out in other large countries in the western part of the Islamic world.
By contrast, other large Muslim countries like Indonesia and Malaysia have succeeded in establishing political orders that serve all segments of highly diverse populations reasonably well.
That may eventually happen in the western Islamic world as well, but only after a struggle of the type occurring now in Pakistan.
The large countries in this part of the Islamic world – most notably Egypt, Pakistan, and Turkey – are attempting to address four problems, the most challenging of which is to define Islam’s role in the political system.
Turkey seems to have found an answer, prodded in part by its wish to join the European Union.
A conservative ruling party with deep religious roots is content to leave religion to private observance, with no direct influence on public policy.
The issue remains less settled in Egypt, while in Pakistan a small but highly motivated part of the population has embraced extreme violence as a form of political expression.
The role of the military in politics also needs to be resolved.
Once again, Turkey has taken the lead; in both Egypt and Pakistan, the men in uniform have returned to their barracks, but they have not lost influence over public policy.
Then there is sectarianism, particularly the growing strife between Sunni and Shia Muslims.
This conflict may be exacerbated by the outcome in Syria.
If Sunnis triumph there, they may become more assertive in countries that have large Shia populations.
It is not often recognized that Pakistan has the world’s second-largest Shia population, after Iran, with roughly 50 million adherents.
They have been mercilessly attacked in Karachi and Quetta in recent years, with more than 400 killed.
Finally, there is the question of the Muslim world’s relations with the West, particular the United States.
The old post-Ottoman “grand bargain” – Western acceptance of authoritarianism in exchange for the secure flow of oil, use of sensitive sea-lanes, and some tolerance for the existence of Israel – has broken down.
What replaces it will be determined by the shape of the new political order that finally emerges in the western Islamic world.
In other words, more is at stake in Pakistan’s upcoming election than just the future of Pakistan.
There is growing recognition, some of it grudging, that the coalition led by the Pakistan People’s Party has managed to create a political structure built on fairly stable foundations.
This is a real accomplishment in a country that was on a political roller-coaster for most of its history.
But the coalition proved unable to translate political success into strong economic performance.
For the last five years, Pakistan’s annual GDP growth has averaged just 3% – half the rate needed to absorb two million new labor-force entrants every year.
If growth does not pick up, the ranks of the unemployed and underemployed will swell, increasing the size of the pool from which extremist groups find fresh recruits.
The upcoming election has both nurtured hope and generated anxiety among Pakistanis.
It could go either way.
And, for good or bad, where Pakistan goes other Muslim countries could follow.
Civilizing the City
BANGALORE – Half of humanity – 3.5 billion people – live in urban areas today.
Our metropolises are the engines of growth for a global economy emerging from the shadow of financial crisis.
In Bangalore, my home, investment is pouring into a city at the forefront of the Indian economy’s transformation – home to companies like Infosys and Wipro, and named by Forbes Magazine as one of the “Fastest Growing Cities of the Next Decade.”
But, as Bangalore’s citizens prepare to go to the polls in state elections, their concerns are not merely economic.
The city’s financial success stories mask a darker reality – quality of life for many city-dwellers has deteriorated over recent years.
The movement of the rural poor to large cities is one of the exemplary narratives of the modern era.
And governments, which typically focus on crude measures of economic performance, encourage rapid urbanization.
In China, for example, the relaxation of migration controls in the 1980’s and the opening of the economy led to the spectacular growth of the country’s eastern cities.
More than 50% of Chinese live in urban areas today, up from 25% in 1990, and the proportion is expected to reach 70% by 2035.
While the majority of Indians still live in rural areas, this, too, is changing fast.
From 1970 to 2010, India’s urban population grew by 250 million.
The next quarter-billion will be added in half that time.
By 2030, 70% of India’s GDP will come from its cities.
But cities are simply unable to cope with the influx of migrants on the current scale.
The fast-growing metropolises of India, China, Brazil, and other major emerging economies offer plenty of jobs, but basic amenities are lacking; as a result, many of the urban poor live in slums, without adequate health care, water supplies, or electricity.
The problems are legion.
Municipalities, often owing to corruption or poor management, are unable or unwilling to impose rigorous planning regulations.
Infrastructure spending is either inadequate or poorly targeted.
Workers come home from their jobs to homes that are dark, dank, and depressing.
They feel unsafe on poorly-lit streets, and have little access to parks or recreational facilities.
Mornings and evenings are lost to long commutes on polluted highways.
The novelty of the rapid economic improvements seen by many city-dwellers in India, China, and elsewhere over the past ten years has insulated governments from the repercussions of poor urban planning.
As I take my morning strolls through Bangalore, though, I sense growing resentment of the inadequacies, and frustration at insufficient improvements in citizens’ quality of life.
Democracy exists precisely to remedy the kinds of injustices I hear from the hardworking Bangaloreans I encounter on the street and online.
Bangalore is a modern city, and its citizens are expressing their displeasure in modern ways – on Facebook, in chat rooms, and on Twitter.
Governments would do well to heed these complaints (indeed, to engage with them in these hi-tech incarnations of a town-hall meeting), because civil unrest could disrupt the positive momentum, not only in cities, but in the entire global economy.
That threat might seem far-off while growth continues at relatively high rates; but, unless workers see the benefit of their labors in the form of improved living conditions, protests could ensue.
Already, there have been major strikes at factories across China – Motorola, Honda, and Foxconn, among others.
That would have been unheard of several years ago, as would today’s growing trend among China’s urban middle classes for de-urbanization – a brain drain whereby educated city dwellers give up on the rat race and return to the countryside in pursuit of cleaner air, open spaces, and better accommodation.
Our cities risk becoming literally uninhabitable.
Of the world’s ten most densely populated cities, seven are in India.
The urban sprawl of Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, and Bangalore has continued unchecked, unplanned, and with under-investment in infrastructure for far too long.
Urban pollution contributed to 620,000 needless deaths in India last year, mainly among the very poor.
The number of people living in our slums has doubled over the past decade, and is now greater than the population of the United Kingdom.
The consultancy McKinsey argues in a recent report that India needs to invest at least $1.2 trillion in its urban infrastructure over the next two decades, or $134 per capita annually.
It currently invests only $17 per capita, compared to $116 in China and $292 in the United States.
India spends less on health care and education per capita than China, Brazil, South Africa, or Mexico.
If India is to maintain its competitiveness, a focus on dramatically improving the nation’s urban areas is imperative.
McKinsey calculates that the country requires between 700-900 million square meters of new residential and commercial space each year; 350-400 kilometers (217-248 miles) of metros and subways (20 times what has been achieved in the past decade); and 19,000-25,000 kilometers of annual road construction (equivalent to all the roads built over the past ten years).
The task is daunting.
But, despite the grumbling, India’s city dwellers – like those elsewhere – do not want to sacrifice the enormous gains of the past few decades to ineffective or corrupt governance.
They want to work toward a future in which their quality of life is among the best in the world, with green spaces, sustainable public transport, clean air, well-built houses, and safe streets.
This is why I have set up the Nammu Bengaluru (“Our Bangalore”) Awards.
It is important to recognize those who are contributing to the vision of a city that is feted not just for its economic successes, but also for its quality of life.
Their example is one that emerging-country urbanites everywhere should seek to emulate.
Globalizing the Security Council
BRASILIA – The 1945 United Nations Charter represented a historic breakthrough in the pursuit of peace on a multilateral basis.
At the end of a global war that claimed more than 50 million lives, the United States and the Soviet Union emerged as the world’s two major powers.
The UN Charter, initially negotiated by the US, the Soviet Union, and the United Kingdom during World War II, established a Security Council containing five permanent members, including France and the Republic of China.
At its inception, the UN brought together 51 countries; it now has 193 member states.
But, although the Security Council was enlarged in 1965 by increasing the number of non-permanent seats from six to ten, its permanent members have not changed since 1945.
The world has gone through extraordinary transformations since then.
In addition to interstate conflict and the proliferation of weapons – particularly weapons of mass destruction – new challenges have emerged, such as terrorism and the involvement of non-state actors in internal conflicts.
Meanwhile, the global distribution of economic and political power has undergone a radical reconfiguration, setting the stage for the emergence of a multipolar international order.
In this environment, the Security Council’s frozen composition is imposing significant limits on the international community’s capacity to address global challenges.
Conflicts drag on without proper action from the body created to resolve them.
Thousands of civilians die, are displaced, or are subjected to appalling human-rights abuses, while the Security Council proves unable or unwilling to act.
Reform of the Council is thus urgent and indispensable.
A majority of UN member states are in favor of creating a new Council with an expanded roster of both permanent and non-permanent members.
This majority reflects a growing perception that the world would be more stable and more secure with a strengthened and updated multilateral system.
That means adding new voices to reflect the world in which we now live.
Only then will the Security Council have the legitimacy to act on today’s manifold conflicts.
A reformed Security Council would reflect the emergence of new powers and their readiness to contribute to the maintenance of international peace and security.
In the financial and economic arena, this new multipolarity has already led to quota reforms at the International Monetary Fund and resulted in the consolidation of the G-20 as the premier venue for multilateral economic-policy coordination.
The contrast with matters of peace and security is stark.
Entire regions of the world, such as Africa and Latin America, are excluded from the nucleus of decision-making.
A governing body that is not representative fuels uncertainty and frustration among those subject to its decisions, undermining the legitimacy – and thus the effectiveness – of its actions.
The greatest risk that we run is erosion of the Security Council’s credibility, and, with it, a diminishing capacity to confront grave threats to peace.
We all stand to lose if new international crises end up being addressed by coalitions of countries at the margins of the Security Council and in a manner that flouts international law.
The lessons of the recent past are clear.
In any conflict, neighboring countries’ participation and commitment are indispensable to the achievement of peace.
Only an expanded Security Council can enable effective conflict resolution worldwide.
The international community cannot afford to postpone reform.
It is our duty to preserve the multilateral system of peace and security – an achievement of the international community that, despite its shortcomings, has helped save the planet from another war on a global scale.
Only an increase in the number of permanent and non-permanent seats can remedy the representation deficit within the Security Council and adapt it to the realities of the twenty-first century.
If new members and regions are not offered a seat at the table, the Council will face increasing irrelevance – and the world, more than ever in need of effective conflict resolution, will be far worse off.
America’s Health-Care Divide
BERKELEY – In 1883, the authoritarian imperial government of Prince Otto von Bismarck – who famously declared, “It is not by speeches and majority votes that the great issues of our time will be decided…but by blood and iron” – established national health insurance for Germany.
The rationale for national health insurance is as clear now as it was to Bismarck 130 years ago.
A country’s success – whether measured by the glory of its Kaiser, the expansion of its territory, the security of its borders, or the well-being of its population – rests on the health of its people.
Serious illness can strike anyone, and seriously ill people, as a rule, do not earn much money.
The longer the seriously ill are untreated, the more costly their eventual treatment and maintenance become.
Private savings, as a rule, can pay the costs of treatment only for the thrifty and the well-off.
So, unless we adopt the view that those without ample savings who fall seriously ill should quickly die (and so decrease the surplus population), a country with national health insurance will be a wealthier and more successful country.
These arguments were entirely convincing to Bismarck.
They are equally convincing today.
On January 1, 2014, the United States will partly implement a law – the Affordable Care Act (ACA) – that will not establish national health insurance, but that will, according to projections by the Congressional Budget Office, reduce by almost one-half the number of people in the US without health insurance.
Back in 2009, President Barack Obama could have proposed a program as comprehensive as the one initiated by Bismarck.
Such a program could have allowed, encouraged, and made it affordable for uninsured Americans to obtain health insurance similar to what members of Congress have; or it simply could have expanded the existing Medicare system for those over 65 to cover all Americans.
Instead, Obama put his weight behind the complicated ACA.
The reason, as it was explained to me back in 2009, was that the core of the ACA was identical to the plan that former Massachusetts Governor Mitt Romney had proposed and signed into law in that state in 2006: “ObamaCare” would be “RomneyCare” with a new coat of paint.
With Romney the Republican Party’s presumptive nominee for the 2012 presidential election, few Republicans would be able to vote against what was their candidate’s signature legislative initiative as governor.
Thus, the US Congress, it was supposed, would enact the ACA with healthy and bipartisan majorities, and Obama would demonstrate that he could transcend Washington’s partisan gridlock.
We know how that worked out.
Not a single Republican voted for the Affordable Care Act in the House of Representatives.
One Republican senator – Olympia Snowe of Maine – voted for it in committee, but then switched sides, threatened to kill it via filibuster, and voted against its final passage.
As for Romney, he refused to recognize any kinship between his bill and the ACA – sort of like when he refused to recognize details surrounding the participation in the 2012 Olympics of a Dressage horse that he owned,
But now January 1, 2014 is looming, and the Affordable Care Act is about to be implemented – but perhaps not everywhere.
In the south and other Republican-controlled regions, legislators have refused to answer constituents’ questions about how to negotiate the new, changed bureaucracy.
They have also refused the federal dollars earmarked to expand their state-level Medicaid programs.
And they have refused to lift a finger to establish the “exchanges” that are supposed to give individuals and small businesses the same access to health insurance at competitive prices that employees of large businesses get via their companies’ benefits departments.
In the Democratic-controlled “blue” states, where 60% of the US population lives – and which account for 70% of national income and 80% of its wealth – implementation of the ACA is likely to be like that of RomneyCare in Massachusetts: a somewhat bumpy ride, but a clear success that nobody will wish to repeal after the fact.
But no one knows what will happen in the “red states,” where the Republican political infrastructure is digging in its heels.
What will doctors and hospital administrators in Phoenix, Kansas City, Houston, and Atlanta do after they talk to their colleagues in Los Angeles, Seattle, Minneapolis, Chicago, Baltimore, and New York, where state governments and political structures are trying to make ACA implementation a success?
Will they compare and contrast the conditions under which they are working?
Which candidates will they support with donations and votes in the 2014 and 2016 elections?
What will nurses and patients denied the benefits of the ACA do?
America’s partisan heat is about to be turned up over the next several election cycles, as the blame game begins.
Bismarck would know who is at fault.
The Sino-American Mirror
HONG KONG – November was a month of major leadership changes around the world, including Xi Jinping’s confirmation as China’s top official and US President Barack Obama’s re-election.
The changes highlighted the sharp differences between the two countries’ political systems.
Yet the two countries share similar national development goals:increasing their citizens’ prosperity, narrowing social inequities, and addressing environmental sustainability.
The fact is that rapid social, technological, and environmental change is challenging both the Western and Chinese models of governance and development, with both requiring significant reform.
And both countries’ leaders must deliver reforms within a limited tenure, with limited resources, and within a global context of trade rivalry and interdependence.
In the United States, where markets, the judiciary, and regulation are highly developed, the imperative is not institutional reform, but policy reform – addressing the weak fiscal position, income and wealth inequities, unemployment, health care, and deteriorating physical infrastructure.
For China, the issue largely concerns the design and implementation of the next stage of institutional reforms to sustain economic growth and efficiency, reduce social inequality, remove market distortions, address environmental deterioration, and combat corruption.
As China becomes a more urban and elderly middle-income society, the challenge for the new leadership is not only to meet the population’s need for employment, health care, and social security, but also to improve governance and state effectiveness by establishing checks and balances on political power.
Both countries face formidable resistance to reform from formidable vested interests and lobby groups.
Both also face major price distortions, owing to quantitative easing by monetary policymakers, which has led to negative real interest rates.
To some extent, the two countries’ problems are mirror images of each other.
The US lacks investment in infrastructure and has excess investment in financial derivatives – the result of opaque leverage from over-consumption.
China suffers from under-consumption and possible over-investment, and needs to strike a balance between the state-owned sector and private enterprise.
American democracy’s emphasis on short time horizons is costly, with tax cuts and increased welfare benefits giving rise to chronic fiscal deficits, with future generations forced to foot the bill for years of excessive consumption.
In China, the one-party system has been effective in delivering strong growth, but it must now address the rampant corruption and excessive bureaucracy that has crowded out the private sector and limited creativity and innovation.
China and the US can draw important lessons from the strengths and weaknesses inherent in both systems.
First, in both countries, the challenge is not one of state versus market, but about finding complementarities between the two.
The state performs best when it delineates, protects, and adjudicates property rights, while the market works best when it allocates property rights and aligns people’s incentives.
Second, both countries must find the right metric to balance short-term and long-term interests.
Given inter-generational demands, large spillover effects between different communities, and interdependence with the rest of the world, any governance system must weigh the interests of ruling elites and lobbyists against those of weaker groups without voice, and popular demands against long-term planning.
Finally, the issue for both countries is not corruption or inequality – which are universal – but equal opportunity and, in China’s case, respect for property rights.
Opaque and unfair delineation and allocation of land rights in China, together with state monopolies and burdensome bureaucracies, create distortions that give rise to corruption and inequities.
China’s main priority should be to strengthen its legal institutions to protect property rights, while reducing state ownership and control of resources and large enterprises.
So far, Xi’s down-to-earth approach has raised hopes that China will enter a new phase of reform that will address economic imbalances, increase social inclusion, and tackle endemic corruption.
In the US, Obama’s re-election has led some to believe that much-needed policy reforms will bring the country back from the brink of the “fiscal cliff” and ignite a new era of growth.
Yet the two leaders and their administrations must overcome monumental challenges as their countries strive to reach the next stage of their development.
How they use monetary, fiscal, structural, institutional, and regulatory policies may differ, but each will ultimately be judged by how close he comes to achieving that goal.
The Sino-American Test in North Korea
MADRID – Repeated threats from North Korea have turned the Korean Peninsula into one of the world’s most dangerous hotspots.
But the situation also offers an important opportunity: a gain in strategic trust between China and the United States, the two countries with the capacity to resolve the tensions once and for all.
If they manage to cooperate constructively in order to shape a peace acceptable to all sides, this would make not only Korea, but also the region and the world, a safer place.
Ten years after opting out of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, North Korea clearly possesses nuclear weapons.
The regime’s nuclear test in February – its third since 2006 – was likely a miniaturized device, which makes the situation even more worrying, given that successful miniaturization is critical for using nuclear weapons in ballistic missiles.
February’s test provoked another round of United Nations sanctions, drafted by the US and China, triggering an escalation of threats and provocations from the North.
The tension on the peninsula increased further with the annual joint military exercises conducted by the US and South Korea – especially when American nuclear-capable B-52 and B-2 bombers were added to the drills.
Nobody wants war on the Korean Peninsula.
For the North, it would be suicide; for the South, with its vibrant economy and widening free-trade agreements, the opportunity cost would be particularly high.
Likewise, regional stability is a prerequisite of China’s stellar economic growth, and military conflict would be a setback for US economic rebirth as well.
Indeed, with US defense spending finally set to decline after a decade of debt-financed war in Iraq and Afghanistan, America has little fiscal room for an unforeseen military entanglement.
The US “pivot” to Asia is built on economic opportunities there; a conflict with unpredictable fallout does not fit the scheme.
China is the key geostrategic player in resolving the conflict, because it provides North Korea with 90% of its energy, 80% of its consumer goods, and 40% of its food.
But it is unclear how much influence China’s government holds over Kim Jong-un’s regime.
Sino-North Korean relations have borne a significant scar since 1991, when China recognized South Korea without insisting that the US formally recognize the North.
The North Koreans believe that China sacrificed them for commercial interests, and bilateral relations have yet to recover.
Nonetheless, China continues to regard North Korea as an important strategic asset, because it serves as a buffer state shielding China’s border from American troops on the peninsula – which has historically been used as an entry point by invading troops.
China’s ideal solution would therefore be to maintain the status quo while persuading the North to open up – a path of gradual change that avoids open conflict or the regime’s collapse.
Either of these traumatic outcomes would spell disaster, for both the region and the world.
First, the regime’s implosion would unleash a massive refugee flow, implying enormous social and economic costs.
Moreover, Asia remains a continent defined by balance-of-power diplomacy, border conflicts, and historic mistrust, with no multilateral security structures to soften regional tensions.
Given these conditions, even a small spark could ignite a wildfire.
In this environment, mistrust of China’s rise as a regional hegemon in much of East Asia only intensifies the need for active Chinese participation in promoting regional stability and peace – a peace framework with Asian roots, acceptable to all parties.
Only through such efforts will China be able to increase its international legitimacy, thereby minimizing the risk of future conflict.
It is essential that China and the US work together to resolve the current crisis.
The US must reiterate clearly that indefinitely prolonging the status quo on the Korean Peninsula would imply a strategic loss for China, and that China must join the international community in its efforts to halt North Korea’s nuclear program.
This cooperation is the only way to force the North’s hand and put an end to the incessant cycle of crisis and mounting risk.
The current crisis offers a unique test case for joint handling of international affairs – or, in this case, regional affairs with global consequences – by the world’s two biggest powers.
During US Secretary of State John Kerry’s trip to China this month, the two countries pronounced their shared goals: denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula and durable peace in the region.
This is a good starting point.
Sino-US cooperation on this flashpoint could be a huge step forward in building much-needed bilateral strategic trust.
But the two countries’ markedly different foreign-policy approaches will not facilitate matters.
While the US tends to segment problems in order to find solutions to each part within a finite period of time, China relies on broad, long-term perspective and views issues as extended, relative processes.
That is why, in dealing with impoverished, isolated, nuclearized North Korea, where Sino-US cooperation is the only option, the US and China face both a challenge and an opportunity.
To make the most of it requires a significant boost in mutual strategic trust.
American Presidential Beauty
NEW YORK – What is the point of a presidential debate?
In the context of American presidential elections, “debate” is something of a misnomer.
When former French President Nicolas Sarkozy faced his Socialist challenger, François Hollande, that was a debate – addressing substantive issues and lasting more than two hours.
By contrast, presidential debates in the United States are more like staged performances, where the answers to every possible question have been rehearsed endlessly with teams of coaches and advisers.
The candidates in US debates address carefully selected journalists who rarely follow up on a question.
And the candidates’ performances are scrutinized less on the substance of their arguments than on their presentation, body language, facial tics, unguarded sighs, smiles, sneers, and inadvertent eye rolling.
Does the candidate come across as a snob, or a friendly guy whom one can trust?
Do the smiles look real or fake?
These “optics” can be of great importance.
After all, Richard Nixon’s race against John Kennedy in 1960 is said to have been lost on television: Kennedy looked cool and handsome, while Nixon scowled into the camera, with sweat trickling down his five o’clock shadow.
In his debates with Ronald Reagan in 1980, Jimmy Carter came across as smug and humorless, and Reagan as a friendly old uncle.
Carter lost.
In 2000, Al Gore, was unable to make up his mind about which role he wished to play in his debates with George W. Bush, so he looked shifty and inauthentic, changing from arrogant to patronizing and back again.
He had the better arguments, but he lost the “debates” (and the election) nonetheless.
We are told that the debates this month between President Barack Obama and the Republican challenger, Mitt Romney, might decide the election.
It is, according to the pundits, Romney’s last chance.
If Obama comes across as an elitist professor, he might lose.
If Romney gets angry, or makes a bad joke, his chances could be blown.
Again, this is not a question of who has the best policies, or the soundest ideas; it is all about presentation.
More than 67 million Americans watched the first of this year’s three debates.
According to public-opinion polls, only about 17% of eligible voters have not yet made up their minds about which candidate to support.
That is surprising, given the widening political gap between America’s two main political parties.
In private, Obama and Romney may be able to agree on many things.
But the Republican Party has moved far to the right of Obama’s moderate liberalism, and Romney has been pulled along with it.
Then there is the great unspoken factor of racial prejudice, something even hard-core right-wing Republicans try not to express openly.
A certain percentage of American voters will not vote for a black man, whatever he says, or however good he looks in a debate.
If policies or prejudices have not persuaded that undecided 17% of voters, they must be looking for something else.
They want to see whether they like one man better than the other.
To them, one can only assume, the debates are nothing more than a personality contest.
In past elections, when there sometimes really was not much political difference between Democrats and Republicans, this made a certain sense.
Broadly speaking, on economics and foreign policy, the candidates often would be in accord, with Republicans more inclined to favor the interests of big business and Democrats defending the interests of labor.
So voters could not always be blamed for finding it hard to make up their minds.
Since they could not make a rational choice, they followed their instincts and voted for the candidate they found most sympathetic.
This time, there seems to be much less justification for such arbitrary choices.
The political differences are too stark.
And yet there is a reason not to dismiss the personality contest entirely.
After all, the US presidency is a quasi-monarchical institution, as well as a political one.
The president and First Lady are the king and queen of the American republic – the official faces that the US presents to the outside world.
It is not utterly absurd, therefore, that voters want to like the look of their presidents, quite apart from the merit of their policies.
Choosing the country’s most powerful politician on the basis of his presentability on television might seem arbitrary, even frivolous.
But it is no more arbitrary than the accident of birth, which determines the right of kings and queens to reign over their countries.
The difference is, of course, that most modern kings and queens are constitutional monarchs with no political power.
And the man whom US voters choose to lead their country will affect the lives of everyone, not just Americans.
Because non-Americans cannot vote in US elections for him (a pity for Obama, who would probably win a global vote by a landslide), we have to depend on the judgment of that 17% of undecided voters watching television this month.
That is not exactly reassuring.
But the American republic has one merit that monarchies lack.
Good or bad, the quasi-king can be booted out every four years.
Then the competition – part ideological, part beauty contest – can start all over again.
The US Candidates’ Non-Debate
DENVER – For the uninitiated, especially foreign observers, the United States’ presidential election campaign can seem like an epic narrative in which the protagonists pass through various trials en route to salvation, with the US media’s nonstop coverage resounding like a Greek chorus.
Now that the made-for-television Republican and Democratic conventions are over, the odyssey of President Barack Obama and his Republican challenger, Mitt Romney, continues with three face-to-face encounters in October.
The first debate is scheduled to take place here at the University of Denver on October 3.
Both candidates received some (well-deserved) criticism during the conventions for appealing to peoples’ emotions instead of addressing facts and policies.
In the debates, that should change as they confront each other directly while making their case to voters.
But October 3 is only the beginning.
The vice-presidential candidates will square off on October 11, while Obama and Romney will meet again on October 16 and then for the last debate, on October 22.
Foreign policy has made few appearances in the campaign, but the final debate is supposed to be devoted to the subject, thereby giving voters a sustained view of how the candidates view the world.
Obama has spoken periodically over the course of his presidency about foreign policy (albeit before the current campaign), whereas Romney has said far less.
Anxious to distance himself from the legacy of the previous Republican administration, he never mentions former President George W. Bush and avoids mention of the two wars of the last decade.
Indeed, when Romney formally accepted the Republican nomination at the party’s convention, he went so far as not to mention US troops in the field, an omission that the Democrats pounced upon when their convention met a week later.
Ironically, it is the Republicans who have prided themselves in recent years as the party that took up President John F. Kennedy’s call to “pay any price” and “bear any burden” in defense of liberty.
But both Romney and his running mate, Paul Ryan, display little or no interest in foreign affairs, apart from assuring voters that Israel’s interests will be safeguarded, Iran’s will not be, and whatever the US does must be tough and strident.
Though the third debate will address foreign-policy issues, viewers will probably remain starved for signs of what might follow in terms of statecraft.
Foreign policy in US politics is often an exercise in demonstrating strength rather than wisdom.
On Iran, the debate will, at best, address how to “solve” (no one will dare say manage) the nuclear threat by using sanctions and military action.
A serious discussion of how to sustain fledgling multinational negotiations between Iran and the world’s six most powerful countries (the so-called P5 + 1) – a process denounced by many American pundits as a waste of time – is unlikely.
Indeed, Iran’s nuclear aspirations, one of the most pressing issues of our time, may well be reduced to whether the US should support Israel in the event that its government takes military action.
One is hard pressed to find any analyst who believes that Israeli air strikes could do more than set back Iran’s program for a few months while unifying fractured Iranian opinion around support for nuclear weapons.
Another fundamental question, China’s standing in the world order, is unlikely to be discussed in any meaningful way.
Indeed, one can expect the debate to center on how to confront China in the short term, rather than on how to nurture long-term cooperative ties.
Most Americans have not yet embraced the idea that the US-China relationship is too big to fail.
Today’s China seems to recall Winston Churchill’s description of Russia as a “riddle wrapped in a mystery inside an enigma” – a new, great power rival that is difficult for US policymakers to understand.
Likewise, Obama and Romney may have tacitly agreed not to discuss the policy choices surrounding the tragedy in Syria, because neither has any interest in addressing its internal complexities, mastery of which will be essential to galvanize international support for an eventual political solution.
In the meantime, Syria and its daily carnage have become the dreariest and most numbing foreign-policy issue in American public opinion, despite the danger that the violence could spread across the Middle East (particularly to neighboring Iraq and Lebanon).
The export of Syria’s civil war is likely to consume far more time in the coming months than either candidate wants to admit.
Other foreign-policy issues cry out for serious discussion and debate: addressing absolute poverty and pandemics in the global South; strengthening global governance, including undermanned and outmoded United Nations structures; international cooperation on the rising number of natural disasters; and rethinking Afghanistan/Pakistan with the understanding that Pakistan is far larger and one angry mob away from a loose nuke – and therefore should not be reduced to the role of a supporting actor in Afghanistan’s travails.
Finally, North Korea’s nuclear aspirations are a hearty perennial for any US president.
Joint US-Chinese effort on this issue could potentially provide the elusive key to an improved relationship.
Yet this issue, too, is unlikely to receive the attention from the candidates that it deserves.
Whether Americans like it or not, with Europe, China, and India largely consumed by domestic politics, international leadership and stewardship of the world’s problems will remain firmly in US hands.
And yet the US election campaign, even the upcoming October debates, will leave most observers wondering whether any country is in charge.
China and the American Dream
PARIS – China may be just a few years away from becoming the world’s leading economic power, and America’s strategic centrality may be on the wane (certainly, no one speaks of the United States today as the world’s “hyperpower”).
But America still makes people dream, and its emotional hold on the world remains unique.
In this sense, last week brought two victories: not just Barack Obama’s over Republican challenger Mitt Romney in the presidential election, but also the victory of America’s democratic system over China’s one-party authoritarianism.
In a few sentences of his victory speech – the space of a magic moment – Obama celebrated “the mystery of democracy” in a very concrete, but also nearly religious manner.
Obama found the right words with which to pay tribute to the multitude of anonymous citizens going door to door to convince their fellow Americans to vote for their preferred candidates.
He was describing democracy at its best, its most noble, as it should be, but not always is: freely mobilized men and women able and willing to change the course of their destiny.
At this moment, however brief, America’s soft power defeated by a knockout that of China, which less than one day later solemnly – and in the most opaque manner – opened the 18th Congress of the Chinese Communist Party.
Millions of people around the world would rather experience for themselves an election night like America’s than become a part of China’s long-term plans.
Of course, America is no longer what it used to be.
It is far too indebted to be the ultimate strategic and economic insurance policy for its allies, as it was in the past.
But, if America’s protective power has receded, its power to inspire remains unique and can still redound to its benefit in the most spectacular way.
Obama’s victory was not only that of democracy, but also of a certain vision and message of America.
By keeping an open stance on immigration, maintaining a respectful discourse toward all who want to live out their differences freely, and considering women in a modern and dignified manner, Obama was able to mobilize the strength of America’s exceptionalism, which rests on one key word: diversity.
In deliberately ignoring this diversity and embracing nostalgia for a long-gone past, the Republican Party – led astray by its ultra-conservative lunatics – was far more responsible than its decent candidate for the defeat.
Romney’s mistake was to align himself for too long with ideas that were too radical for him – and for America.
The fate of Romney’s&#160;candidacy contains a universal message for all democratic regimes: One wins nothing by cultivating the extremes or by becoming their captive.
In fact, one runs the risk of losing not only one’s soul, but also elections.
That was Nicolas Sarkozy’s fate in France: he was defeated after losing the support of the center of the electorate.
Obama was reelected because the Republican Party lost sight of the center in America.
Of course, the greatness of America’s democracy should not hide its deep flaws and current dysfunction.
The cost of this election cycle surpassed $2 billion – all to reproduce the status quo: the same president, and the same balance of power in the US Congress.
Money has become a corrosive agent that is eroding and redefining the democratic process, with the mobilization of personal energies giving way to the enlargement of campaign budgets.
Beyond the issue of money, there is the problem of a system of checks and balances run amok, leading to governmental paralysis.
“Vetocracy” – reflected in the Republicans’ routine Congressional obstructionism in Obama’s first term – is a threat to democracy.
Will the party, chastened by its electoral defeat, recognize that its responsibility is to the American people, and not only to its members and followers?
Obama’s reelection sends a message, but one that will resonate widely – including at home – only if rhetoric does not depart from reality, as was too often the case during Obama’s first term.
America cannot continue to live with the injustices of its health-care system or with crumbling and obsolete infrastructure. Nor can it remain indifferent to the increasingly unacceptable indebtedness of its university students.
At the same time, while America may no longer be the international actor that it once was, domestic production of shale oil and gas appears set to re-write the US energy equation – as it could for France and other Western countries, which may one day be able to do without the energy supplied by the Middle East.
America’s main challenge globally is to accept that it will no longer be alone at the top.
It has never had to deal with others as equals, unlike traditional European powers, which have done so for centuries.
China’s challenge, however, may be more difficult.
It not only has to live with the reality of US power; it must also take into account the American ideal.
In 1989, large numbers of Chinese students took over Tiananmen Square to demand more rights, adopting a symbol resembling the Statue of Liberty.
Today, too, it is not America’s military strength that threatens or challenges China, but rather the enduring attraction of “the&#160;American dream.”
America’s Third-World Politics
CAMBRIDGE – With its presidential election over, the United States can finally take a breather from campaign politics, at least for a while.
But an uncomfortable question lingers: How is it possible for the world’s most powerful country and its oldest continuous democracy to exhibit a state of political discourse that is more reminiscent of a failed African state?
Maybe that is too harsh an assessment of Africa’s nascent democracies.
If you think I exaggerate, you have not been paying close attention.
The pandering to extremist groups, the rejection of science, the outright lies and distortions, and the evasion of the real issues that characterized the most recent election cycle set a new low for democratic politics.
Without question, the worst offenders are America’s Republicans, whose leaders have somehow become enraptured by ideas that are beyond the pale in other advanced countries.
Of the party’s dozen presidential candidates, only two (Mitt Romney and Jon Huntsman) declined to reject scientific evidence concerning global warming and its human causes.
But, when pressed on it, Romney was sufficiently uncomfortable about his position that he wobbled on the issue.
The Darwinian theory of evolution has long been a dirty word among Republicans as well.
Rick Perry, the governor of Texas and an early frontrunner in the Republican primary, called it just a “theory out there,” while Romney himself has had to argue that it is consistent with creationism – the idea that an intelligent force designed the universe and brought it into being.
Likewise, if there is an archaic idea in economics, it is that the US should return to the Gold Standard.
Yet, this idea, too, has strong support within the Republican Party – led by Ron Paul, another contender for the party’s presidential nomination.
No one was surprised when the party’s platform gave a nod to the Gold Standard in its convention in August.
Most non-Americans would find it crazy that neither Romney nor Barack Obama supported stricter gun-control laws (with Obama making an exception only for assault weapons such as AK-47s), in a country where it is sometimes easier to buy guns than it is to vote.
Most Europeans cannot understand how, in a civilized country, both candidates can favor the death penalty.
And I won’t even get into the abortion debate.
Candidate Romney was so cowed by his party’s obsession with low taxes that he never put forth a budget that added up.
It was left to his spinners to explain, as The Economist put it, that this was “necessary rubbish, concocted to persuade the fanatics who vote in the Republican primaries.”
Obama, for his part, catered to economic nationalists by attacking Romney as an “outsourcing pioneer” and calling him an “outsourcer in chief” – as if outsourcing were evil, could be stopped, or Obama himself had done much to discourage it.
So rampant were the equivocations, untruths, and outright lies from both camps that many media outlets and non-partisan groups maintained running lists of factual distortions.
One of the best known, FactCheck.org, an initiative of the Annenberg Public Policy Center at the University of Pennsylvania, confessed that this campaign had kept them exceptionally busy.
Some of the most egregious examples included Obama’s claims that Romney was planning to raise taxes by $2,000 on middle-income taxpayers and/or cut taxes by $5 trillion, and that Romney backed a law that would outlaw “all abortions, even in cases of rape and incest.”
Romney went even further, claiming that Obama planned to raise taxes by $4,000 on middle-income taxpayers; that Obama planned “to gut welfare reform by dropping work requirements”; and that Chrysler, bailed out by the Obama administration, was moving all of its Jeep production to China.
One is that the US will ultimately be undone by the poor quality of its democratic discourse, and that it is merely at the start of an inevitable decline.
The symptoms are there, even if the disease has not yet infected the entire body.
The other possibility is that what is said and done during an election makes little difference to a polity’s health.
Campaigns are always a time for cheap populism and kowtowing to single-issue fundamentalists.
Perhaps what really matters is what happens after a candidate takes office: the quality of the checks and balances within which he or she operates, the advice offered, the decisions taken, and, ultimately, the policies pursued.
But, if American elections are nothing other than entertainment, why is so much money spent on them, and why do so many people get so exercised over them?
Can the answer be that the outcome would be even worse otherwise?
To paraphrase Winston Churchill, elections are the worst way to select a political leader, save for all other methods that have been tried – and nowhere more so than in America.
America’s Unconfirmed Hostages
DENVER – The United States Constitution, which turned 225 years old last summer, is a remarkable document: the provisions of a text written in the eighteenth century continue to guide twenty-first-century governance.
We will be reminded of the implications of that in the coming weeks, as President Barack Obama fills senior positions in his second-term administration.
In many cases, the process will not be pretty.
Article II of the Constitution stipulates presidential powers that require the “advice and consent of the Senate,” including the nomination of senior officials.
Probably nobody, 225 years ago, had any idea that the number of officials deemed to require Senate confirmation would eventually exceed 1,400, or that Senate confirmation would involve a vetting process that often takes years to complete.
Indeed, many people believe that the Senate confirmation process is broken.
They have only to point to the failed attempt to nominate Susan Rice, the US ambassador to the United Nations, to be Hillary Clinton’s successor as Secretary of State, or to the similarly gut-wrenching nomination of former Senator Chuck Hagel to be Secretary of Defense.
Because of the sheer volume of nominations, most have traditionally sailed through the Senate with so-called unanimous consent, a process by which nominations are placed on the day’s calendar and the calendar is approved in a single voice vote.
But that expedited process is becoming rarer nowadays.
A senator may place a “hold” on a nomination for any reason – including personal animus toward the nominee, or, more often, to gain something in exchange.
And, increasingly, nominations have become a kind of public circus, attracting all kinds of players to the ring: non-governmental organizations, pundits, local politicians, and virtually anyone with an opinion and a way to express it.
These types of spectacles used to be reserved for the nomination of Supreme Court justices – a lifetime appointment to a nine-member body that can overturn laws passed by Congress and signed by the president.
But those full-throttle battles have now spilled over to other nominations.
As a result, an individual’s agreement to serve the president for two or three years has become a life-altering – and mind-numbing – experience.
Today, any nominee to a position requiring Senate confirmation can expect to spend many hours listing past places of residence, attaching tax returns, detailing family members’ campaign contributions, and answering questions about the employment of domestic help or gardening services and whether such employees were legal, tax-paying US residents.
The vetting process will even go back to one’s teenage years – all to ensure that anything that the Senate’s own investigators can find is known before the nomination is formally submitted.
During my career, the Senate confirmed me five times.
Each time, the vetting essentially started from scratch.
In addition to the countless forms, lengthy questionnaires, and background investigations, there was an interview with a paralegal whose job was to ferret out any information that might conceivably bear on the nomination.
These interviews included such cheerfully delivered questions as, “Have you ever been arrested for growing marijuana?”
Or, more directly: “Do you take drugs?” &#160;Or, probing further into past activities or behavior, “Have you ever been arrested for public drunkenness?”
(“I cannot recall” is probably not a good reply.)
In the past, a nomination was officially announced before the nominee moved on to the next phase and met with senators to discuss the appointment.
Now, as the process has become more fraught, the Obama administration has introduced a still further preliminary stage in which the nominee engages in a sort of do-it-yourself consultation with senators, after which the administration gauges the reaction and decides whether or not to go through with the nomination.
In the case of Susan Rice, the answer was no.
In the case of Hagel, the administration decided to proceed.
Once the nomination goes to the Senate, the real fun begins.
Some senators issue press announcements: “A fine candidate…” or “I have concerns....”
In the latter case, the nominee, already beginning to wonder whether the job is worth the aggravation, meets with the senator to clear up “misunderstandings.”
Unfortunately, there may not be any misunderstanding; the senator is simply angry at the administration about something, or dislikes the nominee for something supposedly said or done previously.
In the meantime, various NGOs, sometimes working with hostile senate staff, will be parsing the public record to find some utterance by the nominee – context is often irrelevant – that suggests bad judgment or values.
When I was nominated to be US Ambassador in Iraq, a newspaper article was dug up to insinuate that I had compared North Korea’s human-rights record favorably to that of the US – clear proof that I must be a North Korean sympathizer or a lunatic.
(What I had actually said, to a reporter at a reception, was that all countries need to work on their human-rights record, “even the United States, but North Korea’s is arguably the worst in the world.”)
Allies of the nominee are recruited and pressed into service.
Doubting senators can be subjected to telephone campaigns by the nominee’s supporters (often to counter similar campaigns from the nominee’s opponents), and even to threats from Senate leaders.
Sometimes, opponents of a nominee merely want to make a point, or to cultivate donors (an activity that can seep into any issue in Washington).
When the point is made – or the fundraising goals are achieved – the nominee gets the happy phone call: “It’s done.
The nomination will go through this afternoon.
We’ll call you when the vote takes place.
Congratulations!”
At that point, the nominee hangs up and says: “What was I thinking?”
The Usual Suspect
BERKELEY – Across the Euro-Atlantic world, recovery from the recession of 2008-2009 remains sluggish and halting, turning what was readily curable cyclical unemployment into structural unemployment.
And what was a brief hiccup in the process of capital accumulation has turned into a prolonged investment shortfall, which means a lower capital stock and a lower level of real GDP not just today, while the recovery is incomplete, but possibly for decades.
One legacy of Western Europe’s experience in the 1980’s is a rule of thumb: each year that lower labor-force attachment and reduced capital stock as a result of declining investment depresses production $100 billion below normal implies that productive potential at full employment in future years will be $10 billion below what would otherwise have been forecast.
The fiscal implications of this are striking.
Suppose that the United States or the Western European core economies boost their government purchases for next year by $100 billion.
Suppose further that their central banks, while unwilling to extend themselves further in unconventional monetary policy, are also unwilling to stymie elected governments’ policies by offsetting their efforts to stimulate their economies.
In that case, a simple constant-monetary-conditions multiplier indicates that we can expect roughly $150 billion of extra GDP.
That boost, in turn, generates $50 billion of extra tax revenue, implying a net addition to the national debt of only $50 billion.
What is the real (inflation-adjusted) interest rate that the US or Western European core economies will have to pay on that extra $50 billion of debt?
If it is 1%, boosting demand and production by $150 billion next year means that $500 million must be raised each year in the future to keep the debt from growing in real terms.
If it is 3%, the required increase in annual tax revenues rises to $1.5 billion a year.
If it is 5%, the government will need an additional $2.5 billion per year.
Assuming that continued subnormal output casts a 10% shadow on future potential output levels, that extra $150 billion of production means that in the future, when the economy has recovered, there will be an extra $15 billion of output –&nbsp;and an extra $5 billion of tax revenue.
Governments will not have to raise taxes to finance extra debt taken on to fund fiscal boosts.
Instead, the supply-side boost to potential output over the long run from expansionary fiscal policy would be highly likely not only to pay for the additional debt needed to finance the spending boost, but also to allow for additional future tax cuts while still balancing the budget.
Now this is, to say the least, a highly unusual situation.
Normally, the multipliers applied to expansions in government purchases are much less than 1.5, because the central bank does not maintain constant monetary conditions as government spending expands, but rather acts to keep the economy on track to meet the monetary authority’s inflation target.
A more usual multiplier is the monetary-policy offset multiplier of 0.5 or zero.