Rather than a new treaty, let us adopt at Rio+20 a set of Sustainable Development Goals, or SDGs, that will inspire a generation to act.
SDGs to end extreme poverty; decarbonize the energy system; slow population growth; promote sustainable food supplies; protect the oceans, forests, and drylands; and redress the inequalities of our time can galvanize a generation’s worth of problem-solving.&nbsp; Engineers and technology wizards from Silicon Valley to São Paolo to Bangalore to Shanghai have world-saving ideas up their sleeves.
Universities around the world are home to legions of students and faculty intent on solving practical problems in their communities and countries.
Businesses, at least the good ones, know that they can’t flourish and motivate their workers and consumers unless they are part of the solution.
The world is poised to act.
Rio+20 can help to unleash a generation of action.
There is still time, just barely, to turn the F’s to A’s, and to pass humanity’s ultimate test.
Arms or Allies?
RIGA – It should surprise no one that many in Latvia view the sale by France of fully-equipped assault warships to Russia with grave concern. Other European Union member states seem to be looking increasingly towards Russia as a potential purchaser of military equipment.
But is it wise for EU and NATO members to enhance the capacity of non-allies to project their military power?
After all, only two and a half years ago, Russia invaded Georgia, a country that NATO had named as a potential future member, and has occupied part of it ever since.
The EU Council’s common position on arms exports is legally binding on all EU states.
Of course, competence and responsibility for arms-export controls and licensing rests with member states, not EU institutions.
Indeed, under the Wassenaar Arrangement, a decision on exports is the sole responsibility of each participating state.
Implementation of the common EU position on arms exports has led to more exchanges of information, greater transparency, and closer consultation. It has also harmonized export-control arrangements and procedures.
But there are obvious limits to what can be achieved.
Consultations are currently a bilateral matter, with no rules governing how they should be conducted – and no requirement that any final agreement on arms-export decisions be reached.
The effectiveness of this consultation mechanism is difficult to evaluate.
According to the common position’s provisions, before a member state grants an export license, it should consult with any member state that has previously denied a similar license.
But the common position does not specify the extent to which another member state should be consulted.
More importantly, it does not require the arms-exporting member state to consult with any other member state that might have concerns.
As a result, arms exports to third countries remain a contentious issue within the EU.
At the heart of the matter is a conflict between the individual member states’ national interests – the competitiveness of European defense-related companies and the strategic importance of defense markets when linked to national foreign policy – and the Lisbon treaty, which refers specifically to enhanced solidarity and consultation.
If the Lisbon treaty is to be respected, solidarity must be viewed as a political tool for moving towards a European defense policy that works for the common good.
Pursuing solely national policies on technology transfer runs contrary to that goal.
Clearer rules for the consultation mechanism need to be elaborated, and arms-exporting EU member states should consult all other member governments that might have concerns, not only those that have previously issued or denied an export license.
The EU could work towards a common arms-export policy by seeking a shared understanding of the predictability and stability of third-party countries.
Developing a common policy on arms exports to such countries should go hand in hand with the creation of a common and internationally competitive European defense-equipment market.
This means that cooperation with non-EU countries should not be to the detriment of solidarity and common rules within the EU.
Consulting at an early stage would help manage misperceptions – often fueled by reports in the media long before deals are concluded – and thus strengthen convergence and unity among EU member states.
Giving the EU a greater role in situations where member states’ views differ should also be considered.
For example, member states could consult on sensitive or contentious issues within the Political and Security Committee.
This would strengthen the EU Council’s common position, which already defines general rules for the control of exports of military technology and equipment.
As for NATO, the question of consultations among allies is addressed in Article 4 of the North Atlantic Treaty, which states that, “the Parties will consult together whenever, in the opinion of any of them, the territorial integrity, political independence, or security of any of the Parties is threatened.”
But Article 4 does not relate only to imminent threats.
Decisions taken by a NATO country can have implications for other allies.
The transfer of military equipment and technology to third countries could affect regional security and prompt a revision of threat assessments.
The North Atlantic Council would seem an obvious forum within which to enhance solidarity among members, reassure member states that have perceptions of greater vulnerability, and avoid misperceptions.
At a lower level, the Political and Partnership Committee and/or the Conference of National Armaments Directors could be used for initial consultations.
These issues are of concern to all allies, so discussions should not be confined to bilateral agendas.
Arms sales and technology transfers inevitably raise complex moral and ethical questions. That is all the more reason to seek open, confidence-reinforcing discussions among allies.
Solidarity cannot be achieved when our most important institutions are excluded.
Indeed, some of the most dangerous decisions taken in both the EU and NATO are those that are not openly discussed beforehand.
Toward an Immunized World
ABU DHABI/NEW YORK – For a child, receiving a vaccine takes just a moment (and perhaps a few tears).
But such moments are crucial for getting children off to a healthy start in life, and for advancing progress on global health and development goals.
Along with Mohamed bin Zayed bin Sultan Al Nahyan, Crown Prince of Abu Dhabi, we attach great importance to the world’s first global summit, being held this week in Abu Dhabi, aimed at ensuring that all children have access to the full benefits of vaccines.
Vaccines protect people for a lifetime.
They are one of the most cost-effective investments we can make to improve our world.
Vaccines have eradicated smallpox, pushed polio to the verge of eradication, and saved millions of children from measles, diphtheria, tetanus, and other deadly and disabling diseases.
Thanks in large part to the power of vaccines, the number of children dying before the age of five has fallen from 20 million in 1960 to 6.9 million in 2011, despite a large increase in global population.
Disease saps the greatest asset that any country possesses: the energy and talent of its people.
This is an especially harsh loss for poor countries seeking to gain a foothold in the global economy.
But when children are healthy, families are freed from the burden of costly medical care, allowing them to spend more on food and education.
Healthy children attend school more regularly, are better able to learn, and become more productive adults.
New research shows that vaccines improve cognitive development in children, raise labor productivity, and contribute to a country’s overall economic growth.
Yet more than 22 million children lack access to the basic vaccines that people in high-income countries take for granted.
These children live in the poorest and most remote communities, where the risk of disease is highest.
A child born in a low-income country is 18 times more likely to die before reaching the age of five than a child in a high-income country.
Ending this inequity is at the heart of history’s largest and most successful anti-poverty push – the Millennium Development Goals.
The eight MDGs were adopted in the year 2000, when leaders meeting at the United Nations agreed to cut extreme poverty and hunger by half, fight disease, improve water safety and sanitation, expand education, and empower girls and women.
There have been remarkable gains, but there is still much to do – and fewer than 1,000 days of action left until the 2015 deadline.
Raising global immunization coverage will speed progress toward the MDGs and generate momentum toward a successful post-2015 development agenda.
The World Health Assembly, representing the World Health Organization’s 194 member countries, has endorsed a shared vision – known as the Decade of Vaccines – of a world free from vaccine-preventable diseases, with the full benefits of immunization reaching all people, regardless of who they are or where they live.
Eradicating polio will be a milestone on our path to realizing this vision.
With a new, comprehensive plan to be introduced at the Summit, the world will have a clear roadmap for creating a polio-free world by 2018.
The plan works hand in hand with our overall efforts to raise immunization coverage against other diseases like measles, pneumonia, and rotavirus.
Indeed, we are seeing how strong immunization systems protect our gains against polio and provide a platform for reaching the world’s most vulnerable mothers and children with new vaccines and primary health care.
If we are successful, by the end of the decade we will save more than 20 million lives, prevent nearly one billion cases of illness, and save almost $12 billion in treatment costs alone.
And, in the process of freeing people from the burden of disease, we will unlock immeasurable human potential.
The MDGs and the Decade of Vaccines prove that focused global development objectives can make a profound difference.
They show the power of partnerships that bring together the United Nations, governments, development agencies, civil society, foundations, and the private sector.
Over the next 1,000 days and beyond, our progress will be measured by what we have done to improve the lives of the poorest and most vulnerable members of the human family.
Let us start by recommitting ourselves to realizing the shared vision of a world in which all children get a fair start in life with the protection of vaccines.
This generation will thank us – and so will many generations to come.
Arrogance and Authority
WASHINGTON, DC – It is increasingly common to hear prominent American and European central bankers proclaim, with respect to the crisis of 2008-2010, the following verdict: “We did well.”
Their view is that the various government actions to support the financial system helped to stabilize the situation.
Indeed, what could be wrong when the United States Federal Reserve’s asset purchases may have actually made money (which is then turned over to the US Treasury)?
But to frame the issue in this way is, at best, to engage in delusion.
At worst, however, it creates an image of arrogance that can only undermine the credibility on which central banks’ authority rests.
The real cost of the crisis is not measured by the profit and loss statement of any central bank – or by whether or not the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP), run by the Treasury Department, made or lost money on its various activities.
The cost is eight million jobs in the US alone, with employment falling 6% from its peak and – in a major departure from other post-1945 recessions – remaining 5% below that peak today, 31 months after the crisis broke in earnest.
The cost is also the increase in net federal government debt held by the private sector – the most accurate measure of true government indebtedness.
Comparing the US Congressional Budget Office’s medium-term forecasts before (in January 2008) and after the crisis, this debt increase is a staggering 40% of GDP.
Indeed, the reason there is a perceived fiscal crisis in the US today – along with spending cuts that will further hurt many people – is simple: the banks blew themselves up at great cost to the American people, with major negative global implications.
Most of the public-debt increase in the US and elsewhere is not due to any kind of discretionary fiscal stimulus; it’s all about the loss of tax revenue that comes with a deep recession. (And the Bush administration’s tax cuts for the wealthiest, unfunded Medicare prescription benefit, and debt-financed wars in Afghanistan and Iraq have severely weakened the long-term fiscal outlook.)
Finally, the cost of the crisis is millions of homes lost and lives damaged, some permanently.
The issue is not whether the Fed, or any central bank, should seek to prevent the collapse of its country’s banking system.
To see the severe effects of a banking crisis, look no further than the 1930’s, a period that Ben Bernanke studied in detail before he became Fed chair.
If the choice at any particular moment is to provide support or let the system collapse, you should choose support.
But, more broadly, as Dennis Lockhart, President of the Atlanta Federal Reserve Bank, said last week at a public conference organized by his institution, we should not seek to operate a system based on the principle of “private gains and public losses.” And these losses are massively skewed in ways that are grossly inefficient, in addition to being completely unfair.
The private gains can be measured most directly in the form of executive compensation.
From 2000 to 2008, the people running the top 14 US financial institutions received cash compensation (salary, bonus, and the value of stock sold) of around $2.6 billion.
Of this amount, around $2 billion was received by the five best-paid individuals, who were also central to creating the highly risky asset structures that brought the financial system to the edge of the abyss: Sandy Weil (built Citigroup, which blew up shortly after he left); Hank Paulson (greatly expanded Goldman Sachs, lobbied for allowing more leverage in investment banks, then moved to the US Treasury and helped save them); Angelo Mozilo (built Countrywide, a central player in irresponsible mortgage lending); Dick Fuld (ran Lehman Brothers into the ground); and Jimmy Cayne (ran Bear Stearns into the ground).
The public losses are massive in comparison: roughly $6 trillion, if we limit ourselves just to the increase in federal government debt.
And leading bank executives still insist that they should be allowed to run highly leveraged global businesses, in which they are paid based on their return on equity – unadjusted for any risk.
The world’s top independent financial minds have looked long and hard at these arrangements, and, given what we have learned in recent years, have found them worse than wanting (see the Web page of Anat Admati at Stanford’s Graduate School of Business for the details).
In their view, the big banks should be funded much more with equity – perhaps as much as 30% of their capitalization.
But bankers strongly reject this approach (because it would likely lower their pay), as do central bankers (because they are too much persuaded by the protestation of bankers).
There are many advantages to having an independent central bank run by professionals who can keep their distance from politicians.
But when the people at the apex of these institutions insist that the crisis response went well, and that everything will be fine, even as the financial behemoths that caused the crisis lumber forward, their credibility inevitably suffers.
That should worry central bankers, because their credibility is pretty much all they have.
The US Constitution, after all, does not guarantee the Fed’s independence.
Congress created the Fed, which means that Congress can un-create it.
By assuming away the damage that highly leveraged megabanks can do, the myth of a “good crisis” merely makes political pressure on central banks all the more likely.
Artificial Intelligence and Globalization
Today’s conventional wisdom is that the rise of India and China will be the single biggest factor driving global jobs and wages over the twenty-first century.
High-wage workers in rich countries can expect to see their competitive advantage steadily eroded by competition from capable and fiercely hard-working competitors in Asia, Latin America, and maybe even some day Africa.
This is a good story, full of human drama and power politics.
But I wonder whether, even within the next few decades, another factor will influence our work lives even more: the exponential rise of applications of artificial intelligence.
My portal to the world of artificial intelligence is a narrow one: the more than 500-year-old game of chess.
You may not care a whit about chess, long regarded as the ultimate intellectual sport.
But the stunning developments coming out of the chess world during the past decade should still command your attention.
Chess has long been the centerpiece of research in artificial intelligence.
While in principle, chess is solvable, the game’s computational complexity is almost incomprehensible.
It is only a slight exaggeration to say there are more possible moves in a chess game than atoms in a universe.
For most of the twentieth century, programmers were patently unsuccessful in designing chess computers that could compete with the best humans.
A human chess master’s ability to intuit, visualize, and prioritize easily prevailed over the brute force approach of computers.
The computers gradually improved, but they still seemed far inferior to the top humans.
Or so we thought.
Then, in 1997, in what will surely long be remembered as a historical milestone for modern man, IBM’s “Deep Blue” computer stunned the world by defeating the world champion Garry Kasparov.
Proud Kasparov, who was perhaps more stunned than anyone, was sure that the IBM team must have cheated.
He sarcastically told reporters that he sensed the “the hand of God” guiding his silicon opponent.
But the IBM team had not cheated.
Rather, through a combination of ingenious software and massive parallel computing power, they had produced a silicon-based entity capable of such finesse and subtlety, that international chess grandmasters worldwide (including me) were simply amazed.
Since 1997, the computers have only gotten better, to the point where computer programmers no longer find beating humans a great challenge.
Only a game, you say?
Perhaps, but let me tell you this: when I played professional chess 30 years ago (I once represented the United States in the World Chess Championship cycle), I felt I could tell a lot about someone’s personality by seeing a sampling of their games, even those of an amateur.
Until a short while ago, I could certainly distinguish a computer from a human opponent.
Now everything changed like lightning.
The machines can now even be set to imitate famous human players – including their flaws – so well that only an expert eye (and sometimes only another computer!) can tell the difference.
More than half a century ago, the godfather of artificial intelligence, Alan Turing, argued that the brain’s function could all be reduced to mathematics and that, someday, a computer would rival human intelligence.
He claimed that the ultimate proof of artificial intelligence would be met if a human interrogator were unable to figure out that he was conversing with a computer.
The “Turing test” is the holy grail of artificial intelligence research.
Well, for me, a chess game is a conversation of sorts.
From my perspective, today’s off-the-shelf computer programs come awfully close to meeting Turing’s test.
Over the course of a small number of games on the Internet, I could not easily tell the difference.
True, today’s computers have not evolved to the level of the deranged chess-playing HAL in the filmmaker Stanley Kubrick’s masterpiece “2001: A Space Odyssey,” much less Arnold Schwarzenegger-like droids from the Terminator movies.
But the level that computers have reached already is scary enough.
What’s next?
I certainly don’t feel safe as an economics professor!
I have no doubt that sometime later this century, one will be able to buy pocket professors – perhaps with holographic images – as easily as one can buy a pocket Kasparov chess computer today.
So let’s go back to India and China.
Globalization proceeded at a rapid pace through much of the last century, and at a particularly accelerated rate during its last two decades.
Yet the vast body of evidence suggests that technological changes were a much bigger driver in global wage patterns than trade.
That is, technology, not trade, was the big story of the twentieth-century economy (of course, the two interact, with trade helping to diffuse and stimulate technology, but this is a matter of semantics.)
Are we so sure that it will be different in this century?
Or will artificial intelligence replace the mantra of outsourcing and manufacturing migration?
Chess players already know the answer.
Education in the Second Machine Age
MUNICH – Artificial intelligence, once confined to the realm of science fiction, is changing our lives.
Cars are driving themselves.
Drones are being programmed to deliver packages.
Computers are learning to diagnose diseases.
In a recent book, the economists Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee describe these recent advances as examples of the beginning of what they call “the second machine age.”
The very name – the first machine age was the Industrial Revolution – suggests an epochal shift.
And, indeed, if the predictions are to be believed, these technological advances could have profound implications for the way we live.
One common forecast is that as ever-more advanced robots substitute workers, the cost of labor will become less important, and manufacturing will move back to rich countries.
Another is that increasingly intelligent machines will reduce the demand for advanced skills, and that the economic advantage of having these skills will decline as a result.
The first of these two hypotheses remains far-fetched.
But there is evidence that the second has already started to come to pass, with serious implications for the way that modern economies have attempted to meet the challenges of globalization.
To be sure, there has been plenty of anecdotal evidence of “reshoring” – the relocation of jobs from low-wage countries to high-wage economies.
Apple is shifting some manufacturing from China to Silicon Valley; Airtex Design Group is moving part of its textile production from China back to the United States.
In a recent survey of 384 firms in the eurozone by the management consultancy PricewaterhouseCoopers, two-thirds of the respondents said that they had reshored some activities during the past year, and 50% plan to do so in the next.
But when one looks at the data, there is no sign of reshoring.
Indeed, the trend is continuing in the opposite direction.
Offshoring dropped during the Great Recession that followed the 2008 global financial crisis, but quickly rebounded, accelerating past pre-crisis levels.
For the moment, the return of manufacturing to rich countries remains a prediction, not an outcome.
Evaluating the second hypothesis is more complicated.
At first glance, the evidence supports the possibility that demand for advanced skills is falling.
With the exceptions of the US and Germany, the wage gap between skilled and unskilled workers has been declining in all Western countries in the last 17 years.
One possible explanation is that education levels in Europe outstripped the pace of technological change, oversupplying the market for advanced skills.
In Austria, the share of people with a university degree or its equivalent increased by 250% between 1996 and 2012.
In the United Kingdom and Italy, it almost doubled.
In Spain, it jumped by 70%, and in France by 60%.
By comparison, in the US and Germany, the share of the population with a tertiary education rose by a more modest 25%.
It is also possible, however, that the drop in the wage gap between skilled and unskilled workers represents competition from increasingly intelligent machines.
Here, the US is a case in point.
Because educational attainment has been advancing only modestly in the US since the turn of the century, we would expect the wage gap to be rising steeply, as it did in the 1980s and 1990s.
Instead, it has remained largely unchanged, and it is the unemployment rate among skilled workers that is on the rise, doubling in the US and the United Kingdom from 2000 to 2012.
Until the 1980s, about 70% of income went to labor income and 30% to capital income.
But, since then, the share of income going to labor has declined in all rich countries.
It is now at about 58% of GDP.
According to research by the economists Loukas Karabarbounis and Brent Neiman, half of this decline is the result of cheaper information technology, which has enabled firms to replace workers with computers.
The implications are serious.
If these are indeed the first signs of the second machine age, it is possible that we have been fighting the wrong battle.
As the scarcity of human capital declines in importance, the rapid expansion of education may not be the answer to the challenges of globalization that we hoped it would be.
On the Cusp of an AI Revolution
SAN FRANCISCO – Over the last 30 years, consumers have reaped the benefits of dramatic technological advances.
In many countries, most people now have in their pockets a personal computer more powerful than the mainframes of the 1980s.
The Atari 800XL computer that I developed games on when I was in high school was powered by a microprocessor with 3,500 transistors; the computer running on my iPhone today has two billion transistors.
Back then, a gigabyte of storage cost $100,000 and was the size of a refrigerator; today it’s basically free and is measured in millimeters.
Even with these massive gains, we can expect still faster progress as the entire planet – people and things – becomes connected.
Already, five billion people have access to a mobile device, and more than three billion people can access the Internet.
In the coming years, 50 billion things – from light bulbs to refrigerators, roads, clothing, and more – will be connected to the Internet as well.
Every generation or so, emerging technologies converge, and something revolutionary occurs.
For example, a maturing Internet, affordable bandwidth and file-compression, and Apple’s iconic iPhone enabled companies such as Uber, Airbnb, YouTube, Facebook, and Twitter to redefine the mobile-customer experience.
Now we are on the cusp of another major convergence: big data, machine learning, and increased computing power will soon make artificial intelligence, or AI, ubiquitous.
AI follows Albert Einstein’s dictum that genius renders simplicity from complexity.
So, as the world itself becomes more complex, AI will become the defining technology of the twenty-first century, just as the microprocessor was in the twentieth century.
Consumers already encounter AI on a daily basis.
Google uses machine learning to autocomplete search queries and often accurately predicts what someone is looking for.
Facebook and Amazon use predictive algorithms to make recommendations based on a user’s reading or purchasing history.
AI is the central component in self-driving cars – which can now avoid collisions and traffic congestion – and in game-playing systems like Google DeepMind’s AlphaGo, a computer that beat South Korean Go master Lee Sedol in a five-game match earlier this year.
Given AI’s wide applications, all companies today face an imperative to integrate it into their products and services; otherwise, they will not be able to compete with companies that are using data-collection networks to improve customer experiences and inform business decisions.
The next generation of consumers will have grown up with digital technologies and will expect companies to anticipate their needs and provide instant, personalized responses to any query.
So far, AI has been too costly or complex for many businesses to make optimal use of it.
It can be difficult to integrate into a business’s existing operations, and historically it has required highly skilled data scientists.
As a result, many businesses still make important decisions based on instinct instead of information.
This will change in the next few years, as AI becomes more pervasive, potentially making every company and every employee smarter, faster, and more productive.
Machine learning algorithms can analyze billions of signals to route customer service calls automatically to the most appropriate agent or determine which customers are most likely to purchase a particular product.
And AI’s applications extend beyond online retail: Brick-and-mortar stores still account for 90% of retail sales, according to the consultancy A.T. Kearney.
Soon, when customers enter a physical store, they will be greeted by interactive chat-bots that can recommend products based on shopping history, offer special discounts, and handle customer-service issues.
Advances in so-called “deep learning,” a branch of AI modeled after the brain’s neural network, could enable intelligent digital assistants to help plan vacations with the acumen of a human assistant, or determine consumer sentiments toward a particular brand, based on millions of signals from social networks and other data sources.
In health care, deep-learning algorithms could help doctors identify cancer-cell types or intracranial abnormalities from anywhere in the world in real time.
To deploy AI effectively, companies will need to keep privacy and security in mind.
Because AI is fueled by data, the more data the machine gains about an individual, the better it can predict their needs and act on their behalf.
But, of course, that massive flow of personal data could be appropriated in ways that breach trust.
Companies will have to be transparent about how they use people’s personal data.
AI can also detect and defend against digital security breaches, and will play a critical role in protecting user privacy and building trust.
As in past periods of economic transformation, AI will unleash new levels of productivity, augment our personal and professional lives, and pose existential questions about the age-old relationship between man and machine.
It will disrupt industries and dislocate workers as it automates more tasks.
But just as the Internet did 20 years ago, AI will also improve existing jobs and spawn new ones.
We should expect this and adapt accordingly by providing training for the jobs of tomorrow, as well as safety nets for those who fall behind.
AI is still a long way from surpassing human intelligence.
It has been 60 years since John McCarthy, a computer scientist and nominal father of AI, first introduced the term during a conference at Dartmouth College, and computers have only recently been able to detect cats in YouTube videos or determine the best route to the airport.
We can count on technological innovation to continue at an even more rapid pace than in previous generations.
AI will become like electrical current – invisible and augmenting almost every part of our lives.
Thirty years from now, we will wonder how we ever got along without our seemingly telepathic digital assistants, just as today it’s already hard to imagine going more than a few minutes without checking the 1980s mainframe in one’s pocket.
A Russian Spring?
PARIS – Russia is not Egypt.
And Moscow is not on the eve of revolution as Cairo was less than a year ago.
Indeed, Russia’s powerful have at their disposal assets that former Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak’s regime lacked.
As an energy superpower, Russia can open its coffers to appease, at least in part, the humiliation that it has inflicted on its citizens by falsifying the country’s recent legislative election results.
And not all Russians are in the streets.
We should beware of the “zoom effect,” which made many people believe that the young protesters of Cairo’s Tahrir Square were fully representative of Egyptian society.
They were not.
Rural Egypt, like rural Russia, is much more conservative than the young elites who seize the world’s imagination with their protests and embrace of modern social media.
Furthermore, Mubarak was old and sick, and no longer enjoyed the trust of his people.
Vladimir Putin, by contrast, exudes energy and health, and may still reassure many segments of Russian society whose main concern is their country’s glory rather than its citizens’ happiness.
Yet Putin may be overplaying the macho card so excessively that it could backfire and contribute to his isolation from Russia’s urban and more educated voters.
But, even if the tens of thousands of demonstrators are unlikely to threaten the survival of Putin’s regime, the Kremlin would be wise to take them seriously.
The protesters’ trademark so far has been moderation and restraint; nothing would be more dangerous than violent repression.
Beyond the issue of violence, the Russian authorities would take a huge historical risk by failing to register the public’s growing alienation.
Sheltered physically and metaphorically by the Kremlin’s high walls, and having progressively lost contact with the living conditions of ordinary people (if they ever had any), Russia’s leaders seem to consider their lifestyle to be both normal and eternal.
From the standpoint of condemning elite behavior, Russian protesters evoke, at least partly, the actors of the Arab revolution.
In their denunciation of “Soviet electoral practices,” they reject the combination of despotism and corruption that characterized Soviet power yesterday and Russian power today – rhetoric familiar from Arab revolutionaries.
As young Arabs told the rulers of Libya, Egypt, Tunisia, Syria, Yemen, and other Arab countries, this new generation of Russians is telling Putin: “Get Out!”
But most participants hold few illusions about the efficacy of their protest.
They want to express to Russia’s rulers the extent of their frustration and determination.
They may not expect regime change, but they expect at least some minimal reforms.
Above all, they want to set limits on Putin’s power.
But their protest’s ironic consequence may be that the more moderate of the two figures at the summit of Russian politics, Dmitri Medvedev, will not return to the post of prime minister, as had been planned.
A game of political musical chairs would simply be too much in the eyes of too many Russians.
The protests have caught the Kremlin’s masters, as well as the majority of Russia’s citizens, by surprise.
That applies to Russia, too.
For a long time, Russia has perceived itself as a “White Africa.”
The average life expectancy of Russian men, slightly below 60, is more African than European (or even Asian, for the most part).
The corrupt enrichment of so many Russian elites mimics the disastrous habits of many of their African counterparts.
But this comparison has limits.
Despite its many problems, Africa today has become a continent of hope.
Its population is exploding, as are its economic-growth rates.
Senegalese firms seek to help their Spanish business partners, while Portugal extends an almost royal welcome to the leaders of their former colony, newly oil-rich Angola.
Africa is on the rise, while Russia is on the decline.
The democratic idealism that accompanied the fall of communism 20 years ago is gone, but the “imperial pride” recovered in part during the Putin years may not be enough to compensate for the contempt with which the Russian state treats its citizens.
Russia’s demonstrators’ message is simple: “Too much corruption, disdain, and inequality is too much.”
Russia, like the Arab world, wants modernity.
Spain’s Human-Rights Dilemma
NEW YORK – Spanish MPs want to legislate restraints that would prevent a few of the country’s judges from exercising what has seemed like a roving license to prosecute in Spanish courts human-rights violations committed anywhere in the world.
In a current case, a Spanish judge is seeking arrest warrants against Jiang Zemin, the former president of China, and Li Peng, a former Chinese prime minister, for alleged crimes committed in Tibet.
There is no discernible Spanish connection to the case.
The Spanish MPs have a point: Allowing the country’s prosecuting magistrates to select targets from anywhere in the world, without there being a clear legal nexus to Spain, is an invitation to politicize the process.
But it is also important to preserve the core principle underlying these prosecutions: the concept of universal jurisdiction.
Indeed, it is a concept with ancient origins, and it plays a crucial role in the global protection of human rights.
Universal jurisdiction originated in Greek and Roman times in the struggle against piracy.
Because pirates committed their crimes on the high seas, beyond the territory of any state, the idea developed that they were enemies of humanity whom any state could prosecute.
In the seventeenth century, the Dutch scholar Hugo Grotius, who is recognized for codifying international law, argued that pirates could be tried for their crimes, regardless of where they were committed, aboard the ships that captured them.
Following the 1814-1815 Congress of Vienna, with its condemnation of slavery, some states applied the concept to slave traders, who also committed many of their crimes outside national jurisdictions.
Later, the crimes of the Nazis played an essential part in winning widespread acceptance of the concept of universal jurisdiction.
At the end of World War II, Nazi leaders fled, relocating all over the world.
Countries like Canada and Australia, seeking certainty that those who had committed horrendous crimes would not find safe haven within their borders, established the authority to try suspects in their own courts.
The concept has since been embodied in treaties that virtually every country in the world has ratified.
The 1949 Geneva Conventions require states to search for those who have committed war crimes and either prosecute them in their own courts or turn them over to another state that is prepared to try them.
Similarly, the 1984 Convention Against Torture requires states to establish their own jurisdiction to prosecute torture if an offender is on their territory and is not extradited to stand trial in the country where the crime was committed.
A crucial test of universal jurisdiction is now moving forward in Senegal, where one of Africa’s cruelest dictators, Hissène Habré, who ruled Chad from 1982 to 1990, is set to be prosecuted.
A commission of inquiry established that, during its time in power, Habré’s regime carried out torture and was responsible for the deaths of an estimated 40,000 people.
When Habré was deposed, he fled to Senegal with a substantial portion of the national treasury, living there in comfort with much of his extended family, as well as key supporters.
For many years, African human-rights activists, aided by Human Rights Watch, struggled to hold him accountable.
Now, at long last, with the support of the African Union, he faces trial in his adopted home for the crimes he committed in Chad.
A related practice has developed in the United States, where victims of human-rights crimes committed elsewhere file civil suits against immigrant perpetrators.
In a substantial number of cases since the early 1980’s, US courts have ordered the defendants to pay compensation to the victims.
Most often, universal jurisdiction is invoked when the person alleged to have committed war crimes, crimes against humanity, or genocide in another country is present in the territory where he or she is to be tried.
This is consistent with the principle that there should be no safe haven for those who commit such crimes.
If Spain incorporates such a requirement in its law, and also provides for some other appropriate connection (such as the inclusion of Spaniards among the victims), it will overcome the tendency of a few of its judges to reach out too widely.
Such a reform would remain faithful to the principles of justice that underlie the concept of universal jurisdiction.
As China Turns
When Deng Xiaoping began to open China in the late 1970’s, he said, “It doesn’t matter if a cat is black or white. As long as it catches mice, it is a good cat.”
This motto helped catalyze China into becoming what it is today: an increasingly materialistic, money-worshipping society that has lost touch with traditional ethics.
Nothing captures this moral vacuum more vividly than the recent television drama, “Wo Ju” (“Crowded Spaces”), which has been riveting Chinese audiences.
The program’s “hero,” Guo Haizao, is a fair-skinned and innocent 25-year-old woman living near Shanghai.
Initially she follows in her older sister’s footsteps in quest of their common dream, to attend one of China’s top universities.
But, even with a university degree, life in go-go Shanghai turns out not to be as she had imagined.
“Why is the world so full of unfairness, with the limelight only splashing on the prettiest spots in the city?” she wonders one night, as she worries about her and her sister’s struggle to buy a home.
As Song Siming, a handsome, successful, and Audi-driving – but also married – secretary to the Mayor, tells her, “On those unsightly corners in the dark where dirt, flies, and rats wander, nobody's paying attention.”
Song is a resourceful man who oozes charm.
Guo soon becomes intoxicated by his air of can-do and success.
When problems arise, he makes a quick phone call and gets things “settled.” Little by little, Guo finds herself taken in by his charm and ability to get things done.
Before long, she is cheating on her boyfriend and swooning into Song’s arms and bed.
These changes have created a new kind of hope and despair among the generation of Chinese now coming of age.
But, of course, the sub-text is that if this fixation on property has also led to greater pragmatism in affairs of the heart, it has also led to a worrisome property bubble that many economists now fear could soon burst.
Then, because this is a soap opera, Song suddenly dies in a car crash, just as he is rushing to the hospital – while being chased by corruption investigators! – to check on his sweetheart and their unborn baby boy.
But, as it happens, only days before Guo secretly had an abortion, right after a dramatic fight with Song’s wife.
As fantastic and convoluted as the plot sometimes gets, “Wo Ju” offers a truthful look at what animates contemporary Chinese society: property, money, sex, cars, and power.
Perhaps because it captures the zeitgeist so well, the program has become hugely popular, so much so that it has recently caught the attention of media censors.
Indeed, its realistic use of profanity and its depiction of the spiritual vacuum that grips China got it banished from one of Beijing’s TV channels.
While the official media are flooding television and cinema screens with propaganda about Confucius, ancient fairytales, and kung fu epics, “Wo Ju” engages a broad cross-section of contemporary society, which sees in it troubling aspects of their own lives: official corruption, mistresses, even house slaves.
As Song arrogantly says to Guo before he dies, “As long as it’s a problem that we can solve with money, then it’s not a big problem.”
The program has caused a tsunami of online reflection.
Many Web sites and bulletin boards have run surveys with questions like, “If you were Guo Haizao, would you choose Song Siming and an apartment or Xiaobei (the dumped boyfriend) and true love?”
On one of China’s largest sites, 46% picked Song, while only 22% chose the young boyfriend, a choice that suggests where the new generation’s values now lay.
The traditional virtues of “true love” have been replaced by pragmatism and a willingness to become a mistress before youth expires and all chances of getting a good apartment are lost.
After all, many netizens now argue, does not such a practical course of action save many years of hard work?
One recent Internet match-making effort attracted applications from more than 10,000 young women, all seeking a chance to marry a Shenzhen multi-millionaire sight unseen.
That was not the first lottery marriage in today’s China, and it surely will not be the last.
The most interesting thing about “Wo Ju” may be that most viewers do not dislike Song, the string-pulling mayor’s secretary.
Indeed, while Song may be cast as an anti-hero, in contemporary China, he is considered a “good catch.”
More and more young women are making just such practical choices: putting an apartment before love and pragmatism before principle.
Trashing the ASEAN Brand
CANBERRA – Having a reputation for integrity and decency matters as much in international relations as in professional and personal life.
States that are so regarded consistently punch above their weight – witness the Scandinavians.
By contrast, those that never earn – or fritter away – such a reputation can seriously endanger their own interests, jeopardizing trade, tourism, foreign investment, political support in international forums and negotiations, and the security of their own nationals abroad.
Three of Southeast Asia's most important states – Malaysia, Thailand, and now Indonesia – have brought trouble on themselves in this respect in recent months.
All three are raising serious doubts, in different ways, about their commitment to the rule of law, the integrity of their judicial systems, and the quality of mercy in the administration of justice.
In Malaysia, the country's highest court last month rejected opposition leader Anwar Ibrahim's appeal against a five-year prison sentence and a ban against running for public office for a further five years – a shocking and indefensible decision.
Prime Minister Najib Razak's government was transparently vindictive in pursuing allegations of sodomy (a crime rarely prosecuted in Malaysia) against Anwar.
The evidence against him was obviously inconclusive; and the court's acceptance of it was manifestly craven.
If the fiction is maintained that the court was merely doing its judicial duty as it saw it, decency could still prevail: Anwar could be granted executive clemency.
But there is no sign that Najib's government will advise such action.
Anwar's real crime was that his opposition coalition of conservative Muslim, secular, and Chinese parties was seriously challenging the six-decade supremacy of Najib's United Malays National Organization (UMNO), losing the 2013 election only because of a transparent gerrymander.
In Thailand, the biggest crime of former Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra and his supporters was to keep winning national elections with populist campaigns that threatened the interests of the country's long-established Bangkok-based elite.
Serious wrongdoing, involving bribery and institutional corruption, no doubt occurred along the way; but the scale of such offenses could hardly justify last year's military coup and the subsequent repression.
Some of those in the army-installed National Reform Council and Constitutional Drafting Committee have a real interest in ensuring that Thailand's next constitution – the 20th since 1932 – will be genuinely democratic.
Many do want to end, once and for all, the corrupt, vote-buying culture that has long afflicted Thai politics on both sides.
But true reform can be achieved only in a spirit of reconciliation, and the military regime's crude impeachment of deposed Prime Minister Yingluck Shinawatra (Thaksin's sister) in January – on trumped-up charges that seemed flimsy even to many of her diehard opponents – has made that impossible.
The law, once again, has been used for nakedly political ends.
Indonesia's case is different from the other two, and less extreme, but also troubling for the country's reputation.
The grassroots-driven victory of President Joko “Jokowi" Widodo last year triumphantly consolidated the country's democratic transition, and raised high expectations for human-rights and anti-corruption campaigners.
But, domestically, confidence in Jokowi's capacity and will to tackle corruption has eroded with his nomination – only very belatedly withdrawn – of a suspiciously wealthy but politically well-connected candidate for National Police Chief.
Internationally, concern has been growing about Jokowi's stated determination to allow – after a long moratorium – the executions of scores of convicted drug traffickers to proceed.
His stance reflects no consideration of whether their individual cases might justify clemency, as well as apparent indifference to mounting evidence that sentencing in capital cases might have owed less to a case's merits than to the presence or absence of bribes.
Two Australian drug traffickers have been scheduled for execution this month.
While no one doubts that they were properly convicted ten years ago, their behavior since – and questions about the integrity of the judicial process that condemned them to die but allowed others to live – has made a compelling case for the exercise of mercy, for them and for others.
What does not yet seem to have registered with Jokowi, or with enough of his fellow citizens, is the incongruity of refusing even to consider clemency for those on Indonesia's death row, while lobbying passionately for clemency for more than 200 Indonesians condemned to die elsewhere, notably in the Gulf.
Decency can be credibly demanded of others only if one practices it oneself.
It seems only a matter of time before Indonesians start feeling the pain of this inconsistency.
Malaysia has earned worldwide condemnation for its handling of the Anwar affair, and Thailand has lost many international friends since its latest coup, reflected in a humiliating loss in its recent bid for a seat on the UN Human Rights Council.
Thai diplomats fear another such defeat in their country's current attempt to win a seat on the UN Security Council.
There are some larger regional consequences in all of this.
The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) has tenaciously fought for its place as the geopolitical hinge between East and South Asia, and an important player in Asia-Pacific economic and security diplomacy.
In doing so, it has had to repeatedly finesse issues like Cambodia's authoritarian leadership, Myanmar's struggle with democratic transition, Vietnam's stubbornly anachronistic one-party state, and even impeccably incorruptible Singapore's regular misuse of defamation laws to neutralize political opponents.
The question that ASEAN leaders must now ask themselves is just how much trashing of the Southeast Asian brand, by how many of its members simultaneously, the region can afford while still fully realizing its aspirations for economic growth and political influence.
It is always tempting to claim that what happens behind sovereign borders is nobody else's business.
But that is no longer true in today's interconnected world.
Some states may be big and powerful enough to get away with behaving badly, but winning respect for behaving well is a much stronger foundation for economic and political success.
Unshackling ASEAN
SINGAPORE – As the Association of Southeast Asian Nations approaches its 50th anniversary next year, its failure to reach a consensus regarding Chinese territorial claims in the South China Sea has raised concerns throughout the region.
Although the requirement that all decisions be made by consensus enables disparate member states to unite while protecting their national interests, it also limits ASEAN’s effectiveness in dealing with emerging security threats.
The consensus rule explains why ASEAN failed to present a united front after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks in the United States, and in the subsequent US-led war on terror.
Similarly, ASEAN’s response to North Korea’s provocations – such as ongoing nuclear tests and the 2010 attack that sunk the South Korean corvette Cheonan, killing 46 seamen – has been muted, owing to some ASEAN member states’ sympathy for the North Korean regime.
The territorial disputes in the South China Sea are the strongest indicator yet that ASEAN’s consensus principle is limiting the organization’s effectiveness.
The question of how to respond to growing Chinese assertiveness in the region has divided ASEAN member states more deeply than any previous issue has.
At the ASEAN Ministerial Meeting in 2012, the organization failed to issue a joint statement for the first time in its history, because Cambodia refused to allow any mention of incidents caused by China in the South China Sea.
In July 2016, ASEAN foreign ministers failed to mention in their joint communiqué the landmark ruling against China that had been issued just two weeks before by an international arbitral tribunal on the disputes.
ASEAN’s failure to act on the South China Sea issue is leading member-state governments and citizens to question the organization’s ability “to maintain and enhance peace” – the first purpose listed in its Charter.
What’s more, the current stalemate will likely force certain member states to address the issue through other means, which will ultimately jeopardize ASEAN’s regional and international relevance.
ASEAN must solve its consensus dilemma, through either procedural reforms or institutional innovations.
For starters, it should follow a previous suggestion, made by the ASEAN Eminent Persons Group in 2006, to introduce majority decision-making.
With ASEAN’s range of activities broadening, the EPG observed, it should “consider alternative and flexible decision-making mechanisms,” including voting.
The European Union embraced this governance mechanism long ago, and even within ASEAN there is precedent for majority-vote decision-making, particularly on geopolitical and security issues.
For example, the 1995 Treaty on the Southeast Asia Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone established a commission that, “failing consensus,” can make decisions by a two-thirds majority.
When ASEAN member states cannot reach a consensus, they should distinguish between two types of issues to determine the path forward: those that have obvious implications for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, and domestic autonomy of a member state; and those that have obvious implications for regional security.
ASEAN member states should seek consensus in the former case, unless the country in question decides otherwise.
But in the latter case, they should have the option to conduct a majority vote.
Accordingly, if an issue has significant regional-security implications and does not concern a given member state’s sovereignty, territorial integrity, or political autonomy, that state should not be allowed to sideline all other member states’ interests at the expense of regional peace.
Another way out of the consensus dilemma is to create new institutional frameworks.
For example, an ASEAN Commission for the Management of South China Sea Disputes, operating through majority voting, could establish ASEAN’s position on the issue and liaise with China to resolve disagreements when they arise.
Alternatively, ASEAN member states with territorial claims in the South China Sea could align and include non-claimant ASEAN member states.
A South China Sea caucus within ASEAN could shape a common position among its own members ahead of ASEAN-related meetings, and make an ASEAN-wide consensus on the issue more likely.
If these options fail, all like-minded countries in the region, regardless of their South China Sea claims or ASEAN membership, should form a larger caucus to address the issue, by formulating a shared position in region-wide platforms such as the ASEAN Regional Forum and the East Asia Summit.
In the future, this regional caucus could, if circumstances allowed, evolve into a more comprehensive regional security arrangement that supplements ASEAN-led mechanisms.
Including non-member countries could undermine ASEAN’s unity; but that is a tradeoff ASEAN member states will have to accept if they decide to adhere strictly to consensus decision-making.
That said, the consensus principle should not be abandoned.
It is in ASEAN’s best interest to reach a consensus on important issues whenever possible – including on the South China Sea dispute if it proves not to be a serious threat to regional peace.
To this end, ASEAN member states should foster more trust, cooperation, and dialogue among themselves, and with China.
All ASEAN member states must strike a balance between their respective national interests and broader regional interests.
For its part, China should be more sensitive to ASEAN member states’ security concerns, and act to turn the South China Sea into a haven for peace and prosperity, rather than an arena for tensions and rivalry.
ASEAN’s New Approach to Myanmar
NEW YORK – The recent decision by Myanmar’s government to sentence pro-democracy leader Aung San Suu Kyi to a further 18 months’ house arrest shows how difficult it is to deal with that country’s ruling generals.
Yet the first steps toward a new approach may already have been taken.
The clearest sign comes from the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), of which Myanmar is a member.
At first, most of ASEAN’s member governments responded mildly to the verdict, expressing their “disappointment” – a stance that reflects the group’s principle of noninterference in fellow members’ internal politics.
But Thai Foreign Minister Kasit Piromya then consulted his counterparts in Cambodia, Indonesia, Singapore, and Vietnam.
As current ASEAN chair, he floated the idea of concertedly requesting a pardon for Aung San Suu Kyi.
ASEAN government officials have since met to draft a text.
Approval by the association’s foreign ministers may come in September, with ASEAN leaders tackling the issue in October.
Of course, amendments and objections to the draft should be expected.
But the pardon request is already significant.
It seeks to be finely balanced, respecting the regime’s sovereignty while subtly pressing home the point in unison, as neighboring states.
The request would be politely worded, but it would also be an official and public mode of communication, instead of the usual behind-the-scenes quiet diplomacy.
What ASEAN says or does not say will not change things immediately.
Cynics might add that even if Aung San Suu Kyi is pardoned, she may yet still be detained on political grounds or face other barriers aimed at preventing her from competing in the elections promised in Myanmar for 2010.
But Western sanctions have not worked, either.
Since the 1990’s crackdown, human rights violations have continued, most recently with the suppression of the protests led by Buddhist monks in 2007.
The average citizen has grown poorer, even as those close to the junta become ostentatiously rich.
Western sanctions instead paved the way for investments in Myanmar by those with less concern about human rights violations – first by ASEAN neighbors in hotels and other sectors, and more recently by China and India, which are vying for projects and influence in the strategic energy sector.
As a result, Myanmar’s generals have been able to play one side off against another.
The game, however, may now be changing.
ASEAN’s initiative is a new step forward for the group.
While ASEAN rejected previous calls to impose sanctions, or even to expel Myanmar, this step shows that it will not remain inert regardless of what the generals do.
Moreover, some ASEAN member countries, like Singapore, have explicitly called for Aung San Suu Kyi to be allowed to participate in the 2010 elections.
The ASEAN effort coincides with two other developments.
One is the decision by the United States to reconsider its policy of sanctions, becoming more flexible while remaining true to its values and interests.
Some activists have criticized US Senator Jim Webb’s journey to Yangon to obtain the release of John Yettaw, the American whose actions triggered the charges against Aung San Suu Kyi.
But this is consistent with the Obama administration’s policy of seeking a dialogue even with those who are not America’s friends.
Such dialogue is vital if Myanmar is to be prevented from possibly pursuing nuclear weapons and rigging elections, à la Iran.
The other development is less obvious.
After the court delivered its verdict, the regime halved the sentence and agreed to keep Aung San Suu Kyi under house arrest, rather than moving her to one of its worst jails.
This may not seem like much of a concession.
But the junta seems to be trying to cause less offense.
Consider, too, the junta’s gesture in handing over Yettaw to Senator Webb, and its interaction with the international community on humanitarian assistance after Cyclone Nargis.
Might it be possible that the generals in Myanmar recognize that they are in a cul de sac?
Could the regime be seeking ways out of its isolation in the run-up to the 2010 elections?
Could it welcome dialogue and engagement?
How the generals respond to the ASEAN request will be an important signal of the regime’s intentions.
Even if the regime does want to begin talking, sustaining a dialogue will be no easier than has been the case with North Korea.
ASEAN, as the organization of neighboring states, is important to achieving that goal, but US involvement is key, as is inclusion of China and India.
They must be pressed to see more than the opportunity for strategic access to energy and other natural resources.
Japan, too – still the largest Asian economy and a traditional donor to the region – must also play a role.
A moral but pragmatic community needs to be constructed, with all in agreement on how to deal with Myanmar.
Even if, like an orchestra, different countries use different instruments and play different notes, the main theme must be consistent.
If this can be done, the chances of progress in the run-up to the 2010 elections will be strengthened.
Success may still prove elusive, but a new game with a greater possibility for success will have begun.
The Dark Heart of ASEAN
WASHINGTON, DC – Next week, at a summit in California, US President Barack Obama will meet with the leaders of the ten countries of Asia’s most important regional grouping: the Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
The event, the first-ever US-ASEAN summit on American soil, is being touted as a sign of America’s growing interest in Southeast Asia.
The question is whether the US, by inviting all members of ASEAN, has allowed its interests to overwhelm its principles.
The upcoming summit is the latest manifestation of the Obama administration’s strategic “pivot” toward Asia – a national security strategy that entails a shift of American military, economic, and diplomatic resources toward the Pacific Rim countries.
In many ways, this move toward closer relations makes a lot of sense.
For starters, tensions between several Southeast Asian countries and China are on the rise, owing partly to the fact that China, under President Xi Jinping (its most autocratic leader since Deng Xiaoping), has been acting increasingly assertively in staking its contested territorial claims in the region’s waters.
Most recently, China decided to move an oil rig into waters claimed by Vietnam.
A similar decision two years ago led to deadly anti-China riots in Vietnam.
And it is not just Vietnam that’s worried.
Malaysia, Singapore, and the Philippines are also trying to upgrade their navies and coast guards.
Indeed, two decades after essentially tossing US forces out of local bases, the Philippines has welcomed back American troops as part of a new military cooperation deal.
Even countries whose economies rely on China are worried.
China is Laos’s biggest aid donor and largest trading partner; yet Laos’s ruling communist party last month elected a new leadership reportedly devoid of any pro-China politicians.
In Myanmar, which also depends heavily on Chinese aid and trade, the fear of becoming a Chinese satellite was a key reason why the military junta ceded power to a civilian government in the early 2010s.
Beyond security challenges, the US has a growing economic interest in Southeast Asia.
Together, the ASEAN countries comprise America’s fourth-largest trading partner.
Some evidence also suggests that the new ASEAN Economic Community, a framework for a regional free-trade agreement, is helping Southeast Asian countries weather an increasingly turbulent global economic environment.
But there is one very serious problem with the upcoming US-ASEAN summit.
Since the US pivot to Asia was launched in 2011, Southeast Asia’s political systems have, on the whole, regressed significantly.
Over the last few years, Thailand has gone from flawed democracy to military rule, which could persist through 2018, or beyond.
Similarly, Malaysia appeared to be headed for a two-party democracy in 2011.
Today, opposition leader Anwar Ibrahim is in jail on dubious sodomy charges; the government has passed legislation that essentially authorizes it to detain critics indefinitely; and Prime Minister Najib Razak remains embroiled in multiple economic and political scandals.
Cambodia, too, seemed like it had reached a political breakthrough after the opposition coalition nearly won the 2013 general election.
But in the last two years, Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen has reasserted his political dominance.
Opposition leader Sam Rainsy, fearing arrest, has fled into exile.
Then there is Myanmar.
Although the Obama administration has touted the country as a shining example of democratic change, genuine democracy remains over the horizon.
True, the longtime opposition party, the National League for Democracy, won last November’s general election.
But the military still controls many ministries and a quarter of the seats in parliament.
Moreover, civil wars are erupting along Myanmar’s borders, and gangs and other radical groups are slaughtering Muslims in the country’s west.
Laos, Vietnam, and Brunei remain among the most repressive states in the world, with no evidence of political opening at all.
And though democracy has advanced in Indonesia, the Philippines, and Singapore, progress has been slow; in Singapore, the ruling party continues to dominate the political system.
Many factors account for the weakening of democracy in Southeast Asia.
The region’s first generation of elected leaders, like former Thai Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra, often proved to be no more than elected autocrats who used their majorities to crush their opponents and suppress technologies that could be used as tools for change.
Indeed, Thailand, whose online repression has increased under the junta, now blocks more than 100,000 websites from its citizens.
Weak institutions mean many countries, such as Malaysia, struggle to resolve political crises; in Thailand, army takeovers have become the modus vivendi.
Add to that the influence of China – hardly a force for democratic change – and Southeast Asia’s democratic regression is not particularly shocking.
What is troublesome is that the Obama administration has been reinforcing this damaging trend by bolstering ties with Southeast Asian autocrats.
Obama has maintained close relations with Malaysia’s Najib (the two are reportedly golfing buddies).
When Obama visited Malaysia last year, he barely mentioned Anwar’s imprisonment.
The Obama administration also has been conspicuously quiet about abuses in Brunei, Laos, and Vietnam, inviting the head of Vietnam’s Communist Party to Washington, DC, last July for a showy and warm visit.
In recent months, the Obama administration has begun to restore links with Thailand that were put on ice after the May 2014 coup, including by resuming a high-level strategic dialogue.
Yet according to Human Rights Watch, “Thailand’s military junta tightened its grip on power and severely repressed fundamental rights” last year.
And, so far this year, it has shown no signs of changing that approach.
The upcoming US-ASEAN summit will include leaders – like Hun Sen, who has ruled Cambodia for 25 years – who were previously considered too ruthless and repressive to be received by the US president on American soil.
It seems that security and economic considerations have now usurped democracy as leading determinants of US foreign policy in the region.
For the people of Southeast Asia, this approach may ultimately create more risks than benefits.
A Security Strategy for the 21st Century
MADRID – “Time and again in our Nation’s history, Americans have risen to meet –and to shape – moments of transition. This must be one of those moments.”
So begins the National Security Strategy of the United States of America, presented before Congress on May 27.
As with the politics pursued in the Obama administration’s 16 months of office – dialogue, international commitment, nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament – the document’s strength lies in the position that it takes.
The Security Strategy is a clear departure from that of its predecessor and offers a wider conception of what national security represents for US President Barack Obama.
In the face of the major challenges of our times, Obama has taken a stand with a comprehensive doctrine.
Indeed, the Security Strategy is almost a “National” Strategy.
Its thinking goes beyond the dominant, unilateral paradigm of its predecessor and includes a defense of international law. This is particularly noteworthy, given that none of the great treaties to create an international criminal court and a permanent war-crimes tribunal was signed by the US during George W. Bush’s presidency.  
Obama’s approach to security is broader as well, proposing the “three Ds” – defense, diplomacy, and development – as indivisible parts of a whole.