Even mortgage-backed securities, which were at the center of the financial crisis that erupted in 2008, have important uses in spreading home and auto ownership.
The problem was not with the innovation, but with how it was used – that is, with financiers’ incentives.
And competition does play a role here.
Competition makes it harder to make money, and thus depletes the future rents (and stock prices) of the incompetent.
In an ordinary industry, incompetent firms (and their employees) would be forced to exit.
In the financial sector, the incompetent take on more risk, hoping to hit the jackpot, even while the regulator protects them by deeming them too systemically important to fail.
Instead of abandoning competition and giving banks protected monopolies once again, the public would be better served by making it easier to close banks when they get into trouble.
Instead of making banking boring, let us make it a normal industry, susceptible to destruction in the face of creativity.
What Drives Moral Progress?
DAVOS – What would happen if the ancient Greek philosopher Plato partook in contemporary dialogues about the types of questions that he first posed, and that continue to vex us?
In my view, he would have many new questions – including about our increasingly psychological approach to philosophical discussion.
Plato would probably head to a leading global technology hub: Google’s California headquarters.
There, he might fall into a discussion with a software engineer about, say, whether ethical questions can be answered through crowdsourcing.
He would probably love the idea of the information cloud – so abstract, so Platonic – and find Google to be the ideal tool to catch up on the vast scientific and technical advances of the last couple of millennia.
But Plato would probably be most amazed by the world’s moral progress.
After all, he believed that being a “philosopher” meant assuming the responsibilities of moral reformer.
Yet, though morality was always at the center of his thinking, many of the moral truths that we now take for granted never occurred to him.
For example, though Plato opposed the enslavement of Greeks, he – like every other ancient Greek – condoned the enslavement of “barbarians” (non-Greeks).
Today, by contrast, even an emphatically non-philosophical person – say, Plato’s “media escort” – could easily explain why slavery is wrong: “A person is a person.
Everybody’s life is just as important as anybody else’s.”
As obvious as this conclusion might seem, the world has taken millennia to reach it – and, in many ways, has yet to accept it fully.
Nonetheless, we can now collectively look back at our slave-owning, wife-beating, child-brutalizing, heretic-burning, colonizing forebears and wonder how even the most profoundly moral among them failed to see that they should not behave that way.
What drove this progress?
Plato held that moral progress is essentially an intellectual process, driven by reasoned arguments – a stance that many of the most influential moral philosophers, from Baruch Spinoza and Immanuel Kant to John Rawls and Peter Singer, have supported.
Yet many other philosophers have rejected the autocracy of reason in humans’ moral lives, agreeing with David Hume’s assertion that “reason, in itself, is perfectly inert.”
They believe that no purely abstract argument can get us to do anything that we do not want to do.
If a reasoned argument cannot move us, what can?
One simple answer stands out: emotions.
Moral emotions, notably empathy, can accomplish what no bloodless ratiocination can: they make us feel – and thus want to account for – the experience of others.
The more we feel, the more we care – and the more moral our motivations.
In short, a stronger sense of empathy spurs moral progress.
With this shift in focus from reason to emotion, moral philosophy is increasingly giving way to moral psychology, which, by incorporating ideas from evolutionary biology, has more and more to say about human nature and our moral lives.
It all comes down to natural selection.
Moral emotions like empathy are as much an outcome of the blind workings of adaptation as our upright stance and opposable thumbs – traits that are entrenched in a species through the proliferation of particular genes.
We humans are most strongly empathetic toward those who share the greatest proportion of our genes: our children, our parents, our siblings, and, by lessening gradations, our extended family and tribe.
Our empathy toward them might even drive us to make sacrifices that jeopardize our individual survival, but that makes perfect sense in terms of preserving our shared genes.
Of course, empathy is not the only part of our inherited nature that shapes our behavior toward others.
In fact, there is also a compelling evolutionary explanation for xenophobia.
Humans evolved from primates who formed communities that worked together to survive.
Given the obvious benefits of having access to more territory in which to gather and hunt, outsiders – particularly those who bear characteristics that mark them as genetically distant – were treated as foes.
In this sense, the notion of “us versus them” has been fundamental to human evolution, and it continues to shape our interactions.
Just as both empathy and xenophobia can be explained by natural selection, both can be modulated by cultural factors.
But do they have equal claims to being moral emotions?
Within the strict domain of moral psychology, they do.
After all, a psychological telling of the story of our moral development provides no basis for encouraging us to dampen one natural inclination and nurture another.
But moral psychology does not have to tell the whole story.
There is no reason why we cannot have moral psychology and moral philosophy: moral psychology to explain why moral progress is both possible and painfully slow, and moral philosophy to clarify what constitutes moral progress and to push us in the appropriate direction.
We are reasoning, deliberating human beings, and our genes are not the masters of our fate.
We should not become so enthralled by the explanatory power of the behavioral sciences that we succumb to the belief that moral progress is predetermined.
Psychology tells a diminished story that leaves out our past moral advances and the hard argumentative work required to expand those advances in the future.
Plato would reject this view.
So should we.
Energi Terbarukan dan Pembaruan Ekonomi Timur Tengah
FEZ – Jatuhnya harga minyak dunia telah menghancurkan perekonomian negara-negara di Timur Tengah dan Afrika Utara.
Setelah menyaksikan beberapa kali penurunan harga yang cukup parah, banyak pemimpin di kawasan tersebut tergoda menunggu harga naik lagi.
Tetapi penurunan harga kali ini berbeda dan pemerintah perlu membuat strategi pembangunan dan energi yang baru.
Dorongan Maroko untuk menjadi rumah pembangkit energi terbarukan regional menawarkan pilihan nyata bagi pembangunan ekonomi negara-negara Arab lainnya.
Maroko sudah cukup lama berinvestasi dalam proyek-proyek energi terbarukan skala besar namun baru sekarang mulai dioperasikan.
Barangkali salah satu investasi yang paling mengagumkan adalah pembangkit listrik tenaga surya raksasa, Noor-1, berlokasi di gurun Maroko dekat Ouarzazate.
Dibuka pada tanggal 4 Februari, Noor-1 menggunakan teknologi yang sangat canggih untuk penyimpanan energi agar bisa digunakan di malam hari dan ketika berawan.
Dianggap pembangkit listrik tenaga surya terbesar di dunia, Noor-1 diperkirakan bisa menghasilkan energi yang cukup bagi lebih dari satu juta orang, serta energi tambahan yang akan diekspor ke Eropa dan Afrika, menurut Bank Dunia.
Mengingat Maroko mengimpor sekitar 97% pasokan energinya dan tidak memiliki cadangan minyak atau gas alam dalam negeri, pemerintahnya memandang bahwa pengembangan energi terbarukan adalah satu-satunya cara menjamin pembangunan ekonomi yang berkelanjutan.
Cara pandang seperti ini harus dipertimbangkan negara-negara lain di kawasan tersebut.
Proyek Noor-1, seluas lebih dari 4,5 kilometer persegi (1,7 mil persegi) dengan 500.000 cermin lengkung – beberapa diantaranya setinggi 12 meter – menghabiskan biaya sekitar $700 juta.
Namun proyek ini ditujukan sebagai salah satu dari mega kompleks pembangkit listrik tenaga surya yang terbentang seluas lebih dari 30 kilometer persegi.
Memang benar di akhir tahun 2018, tiga pembangkit listrik lainnya, Noor-II, Noor-III, dan Noor-Midelt akan dibangun menggunakan teknologi gabungan, termasuk thermosolar dan fotovoltaik.
Proyek ini akan menghasilkan daya hingga 2.000 megawatt per hari di akhir tahun 2020 dan bisa mengurangi kesenjangan pembangunan antara wilayah perkotaan dan pedesaan.
Tentu saja proyek ini membutuhkan investasi dalam jumlah besar.
Dari total pembiayaan proyek sebesar $9 miliar, sekitar $1 miliar dikeluarkan oleh bank investasi asal Jerman, $400 juta dari Bank Dunia, dan $596 juta dari Bank Investasi Eropa (EIB).
Sisa dana dibiayai oleh pemerintah Maroko sebagai bagian dari strategi pembangunan nasional.
Dalam waktu dekat, Maroko juga akan mengembangkan proyek tenaga angin dengan kapasitas minimal 2.000 MW setiap harinya serta proyek tenaga air sebesar 2.000 MW.
Keduanya dapat memenuhi 42% total produksi energi.
Jumlah ini mencerminkan proporsi yang tiada berbanding dengan energi terbarukan di tingkat regional maupun internasional.
Kini, Tarfaya Wind Farm, bertempat di pesisir selatan Maroko, adalah ladang angin terbesar di Afrika.
Dilengkapi dengan 131 turbin dan kapasitas harian yang lebih dari 300 MW, Tarfaya akan membantu menurunkan emisi karbon dioksida Maroko hingga 900.000 ton per tahun dan mengurangi pembelian minyak impor lebih dari $190 juta.
Meskipun fokus pada energi terbarukan, Maroko tidak menghentikan penggunaan sumber energi tradisional.
Selama lima tahun ke depan, pemerintah akan menyiapkan infrastruktur yang diperlukan untuk menjadikan gas alam cair (LNG) lebih mudah diakses oleh industri dalam negeri.
Ini merupakan upaya besar karena juga meliputi pembangunan pelabuhan dengan LNG dock dan pipa-pipa penyalur sejauh 400 kilometer.
Proyek besar ini akan membutuhkan biaya $4,5 miliar yang semuanya akan didanai oleh pihak swasta.
Dengan kebutuhan listrik yang bertambah 7% per tahun, sebagian besarnya akibat permintaan industri yang meningkat, pemerintah Maroko sudah menyadari bahwa mereka tidak bisa berdiam diri.
Kini, 90% warga Maroko terhubung ke grid, naik secara drastis dari tahun 1990-an ketika persentasenya hanya 18%.
Selama periode tersebut, investasi nasional pada elektrifikasi melonjak hingga lebih dari $3 miliar per tahun.
Pemerintah Maroko yakin bahwa reformasi dan pembangunan akan menegaskan kebangkitannya sebagai pemimpin regional dan pintu masuk ke Afrika.
Bertambahnya akses pada energi terbarukan berarti bahwa semua perusahaan memiliki daya listrik yang cukup untuk memenuhi kebutuhan, yang esensial bagi kemampuan negara untuk mendiversifikasi sektor ekonomi.
Investor sadar akan posisi geografis Maroko yang luar biasa dan stabilitas politiknya di kawasan sering dihambat oleh ketidakpastian.
Proyek pembangkit listrik tenaga surya raksasa dalam negeri serta investasi lainnya akan membantu meningkatkan kemandirian energi, mengurangi biaya dan memperluas akses listrik bagi warga.
Negara-negara lain di Afrika dan Timur Tengah hendaknya memperhatikan.
Morocco’s Veiled Feminists
It is often assumed that modern feminism has no place, and thus can make little headway, in societies undergoing a religious revival, particularly in the Islamic world.
But the real progress made in recent years on women’s rights in Morocco suggests otherwise: a unique combination of activism by secular and religious women, the calculations of political parties, and a significant role for the King has led to real progress.
Pioneering Moroccan feminists began their work soon after independence in 1956.
By and large representative of a liberal perspective, they nonetheless recognized the importance of Islam throughout Moroccan society.
As a result, they took care to frame their demands in ways that provided a measure of Islamic identity.
This first generation of Moroccan feminists was guided by a key insight: the interactions of men and women were not dictated by religion, but by social practices that had often used religion as a means of reinforcement.
For example, women and their sexual purity were linked with the honor of men and their families – a connection that was defended by grounding it in Islam.
For these activists, such linkages were intended to maintain control over women, and were part of Moroccan society, not Islam.
By the 1990’s, Morocco was feeling the impact of the Iranian Revolution and America’s post-Cold War emergence as the sole global superpower.
Like many Muslim countries in this new era, Morocco began to experience a revitalization of political Islam.
This threatened the authority of the King, who had overseen the religious establishment, as well as feminists’ efforts to moderate Morocco’s Family Law, which had been based on a rigid view of religious teachings.
But the same de-centralization of authority that had empowered Islamist movements also empowered Moroccan women.
Better educated and more in touch with global currents through the media or their own travel, women began participating in Moroccan political debates.
They challenged the disparities in legal treatment of women, broached new ideas concerning the role of women in Moroccan society, and questioned practices that had long been understood as Islamic.
Their strategy shifted as well, focusing on the growing importance of religious values in shaping societies and global relations.
As a result, the veil became a mechanism for making their presence felt publicly and gaining credibility within religious debates.
Over the past decade, the number of Moroccan women taking an active role in Islamist associations or political parties increased dramatically.
The growing significance of the veil also highlighted important differences between men and women in Morocco.
For many men, Islamist or not, the veil remains a sign of Islamic affiliation and traditional piety.
For many women, however, the veil is a token of liberation – an indication that they have engaged with the Moroccan public in ways that reflect their own sense of religious practice.
Liberal Moroccan feminists understand this use of the veil by many Moroccan women, and they have encouraged a dialogue with veiled activists from the Islamist camp.
The signs of cooperation have been clear: increasing use of Arabic, rather than French, discussions that incorporate real knowledge of Islamic scripture, and recognition that Islam remains distinct from traditional practices.
At the same time, liberal feminists began to invest more effort in civic associations, rather than political parties.
This broadened their focus to Moroccan society as a whole and questions of how people could be empowered to improve their lives.
As a result, liberal feminists have increased their influence among both decision makers and religious women.
Women are increasingly making the argument that they have been deliberately excluded from a full role in society not because Islam prescribes it, but because Islam was revealed in a deeply patriarchal social context.
Feminist interpretations of religious texts – encouraged by increasing numbers of women in prominent religious positions – continue to challenge traditionalists of all stripes.
The women’s movement in Morocco – which now bridges secular and religious communities – is setting an example of the power of social thought in a traditional society.
Re-visiting traditional interpretations of Scripture is not the end of the story.
Out of this ferment, Morocco has not only revised its Family Law, but also fundamental laws governing nationality, media ownership, and political organizations.
Women’s advocacy has also shaped a new approach to poverty alleviation in Morocco, in the form of the National Initiative for Human Development, which integrates efforts to improve education with better sanitation and housing.
It is no exaggeration to say that the Moroccan women’s movement has become the cutting edge of reform, engaging Islamization, modernization, democratization, and feminism.
The End of Malaria?
WASHINGTON, DC – For those on the frontline of the battle against malaria, news of the development of a vaccine against the parasite is an exciting development.
In 2013, the disease was responsible for 584,000 deaths, nearly 90% of them in Sub-Saharan Africa; some 78% of its victims are children under the age of five.
In the 97 countries in which malaria is endemic, it ravages the economic productivity of those who can least afford it: poor people with limited access to treatment and care.
In July, the European Medicines Agency approved RTS,S – a vaccine also known by its trade name, Mosquirix – for use in children from six weeks to 17 months old.
The global health community has long appreciated the importance of a vaccine in reducing the disease’s burden, and the World Health Organization is expected to make an announcement in November about the use of Mosquirix in countries where malaria is endemic, some 30 excruciating years after researchers at the pharmaceutical company GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) began working on the vaccine.
The approval is a significant step in the right direction for the prevention and control of malaria.
It is also a testament to the enduring power of social philanthropy, partnerships, and international collaborations.
However, many questions about the vaccine’s deployment – and its integration into the health systems of some of the world’s poorest countries – remain to be answered.
Cost is probably the most important issue.
Many of the people who most need the new vaccine are poor.
It remains to be seen whether “equity pricing” will be feasible, considering the millions of dollars invested into research and development.
GSK has said that Mosquirix will be offered “not for profit”; but the pharmaceutical company still must break even.
And who will actually pay?
Many African governments have shown some willingness to invest in public health infrastructure in the past; but a political commitment to the vaccine could mean redirection of resources from other important tools, including rapid test kits, cheap drugs, safe insecticides, and long-lasting insecticidal bed nets.
International non-governmental organizations and private foundations have collaborated with the public sector in the fight against malaria, providing funds and bringing attention to the issue.
It might be asking too much to expect them to pay for the vaccine.
There are also questions about some countries’ capacity to distribute the vaccine, as well as uncertainty about how it will hold up under real-world conditions.
For example, the testing for Mosquirix did not account for the possibility that parents would neglect to use insecticide-treated nets for their children because of a false sense of safety and security provided by the vaccine.
Moreover, in order to maintain the vaccine’s efficacy, a booster needs to be delivered after the initial three doses.
Without it, effectiveness drops to non-protective levels.
Will governments really be willing to spend millions of dollars on this?
Finally, many parents in Sub-Saharan Africa currently do not immunize their children for a variety of reasons, including distrust of health officials and ignorance.
The polio vaccine faced an uphill battle in Nigeria, and the new malaria vaccine could suffer a similar fate.
Governments will have to decide whether to make its use compulsory or provide incentives for those who choose to vaccinate their children.
The approval of Mosquirix opens a promising new phase in the fight against malaria.
But serious challenges abound.
To meet them, African countries must initiate, develop, and support homegrown research capacity and leaner models for delivering care.
Research and investment in physical and social infrastructure must be a high priority as well.
In the time it has taken to read this article, five children will have died from malaria.
Ten years from now, that statistic could be no more than a bad memory, thanks to Mosquirix.
At the very least, the world now has a new weapon in the fight to reduce the disease’s toll.
Mothers of the Disappeared
WASHINGTON, DC – “We were seeking justice.
We wanted to prevent disappearance, for it to end.
Unfortunately, I still see girls disappearing.
I don’t want to be negative, but I don’t know when this will stop,” said Paula Flores of Juárez, Mexico, on July 3, 2016, 18 years after the disappearance and murder of her daughter, María Sagrario González Flores.
Women like Flores, especially mothers of victims of violence, are constantly at the forefront of human-rights activism on issues like forced disappearance, femicide, and abuses by the military.
Where state institutions or elected officials fail to take action against such violence, these women have filled a vacuum, challenging traditional gender roles in the process.
Demanding justice in Mexico, a country where 98% of crimes fail to result in convictions, is no easy task.
The country’s activist mothers and grandmothers follow in the Latin American tradition of predecessors like the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo, who in 1977 began to march in front of the presidential palace in Buenos Aires, Argentina, to protest the mass disappearance of children under the military dictatorship.
They marched weekly for years, forcing public discussion of human rights abuses under the dictatorship.
The Plaza de Mayo mothers inspired similar groups from Africa to Serbia to Los Angeles, and brought them together in the mid-1990s as the International Gathering of Mothers and Women in Struggle.
As Professor Marguerite Bouvard of Brandeis University documented in her 1996 book Women Reshaping Human Rights, women’s groups more generally have played a critical role in the human-rights movement, pursuing economic, social, and cultural justice and emphasizing the importance of human dignity and mutual respect among citizens and between citizens and the state.
Even among women’s groups, however, mothers have a special place.
They operate in countries that typically refuse to recognize the agency of women beyond the role of mothers, wives, and daughters.
They use their given role as a badge of moral authority, taking their voices and their truth out of the home and into the streets to fight not for abstract concepts of justice, but for sons and daughters with names and histories.
When renowned Honduran activist Berta Cáceres was murdered on March 3, 2016, it was her mother, Austra Bertha Flores Lopez, a midwife and social activist, who took the lead in holding the Honduran state responsible for her death.
In the United States, mothers have been active in protesting police brutality in the Black Lives Matter movement.
In India, they have marched to raise awareness of widespread sexual assault.
And in Colombia, they have been active in the peace process, ensuring that the proposed agreement to end the FARC insurgency focuses on the lives of women.
Flores and her fellow activists have committed themselves to a long road.
In 2007, Mexico’s government adopted the General Law on Women’s Access to a Life Free of Violence, which defined and codified the term femicide in Mexico.
But it had to be ratified by each of Mexico’s 31 states, and only the more liberal states did so.
In 2009, mothers and activists brought the case of the “Cotton Field” femicides – eight girls and women whose bodies were discovered in Juárez in 2001 – before the Inter-American Court of Human Rights.
The Court charged the government with failing to investigate the murders properly, and required the government to construct a monument to the victims and compensate families for their loss.
For many mothers like Paula, change is measured in decades.
But their work continues.
In 2014, 43 students from the Ayotzinapa Rural Teacher’s College were on buses heading to Mexico City to join protesters on the anniversary of the 1968 Tlatelolco Massacre (in which up to 300 students were killed ten days before the opening of the Olympic Games).
Local police stopped them near an army checkpoint.
They were “disappeared” in what appears to have been a coordinated state action to silence young activists.
It was mothers who immediately organized and took action to demand justice.
During the 2016 clashes in the Mexican state of Oaxaca between the military and teachers protesting educational reforms, the military killed ten people, including 19-year-old Jesús Cadena Sánchez.
“I went to look for my son where I heard shots fired.
I was so desperate to find my son that I did not care about myself,” recounted Sánchez’s mother.
August 30 was the International Day of the Victims of Forced Disappearance.
Around Mexico, mothers of victims of disappearance and femicide organized protests.
In Juárez, mothers marched to demand that governor-elect Javier Corral adopt policies to prevent forced disappearance.
These mothers refuse to allow their children to be forgotten.
Paula Flores founded a kindergarten in her neighborhood, Lomas de Poleo, named after the Carmelite martyr María Sagrario.
She recently worked with a local artist to design a mural of Sagrario in front of her house.
She and her daughter Guillermina have for years organized groups of mothers to paint crosses around the city at sites where girls and women have disappeared, a visual reminder of a problem that the city has failed to address for two decades.
When the crosses fade, the mothers repaint them.
Other mothers’ groups march wearing shirts or holding posters with the faces of their missing children.
The writ of habeas corpus is one of the first and oldest protections in Western legal systems, requiring jailers – those who “have the body” – to provide a reason for the prisoner’s detention.
If a citizen disappears due to another citizen’s actions, the kidnapper or murderer must be brought to account.
Mothers bring a direct, emotional, and personal component to this age-old struggle, insisting on their children’s existence as citizens and human beings whose rights must be upheld.
Motor City Meltdown
WASHINGTON, DC – The financial crisis that began in 2007 has been persistently marked by muddled thinking and haphazard policymaking.
Now, the United States Treasury is headed for a mistake of historic and catastrophic proportions by refusing to bail out America’s Big Three automakers.
Make no mistake.
If Detroit’s Big Three go bankrupt, the perfect storm really will have arrived with a collapse in both the real economy and the financial sector.
This threat means that the financial bailout funds authorized by Congress can legitimately be used to support the automakers.
Treasury’s refusal to do so is a monumental blunder that risks a general meltdown, the consequences of which will extend far beyond America’s shores.
Proponents of a bailout for the Big Three have emphasized the enormous job losses associated with a bankruptcy scenario, including not only jobs directly provided by the automakers, but also jobs with parts suppliers, auto dealers, and in the transport and advertising industries.
These job losses will then be multiplied locally and nationally.
Lost wages will reduce consumption, causing additional job cuts, while factory closures will reduce investment, hitting employment in capital goods industries.
Lost incomes will also drive down tax revenues, resulting in public-sector employment cutbacks.
Moreover, the automakers are essential for closing the trade deficit, and their demise could bring another surge in imports.
The automakers are also the backbone of American manufacturing, driving advances in manufacturing technology that will be needed if America is to be a world leader in the coming “green” transportation revolution.
Additionally, the Big Three are vital to national security, supplying important military transportation assets.
Lastly, bankruptcy will impose massive costs on the government’s Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC), further worsening the fiscal outlook.
All of this is true.
But missing from this array of arguments is the damage a bankruptcy of the Big Three would do to financial markets.
In one fell swoop, the hard-won gains in stabilizing the financial system would be blown away.
The Big Three and their auto finance associates (such as GMAC) are huge debtors whose liabilities are held throughout the financial system.
If they go bankrupt, the insurance industry, which is likely a large holder of these debts, would quickly enter a spiral of collapse.
Pension funds would also be hit, imposing further costs on the PBGC.
But the greatest damage may come from the credit default swaps (CDS) market that brought down AIG.
Huge bets have undoubtedly been placed on the bonds of GM, Ford, Chrysler, and GMAC, and bankruptcy will be a CDS triggering event requiring repayment of these bonds.
Moreover, a Big Three bankruptcy will bankrupt other companies, risking a cascade of financial damage as their bonds and equities fall in value and further CDS events are triggered. This is the nightmare outcome that risks replicating the Crash of 1929.
Opposition to the bailout is bringing back to the surface the worst of the conservative economic thought that got America and the world into this mess in the first place.
The opposition of the Federal Reserve and Treasury to hands-on intervention meant that they were slow to understand that merely ring-fencing the commercial banks could not save the financial system.
Now, they are failing to understand the financial significance of the Big Three.
Conservative animus toward trade unions is also once again on display.
But it is union weakness that has caused wages to stagnate and forced America to rely on debt and asset price inflation as the engines of growth.
Another conservative accusation is that a bailout would infringe free-trade rules.
But it is these rules that have fostered the trade deficits that have destabilized and undermined the American economy.
The reality is that world trade would suffer far greater damage from the global economic fallout of a Big Three bankruptcy.
Lastly, conservatives have trotted out the old moral hazard story in order to argue that a bailout would turn American manufacturing into a permanent beggar of government funds.
In fact, business has always lobbied Congress for favors and tax breaks, and the Lehman Brothers experience proved the foolishness of confusing parables about moral hazard with crisis management.
There are undoubtedly colossal problems in Detroit, and the bosses of the Big Three automakers could never be convicted of an excess of imagination.
Economic policy has also contributed to their current condition as trade agreements and an over-valued dollar promoted auto imports, and incoherent energy and environmental policy stifled innovation.
All of this must be fixed.
But sacrificing the Big Three automakers will accomplish nothing while risking a tragic economic depression.
Mourning Becomes Connected
PALO ALTO – My close friend Kris Olson died last week.
It wasn’t after a long illness, or even after a car crash.
She just went to bed at home one night, and was dead when her son tried to wake her in the morning.
No drama, no long goodbyes, just…nothing.
I heard about it two days later from my brother, by e-mail, who heard from a friend of his.
Then I got a couple of e-mails from other friends, forwarding messages from people I didn’t even know, with a few cc’s to some familiar names.
I called a friend and got a few sparse details: Kris’s husband was away but had hurried back. And no, there was absolutely no warning.
No signs. No health issues, except that a few years back she broke her arm catching a football.
Until I had these conversations, I didn’t really believe that Kris had died.
And then there were those confirming e-mails.
I had seen her just last month: alive and vivid as usual.
We went to her hairdresser, where she chatted while I had my hair cut.
We went shopping at the Stanford shopping center, and had soup for lunch, sitting outside in unusually chilly weather because the eateries were crowded.
She was her usual self: cheerful, full of plans for her children, her bird watching, her consulting work.
Kris was smart but unpretentious.
It wasn’t until later in the day that I went to her Flickr account to see her photos: http://www.flickr.com/photos/kristenolson/ .   I was struck by the next to last: http://www.flickr.com/photos/kristenolson/4241087527/ – a bird flying free, in sharp focus against a fuzzy backdrop of sea and sky.
But that wasn’t Kris, fleeing some kind of sad life.
There was a better one: http://www.flickr.com/photos/kristenolson/4241806180 - a sharp-eyed red-shouldered hawk, solid and sturdy, gazing balefully at the camera.
Sensible, kind, but no pushover.
Then I went to Kris’s Facebook page, and started crying.
Her Flickr feed is her art, a sort of memorial, but her Facebook page is her life.
People have come to pay tribute.
It is clear that she touched many lives, some of them semi-official, like the Mid-Peninsula Chapter of the National Charity League, but more of them just friends.
Our friendship had existed since 1982 and continued outside of Facebook; I don’t think I saw her page more than once or twice since we “befriended” one another a few years ago.
We communicated by e-mail, but mostly face-to-face a few times a year, ever since we met.
You wouldn’t have guessed from Facebook that, while she knew a lot of industry people, she wasn’t overly impressed with the “important” ones.
She wasn’t unkind; she was just observant.
So what does Facebook mean in the face of death?
Genes are one way for a person to live on: You can see shadows or glimpses of anyone in their children and other relatives.
Their creations – whether diaries or Flickr photos, a hand-crafted cabinet or cheesecake recipes – are another way.
But perhaps our most meaningful creations are the thoughts and changes that we leave in other people.
These traces used to disperse and disappear over time after someone’s death.
But now, with Facebook and other such tools, a person’s page is a place for those memories to gather.
Kris knew lots of people, in many different contexts, and now they are sharing memories on her page.
Now memories of Kris remain alive and accessible from anywhere.
Indeed, Kris will live on much more effectively – and more accessibly to all her friends.
Through her, they may meet one another, or they may simply be able to recall her for themselves, even as they find out new things about her that they neglected to discover while she was alive.
Yes, it does sharpen the memories, even as it eases the pain.
Learning About Growth from Austerity
MILAN – In a recent set of studies, Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff used a vast array of historical data to show that the accumulation of high levels of public (and private) debt relative to GDP has an extended negative effect on growth.
The size of the effect incited debate about errors in their calculations. Few, however, doubt the validity of the pattern.
This should not be surprising.
Accumulating excessive debt usually entails moving some part of domestic aggregate demand forward in time, so the exit from that debt must include more savings and diminished demand.
The negative shock adversely impacts the non-tradable sector, which is large (roughly two-thirds of an advanced economy) and wholly dependent on domestic demand.
As a result, growth and employment rates fall during the deleveraging period.
In an open economy, deleveraging does not necessarily impair the tradable sector so thoroughly.
But, even in such an economy, years of debt-fueled domestic demand may produce a loss of competitiveness and structural distortions.
And the crises that often divide the leveraging and deleveraging phases cause additional balance-sheet damage and prolong the healing process.
Thanks in part to research by Reinhart and Rogoff, we know that excessive leverage is unsustainable, and that restoring balance takes time.
As a result, questions and doubts remain about an eventual return to the pre-crisis trend line for GDP, and especially for employment.
What this line of research explicitly does not tell us is that deleveraging will restore growth by itself.
No one believes that fiscal balance is the whole growth model anywhere.
Consider southern Europe. From the standpoint of growth and employment, public and private debt masked an absence of productivity growth, declining competitiveness in the tradable sector, and a range of underlying structural shortcomings – including labor-market rigidities, deficiencies in education and skills training, and underinvestment in infrastructure.
Debt drove growth, creating aggregate demand that would not have existed otherwise.
(The same is true of the United States and Japan, though the details differ.)
Government is not the sole actor in this.
When the deleveraging cycle begins, the private sector starts to adjust structurally – a pattern clearly seen in the data on growth in the tradable side of the US economy.
Muted wage growth increases competitiveness, and underutilized labor and capital are redeployed.
How fast this happens partly depends on the private sector’s flexibility and dynamism.
But it also depends on the ability and willingness of government to provide a bridging function for the deficiency in aggregate demand, and to pursue reforms and investments that boost long-term growth prospects.
If public-sector deleveraging is not a complete growth policy – and it isn’t – why is there so much attention on fiscal austerity and so little action (as opposed to lip service) on growth and employment?
Several possibilities – not mutually exclusive – come to mind.
One is that some policymakers think that fiscal balance really is the main pillar in a growth strategy: Deleverage quickly and get on with it.
The belief that the fiscal multiplier is usually low may have contributed to underestimation of the short-run economic costs of austerity policies – and thus to persistently optimistic forecasts of growth and employment.
Recent research by the International Monetary Fund on the context-specific variability of fiscal multipliers has raised serious questions about the costs and effectiveness of rapid fiscal consolidation.
Estimates of the fiscal multiplier must be based on an assumption or a model that says what would have happened in the absence of government spending of some type.
If the assumption or the model is wrong, so is the estimate.
The counterfactual needs to be made explicit and assessed carefully and in context.
In some countries with high levels of debt and impaired growth, fiscal stimulus could raise the risk premium on sovereign debt and be counterproductive; others have more flexibility.
Countries vary widely in terms of household balance-sheet damage, which clearly affects the propensity to save – and hence the multiplier effect.
Uncertainty is a reality, and judgment is required.
Then there is the time dimension.
If infrastructure investment, for example, generates some growth and employment in the short to medium term and higher sustainable growth in the longer term, should we rule it out because some estimates of the multiplier are less than one?
Similarly, if fiscal stimulus has a muted effect because the recipients of the income are saving to restore damaged household balance sheets, it is not clear we want to discount the accelerated deleveraging benefit, even if it shows up in domestic demand only later.
Policymakers (and perhaps financial markets) may have believed that central banks would provide an adequate bridging function through aggressive unconventional monetary policy designed to hold down short- and long-term interest rates.
Certainly central banks have played a critical role.
But central banks have stated that they do not have the policy instruments to accelerate the pace of economic recovery.
Among the costs and risks of their low-interest-rate policies are a return to the leveraged growth pattern and growing uncertainty about the limits of a central bank’s balance-sheet expansion.
In other words, will the elevated asset values caused by low discount rates suddenly reset downward at some point?
No one knows.
Countries are subject to varying degrees of fiscal constraint, assuming (especially in the case of Europe) a limited appetite for unlimited, unconditional cross-border transfers.
Those that have some flexibility can and should use it to protect the unemployed and the young, accelerate deleveraging, and implement reforms designed to support growth and employment; others’ options – and thus their medium-term growth prospects – are more constrained.
All countries – and policymakers – face difficult choices concerning the timing of austerity, perceived sovereign-credit risk, growth-oriented reforms, and equitable sharing of the costs of restoring growth.
So far, the burden-sharing challenge, along with naive and incomplete growth models, may have contributed to gridlock and inaction.
Experience can be a harsh, though necessary, teacher.
Growth will not be restored easily or quickly.
Perhaps we needed the preoccupation with austerity to teach us the value of a balanced growth agenda.
Moving Pictures
CANNES – This year’s Cannes Film Festival was marked by a profound contrast between what unfolded along La Croisette, the palm-lined sweep of pedestrian walkway that stretches between swathes of luxury hotels and the azure Mediterranean, and the films debuting onscreen.
Outside all was glitter, excess, posturing, and brand names.
Young women in five-inch heels and revealing clothing prowled for wealthy men – or were imported by them to decorate boats and premiere parties.
Every night, the parade of stars up the red carpet, flanked by photographers, played out like a relic of a more ritualistic time.
Inside the Palais, the hulking brutalist structure where the films are screened, this year’s lineup was filled with tales of ordinary people, or poor people, struggling with the fallout of the global issues that increasingly unite us – or confronting painful political conflicts that official histories had laid to rest.
If in the past Cannes showcased films telling a hundred different kinds of stories, this year’s offerings made clear that in an increasingly flattened and wired world, there is really only one story – with a hundred different inflections.
Thai cinema’s gifted young director Apichatpong Weerasethakul’s film, Uncle Boonmee Who Can Recall His Past Lives, won the Palme d’Or.
It is a Spanish-German-French-British-Thai co-production, the kind of international collaborative effort we are increasingly seeing in film – a form of cross-border collaboration that should point the way to other forms of global civil-society projects.
Other films address a conflict that is closer to home here in France.
Outside the Law, directed by Rachid Bouchareb, narrates the story of the massacre at Setif, Algeria, in May 1945.
The film tracks the events surrounding three Algerian brothers over a 35-year period, and brings to light aspects of the massacre that had been considered taboo in France.
Strikingly, Outside the Law is a Franco-Algerian production, and it has already caused political controversy: it was denounced by Lionnel Luca, a French deputy who is, as one French periodical put it, “nostalgic for a French Algeria.”
The film actually sparked a noisy protest along La Croisette, with French veterans defensively and aggressively singing “La Marseillaise,” even as couples dressed in black tie and gowns swept in a parallel path to the evening's festivities.
In response, the mayor of Cannes organized a ceremony to commemorate all victims of the French-Algerian conflict.
Still another film reawakens not-so-distant American history and casts it in a radically altered light: Doug Liman’s Fair Game reinterprets the Valerie Plame/Joe Wilson scandal of 2003, and reveals that Plame was far from being a glorified secretary, as the Bush administration had portrayed her.
On the contrary, she led a team that intercepted components of nuclear weapons at their source, whisked them away to the United States, altered them slightly so that they would not work, and replaced them.
So the Bush administration’s leak of her identity ended not just her career, but also a sensitive program that had kept us all safe.
Other films simply tell stories of people who are not usually portrayed by film.
Los Labios, an Argentine project directed by Santiago Loza and Ivan Fund, simply follows three government-funded nurses who go to a rural area to serve the needs of the impoverished local population.
It humbly tracks their accounting of cases of malnourishment, alcoholism, diseases of poverty, and the ravages of unemployment and inadequate medical care.
Similarly, Sergei Loznitsa’s My Joy simply explores the life of a Ukrainian truck driver named Georgy, who gets lost and finds himself in an archetypal Russian village, where he is drawn into daily life.
This is a real cinema of humility – the directors again and again have chosen to take seriously the dramas and struggles of ordinary people and find the heroism or tragedy therein.
What does it all mean?
The many movies that critically revise settled national narratives suggest that people are no longer willing to accept history that has been crafted by elites for their own purposes.
In most cases, the directors researched their own films by interviewing sources who were close to the action, or close to the main events at a grassroots level.
That is an exciting development, though initially it implies a messier historical narrative.
In Bouchareb’s film, for example, there is not a unified story of the occupation of Algeria, but many points of view that a young French teenager (or French-Algerian teenager) can witness and draw from.
That is surely good, especially in an open society.
So is the focus of other films on the struggles of ordinary people.
To be sure, simply championing populism for its own sake – a Stalinist or New Left reflex – makes for bad art.
But the flattening of the world has led to a flattening of the kinds of people who can be seen as heroes or seekers.
By bringing these subjects into focus, great film directors have gained a larger and more representative world of stories from which to work their magic.
Ms. Europe or Frau Germania?
BERLIN – Just what is the matter with Angela Merkel?
Only a short while ago, she was celebrated as “Ms. Europe”; now, she increasingly gives the impression of being Frau Germania.
Instead of providing resolute leadership in the global financial and economic crisis, the European Union’s largest economy is withdrawing into its shell.
Germany has always been the motor of European integration, in accordance with its political and economic interests.
Every post-World War II government has always been willing to harness Germany’s financial strength to further that aim, i.e., to foot the bill for Europe.
The motto was simple: Germany gives and profits in turn.
Should Germany spurn the first part of this formula, the European project would suffer serious damage – and so will German national interests.
Yet this is the direction in which Chancellor Merkel seems to be heading.
Indeed, in the wake of the Greek crisis, Merkel spoke publicly of the need to be able to exclude eurozone members that do not play by the rules.
Does she seriously believe that the euro and the EU would survive such punitive action?
Instead of ideas for strengthening the solidarity and stability of the eurozone, absurd proposals are floated in Berlin.
The idea that Germany would show financial solidarity with weakened eurozone members only if they accept draconian stabilization measures is similarly unrealistic.
Such measures would only exacerbate deflation in these countries, which are the most important markets for German exports.
What is essential is the right combination of stability and financial aid, even if the latter is unpopular with the German public.
To be sure, eurozone member states also needed the courage to respond to the crisis of confidence confronting the common currency with concerted action for tighter control of national budgets and improved cooperation.
As a first step, however, Greece must be given help, through the financial solidarity of EU governments.
On the other hand, foreign criticism of Germany for running a current-account surplus similar to China’s is unfounded.
Such criticism disregards two important differences: first, unlike China, Germany, as a member of the eurozone, cannot undervalue its currency.
Second, German “exports” go mainly to the EU.
To demand that Germany should stop increasing its competitiveness, or even reduce it, is simply bizarre.
From 1990 to 2005, Germany struggled with high unemployment, slow growth, and low competitiveness, and Europe’s economy suffered as a result.
Recovery was difficult to achieve, but the Common Market has profited from Germany’s renewed competitiveness.
The crucial point is not the German economy’s renewed strength, but whether Germany will use this strength in Europe’s interest or its own.
Unfortunately, Merkel seems to have decided on the second option, because it entails fewer domestic political risks.
The responsibility for the current conflict within the EU rests with eurozone governments, but primarily with Germany and France, the zone’s two strongest economies.
Rather than lead, the Franco-German couple is constantly, and publicly, at each other’s throats.
While today’s quarrel is about who should pay for restructuring Greece, the real issue is the latent distrust between the two partners, which carries the danger of a permanent estrangement.
From the German point of view, France only wants to solve its national budget and debt problems at Germany’s expense, simultaneously weakening Germany’s competitiveness.
The French government, on the other hand, fears that the Germans’ commitment to eurozone stability is a ploy aimed at pushing France into a corner and leaving it behind economically.
Since the global crisis erupted in the fall of 2008, both Merkel and French President Nicolas Sarkozy have been faced with threats that their political majorities might disappear if they put aside their national interests in favor of a European compromise.
France has no chance of meeting Germany’s stabilization objectives unless Sarkozy wants to forget about re-election.
Merkel would cause outrage among her conservative voters (as well as court defeat at the German Constitutional Court in Karlsruhe) should she agree to a more free-spending policy, including any direct financial assistance for Greece.
Soon, Helmut Kohl, Europe’s Honorary Citizen and Germany’s Chancellor of Reunification, will be celebrating his 80th birthday.
As is usual on such occasions, there will be a lot of lofty speeches about Europe.
But, in view of the current situation, we can safely ignore these.
What Europe needs in this serious crisis are statesmen and women of Kohl’s caliber, not domestic politicians!
As the big economic and political winner of the eurozone, Germany, in particular, cannot let a serious crisis of confidence threaten the European project, because nearly two-thirds of its exports go to the EU.
Ever since the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, it has been clear that the global crisis would challenge the EU and the euro, because Europe lacks a common government and fiscal policy.
Coordination within the eurozone – above all between its most important economies, France and Germany – is therefore all the more important.
It is in Berlin and Paris, first and foremost, that the crisis-management strategy for the eurozone must be decided.
Mubarak’s Last Laugh?
CAIRO – August 3, 2011, will be remembered as a historic day in Egypt.
Former President Hosni Mubarak was put on public trial, together with his two sons and his ex-interior minister, General Habib el-Adly.
The repercussions for Egypt, indeed for the entire Arab world, will be profound.
This is not the first time that an Arab dictator has been put on trial.
Saddam Hussein and Zine El Abidine Ben Ali preceded Mubarak in the dock.
Hussein was tried with the help of a United States-led coalition; Ben Ali was tried and convicted in absentia, after fleeing to Saudi Arabia.
But in Egypt, “It was done exclusively by Egyptians for Egypt,” as a friend put it to me.
“That is why we are so proud of it.”
But the run-up to the trial was contentious.
On July 29, many organizations staged a large protest in Cairo’s Tahrir to highlight the unity of Egypt’s revolutionaries (whose demands included a public trial of Mubarak).
Instead, the protest exposed the dramatic polarization between Islamists and secularists since Mubarak’s ouster.
Moreover, it revealed the potent capacity of Egypt’s Salafis to mobilize supporters, who were the overwhelming majority in Tahrir Square that day.
Other groups, including the leftist April 6 Youth Movement and the multi-ideological Coalition of the Revolution’s Youth, looked minute and insignificant.
As a result, many secular activists ended their week-long sit-in and withdrew from Tahrir Square.
Ironically, this was what the ruling Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF) wanted, and it was achieved at no cost in violence or military tribunals.
Chants of “islamiyya, islamiyya” (Islamic, Islamic) were enough.
With no representative institutions and the military in control of the country, street mobilization has become the main tool of Egyptian politics.
But then came some controversial demands.
Fearing that elections might bring an Islamist majority to Parliament and to the assembly that will write a new constitution, most secularists demanded supra-constitutional principles (akin to a bill of rights, with a few twists) or a constitution to be enforced by the SCAF before elections.
They staged street demonstrations, mobilized media pressure, and lobbied the SCAF.
It worked.
The SCAF announced that it is forming a body of constitutional experts to craft several versions of a potential constitution.
Obviously, the SCAF has its own calculations, which probably have less to do with protecting a liberal Egypt than with protecting the military’s financial independence and shielding itself from accountability to civilian institutions.
The secularists’ gains were a wake-up call for the Islamists, and they responded en masse on July 29.
But Egypt’s old-line Muslim Brotherhood, with all of its factions, tendencies, and offshoots, no longer appears to be the country’s dominant Islamist force, as Salafis challenge the Brotherhood’s traditional hegemony.
The Salafis are defined in part by their strict theological orthodoxy.
Their belief in the superiority of literal interpretations of Islamic texts and their deep animosity towards religious innovation (broadly defined) reflect their certainty that the first three generations of Muslims possessed the best understanding of Islam, and should provide guidance for future generations.
But Salafism is also a powerful source of personal identity, shaped and reinforced by a common form of dress and style of beard, a high degree of social conservatism, and a generally negative (but nuanced) perception of liberal individualism.
“I raise my head high as I am an Egyptian, and I raise my head even higher as I am a Salafi,” an assistant of a leading Salafi sheikh proudly told me.
At the same time, Salafis’ social origins, organizational structures, political behavior, and even their views on democracy, violence, and state authority, are quite varied.
Decentralized organization, multiple leaderships, and conflicting ideological stances make the Salafi trend amorphous, volatile, and susceptible to manipulation and infiltration.
That has been the pattern observed in Algeria, Saudi Arabia, and Yemen. Egypt may follow.
At the moment, Egyptian liberals’ main concern should be their popular appeal and ability to mobilize support, rather than picking fights with the Salafis and trying to enforce a constitution by any means, democratic or not.
During its transition period (1988-1991), Algeria’s secularists crafted a pluralist constitution that excluded religious parties.
Yet, when parliamentary elections were held in 1991 – more than two years after the constitution was adopted – the Islamic Salvation Front still won.
The Algerian secularists’ strategy of exclusion, fraud, cheating, and gerrymandering backfired badly: Islamists were perceived as victims, while secularists – with some exceptions – were cast as unprincipled opportunists.
Enforcing a secular constitution before elections does not guarantee a secular outcome.
Popular support does.
Unity among the former revolutionary opposition is critical for the success of any democratic transition, and Egypt is no exception.
The public trial of Mubarak shows what united demands can achieve.
Egyptian and other Arab revolutionaries should therefore keep the lessons of July 29 and August 3 in minds.
Unity now can bring justice and freedom later.
Polarization will bring neither.
Mubarak’s Odious Debts
NEW YORK – A glance at Egypt’s public finances reveals a disturbing fact: the interest that the country pays on its foreign loans is larger than its budget for education, healthcare, and housing combined.
Indeed, these debt-service costs alone account for 22% of the Egyptian government’s total expenditures.
The impact has become impossible to ignore.
With growing political uncertainty and a slowing economy, Egypt is likely to witness decreasing government revenues, increasing demands for urgent spending, and rising interest rates on government borrowing.
This could lead to a fiscal catastrophe for the government at the very moment when the country is attempting a complicated political transition.
Egypt’s public debt is around 80% of GDP, very close to the 90% level that economists Kenneth Rogoff and Carmen Reinhart identify as a harbinger of slower growth and heightened vulnerability to financial and fiscal crises.
Egyptians need only glance north, at the European debt crisis, to understand they should sort out their debt problem now, rather than waiting until it reaches Greek proportions.
This debt was incurred during the 30-year reign of the deposed president, Hosni Mubarak.
In international law, debt that is incurred without the consent of the people, and that is not used to their benefit, is referred to as “odious”; as such, it is not considered transferable to successor regimes.
The reasoning is simple and logical: if someone fraudulently borrows money in my name, I am not expected to pay it back, and neither should a country’s population when an unrepresentative leader borrows in their name and to their detriment.
For three decades, Mubarak’s borrowing only enriched him and his ruling clique while impoverishing and repressing the rest of Egypt.
Corruption was rife, but not just the covert type: public money was openly used to support many businesses under flimsy pretexts like “fostering economic growth” and “creating employment.”
Along with regulatory capture, this harmed competitiveness, market openness, and Egypt’s small and medium-size businesses.
The beneficiaries of this largesse are now mostly sitting in prison awaiting trial.
The rest of Egypt, however, only felt this money in the form of an ever-expanding state apparatus that solidified Mubarak’s rule, crushed dissent, and repressed millions.
When Egyptians rose up against Mubarak in January, they were confronted by weapons paid for with borrowed money.
Is it fair to expect Egyptians to continue paying for their previous repression and impoverishment at the hands of Mubarak and his cronies?
Since this money clearly benefited Mubarak but not his people, should it not be Mubarak, rather than his victims, who is held responsible for it?
The type of regime Mubarak was running had been clear for many years, and it was also clear how the money was being used.
A prudent lender should have considered these facts before making the loans.
So the banks and international institutions that lent money to Mubarak should bear the responsibility of their choice to bankroll his repressive regime.
The new Egypt should make a clean break with Mubarak and his creditors, and let them sort out their business among themselves without involving the Egyptian people.
The Egyptian government’s only role should be to help liquidate Mubarak assets for repayment should the need arise.
This would be not only fair, but it also would teach an important lesson to those who bankroll dictators – a lesson that is likely to have an immediate positive impact worldwide.
Lenders to a repressive regime will no longer expect these debts to be repaid by its successors, immediately making lenders worldwide careful about lending to them.
An Egyptian precedent would bring awareness and sobriety to an entire generation of lenders that is not accustomed to considering this type of risk, and that may even be unfamiliar with the doctrine of odious debt.
Repressive regimes would find it harder to borrow, which would, in turn, make it harder for them to repress their people, and make it easier and cheaper for responsible and legitimate governments to secure important funding when they need it.
Transferring liability for foreign debt to Mubarak should not have negative economic consequences for Egypt in the long run.
This move should not be understood as a move towards fiscal recklessness, but as a one-time break from it.
With a smaller debt burden and interest payments, Egypt’s fiscal position would improve significantly, and threats to economic growth would recede.
Foreign lenders’ resulting caution would prevent future Egyptian governments from irresponsibly saddling their populace with debt.
Perhaps most importantly, the days of borrowing to build a large state security apparatus would be gone for good – worldwide.
For the sake of Egyptians and people living under tyranny everywhere, Egypt’s government must take a brave stand.
The Drug Industry’s Poison Pills
BOSTON – One does not need to spend a lifetime in the global health-care sector to appreciate that substandard or counterfeit drugs are a major public-health hazard.
These bogus products have infiltrated pharmaceutical supply chains from Azerbaijan to Zambia, wrecking the most promising programs to control, manage, and eradicate deadly diseases.
Yet little is being done to stop this criminal activity.
Growing up in Pakistan, I realized how vital it was for my mother, like any educated parent, to know which drugs and pharmacies could be trusted.
Little has changed since then.
Local pharmacists from Lahore to Lusaka continue to sell a variety of brands of the same drug at different prices; and shopkeepers are called upon to give a candid opinion of their benefits and shortcomings.
Unfortunately, the problem runs a lot deeper than a few bad drugs sold at the corner pharmacy.
Around $75 billion of substandard drugs are sold annually, causing an estimated 100,000 deaths worldwide, and making many more people seriously ill.
The trade in inferior drugs also undermines fragile public-health systems in poor countries.
As well as killing consumers, the effects of bad drugs can be passed from parent to child, and even create new drug-resistant strains of diseases that threaten us all.
Yet the fight against substandard drugs has never been taken as seriously as other global health crises such as malaria, HIV, or maternal and infant mortality.
This may be because there is no obvious solution.
But, in seeking answers, we must first acknowledge that the issue is larger than just counterfeit medicines.
Many legitimate manufacturers worldwide, whether through complacency or incompetence, lack adequate quality controls.
In some cases, deficient storage and refrigeration systems turn safe medicines into dangerous substances.
Unfortunately, those drug makers then take advantage of developing countries’ weak or poorly implemented legislation and corrupt officials to pass their products through local supply chains and into shops.
Public ignorance or apathy means that those responsible are able to avoid prosecution.
The technical expertise and equipment needed to detect inferior products is usually beyond the financial reach of many developing countries.
But there are low-cost alternatives.
One approach, for example, would be to include on packaging a “scratch code” that includes a phone number for consumers to call in order to check that the batch number matches an authentic product.
But, while this approach would certainly help to catch counterfeits, it would miss the substandard or degraded products made by legitimate firms, which are tested only by the consumer – and often at great cost in terms of health risks.
It is therefore imperative to develop new detection technologies that will work in poorer countries, and that complement existing systems such as bar codes.
Detection technology must be capable of analyzing all forms of a drug – whether powder, pill, capsule, or syrup – and of detecting several different grades of quality, not just the junk.
It must be simple, affordable, adaptable, and scalable; and it must work at all stages of distribution, whether at customs, in hospitals, or in remote villages.