And the Gülen movement was not exactly caught off-guard; cram-school representatives had been engaged in a dialogue with education-ministry officials for some time.
As in any democracy, public criticism of Turkey’s government policies is normal and healthy.
But attempts by Gülen-aligned members of the judiciary and the police force to blackmail, threaten, and illegally bargain with the government are unacceptable.
Now, it is up to the courts to discern the truth about corruption among Turkey’s so-called “public servants.”
But all of the signs point to a coordinated political crusade by Gülen followers, including the chief prosecutors involved in the recent corruption cases and the pro-Gülen media that have steadfastly defended the prosecutors’ impartiality (despite the many irregularities – such as extensive unauthorized wiretaps – that have come to light).
Moreover, a coordinated group within the judiciary is suspected of planting evidence – allegations that have led to the calls for military personnel to be retried.
To be sure, this does not mean that there were no coup attempts by members of the military in the past or cases of corruption by politicians and bureaucrats.
The point is that Turkey needs judicial reforms that eliminate the possibility of organized cliques manipulating their constitutional powers to advance their own narrow goals.
This is a red line for any pluralist democracy.
Individual citizens should be free to live according to their beliefs; but an unaccountable theological vision must not be allowed to shape their behavior as civil servants and bureaucrats.
More generally, the debate about the Gülen movement should serve as an opportunity to clarify the relationship between religion and politics, while reminding the Turkish public – and Muslim-majority countries throughout the region – of the core democratic values that have enabled Turkey to develop and thrive.
Escaping the Refugee Crisis
PRINCETON – In July, the number of migrants reaching the borders of the European Union passed 100,000 – the third consecutive month in which a new record was set.
In one week in August, 21,000 migrants arrived in Greece.
Tourists complained that the summer holiday they had planned on a Greek island was now in the midst of a refugee camp.
Of course, the refugee crisis has far more serious implications.
Last week, Austrian authorities found the decomposing bodies of 71 migrants in a Hungarian truck abandoned near Vienna.
And more than 2,500 would-be migrants have drowned in the Mediterranean this year, most of them attempting to cross from North Africa to Italy.
Migrants who have made it as far as France are living in tents near Calais, waiting for a chance to get to England by scrambling aboard a freight train passing through the Channel Tunnel.
Some of them die, too, falling off trains or getting run over.
Nevertheless, the number of refugees in Europe is still small compared to some other countries.
Germany has received more applications for asylum than any other European country, but its six refugees per thousand inhabitants is less than a third of Turkey’s 21 per thousand, which in turn is dwarfed by Lebanon’s 232 per thousand.
At the end of 2014, UNHCR, the United Nations agency for refugees, estimated that there were 59.5 million forcibly displaced people worldwide, the highest level ever recorded.
Of these, 1.8 million are awaiting a decision on their asylum applications, 19.5 million are refugees, and the rest are displaced inside their own countries.
Syria, Afghanistan, and Somalia are the largest sources of refugees, but many more come from Libya, Eritrea, the Central African Republic, South Sudan, Nigeria, and the Democratic Republic of Congo.
In Asia, the persecution of the Muslim Rohingya minority in Myanmar has contributed to a recent increase in the number of refugees.
We cannot blame people for wishing to leave conflict-ridden, impoverished countries and find a better life elsewhere.
In their situation, we would do the same.
But there must be a better way of responding to their needs.
A few bold thinkers advocate a world with open borders, arguing that this would greatly boost both global GDP and average global happiness.
(See, for example, http://openborders.info.)
Such arguments ignore our species’ lamentable xenophobic tendencies, evidenced all too clearly by the surge in popularity of far-right extremist political parties in Europe.
For the foreseeable future, no government will open its borders to all who want to enter.
Indeed, there is only movement in the opposite direction: Serbia and Hungary are building fences to keep migrants out, and there has been talk of reinstating border controls within the Schengen Area, which currently guarantees freedom of movement among 26 European countries.
Instead of simply sealing themselves off, affluent countries should be giving much more support to less affluent countries that are supporting large numbers of refugees: Lebanon, Jordan, Ethiopia, and Pakistan are obvious examples.
Refugees living securely in countries that border their own are less likely to attempt hazardous journeys to remote regions and more likely to return home once a conflict is resolved.
International support for countries bearing the greatest refugee burden also makes economic sense: it costs Jordan about €3,000 ($3,350) to support one refugee for a year; in Germany, the cost is at least €12,000.
Ultimately, however, we need to reconsider what for many is a sacred and immutable text: the UN Convention and Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees.
The Convention, concluded in 1951, was originally limited to persons within Europe fleeing events before that date.
It required the signatory countries to allow refugees who reached their territory to stay there, without discrimination or penalty for breaching immigration laws.
Refugees were defined as those unable or unwilling to return to their country because of a well-founded fear of persecution on the grounds of “race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group, or political opinion.”
In 1967, the restrictions of time and geography were removed, making the Convention universal.
That was a noble thing to do, but a key question was never asked: Why should someone who is able to travel to another country have priority over others who are in refugee camps and unable to travel?
Affluent countries have a responsibility to take refugees, and many of them can and should accept more than they do.
But as the number of people seeking asylum has grown, it has become difficult for tribunals and courts to determine who is a refugee, as defined by the Convention, and who is a well-coached migrant seeking a better life in a more affluent country.
The Convention has also given rise to the new, often unscrupulous, and sometimes lethal industry of people smuggling.
If those who claim asylum in a nearby country were sent to a refugee camp, safe from persecution, and supported financially by aid from affluent countries, people smuggling – and deaths in transit – would be eliminated.
Moreover, the incentive for economic migrants to seek asylum would be reduced, and affluent countries could fulfill their responsibility to accept more refugees from the camps, while maintaining control of their borders.
That may not be the best solution, but it may be the most workable.
And it looks a lot better than the chaos and tragedy that many refugees are facing now.
Turning away people who manage to reach one’s country is emotionally difficult, even if they are being sent to a safe haven.
But we should also have compassion for the millions of people who are waiting in refugee camps.
We need to give them hope, too.
Escaping George Bush’s Future
It always comes back to oil.
The continuing misguided interventions in the Middle East by the United States and the United Kingdom have their roots deep in the Arabian sand.
Ever since Winston Churchill led the conversion of Britain’s navy from coal to oil at the start of the last century, the Western powers have meddled incessantly in the affairs of Middle Eastern countries to keep the oil flowing, toppling governments and taking sides in wars in the supposed “great game” of energy resources.
But the game is almost over, because the old approaches are obviously failing.
Just when one is lulled into thinking that something other than oil is at the root of current US and UK action in Iraq, reality pulls us back.
Indeed, President Bush recently invited journalists to imagine the world 50 years from now.
He did not have in mind the future of science and technology, or a global population of nine billion, or the challenges of climate change and biodiversity.
Instead, he wanted to know whether Islamic radicals would control the world’s oil.
Whatever we are worrying about in 50 years, this will surely be near the bottom of the list.
Even if it were closer to the top, overthrowing Saddam Hussein to ensure oil supplies in 50 years ranks as the least plausible of strategies.
Yet we know from a range of evidence that this is what was on Bush’s mind when his government shifted its focus from the search for Osama bin Laden to fighting a war in Iraq.
The overthrow of Saddam was the longstanding pet idea of the neoconservative Project for a New American Century, which was already arguing in the 1990’s that Saddam was likely to achieve a stranglehold over “a significant proportion of the world’s oil supplies.”
Vice President Dick Cheney reiterated these fears in the run-up to the Iraq War, claiming that Saddam Hussein was building a massive arsenal of weapons of mass destruction to “take control of a great portion of the world’s energy supplies.”
Cheney’s facts were obviously wrong, but so was his logic.
Dictators like Saddam make their living by selling their oil, not by holding it in the ground.
Perhaps, though, Saddam was too eager to sell oil concessions to French, Russian, and Italian companies rather than British and US companies.
In any event, the war in Iraq will not protect the world’s energy supplies in 50 years.
If anything, the war will threaten those supplies by stoking the very radicalism it claims to be fighting.
Genuine energy security will come not by invading and occupying the Middle East, or by attempting to impose pliant governments in the region, but by recognizing certain deeper truths about global energy.
First, energy strategy must satisfy three objectives: low cost, diverse supply, and drastically reduced carbon dioxide emissions.
This will require massive investments in new technologies and resources, not a “fight to the finish” over Middle East oil.
Important energy technologies will include conversion of coal to liquids (such as gasoline), use of tar sands and oil shale, and growth in non-fossil-fuel energy sources.
Indeed, there is excellent potential for low-cost solar power, zero-emitting coal-based technologies, and safe and reliable nuclear power.
Solar radiation equals roughly 10,000 times our current energy use.
We tap that solar power in many fundamental ways – food production, wind power, hydroelectric power, solar heating, solar-thermal electricity, solar panels – but the possibilities for greatly increased use of inexpensive, widely available, and environmentally friendly solar power are huge.
Coal, like solar energy, is widely available.
It is already inexpensive, but it is a solid rather than a liquid, a major pollutant, and a source of greenhouse gas emissions.
Yet all of these problems can be solved, especially if we make the needed investments in research and development.
Gasification of coal allows for the removal of dangerous pollutants, and coal can already be converted to gasoline at low cost; a South African company is beginning to bring that technology to China on a large scale.
Nuclear power, both fission-based and fusion-based, is yet another possibility for vast, reliable, secure, and environmentally safe primary energy.
Here, too, there are technological obstacles, but they seem surmountable.
Of course, there are also major political, regulatory, and security considerations, all of which need to be addressed properly.
It is ironic that an administration fixated on the risks of Middle East oil has chosen to spend hundreds of billions—potentially trillions—of dollars to pursue unsuccessful military approaches to problems that can and should be solved at vastly lower cost, through R&amp;D, regulation, and market incentives.
The biggest energy crisis of all, it seems, involves the misdirected energy of a US foreign policy built on war rather than scientific discovery and technological progress.
Escaping the Oil Curse
CAMBRIDGE – Libyans have a new lease on life, a feeling that, at long last, they are the masters of their own fate.
Perhaps Iraqis, after a decade of warfare, feel the same way.
Both countries are oil producers, and there is widespread expectation among their citizens that that wealth will be a big advantage in rebuilding their societies.
Meanwhile, in Africa, Ghana has begun pumping oil for the first time, and Uganda is about to do so as well.
Indeed, from West Africa to Mongolia, countries are experiencing windfalls from new discoveries of oil and mineral wealth.
Heightening the euphoria are the historic levels that oil and mineral prices have reached on world markets over the last four years.
Many countries have been in this position before, exhilarated by natural-resource bonanzas, only to see the boom end in disappointment and the opportunity squandered, with little payoff in terms of a better quality of life for their people.
But, whether in Libya or Ghana, political leaders today have an advantage: most are well aware of history, and want to know how to avoid the infamous natural-resource “curse.”
To prescribe a cure, one must first diagnose the illness.
Why do oil riches turn out to be a curse as often as they are a blessing?
Economists have identified six pitfalls that can afflict natural-resource exporters: commodity-price volatility, crowding out of manufacturing, “Dutch disease” (a booming export industry causes rapid currency appreciation, which undermines other exporters’ competitiveness), inhibited institutional development, civil war, and excessively rapid resource depletion (with insufficient saving).
Oil prices are especially volatile, as the large swings over the last five years remind us.
The recent oil boom could easily turn to bust, especially if global economic activity slows.
Volatility itself is costly, leaving economies unable to respond effectively to price signals.
Temporary commodity booms typically pull workers, capital, and land away from fledgling manufacturing sectors and production of other internationally traded goods.
This reallocation can damage long-term economic development if those sectors nurture learning by doing and fuel broader productivity gains.
The problem is not just that workers, capital, and land are sucked into the booming commodity sector.
They also are frequently lured away from manufacturing by booms in construction and other non-tradable goods and services.
The pattern also includes an exuberant expansion of government spending, which can result in bloated public payrolls and large infrastructure projects, both of which are found to be unsustainable when oil prices fall.
If the manufacturing sector has been “hollowed out” in the meantime, so much the worse.
Even if an increase in oil prices turns out to be permanent, pitfalls abound.
Governments that can finance themselves simply by retaining physical control over oil or mineral deposits often fail in the long run to develop institutions that are conducive to economic development.
Such countries evolve a hierarchical authoritarian society in which the only incentive is to compete for privileged access to commodity rents.
In the extreme case, this competition can take the form of civil war.
In a country without resource wealth, by contrast, elites have little alternative but to nurture a decentralized economy in which individuals have incentives to work and save.
These are the economies that industrialize.
The final pitfall is excessively rapid depletion of oil or mineral deposits, in violation of optimal rates of saving, let alone environmental preservation.
What can countries do to ensure that natural resources are a blessing rather than a curse?
Some policies and institutions have been tried and failed.
These include, in particular, attempts to suppress artificially the fluctuations of the global marketplace by imposing price controls, export controls, marketing boards, and cartels.
But some countries have succeeded, and their strategies could be useful models for Libya, Iraq, Ghana, Mongolia, and others to emulate.
Countries can choose to use their resource bonanzas for the long-term economic advancement of their people, not just that of their leaders.
From the CIA to the GFE
NEW YORK – The United States needs to shift its spending from war to education, from CIA-backed regime change to a new Global Fund for Education (GFE).
With hundreds of millions of children around the world not in school, or in schools with under-qualified teachers, a lack of computers, large class sizes, and no electricity, many parts of the world are headed for massive instability, joblessness, and poverty.
The twenty-first century will belong to countries that properly educate their young people to participate productively in the global economy.
The current imbalance in US spending on global education and military-related programs is staggering: $1 billion per year on the former, and roughly $900 billion on the latter.
Military-related programs include the Pentagon (around $600 billion), the CIA and related agencies (around $60 billion), Homeland Security (around $50 billion), nuclear weapons systems outside of the Pentagon (around $30 billion), and veterans’ programs (around $160 billion).
What US politicians and policymakers in their right minds could believe that US national security is properly pursued through a 900-to-1 ratio of military spending to global education spending?
Of course, the US is not alone.
Saudi Arabia, Iran, and Israel are all squandering vast sums in an accelerating Middle East arms race, in which the US is the major financier and arms supplier.
China and Russia are also sharply boosting military spending, despite their pressing domestic priorities.
We are, it seems, courting a new arms race among major powers, at a time when what is really needed is a peaceful race to education and sustainable development.
Several recent international reports, including two this month by UNESCO and the International Commission on Financing Global Education, headed by former UK Prime Minister Gordon Brown, show that annual global development assistance for primary and secondary education needs to rise from around $4 billion to around $40 billion.
Only this ten-fold increase can enable poor countries to achieve universal primary and secondary education (as called for by Goal Four of the new Sustainable Development Goals).
In response, the US and other rich countries should move this year to create the GFE, with the needed funds shifted from today’s military spending.
If Hillary Clinton, the likely next US president, genuinely believes in peace and sustainable development, she should announce her intention to back the GFE’s creation, just as President George W. Bush in 2001 was the first head of state to endorse the newly proposed Global Fund to Fight AIDS, TB, and Malaria.
She should call on China and others to join this multilateral effort.
The alternative – to continue spending massively on defense rather than on global education – would condemn the US to the status of a declining imperial state tragically addicted to hundreds of overseas military bases, tens of billions of dollars in annual arms sales, and perpetual wars.
Without a GFE, poor countries will lack the resources to educate their kids, just as they were unable to finance the fight against AIDS, TB, and malaria until the Global Fund was established.
Here’s the basic budgetary challenge: it costs at least $250 in a poor country to educate a child for a year, but low-income countries can afford, on average, only around $90 per child per year.
There is a gap of $160 per child for around 240 million school-aged kids in need, or about $40 billion per year.
The consequences of underfunded education are tragic.
Kids leave school early, often without being able to read or write at a basic level.
These dropouts often sign up with gangs, drug traffickers, even jihadists.
Girls marry and begin to have children very young.
Fertility rates stay high and the children of these poor, under-educated mothers (and fathers) have few realistic prospects of escaping poverty.
The cost of failing to create decent jobs through decent schooling is political instability, mass migration to the US (from Central America and the Caribbean) and Europe (from the Middle East and Africa), and violence related to poverty, drugs, human trafficking, and ethnic conflict.
Soon enough, the US drones arrive to exacerbate the underlying instability.
In short, we need to shift from the CIA to the GFE, from the expensive failures of US-led regime change (including those targeting Afghanistan’s Taliban, Iraq’s Saddam Hussein, Libya’s Muammar el-Qaddafi, and Syria’s Bashar al-Assad) to investments in health, education, and decent jobs.
Some critics of aid argue that funds for education will simply be wasted.
Yet the critics said exactly the same about disease control in 2000 when I proposed a scale-up of funding for public health.
Sixteen years later, the results are in: disease burdens have fallen sharply, and the Global Fund proved to be a great success (the donors now think so, too, and have recently replenished its accounts).
To establish a successful counterpart for education, first the US and other countries would pool their assistance into a single new fund.
The fund would then invite low-income countries to submit proposals for support.
A technical and non-political review panel would assess the proposals and recommend those that should be funded.
Approved proposals would then receive support, with the GFE monitoring and evaluating implementation, enabling well-performing governments to build track records and reputations for sound management.
Since 2000, the US and other countries have squandered trillions of dollars on wars and arms purchases.
The time has come for a sensible, humane, and professional new approach that would scale up investment in education while scaling back expenditures on wars, coups, and weaponry.
The education of the world’s youth offers the surest path – indeed, the only path – to global sustainable development.
The Transparency Challenge
NEW YORK – So now we Americans know.
We know that our government is spying not just on foreigners; it is also spying on us.
Of course, most of what the government “knows” about you is “known” only in the sense that someone could get at it if they wanted to find out more about you – or if your data matched some pattern that they were investigating.
So, in a sense, the data that the government collects are harmless – that is, until such information is used for a real-world purpose, such as putting people on a no-fly list or forcing into an institution someone whose online posts are “troubling.”
And that is only the beginning.
Personally, I am reluctantly willing to accept the US government spying on people, especially foreigners, as long as it is constrained by rules that are public and enforced.
The argument that “the other guys do it” is lame, but it is also true.
The absence of a world government deters abusive power – however imperfectly, it forces governments to compete (even though they often collude).
And, in an imperfect world, part of each government’s job is to protect its citizens from enemies.
Regardless of what I think, Americans live in a democracy, and overall, the public seems to support government surveillance.
The question is how to keep surveillance off the slippery slope to unaccountable snooping.
The most important principle is transparency: It is wrong to lie and pretend that we are not doing it.
Some Americans are horrified that our government is doing it at all; others think that it mostly depends on what the government is looking for – terrorists, yes; political opponents, no.
What about troubled teenagers?
Bullies?
Potential criminals?
There is a lot of judgment involved.
In practice, resolving such questions must be a matter of continuous public scrutiny and negotiation.
But what of the assumptions that we rarely question?
Do we want to call in the government over every possible irregularity?
Do we want a world that is safe from criminals, but where most people are treated like criminals, with their every move monitored?
Maybe we are attacking the wrong target – people – in our quest for safety.
Perhaps it would be better to control the weapons.
Every time someone goes on a shooting rampage, we ask why this particular person was not detected and stopped.
But we should have stopped him (and many others) from getting a gun in the first place.
In the US, however, one often needs more ID to get on an airplane than to buy a gun.
That is crazy.
The danger of terrorist attacks on aircraft is highly exaggerated.
Then again, if voters want the government to continue to search travelers, I do not object (especially if I can pay a little money and sacrifice a little privacy to go through an expedited preferred-traveler lane).
The things that trouble me are different.
Power – especially destructive power – implies the need for transparency.
That is, we should know more about our government than it knows about us.
When citizens acquire power – through, say, an elected position, a job that lets them decide who gets a liquor license or who gets arrested with a gun – the public has a right to know more about them.
That is why I am more concerned with what the government does with its data concerning us.
Will it circumscribe my freedom or prohibit me from taking certain jobs?
Will it curb my right to speak freely or punish me by throwing me in jail?
Will it scrutinize my tax returns extra carefully?
Carelessness about the truth leads to lack of accountability.
But just having the truth does not create accountability by itself.
Too many people who applaud (as do I) the leaks by the former US intelligence contractor Edward J. Snowden think that the job is done.
It is not: The reason for transparency is that we cannot resolve all questions in advance.
There is no sensible way to regulate all government behavior, but we do want – for ourselves and for whistleblowers – the right to legal recourse and to speak out if we (or someone else) may have been wronged.
Finally, in a transparent world, culture, as opposed to laws, becomes more important than ever as a guide to behavior.
Two trends deserve attention and mitigation (but not regulation or secrecy!).
First, the press covers human tragedy and terrorism to such an extent that most parents are more scared of kidnappers than of careless drivers, and most of us fear terrorists more than careless homebuilders – despite statistics to the contrary.
In the US, people are twice as likely to die from suicide as from homicide.
But the correct response is more transparency (and some statistical sophistication) about the mundane fact that Americans are mostly safe.
Second, with transparency we tend to see more of humans at their worst.
Badly behaved movie stars and politicians skew ideas of the norm – or of what should be acceptable.
Obviously, not all types of bad behavior should be criminalized; but voters and customers should still shun them.
In an environment of transparency, accountability becomes all the more important.
Many Americans – to their great good fortune – do not have the experience to understand how much the misdeeds of powerful people and institutions are known while nothing is done.
There is a naïve sense in the US that if bad things are known, they will be stopped.
But transparency can only increase awareness of problems; it is up to us to take action.
Day Traders of Charity
LANGKAWI, MALAYSIA – An online charity organization is taking Silicon Valley by storm.
Called Watsi, the charity allows users to read personal tales of medical woe in emerging markets and contribute up to the total amount needed to pay for a particular patient’s treatment.
Many might say, “How nice!”
But I say, “Hold the applause.”
The problem is not that Watsi is a bad service.
The problem is that it is good at what it does.
All the money raised goes directly to the individual whose care you are paying for.
(You can contribute separately if you want to support Watsi’s operations.)
There are strict processes and protections in place to ensure that the care goes only to the “deserving poor” (not their words, but that is the idea), rather than to just anyone.
There are safeguards to prevent expensive care from being given to someone who does not really need it.
And everything is visible; all of Watsi’s financial records are accessible on a Google Transparency Document.
Yes, the Internet allows people to connect – one to one – across cultures and distance.
And it is good that people feel empathy, or at least sympathy, for those who are less fortunate.
But the ability to solve immediate problems encourages a passive, money-heals-all approach.
You see someone lying in a virtual ditch, you help him or her, and call it a good day.
In this respect, Watsi resembles a day-trading site, where investors buy and sell stocks relentlessly, without helping to build the underlying businesses.
The problem is broader than Watsi.
Even as it becomes easier to see and care for people lying injured on the side of the virtual highway, it becomes harder to perceive and easier to ignore the “road” conditions that caused their injuries – poor nutrition, poverty, inadequate prenatal care, corruption, diversion of resources, and the like.
Like so many modern tools, Watsi encourages a short-term, emotional approach to the state of the world.
It is like looking through a telescope: a lot of detail, no perspective.
It is not that we should feel nothing; but we should be encouraged to think more and to prevent the wound rather than pay for the Band-Aid.
In a media culture that can deliver instant stardom and fickle trends, our attention shifts too rapidly to see the forest for the trees.
It is this short-term approach that leads us to celebrate each overthrow of a dictator, rather than think about how to educate people to demand good government.
We are drawn to heartwarming stories of an understanding teacher who sees a student’s potential and helps her get into university, or a frequent diner who funds a kitchen worker’s dream to start his own restaurant.
But a good society is one in which you do not have to get lucky to avoid a life of poor education, unhealthy food, and dead-end jobs.
And a good commentary is one that does more than just whine about other people’s shortsightedness.
So, what would work better?
The answer probably is not an academic paper about the inadequate diet or corrupt medical system in country X. But perhaps it would help to ground discussion of such issues in the context in which other people live.
It is easy to think we understand someone’s distress, but most people (especially Americans) have no idea what life is really like in another country.
Indeed, instigating and supporting long-term change is a far more complicated undertaking than treating the casualties of broken systems.
The fact that we can quantify so many things means that sometimes we abandon the challenges that are harder to measure – such as corruption, food quality, or education.
Even as the Internet and services such as Watsi make the world seem smaller, they can obscure the reality of what is driving global developments.
Let’s invest in prenatal care, education, and transparency.
Let’s help people build their own societies.
Unfortunately, addressing the world’s most pressing problems is not as simple as setting up a Web site where foreigners can contribute to social improvements in some other country.
So, if you lack the knowledge or standing to involve yourself in another country’s affairs, don’t do it.
Poverty, ignorance, poor nutrition, and inadequate health care exist almost everywhere; the path of least effort – and perhaps greatest effectiveness – may start at home.
A User’s Guide to Conferences
DALLAS – Summer is conference season – a critical time for building brands, making connections, and shaping industries.
Indeed, though people increasingly learn and interact online, we retain a fundamental need to engage in person.
At conferences, such engagement is guided by a few basic principles.
Understanding them – being “conference literate” – is critical to making the most of a conference, whether as an organizer, speaker, or attendee.
Perhaps the most important aspect of a conference is its purposes, which all participants should identify for themselves.
An individual or organization may attend a conference to understand the future of bottled water, to find procurement managers who buy bottled water, or even to disrupt the bottled-water market with water-filtration systems.
A speaker may want to promote his or her employer, or find a new one.
Even the organizers can have purposes beyond direct profit.
For example, the conference could be held to give legitimacy to a corresponding trade show, where the main sources of revenue are sponsorships and rental of floor space.
Or it could be intended to impress the organizer’s clients, thereby generating longer-term revenue.
Or it could be a service to an organization’s members or to a venture capitalist’s portfolio companies.
A broadcast media company recently held a conference largely for its reporters and television anchors, in order to generate a large amount of video content at once, in front of a live audience.
While the audience comprised mostly college students, the speakers were industry luminaries, each of whom would have taken a week or two to schedule.
The distinction between the organizer’s purpose and business model is critical.
There are two primary business models for conferences: charge attendees to pay the speakers (with a margin for the organizers), or charge sponsors for the right to select the speakers and, to some extent, control the content.
The concept of “native advertising” (paid advertising masquerading as editorial content) is distressingly applicable at sponsored events.
Of course, many conferences combine the two models.
But the balance must be handled delicately to ensure that attendees who have paid are not put off by aggressive marketing.
Given that the content is being created in real time, this can be challenging; a speaker may unexpectedly use the stage to promote a product, in which case he or she would probably not be invited back.
(Just as columnists may promote themselves or some other party’s offering.)
The third model – the most effective and rewarding in my view – resembles large workshops, with both speakers and audience members contributing to the conversation.
At such events, the promise that participants will learn something that they could not learn elsewhere and meet people they want to know is sufficiently credible to make the audience willing to pay and to motivate the speakers to join for free.
These events bring together market leaders, who in real-time discussion among themselves and with the audience generate a new understating of their industry’s evolution, guided by a moderator who provokes the silent and silences the needlessly provocative.
Even within the traditional conference structure, diversity of perspectives is critical.
For example, ten years ago I took over a moribund event about anti-spyware tools.
“So where are the spyware speakers?”
I asked.
Oh, they're evil, was the reply.
So I went about getting four spyware speakers, with careful coaxing and a few promises about the limits of what I would ask in public.
The audience – including many security companies and also a lawyer from the NY State Attorney General's office – took active part.
The conference changed a lot of people’s perceptions of themselves and their enemies.
Moreover, by highlighting that a spyware company, just like any other, is based on a business model, it implied that the best way to attack it may be to target the advertisers who turn a blind eye to where their ads are running.
To some extent, that has occurred, though the problem of rogue software – and inattentive advertisers – persists.
At another remarkable conference a quarter-century ago, the leaders of revenue management in the airline industry explained their field to people involved with hotels, sports clubs, and other time-based businesses.
Much of today’s time-based pricing can be traced back to the topics that were explained and explored at that event.
Simply put, the best conferences help a community to define and understand itself.
The market segments are defined and clarified.
Customers’ needs and threats to vendors are made visible.
And participants, speakers and organizers alike are eager for the next gathering.
The Facebook Furor
AMSTERDAM – There has been a lot of fuss lately about the psychological experiment that Facebook conducted on nearly 700,000 of its users.
In order to gauge how people’s Facebook “News Feeds” affect their moods, the company temporarily implemented a new algorithm to display slightly more positive messages to some users, and slightly gloomier ones to others.
As it turns out, people’s posts shifted to reflect the tone of their friends’ posts.
But the furor missed some of the most interesting questions, focusing (as usual) on Facebook’s tone-deafness (as usual).
Nobody seemed interested in the obvious question of whether the findings reflected a genuine shift in mood, or simply a desire – conscious or unconscious – to fit in.
What has people outraged is the notion that Facebook is manipulating its unwitting users to advance its own agenda, with many citing the secrecy surrounding the research to illustrate the company’s misconduct (though the company published the results with no apparent sense of unease).
But, though Facebook’s lack of transparency is certainly disconcerting – as is its deafness to its users’ concerns – these complaints miss the point.
Of course Facebook is manipulating its users – just like all companies that use advertising to induce consumers to crave a double cheeseburger, a sexy dress, or a sexy partner.
Whether it is done through targeted advertisements based on a search history or billboards on a public highway, the (intended) result is the same.
A century ago, this might have been big news.
Today, it is mundane.
Yet people continue to react to explicit revelations of such manipulation with shock and outrage.
The bigger problem is the modern paradox of choice.
Today, people are constantly presented with choices – and also with the option to avoid them, under the guise of speed or convenience.
While the power to make one’s own choices is appealing in theory, the sheer number of options can be exhausting and disorienting – not least because of the pressure to make the “right” choice.
As Barry Schwartz has pointed out, choices are an opportunity for regret.
When forces beyond our control make us unhappy, at least we do not feel angry with ourselves for putting ourselves in that position.
The logical response to this pressure is to delegate some decisions to others.
But, when reminded of how others are shaping our lives, we become indignant, calling it “creepy” and a violation of our free will.
Users let Google filter the deluge of emails they receive daily, but they are incensed when Google weeds out an important message.
Likewise, when Facebook responds to complaints that users cannot keep track of all of their friends’ posts, it develops an algorithm to show users only the most relevant.
But what qualifies a post as “relevant”?
Twitter is now trying to solve the same problem.
Some have said that the choices that Facebook makes for its users could endanger its users’ mental health.
But so can an overworked high-school teacher who cannot dedicate the needed energy to troubled students; magazines that promote unrealistic body images; sermons from clergy who believe that God does not forgive everyone; or even a stranger acting rudely on a train.
All of these actors have their own ideas and motivations, and they are all manipulating our perspectives – and our moods – every day.
Of course, with advertising, the manipulation is particularly overt.
But marketers also regularly test users’ emotional reactions to less explicit aspects of their products, from the color of their packaging or their placement in the store to their celebrity spokesperson.
And they lure consumers into paying more by offering an over-priced option that makes anything less expensive seem reasonable.
Reading about Kim Kardashian’s new dress may make you want to buy the dress, but does it also make you feel ugly?
If you’re a tech entrepreneur, you may aspire to be Marc Andreessen, but reading about him may also make you feel inadequate – especially if you are female.
Facebook inadvertently raised this issue of emotional manipulation and unintended consequences indirectly and in one context, by being secretive about its research and not giving people the chance to opt out beforehand.
(Now, that would have been a smart choice!)
But, in the end, there is no problem to be solved – or even an issue that concerns Facebook in particular.
What we are seeing is a fundamental improvement in our ability to discover the short-term and long-term impact of our actions and those of others.
(Global warming, anyone?) As our ability to measure things and detect the impact of any change improves – in short, as we get better at empirical research – we need to consider what kind of responsibility is entailed by the knowledge that we gain.
The Private Sector’s Privacy Puzzle
NEW YORK – Why is privacy such a challenge for private companies?
(Governments have their own problems, but that is another story.) Beyond privacy laws, companies must cope with customers with varying expectations, competitors with varying levels of integrity, and the various relationships that form the context of data exchange.
Privacy relates not only to who knows how much about us, but also to how we feel about it.
Many “privacy” concerns are based on concrete interests, such as preserving financial security or obscuring information that could compromise one’s employment or ability to qualify for affordable health insurance.
But there is also a more personal aspect: the tension between the desire to be known and the desire to protect one’s secrets, whether insidious, embarrassing, or intimate.
When the co-founder of a company in which I invested mentioned to me that a famous person I happen to know had signed up for the service, our first reaction was that I should reach out to him with a friendly note.
But then I began to wonder whether he would be comfortable to hear that others knew of his use of the service (though it is a non-edgy business tool).
Of course, he trusted the company enough to grant it technical access to his business data, which the company’s terms of service assure will not be viewed or used.
Would the fact that others knew his identity as a user undermine that trust?  
As it happens, the company uses a tool called Intercom, which allows any website operator to find out about its customers by their email address, Facebook ID, or whatever they use to sign in.
There are many such “customer relationship” services, which rely on data sources that match usernames and email addresses using unspecified means.
Most people are probably not aware of these practices – though, at this point, most would not likely be shocked by the information. (I, for one, was only somewhat surprised – about as much as I was to learn about the US National Security Agency’s far-reaching data collection.)
Some of Intercom’s customers want to know how many Twitter followers their users have, to determine their potential value as “influencers.”
Once a company identifies which users have the most influence – well-known bloggers, for example – it may offer them better treatment, in the hope that they will recommend the service.
Website startups may even want to check their users’ profiles on the Angel List database of angel investors, viewing them as a potential source of financing.
Others might use services such as Intercom to gain insight into their users’ interests – from their preferences in music to their favorite hobbies – in order to offer more personalized service.
Indeed, many online services now offer to link users with their Facebook friends or LinkedIn contacts, or recommend activities or restaurants based on past behavior or current location.
Some people do not want this kind of attention, whether because they are already well-known personalities trying to fend off adoring fans or mooches, or simply because they are uncomfortable with unknown entities knowing so much about them.
But, for many ordinary users, such recognition can be valuable and appreciated, even if it is not accompanied by special gifts or benefits.
The question is how to distinguish between the two groups.
The answer should be simple.
Ask the customer: “How may we use the information you share with us, or that we receive from services like Intercom?”
The problem is that most companies prefer not to raise this issue; they would rather let sleeping dogs lie.
What these companies must recognize is that over time they may not be able to survive a steady stream of privacy gaffes – whether the result of their own mistakes or guilt by association – and constantly changing rules. (In this sense, Facebook is a rare exception.)
While it may require a little more effort and awkwardness to find out what customers want, companies that do so in a straightforward and open way will benefit in the long run.
To be sure, such openness carries some risks.
For example, some people, alerted to the amount of information that is being collected about them, may refrain from using the service.
For them, recognition from people may be okay – even desirable – but recognition by computers is creepy and unfulfilling.
The movie Her tells the story of a man whose job – composing letters for people who cannot write their own – will soon be automated by a new generation of operating systems capable of learning so quickly and comprehensively that they quickly surpass a single human in terms of accumulated knowledge.
The film’s protagonist soon falls in love with one of these operating systems.
“She” loves him, too – as well as 640 more of the 8,316 people with whom she works.
He is not satisfied with that level of shared attention, especially given how intimately she knows him.
The computer is human-like enough to win his love, but cannot fulfill the relevant expectations.
The challenge is thus to build systems that feel appropriately personal, without making users feel violated or uncomfortable.
At the same time, they should not be presented as being more human than they are. Otherwise, users’ expectations will become disconnected from what the company can deliver.
But there is one more complication: Some people seek “privacy” from themselves.
These are the kind of people who sport comb-overs, insisting to everyone – including themselves – that they are not balding.
A scale salesman once told me that many people, despite being willing to share their weight with a doctor, do not want to look at the precise numbers themselves.
The concreteness of the data scares them.
Another example: To commemorate Facebook’s ten-year anniversary, Time, Inc. offered to assess people’s newsfeeds to estimate how much time they had wasted on the site.
While many were curious, I am sure many preferred not to face the facts.
Privacy is personal.
By using a service, a person effectively enters into a relationship with its provider.
Service providers should understand that their users will expect the transparency, respect, and recognition that are fundamental to any relationship.
Measure for Mismeasure
ISTANBUL – I recently used Uber (an online service for ordering a car and driver) and did not have the usual pleasant experience.
The driver did not know the area, and, worse, he did not follow his navigator’s instructions, turning left instead of right.
When Uber asked me, as usual, to rate the driver, I did not hesitate to give him two out of five.
I was not being vindictive; I wanted to save other passengers from an unpleasant experience, and I hoped that maybe feedback would encourage him to improve or find another line of work.
But what does two out of five mean?
It obviously means worse than average, which would be three.
But, while I would always pick an average driver over a driver with a rating of two, given the choice between a two driver and a blind pick, I might pick the two, because the fear of someone even worse would keep me from taking a risk.
This is a well-known phenomenon known as loss aversion: the risk of a one outweighs the hope of a five.
Just last week, I was engaged in ranking proposals for the Knight News Challenge; to simplify things, they had a three-point ranking: three for yes, two for consider, one for reject.
The idea was to pick the easy winners, reject the losers, and focus on distinguishing among the maybes.
That makes sense in the context of focusing attention where a decision is needed.
Ranking exercises, like the things they rank, are not all the same; different approaches fit different situations.
We live in a world where everything is being rated, whether you are a professional judge or an individual trying to make sense of modern life.
Indeed, while we rate the Uber drivers, they are rating us.
Consider a business plan or a foundation grant proposal.
One proposal might be ranked nine out of ten, while another is eight out of 20; the first is pretty good but with limited upside, while the second is not so good, but has the potential to be great.
The two cannot really be compared: One is a safe choice, but not likely to have a huge impact; the other is riskier, but ultimately may be more worthwhile.
If you are a customer buying a product that should work, you want the nine out of ten; if you are a venture capitalist who thinks she can add value, you want the eight out of 20.
Helping people to think clearly about these numbers is important.
People want simplicity, yet at the same time, in a world of targeted marketing, customization, and precision, in which vendors struggle to give consumers exactly what they want, people can help themselves by thinking clearly and specifying their preferences.
Imagine that you have cancer.
The doctor says that you probably have two years to live, or a 50% expected improvement in “survival” (medical terminology for living another five years) if you undergo chemotherapy.
In other words, you can have two years of gradual decline with some pain, or three years of nauseating treatments, “chemo brain,” loss of hair, and diminished dignity.
If you think those numbers are not quite comparable, you are right; that is part of the problem.
(And the numbers may be based on a limited sample of people who do not quite resemble you.)
But, while the timing is uncertain, the trade-offs are pretty clear.
What you really want, of course, is a cure, not merely a minimal extension of life expectancy, but nothing is certain.
The choice sounds easy, but then perhaps you just want to survive to see your daughter graduate, or your son get married.
It would be nice to understand those numbers better.
Even on the population level, we are facing some of the same complexities at HICCup (the Health Initiative Coordinating Council), a startup that I founded.
How do you measure health improvement?
It is not, as one benighted analyst suggested, “A 20% improvement (reduction) in heart attacks plus a 30% improvement (reduction) in diabetes incidence equals a 50% improvement.”
You need to average the improvements to get a figure somewhere between 20% and 30%.
But how do you weight diabetes versus heart attacks, life extension versus quality of life?
There is also, in any sector, the issue of what the data really mean.
One of my favorite (sad) stories concerns consumer credit ratings in Russia.
A retail banker once told me that in making credit decisions in Russia, his analysts had faced a shortage of data and had assumed that a criminal record would be one easy way to weed out the bad eggs.
But when the bank ran the numbers, they discovered that although about half of the people applying for low-end, high-interest-rate credit had a police record, this did not seem to reflect on payment outcomes.
I suspect the reason was that the people with no police record were the middle 50%.
At the bottom were 25% who had a police record for some kind of bad behavior.
At the top were 25% who had a police record for exceptionally good behavior, like refusing to pay bribes or to overlook corruption.
The moral of this story is that numbers do not tell us everything.
Do we end up focusing on price because we can measure it, to the exclusion of other things that matter?
This phenomenon has rendered the airline business largely unprofitable – and customers increasingly unhappy.
Quality used to be included in the price of a ticket; now, with surcharges for seat selection, meals, and the like, customers are charged for it separately.
In short, the paradox of choice (as elegantly described in an eponymous book by Barry Schwartz) is that too many choices confuse us and raise the possibility of regret; how can we be sure that we are getting just what we want, and that something else would not be better?
Or it may be that the greatest happiness of all comes from not having to worry about stuff like this.
The Great Global Bazaar
NEW YORK – I have had the same apartment in New York City for almost 40 years but have actually lived in it for less than half of that time, owing to a busy travel schedule.
I enjoy it; my experiences abroad have taught me the importance of an open mind and have given me a willingness to wander off the beaten path – not only to keep life interesting, but also to understand in a meaningful way that things do not look the same from every vantage point.
The most interesting lessons often lie in the mundane – those aspects of everyday life that locals take for granted and tourists tend to overlook.
For example, at my Western hotel in South Korea there was a pictogram alongside the toilet explaining how to use it properly – that is, to sit on the seat, rather than crouching over the bowl, as one would on a traditional South Korean toilet.
In 1989, during a trip to Estonia – then still a part of the Soviet Union – I asked my interpreter, a moonlighting dentist, to take me to her dental clinic.
Beyond getting a glimpse of the equipment – old and sickly green – I learned that my interpreter and her colleagues were augmenting their state salaries with direct (and much higher) payments from Finnish dental tourists.
When they had saved enough money, they explained, they would purchase new equipment and launch their own practice.
My dentist-guide also described her work spreading “sanitary propaganda” – that is, visiting local grade schools to teach children how to brush their teeth.
But, she noted, many could not even afford toothbrushes.
I had had no idea that the tin of dental floss in my pocket – which I quickly handed over – was so valuable.
Around the same time, while sitting in a government office in Moscow, I gained another small but powerful insight.
When the phone rang, no one moved – an unnerving response to an American, for whom a ringing phone demands an immediate reaction in anticipation of an opportunity.
When I asked about it, the employees explained what to them was obvious: “People call offices only about problems.”
Solving problems, they evidently believed, was not part of their job.
Late communism was a strange time indeed.
A Hungarian friend who worked in a Budapest hotel during that period described an experience that surprised even him.
When asked to take several bottles of water to a room that he had not previously known existed, he found a group of men wearing headsets, listening to what was happening in the other rooms.
More recently, in 2008, I took a weekend visit to Baku, Azerbaijan, the hometown of my friend and travel companion Tatyana Kanzevali – a former chess champion who had often played against Garry Kasparov while he, too, was growing up in Baku.
The opportunity to see the city through a local’s eyes, hearing stories about everything from high school teachers to food shortages, was invaluable.
If I had not known better, I might have thought that the word “aliyev” meant street, because it appeared on almost every street sign.
But it was the name of the ruler, Heydar Aliyev, whose son, Ilham, succeeded him in 2003 and remains President to this day.
During our visit, my friend and I visited an orphanage to which she had sent a dozen computers the previous year.
Some had been distributed to administrators, but several were now available for children to use during supervised lessons.
I vividly remember the children’s delighted squeals as they ran through the yard playing with the bubble-blowing pens that we had brought them.
Finally, two years ago in Cuba, after advertising for “entrepreneurs” on Twitter, I had the opportunity to meet several dissidents.
The meeting was fascinating, despite – or perhaps partly because of – the furtive glances of two watchful men peering at us from behind their newspapers at the next table.
But a thirst for knowledge is useful not only in foreign countries.
Indeed, it is critical to gaining insight into the differences – and similarities – among people of different backgrounds, even those who live just a few towns or miles apart.
That is precisely the attitude that I hope to bring to my travels within the United States for The Way to Wellville contest, in which five communities will compete to improve their health.
Rick Brush, the competition’s CEO, and I have already visited several of the 10-15 communities that we will explore before choosing the five contestants.
One stop was Lancaster, Pennsylvania, where we met a group of health- and civic-minded citizens at a grade school.
Teachers described the experience of taking unfinished meals home from a restaurant in a doggy bag, in the hope of instilling in their students the understanding that it is better to enjoy leftovers later than to overeat now.
(And, my Silicon Valley perspective told me, the restaurant could increase its revenue by selling ads on the sides of the doggy bags.)
In Niagara Falls, New York, we met with a larger group, including Mayor Paul Dyster, who last year officiated at the state’s first gay wedding, and a pastor who had also attended that wedding, carrying a protest sign.
Despite their differences, both came to the meeting to discuss the community’s health with a friendly and constructive attitude.
However, the pastor did express some frustration that the police drive through, rather than walk around, the neighborhoods.
A couple of hours later, as we drove through on a site visit, our path was blocked by two police cars, stopped side by side in the middle of the street, with the officers talking.
I doubt they were discussing their – and their community’s – health. 
Lesson One in School Food
NEW YORK – Had you told me a year ago that I would attend a conference devoted to school lunches, I would have laughed.
The closest that I have come to eating a school lunch lately is coach-class food on long-haul flights.
But earlier this month I attended School Food FOCUS’s “National Gathering.”
I found it both heartwarming and thought-provoking.
A little context: In the United States, subsidized school lunches started in 1946 as a welfare program – but one focused on the welfare of farmers, not schoolchildren.
The primary purpose was to help farmers get rid of – I mean, distribute generously – their surplus production.
The program was gradually transformed over the years as students, whether out of choice or necessity, increasingly came to rely on school lunch rather than bringing their own.
The percentage of children who qualify for a free or reduced-price school lunch has grown – to 48%, or about 20 million – and school lunch (and increasingly, breakfast and even dinner) is now a significant part of many children’s diets.
Now, new legislation mandates better nutrition, bans sugary drinks and sweets, and forbids the parallel sale of unhealthy alternatives to the main menu (which had been a major source of funding for subsidized lunches).
But the new laws do not specify how healthy lunches are to be provided, and local communities are still expected to provide the funding (except for the surplus commodities).
It is one thing to enact legislation; building the infrastructure to implement it and, in this case, offer a healthy meal for about $1.50 per child is another matter.
Indeed, how to change school lunches has more to do with money and business than with health and nutrition.
(The latter goals are clear; the challenge is how to achieve them.)
School Food FOCUS, an arm of the New York-based non-profit Public Health Solutions, convenes its members – food managers from 36 large US school districts, serving more than four million children daily – and brings in researchers, partner philanthropies (mostly healthy-food advocates), and food vendors.
Indeed, FOCUS turns the vendors into allies – and sponsors.
The National Gathering was a trade show as much as an event for bureaucrats and philanthropists.
I expected to hear about lobbying efforts and nutrition, but mostly I learned about supply chains.
The discussion focused mainly on how food can be procured, prepared, and delivered within the constraints of pricing, availability, and each school district’s facilities (which determine what kind of food they can prepare and serve).
The school lunch program is the largest discrete market for low-cost, healthy food.
But most food vendors would rather follow the dictates of their shareholders and sell more expensive, higher-margin food, with little regard for how healthy it is.
For years, they have complained that children (and adults) reject healthy food in favor of less-healthy food that tastes good.
Now, increasingly pushed toward healthy foods by government regulations, the school-food vendors are trying to figure out how to boost both healthiness and tastiness, because the government requires that schools measure not what the children are offered but what they select (though not what they actually eat rather than throw away).
One could argue that a government cannot and should not control what people eat.
But in this unique market, it is the government that is paying and the customers are incapable – at least in legal terms – of choosing what is in their own best interest.
That creates an ideal test environment not just for school suppliers, but also for the broader food market.
The challenge to the vendors is straightforward: make cheap, healthy food that appeals to the world’s most finicky eaters, grade-school kids.
To do that, the first question to answer is what makes school food so bad.
Aside from the focus on price and the need to absorb US farms’ excess output, school lunches reflect a broader trend toward turning food preparation into industrial production.
Uniformity is prized above quality, and convenience is valued over freshness (and often over cost).
Restaurant chains such as McDonald’s, for example, have transformed agriculture around the world with their homogenizing requirements for meat, bread, potatoes, and the like.
Under the assumption that consistency equals quality, variation in the size or color of, say, tomatoes has come to be considered bad (unless one calls them “heirloom” tomatoes and emphasizes their uniqueness).
In schools, too, pre-packaged foods are now considered better than hand-prepared foods, not only because they can be set out again on Tuesday if the kids do not eat them on Monday, but also because they all look alike.
This trend is now being reversed in school food, thanks to legislative innovations such as allowing a preference (of up to about 10%) for locally grown products.
But there is another issue: serving better school lunches often requires restoring the food-preparation facilities that existed before.
Instead of loading docks to unpack boxes and store packages, schools need stoves, refrigerators, cooking utensils, and serving dishes, among other things.
One speaker at the National Gathering noted that it is easier to obtain funding for capital equipment than for daily food purchases.
And vendors such as Revolution Foods, founded by two mothers of school-age children, provide not only food, but also nutrition curricula for students, and even vocational training for food workers.
Like most large-scale social change, the shift to mass consumption of healthier food requires both awareness and capacity.