In 2002 a second referendum was held which reversed the result and saw the ‘Yes’ side triumph.
A good part of the explanation for this turnaround was the fact that the government managed to convince enough voters to move from abstention to the ‘Yes’ camp (though the turnout still failed to reach 50%).  All of this suggests that the higher the turnout the greater the likelihood of a ‘Yes’ win.
For Irish farmers the campaign has delivered a golden opportunity to engage in a tactical assault on Brussels.
They have sought to link the Treaty to the ongoing Doha Round of World Trade Organization talks.
Peter Mandelson, the EU’s trade commissioner, has been routinely presented as public enemy number one with his proposals to reduce some agricultural tariffs by up to 70%.
Farming organizations threaten to withhold support for the Treaty unless the government threatens to veto Mandelson’s proposals.
Although the Irish Farmers Association (IFA) has belatedly urged its 85,000 members to support the Treaty, opinion polls show farmers are opposed to Lisbon by a two to one majority.
Their votes could prove crucial in a tight contest.
From the outside looking in it seems almost perverse that Irish voters might reject the Lisbon Treaty.
After all Ireland has benefited more than other state from the European integration process, garnering almost €60billion in EU subsidies during 35 years of membership.
But in a context where the EU remains too remote from citizens and where apathy and confusion define the referendum campaign, the ‘No’ side has cleverly packaged its message of Europe as an existential threat to Irish jobs, investment and sovereignty.
Ireland, long one of the EU’s bright spots, will be a source of great anxiety in the days to come.
Is Academic Freedom Worth Its Price?
WARWICK, UK – Is academic freedom affordable in a time of economic crisis?
That was the topic for discussion at the annual signing of the Magna Charta Universitatum at the mother of universities, the University of Bologna, earlier this year.
The Magna Charta is the world’s most visible statement of principles for the promotion and protection of university autonomy.
Over the past two decades, nearly 700 institutions of higher education on every continent have signed it.
Nevertheless, there remains a nagging sense that universities are luxuries now that ordinary people are struggling to make ends meet.
There has always been reason for concern.
In the past, universities have been created in times of plenty, typically to encourage people to think beyond their immediate need for survival to more edifying spiritual or national goals.
Nearly 50 years ago, a statistically minded historian of science, Derek de Solla Price, observed that the best indicator of academic research production is a nation’s energy consumption per capita: both grow together.
This is hardly surprising.
From a strictly economic standpoint, academic freedom requires relative immunity to costs, whether stemming from trial-and-error experimentation or from more radical challenges to the status quo.
But should universities now reduce their demands in order to meet the needs of the larger society, not least in terms of their carbon footprint?
If universities are to remain universities in the sense originally laid down by the Bolognese lawyers, the answer is no.
Moreover, this is not an affront to economics.
The efficiency savings of academia occur downstream from the activities of the universities themselves.
Indeed, universities may be the most consistently performing products of long-term capital investment, especially if one is inclined to think about social and economic “investment” in exactly the same terms.
After all, the university’s unique institutional mission is to manufacture knowledge as a public good.
The new knowledge produced by original research is an instance of social capital formation.
It results from academics and funders collaborating on projects that aim to increase the competitive advantage of each in their respective domains.
Left at this stage, knowledge is simply intellectual property, access to which is restricted to paying customers.
But universities also have an institutional mandate to teach.
This forces knowledge to be made more widely available, thereby breaking the effective monopoly that researchers and their funders would otherwise enjoy.
Joseph Schumpeter’s phrase “creative destruction,” his definition of entrepreneurship, aptly describes this process.
Once teaching reduces, if not eliminates, the original competitive advantage associated with a piece of research, academics and their funders are forced to seek new sources of advantage by producing new knowledge.
In the process, the larger public – those not involved in the original production of new knowledge – benefit through classroom instruction.
In this sense, the heart of the university is located in its curriculum committee, as the mechanism by which research is regularly translated into teaching, generating new cycles of creative destruction.
Efficiency-minded knowledge managers nowadays say that the very idea of the university as a place where the same people produce and distribute knowledge is a throwback to the Middle Ages.
Today, teaching is thus said to be more efficiently delivered on-line, and research best delivered through dedicated “science parks.”
But, while the sense of “efficiency” that attracted the mendicant Christian orders, the Dominicans and Franciscans, to staff the original universities was rather different, it is no less relevant today.
The Dominicans and Franciscans literally lived by begging – that is, by depending on diverse sources of income, whose return to any particular investor was always unclear.
The autonomy of these orders rested on a proven long-term ability to do more than expected with what they were given.
The Latin word for this ability was povertas, or “poverty” in English.
While the word does not retain its original virtuous connotations, we still warm to the virtuosity of “doing more with less.”
In the case of the university, this means allowing access to knowledge to students who lack the intellectual, political, or financial resources that might have enabled them to produce it for themselves.
Universities perform their natural economic function when academics speak and write plainly, demystify jargon, present their ideas in alternative media and stress applications to domains that do not concern the academics themselves.
In these ways, academics enable knowledge to do maximum work at minimal cost to its recipients.
In short, universities prove their worth if students find it easier to appropriate academic knowledge than the academics themselves originally did.
Is America Healing Fast Enough?
NEWPORT BEACH – Six internal factors suggest that the United States’ economy is slowly healing.
For some observers, these factors were deemed sufficient to form the critical mass needed to propel the economy into escape velocity.
While I hoped that they might be proven right, the recent stream of weak economic data, including May’s timid net job creation of only 69,000, confirmed my doubts.
With this and other elements of a disheartening employment report now suddenly raising widespread worries about the underlying health and durability of America’s recovery, it is important to understand the positive factors and why they are not enough as yet.
For starters, large US multinational companies are as healthy as I have ever seen them.
Their cash balances are extremely high, interest payments on debt are low, and principal obligations have been termed out.
Many of them are successfully tapping into buoyant demand in emerging economies, generating significant free cash flow.
Company cash is not the only source of considerable spending power waiting on the sidelines.
Rich households also hold significant resources that could be deployed in support of both consumption and investment.
The third and fourth positive factors relate to housing and the labor market.
These two long-standing areas of persistent weakness have constituted a major drag on the type of cyclical dynamics that traditionally thrust the US out of its periodic economic slowdowns.
But recent data support the view that the housing sector could be in the process of establishing a bottom, albeit an elongated one.
Meanwhile, job growth, while anemic, has nonetheless been consistently positive since September 2010.
Then there is the US Federal Reserve Board.
Despite legitimate questions about the effectiveness of its unconventional and ever-experimental policy stance, the Fed appears willing to be even more activist if the economy weakens.
Indeed, if the Fed makes an inadvertent mistake (the likelihood of this is considerable, given the country’s complex situation and the “unusually uncertain” outlook), it is more likely to err on the side of staying accommodative for too long, rather than tightening monetary policy prematurely.
Finally, with the November elections in sight and subsequently out of the way, some believe that politicians in Washington might finally be in a better position to agree to much-needed grand policy bargains.
In addition to removing the damaging specter of the fiscal cliff – a potentially disruptive economic hindrance equivalent to some 4% of GDP, in the form of excessively blunt spending cuts and across-the-board tax increases – greater political effectiveness would serve to remove other uncertainties that inhibit certain economic activities.
Each of these six factors suggests actual and potential economic healing.
So, not surprisingly, they have provoked excitement in some circles that the US may finally be poised to leave behind the depressing trio of unusually sluggish growth, persistently high unemployment, and high and growing inequality.
The problem is that these factors, both individually and in combination, are unlikely to be a game-changer, for four reasons:
·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; The economic and financial headwinds from outside the US are strong and gusting, owing largely to the ever-worsening European crisis, which is now entering an even more disruptive and unpredictable phase as depositors in some countries step up their withdrawals from local banks.
But it also reflects the beginning of a growth slowdown in the major emerging countries, including Brazil, China, India, and Russia.
·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Too many sectors of the US economy have not completed their balance-sheet rehabilitation process.
This is true for the banking system, which has not de-leveraged to the satisfaction of either regulators or the markets, thus limiting the scope for credit growth.
It is also true for many households.
Indeed, with the average household savings rate having dropped recently to below 4%, too many families are in the process of exhausting their cushions of emergency cash, if they have not done so already.
·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; The unusual monetary-policy activism of the last few years risks causing collateral damage and producing unintended consequences.
While no individual issue is overwhelming yet, together they could serve to dampen economic activity and the proper functioning of markets.
Recall that the Fed’s policy bet was that these “costs and risks,” to use Chairman Ben Bernanke’s phrase, would be more than offset by the improvement in the overall economic situation.
But this generalized benefit has failed to materialize.
·&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Perhaps most importantly, repeated delays in removing the persistent impediments to growth and jobs means that some of them are becoming stubbornly embedded in the structure of the US economy – thus draining its dynamism and reducing its responsiveness.
For example, with long-term joblessness at 5.4 million and the average duration of unemployment at 2.5 times the historical norm, workers are less able to regain productive employment quickly at anywhere near their previous wages and salaries.
Similarly, the alarmingly high level of youth joblessness increases the risk of relatively new entrants into the labor force becoming unemployable.
The bottom line is unfortunate, but it must be acknowledged.
While the US economy is gradually healing, a lot more needs to happen – indeed, urgently – to restore its traditional vigor and vitality.
Most important, robust recovery requires a degree of seriousness and constructive collaboration in Washington that seems elusive today.
Unless and until this cooperation materializes, the hope of achieving economic escape velocity will remain just that – a hope.
And, rather than surging forward, the US economy, regrettably and exasperatingly, will remain captive to unusual sluggishness, while its vulnerability to the ill winds blowing from the rest of the world will only increase.
Is Azerbaijan Next?
As Azerbaijan gears up for parliamentary elections on November 6, the main question is whether the country is about to undergo its own “color” revolution, along the lines of those that have overthrown post-Soviet elites in Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan in the last two years.
Such an outcome cannot be ruled out, but the prospects are uncertain at best.
Azerbaijan’s ruling party, Eni Azerbaijan, faces challenges all around, despite the support of President Ilham Aliyev and privileged access to state resources.
At least three opposition parties – Isa Gambar’s “Mussavat,” Ala Keremela’s “The National Front, and the Social Democratic Party – have maintained support and political influence since Ilham succeeded his late father, Heydar Aliyev, in 2003.
Moreover, like Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan, dynastic politics in Azerbaijan reflects the dominance of clans whose members’ success is determined by proximity to the president.
While such systems may appear stable, they are inherently fragile, for they are synonymous with lawlessness, injustice, and abject poverty for the majority of the population.
The opposition has already started preparing the ground for change.
The leaders of the three-party opposition bloc Azadlyg (Freedom) have declared that they will regard any electoral outcome that gives opposition parties less than 70% of the vote as having been falsified, and that street protests would follow.
This would conform to the pattern seen in Serbia in 2000, Georgia in 2003, and Ukraine in 2004.
But can such a scheme work in Azerbaijan?
A “dress rehearsal” failed in October 2003, when the opposition, incapable of uniting around a single candidate to challenge Ilham in the presidential election, declared the results to have been falsified and called people into the streets.
Only several hundred showed up, and the police quickly dispersed them, arresting dozens.
This time, the opposition is united, having found it far easier to agree on mutual support for 125 parliamentary candidates than to settle on a single presidential candidate.
But the authorities may have the upper hand.
In Tbilisi, Kiev, and Bishkek, the leaders of the “color revolutions” had already held lofty positions in regimes that they now attacked as thoroughly corrupt; yet they succeeded in gaining the population’s trust.
That is far from a foregone conclusion in Azerbaijan, where the last stint in power by some of the opposition leaders in 1992-1993 still evokes bitter memories of a time of war and crisis that few can recall without horror.
Most importantly, however, the previous “color revolutions” underscore the crucial role of world public opinion and the global mass media that shape it.
As in Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan, the fate of the regime and the country may well hang on whether the current government is portrayed on the world’s television screens as a violator of human rights that is thwarting the will of the people and thus rejecting “generally accepted democratic values.”
Such an image may be less valid in Azerbaijan.
After coming to power in 1993, Heydar Aliyev stopped the war with Armenia over the Nagorno-Karabakh enclave, secured Azerbaijan’s existence as a sovereign state, and, as the oil-and-gas sector flourished, oversaw the country’s growing international authority.
The transfer of power from father to son took place peacefully, and Ilham’s administration has presided over completion of the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan oil pipeline – to the annoyance of Russia and Armenia.
At the same time, high oil prices have enabled higher social spending and infrastructure investment.
Today, the capital, Baku, resembles a huge construction site, with high-rise housing, stores, and roads being built at a breakneck pace – and apparently benefiting the broad strata of the population.
But none of this may ultimately matter if the West ­– and the United States, in particular – decides that Ilham’s regime is not ensuring its interests and seeks to manipulate the global media image accordingly.
The West’s main interest is not Azerbaijan’s oil reserves, which accounted for just 0.06% of the world’s total in 2004, but its geopolitical position at the crossroads of global energy and transport corridors and as a frontline state vis-à-vis an increasingly assertive Iran.
So far, it appears as though the West will back Ilham over the opposition.
Former US Secretary of State Madeleine Albright, the president of the European Parliamentary Assembly, Rene Van der Linden, and US Deputy Secretary of State for global affairs Paula Dopryansky have all visited Baku recently.
As US foreign-policy doyen Zbigniew Brzezinski put it in an interview with a German radio station, “The majority of Azeris actually support President Ilham Aliyev.
Therefore, we have a situation that differs from those that took place in Georgia, Ukraine, and Kyrgyzstan.”
Nevertheless, the West appears to be hedging its bets by sustaining contacts with the opposition.
As Brzezinski added, “Of course, it is important for the political regime in Azerbaijan to be as stable and legitimate as possible.”
If the West decides that the government has become unreliable, television shots of demonstrators’ weekly clashes with the Baku police, Ilham’s refusal to hold televised debates, and the confiscation of all orange objects from stores will come in handy.
Of course, modern technology alone cannot bring about a revolution.
But almost all post-Soviet states remain weak, and therefore vulnerable to domestic turmoil.
Azerbaijan is no exception, and Russia, having been burned by its naked intervention on behalf of the governments in Georgia and Ukraine, has given every indication that it intends to sit this one out.
The government appears confident that high oil prices, administrative resources, and dominance of the local media will ensure an election victory.
That may not be enough.
Is Bankers’ Pay Really the Root of Financial Evil?
CHICAGO – Compensation practices at financial firms stand accused of being a primary cause of the recent global financial crisis.
Restricting bankers’ pay is said to be the answer.
But will such restrictions work?
Before instituting such invasive regulation, we should examine whether past compensation structures really were the catalysts for our recent problems.
To say that they were implies three things: top bank executives were rewarded for short-term results with large amounts of up-front cash; bank executives did not hold sufficiently large amounts of stock to align their interests with those of shareholders; and executives with more short-term pay and less stock ownership should have had the greatest incentive to take bad and excessive risks, and thus should have performed worse in the crisis.
Two economists, Rudiger Fahlenbrach and Rene Stulz, tested these implications by studying the CEOs of almost 100 large financial institutions from 2006 to 2008.
They start in 2006 because that seems to be the point at which some financial firms took on the risky positions that led to the crisis.
In 2006, the CEOs took home $3.6 million in cash compensation on average, which represented less than half of total compensation.
The larger share of pay was in restricted stock and options.
At the same time, they held an average of $88 million in their firms’ equity and options.
In other words, they left more than 24 times as much in their firm as they took home.
So it seems unlikely that this up-front cash provided much of an incentive for the average CEO to knowingly take bad or excessive risks that would jeopardize their much larger equity stakes.
Moreover, these CEOs lost a lot in the crisis.
From 2006 to 2008, the average CEO lost $31 million in his or her holdings of a firm’s stock, dwarfing any gains from cash compensation.
The CEOs lost on their options as well.
So, if pay and front-loaded incentives were not the reason that banks’ CEOs got their firms (and the world) into a mess, what was?
Some economists point to highly expansionary monetary policy in the years leading up to the crisis.
Others cite the so-called “capital glut” – large inflows of external financing from China and much of the developing world.
Still others highlight the role that the political system played in inflating the banking sector and real-estate prices, particularly the sub-prime sector.
Ruling out compensation practices hardly leaves us at a loss for culprits.
While today’s proposed pay restrictions are unlikely to stop the next financial crisis, they are likely to damage the financial sector.
To see why, it is important to understand why bankers are paid so much.
Over the last two or three decades, technological change and increased scale have led to much greater productivity and much higher incomes for those at the top of society’s income distribution.
Corporate executives manage larger companies.
Investors manage much larger sums of money. Entertainers and athletes appeal to larger audiences.
Lawyers oversee bigger transactions and cases.
Pay for all of these groups has increased by much more than pay for the average worker.
Given this reality, the best bankers, traders, dealmakers, etc. will work for companies that provide the most attractive compensation.
Greater pay regulation will drive the most talented away from regulated banks and towards hedge funds, private equity funds, boutique investment banks, and other unregulated investment firms.
This talent drain is likely to be exacerbated as pay regulations impose a one-size-fits-all regime.
Why impose restrictions on a dealmaker who earns a large fee for arranging a merger that imposes no risk on the bank after the transaction has closed?
The same is true for a trader who makes money on spreads rather than from taking on risk.
These types of employees will be penalized for no good purpose under the proposed pay regimes.
Perhaps more troubling is that pay restrictions open a Pandora’s box of other restrictions.
Indeed, politicians, eager to look good in the eyes of angry voters, are often more interested in setting limits to total compensation than they are in designing the optimal form of compensation.
Banks serve a special function in the economy that does warrant a special role for the government: not in setting pay, but in imposing effective capital requirements.
Higher and pro-cyclical equity-capital requirements on banks, combined with a requirement to raise contingent long-term debt – debt that converts into equity in a crisis – is a better way forward.
The typical bank is capitalized with equity, long-term debt, short-term debt, and deposits.
Investment banks like Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers got into trouble because they had too little equity capital – far less than 10%.
Regulators might consider imposing pro-cyclical equity requirements – increasing the equity percentage in boom times in order to offset losses in the inevitable bust times.
In addition, regulators should require banks to issue an additional amount of capital – say, 10% – in the form of long-term debt that is forced to convert into equity if the bank and the overall banking system get into financial difficulty.
In issuing contingent capital, banks would have to pay a higher interest rate than they would on ordinary long-term debt, because debt investors will face the true cost of capital, not the government-subsidized cost.
Over time, however, the interest-rate premium is likely to be small, because higher capital requirements and contingent capital should significantly reduce the likelihood of ever reaching the triggers.
If such a contingent-capital structure had been in place before the crisis, troubled banks would have been recapitalized by the contingent debt holders while avoiding the complications and legal posturing inevitable in formal bankruptcy.
Debt investors, not the government, would have bailed out the banks, making the financial crisis substantially smaller, if it had occurred at all.
Is Bernanke Ready?
Ben Bernanke, the nominee to replace Alan Greenspan this month as Chairman of the US Federal Reserve Board, is a highly capable economist who has devoted his professional life to understanding the historical role of central banks and the problems that they have faced.
His views represent, as much as can be expected, a consensus among those who have studied the issues carefully.
But that does not mean that Bernanke is prepared to ensure that healthy economic growth continues in the US in the coming years and provide the kind of leadership that the world needs.
By the standards of what is generally understood today, he will do a good job.
Unfortunately, that may not be enough.
John Maynard Keynes once said that monetary policy may work like a string.
A central bank can pull the string (raise interest rates) to rein in an economy that is galloping ahead unsustainably.
But it cannot push the string up: if economic growth stalls, as when confidence is seriously damaged, lowering interest rates may not be enough to stimulate demand.
In that case, a recession can occur despite the central bank’s best efforts.
Bernanke made his name as an economist by analyzing the worldwide Great Depression of the 1930’s – good expertise to have, since preventing such disasters is a central bank head’s most important job.
The Great Depression, which followed the stock market crash of 1929, saw unemployment rise sharply in many countries, accompanied by severe deflation.
In the US, consumer prices fell 27% between 1929 and 1933, and the unemployment rate topped out in 1933 at 23%.
According to Bernanke’s “debt deflation” theory, the collapse in consumer prices was one of the causes of the Great Depression, since deflation raised the real value of debts, making it difficult to repay loans.
As Bernanke pointed out, 45% of US farms were behind on mortgage payments in 1933, and in 1934, default rates on home mortgages exceeded 38% in half of US cities.
The debt burden destroyed consumer confidence and undermined the banking system, crippling the economy.
Bernanke’s research also stressed that the sooner a country abandoned the gold standard, the better off it was.
Adhering to the gold standard during the Great Depression implied a deflationary monetary-policy bias, since it required keeping interest rates relatively high to encourage investors to hold deposits in banks rather than demanding the gold that backed them.
Once a country eliminated convertibility into gold, it was free to pursue monetary expansion, and deflation tended to end.
But Bernanke’s impressive research on the Great Depression does not mean that he can prevent the next recession or depression, for stopping deflation hardly solves all problems.
After all, the US went off the gold standard in 1933, and the Fed cut the discount rate to 1.5% in 1934, ending deflation (except for minor episodes); but the unemployment rate did not fall consistently below 15% until 1941 and the onset of World War II.
Bernanke will therefore have to be careful about over-generalizing from his past research, just as medical specialists must be careful not to over-diagnose diseases in their own specialty and military strategists must be careful not to over-prepare to fight the last war.
Of course, this does not mean that we should ignore the past altogether.
A 2005 study headed by Guillermo Calvo, Chief Economist for the Inter-American Development Bank, found important similarities between the Great Depression of the 1930’s and economic crises since 1980 in 31 emerging countries.
But the study also found important differences.
The fundamental experience of the Great Depression has repeated itself, on a smaller scale, many times and in many countries in recent decades: a shock in financial markets, followed by a sharp decline in gross domestic product.
But the behavior of consumer prices in the post-1980 crises is fundamentally different from that seen in the 1930’s.
In contrast to the Great Depression, collapsing national output was in recent decades accompanied by accelerating inflation, not deflation.
The Calvo study thus concludes that Bernanke’s debt deflation theory of the Great Depression does not generally apply to the more recent crises.
At the same time, Bernanke is inheriting a pair of economic vulnerabilities that are unusual by historical standards, and that did not precede the Great Depression of the 1930’s.
We are now in the late stages of the biggest real estate boom in US (or world) history, driven by frenzied market psychology.
In contrast, US home prices were uneventful before the Great Depression, and actually fell slightly in real terms between 1925 and 1929.
Moreover, we are now experiencing a fundamental change in expectations about oil prices: not only are today’s prices quite high in real terms by historical standards, but the futures markets indicate that prices are expected to remain high for years to come.
In contrast, real oil prices were flat leading up to 1929, and down nearly 50% in real terms from the 1925-6 “fuel folly” peaks.
In the near future, substantially higher oil prices, lower real estate prices, or both, could, depending on public reaction, put Bernanke into uncharted territory for economic stress.
If confidence declines, his historical understanding of the Great Depression of the 1930’s could leave him ill-equipped to prevent such shocks from sinking the US, and the world, economy.
He might find himself pushing on a string.
Is Capitalism Doomed?
NEW YORK – The massive volatility and sharp equity-price correction now hitting global financial markets signal that most advanced economies are on the brink of a double-dip recession.
A financial and economic crisis caused by too much private-sector debt and leverage led to a massive re-leveraging of the public sector in order to prevent Great Depression 2.0.
But the subsequent recovery has been anemic and sub-par in most advanced economies given painful deleveraging.
Now a combination of high oil and commodity prices, turmoil in the Middle East, Japan’s earthquake and tsunami, eurozone debt crises, and America’s fiscal problems (and now its rating downgrade) have led to a massive increase in risk aversion.
Economically, the United States, the eurozone, the United Kingdom, and Japan are all idling. Even fast-growing emerging markets (China, emerging Asia, and Latin America), and export-oriented economies that rely on these markets (Germany and resource-rich Australia), are experiencing sharp slowdowns.
Until last year, policymakers could always produce a new rabbit from their hat to reflate asset prices and trigger economic recovery.
Fiscal stimulus, near-zero interest rates, two rounds of “quantitative easing,” ring-fencing of bad debt, and trillions of dollars in bailouts and liquidity provision for banks and financial institutions: officials tried them all.
Now they have run out of rabbits.
Fiscal policy currently is a drag on economic growth in both the eurozone and the UK.
Even in the US, state and local governments, and now the federal government, are cutting expenditure and reducing transfer payments.
Soon enough, they will be raising taxes.
Another round of bank bailouts is politically unacceptable and economically unfeasible: most governments, especially in Europe, are so distressed that bailouts are unaffordable; indeed, their sovereign risk is actually fueling concern about the health of Europe’s banks, which hold most of the increasingly shaky government paper.
Nor could monetary policy help very much.
Quantitative easing is constrained by above-target inflation in the eurozone and UK.
The US Federal Reserve will likely start a third round of quantitative easing (QE3), but it will be too little too late.
Last year’s $600 billion QE2 and $1 trillion in tax cuts and transfers delivered growth of barely 3% for one quarter.
Then growth slumped to below 1% in the first half of 2011.
QE3 will be much smaller, and will do much less to reflate asset prices and restore growth.
Currency depreciation is not a feasible option for all advanced economies: they all need a weaker currency and better trade balance to restore growth, but they all cannot have it at the same time.
So relying on exchange rates to influence trade balances is a zero-sum game.
Currency wars are thus on the horizon, with Japan and Switzerland engaging in early battles to weaken their exchange rates. Others will soon follow.
Meanwhile, in the eurozone, Italy and Spain are now at risk of losing market access, with financial pressures now mounting on France, too.
But Italy and Spain are both too big to fail and too big to be bailed out.
For now, the European Central Bank will purchase some of their bonds as a bridge to the eurozone’s new European Financial Stabilization Facility.
But, if Italy and/or Spain lose market access, the EFSF’s €440 billion ($627 billion) war chest could be depleted by the end of this year or early 2012.
Then, unless the EFSF pot were&nbsp; tripled – a move that Germany would resist &nbsp;– the only option left would become an orderly but coercive restructuring of Italian and Spanish debt, as has happened in Greece.
Coercive restructuring of insolvent banks’ unsecured debt would be next. So, although the process of deleveraging has barely started, debt reductions will become necessary if countries cannot grow or save or inflate themselves out of their debt problems.
So Karl Marx, it seems, was partly right in arguing that globalization, financial intermediation run amok, and redistribution of income and wealth from labor to capital could lead capitalism to self-destruct (though his view that socialism would be better has proven wrong).
Firms are cutting jobs because there is not enough final demand.
But cutting jobs reduces labor income, increases inequality and reduces final demand.
Recent popular demonstrations, from the Middle East to Israel to the UK, and rising popular anger in China – and soon enough in other advanced economies and emerging markets – are all driven by the same issues and tensions: growing inequality, poverty, unemployment, and hopelessness.
Even the world’s middle classes are feeling the squeeze of falling incomes and opportunities.
To enable market-oriented economies to operate as they should and can, we need to return to the right balance between markets and provision of public goods.
That means moving away from both the Anglo-Saxon model of laissez-faire and voodoo economics and the continental European model of deficit-driven welfare states.
Over time, advanced economies will need to invest in human capital, skills and social safety nets to increase productivity and enable workers to compete, be flexible and thrive in a globalized economy.
The alternative is – like in the 1930s - unending stagnation, depression, currency and trade wars, capital controls, financial crisis, sovereign insolvencies, and massive social and political instability.
Is Central Bank Independence All It’s Cracked up to Be?
Alan Greenspan attained an almost iconic status as Governor of the Federal Reserve Board.
So, as his term draws to a close and his mantle of infallibility is passed on to his successor, it is worth examining whether his legacy will measure up and what we can expect from the new Fed chief, Ben Bernanke.
Few central bank governors have the kind of hagiography lavished upon them, especially in their lifetime, that Greenspan has had.
But what makes for a great central bank governor in our modern societies, great institutions or great individuals?
In economics, we seldom have a clearly defined counterfactual: Would the economy have performed even better or a little differently if someone else had been at the helm?
We can’t know, but there is little doubt that those “managing” the economy receive more credit than they deserve, if sometimes less blame.
Many forces behind the boom of the 1990’s, including advances in technology, were set in motion before Bill Clinton took office (just as the legacy of President George W. Bush’s deficits will be felt long after he leaves).
So Greenspan cannot be given credit for the boom.
But, while no central bank governor can ensure economic prosperity, mismanagement can cause enormous harm.
Many of America’s post-World War II recessions were caused by the Fed hiking interest rates too fast and too far.
There is little doubt that Greenspan had great moments, when one could at least imagine a less deft governor doing the “wrong” thing with disastrous consequences.
One such moment was the stock market crash of 1987.
Perhaps another occurred in 1998, when the Fed lowered interest rates in the face of what appeared to be an impending global financial crisis.
These successes, combined with the 1990’s boom and the seeming durability of price stability, reinforced Greenspan’s exalted status.
But they also led many to forget less successful moments.
The Fed failed to avert the economic downturn of 1990, and a reading of Greenspan’s testimony to Congress during that period makes clear that the basic nature of the economy’s problems was not well understood.
But the real problem for Greenspan’s legacy concerns what happened to the American economy in the last five years, for which he bears heavy responsibility.
Greenspan supported the tax cuts of 2001 with the most specious of arguments – that unless something was done about America’s soaring fiscal surpluses, the national debt would be totally paid off within, say, ten to fifteen years.
According to Greenspan, immediate action needed to be taken to avert this looming disaster, which would impede the Fed’s ability to conduct monetary policy!
It says a great deal about the gullibility of financial markets that they took this argument seriously.
More accurately, tax cuts were what Wall Street wanted, and financial professionals were willing to accept any argument that served that purpose.
Of course, if, say, by 2008 the disappearing national debt really did appear to pose an imminent danger, Congress would have happily obliged in cutting taxes or increasing expenditures.
Greenspan’s irresponsible support of that tax cut was critical to its passage.
The fault was not only in the magnitude of the tax cut, but also in its design; by directing the cuts at upper-income Americans, it provided little economic stimulus.
But soaring deficits did not return the economy to full employment, so the Fed did what it had to do – cut interest rates.
Lower interest rates worked, but not so much because they boosted investment, but because they led households to refinance their mortgages, and fueled a bubble in housing prices.
In short, as Greenspan departs, he leaves behind an American economy burdened with high household and government debt and fragile balance sheets – a legacy that is already contributing to global financial instability.
It is still not clear what led Greenspan to support the tax cut.
Was it a massive economic misjudgment, or was he currying favor with the Bush administration?
The most likely explanation is a combination of the two, for he and Bush were pursuing the same “starve the beast” political strategy, which calls for tax cuts to be used to reduce revenues, thereby forcing the public sector to be downsized.
The traditional argument for an independent central bank is that politicians can’t be trusted to conduct monetary and macroeconomic policy.
Neither, evidently, can central bank governors, at least when they opine in areas outside their immediate responsibility.
Greenspan was as enthusiastic for a policy that led to soaring deficits as any politician; but the fig leaf of being “above politics” gave credence to that policy, engendering support from some who otherwise would have questioned its economic wisdom.
This, then, is Greenspan’s second legacy: growing doubt about central bank independence.
Macroeconomic policy can never be devoid of politics: it involves fundamental trade-offs and affects different groups differently.
Unemployment harms workers, while the lower interest rates needed to generate more jobs may lead to higher inflation, which especially harms those with nominal assets whose value is eroded.
Such fundamental issues cannot be relegated to technocrats, particularly when those technocrats place the interests of one segment of society above others.
Indeed, Greenspan’s political stances were so thinly disguised as professional wisdom that his tenure exposed the dubiousness of the very notion of an independent central bank and a non-partisan central banker.
Unfortunately, many countries have committed themselves to precisely this illusion, and it may be a long time before they take heed of Greenspan’s most important lesson.
Stressing the new Fed chief’s “professionalism” may only delay the moment when this lesson is learned again.
Is China Losing the Diplomatic Plot?
SINGAPORE – In 2016, China’s share of the global economy will be larger than America’s in purchasing-price-parity terms.
This is an earth-shaking development; in 1980, when the United States accounted for 25% of world output, China’s share of the global economy was only 2.2%.
And yet, after 30 years of geopolitical competence, the Chinese seem to be on the verge of losing it just when they need it most.
China’s leaders would be naïve and foolish to bank on their country’s peaceful and quiet rise to global preeminence.
At some point, America will awaken from its geopolitical slumber; there are already signs that it has opened one eye.
But China has begun to make serious mistakes.
After Japan acceded to Chinese pressure and released a captured Chinese trawler in September 2010, China went overboard and demanded an apology from Japan, rattling the Japanese establishment.
Similarly, after North Korean shells killed innocent South Korean civilians in November 2010, China remained essentially silent.
In a carefully calibrated response, South Korea sent its ambassador to attend the Nobel Peace Prize ceremony for the imprisoned Chinese human-rights activist Liu Xiaobo in December 2010.
China has also ruffled many Indian feathers by arbitrarily denying visas to senior officials.
Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao subsequently calmed the waters in meetings with Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, but such unnecessary provocations left a residue of mistrust in India.
But all of these mistakes pale in comparison with what China did to the Association of Southeast Asian Nations in July.
For the first time in 45 years, the ASEAN Ministerial Meeting (AMM) failed to agree to a joint communiqué, ostensibly because ASEAN’s current chair, Cambodia, did not want the communiqué to refer to bilateral disputes in the South China Sea.
But the whole world, including most ASEAN countries, perceived Cambodia’s stance as the result of enormous Chinese pressure.
China’s victory proved to be Pyrrhic.
It won the battle of the comminiqué, but it may have lost 20 years of painstakingly accumulated goodwill, the result of efforts such as the ASEAN-China free-trade agreement, signed in November 2002.
More importantly, China’s previous leaders had calculated that a strong and unified ASEAN provided a valuable buffer against any possible US containment strategy.
Now, by dividing ASEAN, China has provided America with its best possible geopolitical opportunity in the region.
If Deng Xiaoping were alive, he would be deeply concerned.
It may be unfair to blame China’s leaders for the ASEAN debacle.
More likely than not, over-zealous junior officials pushed a hard line on the South China Sea, whereas no Chinese leader, if given the choice, would have opted to wreck the AMM Communiqué. But the fact that it happened reveals the scope of China’s recent poor decision-making.
The “nine-dotted line” that China has drawn over the South China Sea may prove to be nothing but a big geopolitical millstone around China’s neck.
It was unwise to attach the map in a note verbale responding to a joint submission by Vietnam and Malaysia to the United Nations Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf in May 2009.
This was the first time that China had included the map in an official communication to the UN, and it caused great concern among some ASEAN members.
The geopolitical opportunity implied by inclusion of the map has not been lost on America, which is why the US, somewhat unusually, has made another effort to ratify the Law of the Sea Convention.
Having tabled the nine-dotted line at the UN, China walked into a no-win situation, owing to the difficulty of defending the map under international law.
Indeed, as the eminent historian Wang Gungwu has pointed out, the first maps to claim the South China Sea were Japanese, and were inherited by Nationalist China.
Domestically, too, the nine-dotted line may cause problems for the government by presenting critics with a useful weapon.
Any hint of compromise will expose officials politically.
In other words, a few rocks in the South China Sea have put China between a rock and a hard place.
There is no doubt that China will have to find a way to compromise over the nine-dotted line. In private, it has begun to do so.
Even though the line covers the waters northeast of the Indonesian-owned Natuna Islands, the Chinese government has given Indonesia categorical assurances that China does not claim the Natuna Islands or their Exclusive Economic Zone.
These private assurances calmed relations with Indonesia.
So why not make similar overtures to other ASEAN states?
The legacies of Deng and his predecessor, Mao Zedong, are very different.
But the People’s Republic’s two most important leaders did agree in one area: both bent over backwards to make territorial concessions to resolve border disputes.
This explains why China was so generous to Russia, for example, in its border settlements.
Mao and Deng could do this because both provided China with strong leadership.
The challenge for the world now is that China has become politically pluralistic: no leader is strong enough to make wise unilateral concessions.
Nothing will happen in China until the leadership transition is completed in November.
The new administration of Xi Jinping and Li Keqiang will need some time to settle in.
But America is waking up. So, too, will the rest of the world in 2016.
The big question then will be: Is China as geopolitically competent as number one as it was when it was number two?
Is China Overplaying Its Hand?
LONDON – Remember the G-2?
America’s financial difficulties and foreign entanglements, together with China’s economic ascent, led many last year to envisage the emergence of a sort of global condominium between the two countries.
The G-8 had morphed by necessity into the G-20, which, whenever it really mattered, would shed its zero: the United States and China would call the shots.
The idea was an over-simplified reflection of global realities.
It left out other emerging powers like Brazil and India.
It exaggerated the weakness of America, which remains the world’s only superpower.
It also reeked of the European Union’s peevish realization that its inability to get its act together on contentious issues was likely to place it firmly on the sidelines.
At the Copenhagen climate summit last December, don’t forget, a deal of sorts was cobbled together by the US and the emerging economies over the EU’s head, even though Europe had the most advanced set of proposals on tackling climate change.
Despite all this, there was enough credibility in the G-2 idea to give it legs.
President Barack Obama’s first visit to China last November, in which he accepted the role of pliant suitor at the court of the emperor, strengthened the impression of a deal between today’s great power and tomorrow’s.
That was last year.
This is now, and the idea looks a lot less plausible.
Why has the G-2 become so far-fetched so fast?
First, the weak and largely jobless economic recovery in America and Europe shines the spotlight on China’s surging exports and the non-tariff barriers confronted by would-be importers to China.
You would have difficulty finding many members of the US Congress who do not ascribe some of America’s problems, including the hollowing out of the middle class, to China’s alleged currency manipulation.
China may point to the mountain of US Treasury bonds that it has bought up, thereby helping to sustain America’s budget deficit.
(What China’s recent sell-off of US T-bills will mean is, for now, anyone’s guess.)
They grumble at the injustice of blaming them for the global economy’s imbalances.
But China does have a case to answer.
Critics think that pegging the currency below its real value is part of a deliberate strategy to keep growth rolling, thereby avoiding the tricky politics of growing unemployment in a system that has no institutionalized channels for expressing popular grievances.
Unless this issue is addressed soon, it will lead inexorably to protectionism in America and Europe.
Advocates of tit-for-tat trade polices have even found supportive quotes from Adam Smith on the subject.
A second issue likely to blow the G-2 apart before it has actually taken shape is the impact of China’s authoritarianism on the free movement of information.
China’s clash with Google and US protests at cyber attacks on American targets remind the outside world, as well as America’s media and political elites, of the difference in values between the two countries.
This is particularly awkward at a time when the Chinese authorities seem to be taking an even harder line on dissent.
The human rights activist Liu Xiaobo has just been locked up for 11 years, drawing widespread condemnation.
The veteran campaigner for the release of political detainees, John Kamm, argues that this was “a tipping point” for the Chinese authorities, and that “they will have to work themselves out of this in a less hard-line way.”
The outcome of the climate talks in Copenhagen is a third reason for concern.
China has been widely accused of blocking a more ambitious result, mostly because of its resistance to external surveillance of its agreed targets, appealing to state sovereignty with all the self-righteousness that the world was accustomed to hearing from former US President George W. Bush.
Maybe the criticism is unfair.
But it certainly was unwise to allow a junior official to shout and wag his finger at Obama at one of the key Copenhagen meetings.
Americans, too, Chinese officials should remember, have “face” that they do not wish to lose.
Some people cite the spat over arms sales to Taiwan and the Dalai Lama’s visit to Washington as a fourth dampener on all the G-2 talk.
I am not so convinced.
These are fairly ritualistic issues, and Chinese officials are smart enough to know that, given the Chinese government’s recent behavior, Obama had little choice but to decide on them as he did.
Far more worrying is an issue that is yet to play out.
How will China react to any move to introduce tougher sanctions on Iran if no progress is made in efforts to prevent it from developing nuclear weapons?
If China blocks action in the United Nations Security Council, relations with America will be set back to a point where any G-2 talk will seem laughable.
Deng Xiaoping, the architect of China’s economic rise, advised his colleagues to move stealthily in dealing with the rest of the world.
“Hide your brightness, bide your time,” he counseled.
As someone who believes that China’s rise should be good for the world, I hope that Deng’s wise advice will be heeded by those Chinese officials who seem to think that this is a good moment to start stamping their feet.
Is China Overtaking America?
CAMBRIDGE – The twenty-first century is witnessing Asia’s return to what might be considered its historical proportions of the world’s population and economy.
In 1800, Asia represented more than half of global population and output.
By 1900, it represented only 20% of world output – not because something bad happened in Asia, but rather because the Industrial Revolution had transformed Europe and North America into the world’s workshop.
Asia’s recovery began with Japan, then moved to South Korea and on to Southeast Asia, beginning with Singapore and Malaysia.
Now the recovery is focused on China, and increasingly involves India, lifting hundreds of millions of people out of poverty in the process.
This change, however, is also creating anxieties about shifting power relations among states.
In 2010, China passed Japan to become the world’s second largest economy.
Indeed, the investment bank Goldman Sachs expects the Chinese economy’s total size to surpass that of the United States by 2027.
But, even if overall Chinese GDP reaches parity with that of the US in the 2020’s, the two economies will not be equal in composition.
China would still have a vast underdeveloped countryside.
Assuming 6% Chinese GDP growth and only 2% US growth after 2030, China would not equal the US in terms of per capita income – a better measure of an economy’s sophistication – until sometime near the second half of the century.
Moreover, linear projections of economic growth trends can be misleading.
Emerging countries tend to benefit from imported technologies in the early stages of economic takeoff, but their growth rates generally slow as they reach higher levels of development.
And the Chinese economy faces serious obstacles to sustainable rapid growth, owing to inefficient state-owned enterprises, growing inequality, massive internal migration, an inadequate social safety net, corruption, and inadequate institutions, all of which could foster political instability.
China’s north and east have outpaced its south and west.
Almost alone among developing countries, China is aging extraordinarily fast.
By 2030, China will have more elderly dependents than children.
Some Chinese demographers worry that the country will get old before getting rich.
During the past decade, China moved from being the world’s ninth largest exporter to its leader, displacing Germany at the top.
But China’s export-led development model will need to be adjusted as global trade and financial balances become more contentious.
Indeed, China’s 12th Five-Year Plan is aimed at reducing dependence on exports and boosting domestic demand.
Will it work?
China’s authoritarian political system has thus far shown an impressive capacity to achieve specific targets, for example, staging a successful Olympic Games, building high-speed rail projects, or even stimulating the economy to recover from the global financial crisis.
Whether China can maintain this capability over the longer term is a mystery to outsiders and Chinese leaders themselves.
Unlike India, which was born with a democratic constitution, China has not yet found a way to channel the demands for political participation (if not democracy) that tend to accompany rising per capita income.
Communist ideology is long gone, so the legitimacy of the ruling party depends on economic growth and ethnic Han nationalism.
Whether China can develop a formula to manage an expanding urban middle class, regional inequality, and resentment among ethnic minorities remains to be seen.
The basic point is that no one, including the Chinese, knows how China’s political future will affect its economic growth.
Some analysts argue that China aims to challenge America’s position as the world’s dominant power.
Even if this were an accurate assessment of China’s intentions (and even Chinese cannot know the views of future generations), it is doubtful that China will have the military capability to make this possible.
To be sure, Chinese military expenditures, up more than 12% this year, have been growing even more rapidly than its economy.
But China’s leaders will have to contend with other countries’ reactions, as well as with the constraints implied by the need for external markets and resources in order to meet their economic-growth objectives.
A Chinese military posture that is too aggressive could produce a countervailing coalition among its neighbors, thereby weakening China’s hard and soft power.
In 2010, for example, as China became more assertive in its foreign policy toward its neighbors, its relations with India, Japan, and South Korea suffered.
As a result, China will find it more difficult to exclude the US from Asia’s security arrangements.
China’s size and high rate of economic growth will almost certainly increase its relative strength vis-à-vis the US in the coming decades.
This will certainly bring the Chinese closer to the US in terms of power resources, but China will not necessarily surpass the US as the most powerful country.
Even if China suffers no major domestic political setback, many current projections based on GDP growth alone are too one-dimensional: they ignore US military and soft-power advantages, as well as China’s geopolitical disadvantages in the internal Asian balance of power.
My own estimate is that among the range of possible futures, the more likely scenarios are those in which China gives the US a run for its money, but does not surpass it in overall power in the first half of this century.
Most importantly, the US and China should avoid developing exaggerated fears of each other’s capacities and intentions. The expectation of conflict can itself become a cause of conflict.
In reality, China and the US do not have deeply rooted conflicting interests.
Both countries, along with others, have much more to gain from cooperation.
Is China Really Immune to the Crisis?
CAMBRIDGE – Addressing the annual World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao explained his government’s plans to counter the global economic meltdown with public spending and loans.
He all but guaranteed that China’s annual growth would remain above 8% in 2009.
Wen’s words were like warm milk to the recession-numbed audience of global political and business leaders.
But does the Chinese government really have the tools needed to keep its economy so resilient?
Perhaps, but it is far from obvious.
America’s deepening recession is slamming China’s export sector, just as it has everywhere else in Asia.
The immediate problem is a credit crunch not so much in China as in the United States and Europe, where many small and medium-size importers cannot get the trade credits they need to buy inventory from abroad.
As a result, some once-booming Chinese coastal areas now look like ghost towns, as tens of thousands of laid-off workers have packed their bags and returned to the countryside.
Similarly, in Beijing’s Korean section, perhaps half of the 200,000-300,000 inhabitants – mainly workers (and their families) who are paid by Korean companies that produce goods in China for export – reportedly have gone home.
With roughly $2 trillion in foreign-exchange reserves, the Chinese do have deep pockets to fund massive increases in government spending, and to help backstop bank loans.
Many leading Chinese researchers are convinced that that the government will do whatever it takes to keep growth above 8%.
But there is a catch. Even if successful in the short run, the huge shift toward government spending will almost certainly lead to significantly slower growth rates a few years down the road.
Simply put, it is far from clear that marginal infrastructure projects are worth building, given that China is already investing more than 45% of its income, much of it in infrastructure.
True, some of China’s fiscal stimulus effectively consists of loans to the private sector via the highly controlled banking sector.
But is there any reason to believe that new loans will go to worthy projects rather than to politically connected borrowers?
In fact, China’s success so far has come from maintaining a balance between government and private sector expansion.
Sharply raising the government’s already outsized profile in the economy will upset this delicate balance leading to slower growth in the future. 
It would be preferable for China to find a way to substitute Chinese for US private consumption demand, but the system seems unable to move quickly in this direction.
If government investment has to be the main vehicle, then it would be far better to build desperately needed schools and hospitals than “bridges to nowhere,” as Japan famously did when it went down a similar path in the 1990’s.
Unfortunately, China’s local officials need to excel in the country’s “growth tournament” to get promoted.
Schools and hospitals simply do not generate the kind of fast tax revenue and GDP growth needed to outperform political rivals.
Even prior to the onset of the global recession, there were strong reasons to doubt the sustainability of China’s growth paradigm.
The environmental degradation is obvious even to casual observers.
And economists have started to calculate that if China were to continue its prodigious growth rate, it would soon occupy far too large a share of the global economy to maintain its recent export trajectory.
So a shift to greater domestic consumption was inevitable anyway.
The global recession has simply brought that problem forward a few years.
Interestingly, the US faces a number of similar challenges.
For years, the US achieved fast growth by deferring attention to a variety of issues, ranging from the environment to infrastructure to health care.
Even absent the financial crisis, addressing the shortcomings in these areas would likely have slowed down US growth.
This is not to say that the US and China are the same.
One of the great challenges ahead is to find a way to bring these two countries’ savings into line, given the vast trade imbalances that many believe planted the seeds of financial crisis.
I was reminded of the challenge recently when a Chinese researcher explained that men in China today feel compelled to save in order to find a bride.
The same week, a former student of mine who lost his lucrative financial-sector job explained that he had no savings because it was so expensive to date in New York!
These social differences have little to do with the yuan-dollar exchange rate, although that matters, too.
One way or the other, the financial crisis is likely to slow medium-term Chinese growth significantly.
But will its leaders succeed in stabilizing the situation in the near term?
I hope so, but I would be more convinced by a plan tilted more toward domestic private consumption, health, and education than to one based on the same growth strategy of the past 30 years.
Is China’s Economy Overheating?
The Chinese economy has been growing at such a breathtaking annual pace – 9.5% in the year ending in the second quarter of 2005 – that it is the toast of the world, an apparent inspiration for developing countries everywhere.
But is China getting too much of a good thing?
Since he became president in 2003, Hu Jintao has repeatedly warned that China’s economy is overheating, and his government has recently acted accordingly, raising interest rates last October, imposing a new tax on home sales in June, and revaluing the Yuan in July.
But claims that China is overheating don’t seem to be based on observations of inflation.
While China’s consumer price index rose 5.3% in the year ending in July 2004, this was due primarily to a spike in food prices; both before and since, inflation has been negligible.
Nor are these claims based on the Chinese stock market, which has generally followed a downward path over the past few years.
Instead, those who argue that the Chinese economy is overheating cite the high rate of investment in plant and equipment and real estate, which reached 43% of GDP in 2004.
On this view, China has been investing too much, building too many factories, importing too many machines, and constructing too many new homes.
But can an emerging economy invest too much?
Doesn’t investment mean improving people’s lives?
The more factories and machines a country has, and the more it replaces older factories and machines with more up-to-date models, the more productive its labor force is.
The more houses it builds, the better the private lives of its citizens.
A number of studies show that economic growth is linked to investment in machines and factories.
In 1992, Bradford DeLong of the University of California at Berkeley and Lawrence Summers, now President of Harvard University, showed in a famous paper that countries with higher investment, especially in equipment, historically have had higher economic growth.
One of their examples showed that Japan’s GDP per worker more than tripled relative to Argentina’s from 1960 to 1985, because Japan, unlike Argentina, invested heavily in new machinery and equipment.
In short, the more equipment and infrastructure a country is installing, the more its people have to work with.
Moreover, the more a country invests in equipment, the more it learns about the latest technology – and it learns about it in a very effective, “hands-on” way.
It would thus appear that there is nothing wrong with China continuing to buy new equipment, build new factories, and construct new roads and bridges as fast as its can.
The faster, the better, so that the billion or so people there who have not yet reached prosperity by world standards can get there within their lifetimes.
And yet any government has to watch that the investment is being made effectively.
In China, the widespread euphoria about the economy is reason for concern.
Some universal human weaknesses can result in irrational behavior during an economic boom.
Simply put, China’s problem is that its economic growth has been so spectacular that it risks firing people’s imaginations a bit too intensely.
At times like these, people can easily imagine that an apartment in Shanghai will be worth some enormous amount in 10 or 20 years, when China is vastly more prosperous than it is today.
And if it will be worth an enormous amount in 10 or 20 years, then it should be worth a lot today, too, since real interest rates – used to discount future values to today’s values – are still low in China.
People are excited, and they are lining up to buy.
To be sure, their reasoning is basically correct.
But when the ultimate determinants of values today become so dependent on a distant future that we cannot see clearly, we may not be able to think clearly, either.
Since the true value of long-term assets is so hard to estimate, it is human nature to focus on the rate of increase in their observed prices, and to allow one’s attention to become fixated on these assets just as their value is increasing very fast.
This can lead people to make serious mistakes, paying more for long-term assets than they should, even assuming that the economy will perform spectacularly well in the future.
They can overextend their finances, fall victim to promotions, invest carelessly in the wrong assets, and direct production into regions and activities on the basis of momentary excitement rather than calculation of economic fundamentals.
So, maybe the word “overheated” is misleading.
It might be more accurate to say that public attention is over-focused on some recent price changes, or over-accepting of some high market values.
Whatever one calls it, it is a problem.
Fortunately, people also tend to trust their national leaders.
For this reason, it is all the more important that the leaders not remain silent when a climate of speculation develops.
Silence can be presumed to be tacit acceptance that rapid increases in long-term asset price are warranted.
National leaders must speak out, and they must match their words with concrete actions, to help signal to the public that the speculative bubble cannot be expected to continue.
That is what the Chinese government has begun to do.
The real-estate boom appears to be cooling.
If the government continues to pursue this policy, the salutary effects in terms of public trust in the country’s businesses and institutions will help ensure stable, sustainable economic growth for years to come.
Is China Strong or Weak?
IRVINE, CALIFORNIA – China’s government has been using unusually strong language of late to assert its sovereignty over disputed stretches of international waters near to its shores.
This has led to a ratcheting up of tensions, in particular between China and the United States, with Secretary of State Hillary Clinton stressing that the Obama administration is now ready to step in and help ensure the fair adjudication of disputes relating to the South China Sea.