And they threw the book at one of Mladić’s men who pled guilty and gave damning insider testimony, eliminating the prosecution’s leverage to obtain similar admissions.
Prosecution officials also negligently incinerated personal effects of Srebrenica victims, as well as items discovered in Albania and other evidence, and then obfuscated to dodge a scandal.
New rules and procedures, as well as better training, can minimize such failings.
But without the ICTY, impunity would have reigned for the murderers of Srebrenica and of less-renowned scenes of war crimes. Karadžić would still be flogging love potions in Belgrade.
The retired generals would be tanning beside the Adriatic.
Overwhelming proof of Croatia’s complicity with Serbia in the dismemberment of Bosnia – something the media have also ignored – would never have emerged.
And, following this anniversary of the massacre, it is safe to say that, without international justice, all of Srebrenica’s victims – including my brother-in-law’s father, Huso Čelik, and the others who are still missing – would still be moldering anonymously in mass graves.
Their loved ones would be waiting still to gather at the town’s memorial cemetery, where, on this anniversary, they dropped to their knees, drew their hands over their eyes, and recited the funeral prayer to Allah for forgiveness of the living and the dead.
Justice Is Reconciliation
In South Africa, indeed around the world, we are raised on a strict diet of justice as retribution.
With violent crimes on a shocking upsurge, with the hideous crimes of child rape and abuse on the increase, there are nowadays frequent calls – backed by wide public support – to restore capital punishment.
Mercifully, South Africa’s Constitutional Court has ruled that the death penalty – which South Africans eliminated at the same time we were liberated from apartheid – is unconstitutional.
Sadly, in many places in the world, it seems that men and women have not advanced beyond the biblical admonition of “an eye for an eye” in their yearning for retribution.
Indeed, some Muslim countries amputate the hands of convicted thieves in public.
But that biblical adage was in fact invoked originally to curb blood feuds from claiming the innocent relatives of the person who committed the killing.
“An eye for an eye” asks that the culprit should be the sole target, and not others, whose only crime was to be related to him.
So the “eye for an eye” adage was not intended to mean what it has come to mean, namely that killing be paid for by another killing.
Given the brutality of the apartheid era, that would have never worked in my homeland.
Some South Africans called for Nuremberg-type trials, especially for perpetrators of those atrocities that were designed to maintain the vicious apartheid system.
There were demands that the guilty be brought to book.
But we were fortunate in that Nuremberg was not really an option for us.
Nuremberg happened because the Allies inflicted unconditional surrender on the Nazis and so could impose a so-called victor’s justice.
In our case, neither the apartheid government nor the liberation movements could defeat each other. We had a military deadlock.
Moreover, in the case of Nuremberg, the prosecutors and judges could pack up their bags after the trial and leave Germany for their several homes.
We had to make our homes in this, our common motherland, and learn to live with one another.
Such trials would probably have gone on nearly forever, leaving gaping wounds open. It would have been difficult to procure the evidence to get convictions.
We all know just how cunning bureaucrats can be in destroying incriminating evidence.
So it was a mercy that our country chose to go the way of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission – granting amnesty in exchange for the truth.
This was ultimately based on the principles of restorative justice and ubuntu.
At the TRC hearings we were exposed to gruesome details about atrocities that were committed to uphold or to oppose apartheid.
“We gave him drugged coffee and shot him in the head and then we burned his body.
As it takes 7 – 8 hours for a human body to burn, we had a braaivleis on the side, drinking beer and eating meat.”
How low men can sink in our inhumanity!
Each time such horrible stories were published, we had to remind ourselves that, yes indeed, the acts were demonic, but the perpetrators remained each a child of God.
A monster has no moral responsibility and so cannot be held accountable; but even more seriously, designating someone a monster closes the door to possible rehabilitation.
Restorative justice and ubuntu are based firmly on the recognition of the fundamental humanity of even the worst possible offender.
We cannot give up on anybody.
If it was true that people could not change, once a murderer always a murderer, then the whole TRC process would have been impossible.
It happened because we believed that even the worst racist had the capacity to change.
And I think we in South Africa have not done badly; at least that is what the rest of the world seems to think of our transformation and the TRC process.
Because an “eye for an eye” can never work when communities are in conflict – reprisal leads to a counter-reprisal in the sort of blood spiral we are seeing in the Middle East.
The type of justice South Africa practiced, what I call “restorative justice” is, unlike retribution, not basically concerned with punishment, it is not fundamentally punitive.
It sets high store by healing.
The offence has caused a breach in relations and this breach needs to be healed.
It regards the offender as a person, as a subject with a sense of responsibility and a sense of shame, who needs to be reintegrated into the community and not ostracised.
There is a wealth of wisdom in the old ways of African society.
Justice was a communal affair and society set a high store by social harmony and peace.
The belief was that a person is a person only through other persons, and a broken person needed to be helped to be healed .What the offence had disturbed should be restored, and the offender and the victim had to be helped to be reconciled.
Justice as retribution often ignores the victim and the system is usually impersonal and cold.
Restorative justice is hopeful.
It believes that even the worst offender can become a better person.
This does not mean being soft on crime.
Offenders must realize the seriousness of their offences by the kind of sentences they get, but there must be hope, hope that the offender can become a useful member of society, after paying the price they owe to society.
When we act as if we really believe that someone can be better, is better, then they will often rise to our expectations.
Biomedicine in Reverse
LA JOLLA, CALIFORNIA – Pundits have long predicted that biology would dominate the twenty-first century, just as physics dominated the twentieth century.
But biomedical research has yet to achieve the kind of productivity increases that accompanied the industrialization of combustion, electricity, and electronics.
Will the “century of biology” turn out to be little more than a fantasy?
The problem largely comes down to a decrease in biomedical research-and-development expenditure.
As it stands, roughly $270 billion is invested in the field each year, producing an impressive half-million research publications, but only 20-30 new medicines.
The discrepancy between spending and output adheres to what has come to be known as “Eroom’s law” – Moore’s law in reverse.
Moore’s law observes the increase in computer processing power over time – specifically, that the number of transistors that can be placed cheaply on an integrated circuit doubles every 18-24 months.
By contrast, Eroom’s law charts the regress in new drug approvals, noting that the costs of developing a new medicine double roughly every nine years.
This phenomenon is rooted in high rates of drug failure and lengthening technology cycles.
The probability that a drug entering clinical trials will gain approval from the US Food and Drug Administration has dropped from 23.9% in 1997 to 10.4% today.
While the first recombinant insulin in the 1980’s took less than a decade from testing to approval, monoclonal antibodies and gene therapy took more than 20 years to reach the same milestone.
So far, pharmaceutical and biomedical research firms have responded to Eroom’s law by cutting R&D or moving it to less expensive sites in Asia, shifting their focus to less prevalent diseases, and sourcing innovation externally.
As a result, growth in biomedical R&D spending has declined from more than 9% annually in the early 2000’s to less than 3% today.
But, while this strategy will moderate the impact of Eroom’s law, it will ultimately prove inadequate to sustain the industry.
The industry’s ability to support R&D budgets has already led to the closure of more than 30 major research sites.
The United States bore the brunt of these closures, with biomedical R&D expenditure declining by more than $12 billion from 2007 to 2012.
And Asia – where biomedical R&D is growing rapidly, but from a small base – is unlikely to pick up the slack.
Asian countries have tended to be reluctant to shoulder the cost of developing new medicines, with reimbursements falling far short of US levels, and their R&D productivity will not match that of the US and Europe for several more years.
Moreover, biomedical research firms are abandoning certain diseases in order to avoid the large-scale trials that they require, focusing instead on “orphan diseases” like cystic fibrosis, which demand smaller clinical trials that have a higher probability of success, leading to drugs that can cost more than $100,000 annually per patient.
But, with insurers and payers worldwide becoming increasingly vigilant about controlling costs, this business model’s long-term prospects are unclear.
Finally, while drugs are increasingly produced by small companies that larger pharmaceutical firms then acquire, funding for these start-ups is drying up.
Likewise, universities – the main source of biomedical innovation – are facing dwindling budgets.
This year, funding for the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) – one of the world’s leading medical research centers – is a billion dollars lower than in 2012.
Restoring funding for basic biomedical research appears to have lost favor with policymakers, because it does not offer immediate self-sustaining economic returns.
And funding for basic research remains a low priority in emerging economies like China, where it accounts for less than 15 cents for every research dollar spent (compared to 35 cents in the US).
With no panacea in sight, several other solutions are gaining traction.
To maximize investment, the public and private sectors are increasingly pooling resources.
For example, under the Accelerating Medicines Partnership, the NIH and ten biopharmaceutical companies will fund a five-year effort to validate promising targets in three disease areas.
Other initiatives include efforts in Alzheimer’s research to test competing drugs against one shared “placebo arm” in clinical trials, and in cancer research to test multiple therapies in a single trial and identify the most responsive patients.
These pooled resources will be directed to a few high-priority diseases, identified through an evaluation of the marginal benefit of additional R&D. Japan’s focused strategy to champion stem-cell R&D should serve as a model for other countries.
At the same time, governments will have to implement policies aimed at guiding investment toward specific diseases.
For example, increased NIH funding, extended market exclusivity, and relaxed regulatory hurdles in the US resulted in a renaissance in antibiotic drug development.
Society will also have to share the cost of drug development.
Regulatory agencies worldwide may follow the United Kingdom’s lead in embracing adaptive licensing.
Under this approach, drugs are conditionally approved and marketed, with the revenue generated following the conditional approval covering the costly trial for proving efficacy.
Such a scheme facilitates lower drug pricing, while overcoming the effect of Eroom’s law on investment in treatments for many diseases.
Whether these efforts will succeed in putting biomedical research on a more sustainable footing remains an open question.
This could still turn out to be biology’s century.
But it is not a sure thing.
Infrastructure’s Class of Its Own
BEIJING – After several months of disappointing economic indicators, China’s State Council has unveiled a “mini-stimulus” package, focused on social-housing construction and railway expansion.
The decision came a month after Premier Li Keqiang’s declaration that China had set its annual growth target at “around 7.5%” – the same as last year’s goal.
The implication is clear: While consumption-driven growth remains a long-term goal for China, infrastructure will continue – at least in the short term – to serve as a key driver of China’s economy.
Of course, China is not the only economy that depends on infrastructure investment to buttress economic growth.
The World Bank estimates that infrastructure investments accounted for nearly half of the acceleration in Sub-Saharan Africa’s economic growth in 2001-2005.
According to the Bank, a 10% increase in infrastructure investment is associated with GDP growth of 1%.
Such investment also creates jobs, both in the short term, by creating demand for materials and labor, and in the long term, for related services.
For example, every $100 million invested in rural road maintenance translates into an estimated 25,000-50,000 job opportunities.
Discussions within the G-20 have produced two possible explanations for Asian countries’ inability to attract more private capital to infrastructure projects.
Most developing countries argue that the problem is rooted in the provision of capital, with investors preferring to fill their infrastructure portfolios with low-risk projects, and insurance companies and banks facing overly restrictive regulations.
OECD countries like Germany counter that the problem is the lack of investment-worthy assets; there are simply not enough bankable projects available.
In fact, both explanations are correct – but neither is complete.
It is time for Asia’s leaders to recognize that the lack of private funding for infrastructure projects cannot be reduced to one or even two problems, and to develop comprehensive solutions that account for the full scope of the challenge.
This requires, first and foremost, abandoning the view that infrastructure assets fit into the paradigm of traditional asset classes like equity, debt, or real estate.
Infrastructure must be redefined as a new asset class, based on several considerations.
For starters, there is the public-good element of many infrastructure projects, which demands contingent government obligations like universal coverage levels for basic services.
In order to make such projects more appealing to private investors, economic externalities should be internalized, and a link should be established between the internal rate of return, which matters to a commercial investor, and the economic rate of return, which matters to society.
Moreover, innovative mechanisms to supply new assets to investors would be needed – and that requires the creativity found and priced by markets.
To this end, private-sector sponsors must be given space to initiate valuable projects.
The new asset class would need its own standardized risk/return profile, accounting, for example, for the political risks that public-sector involvement may imply and for the lower returns from infrastructure relative to traditional private equity.
Moreover, the risks associated with the new asset class would change as projects progress from feasibility study to construction to operation, implying that each phase would attract different sources of funding.
A clear understanding of this process would enable potential investors to assess projects more effectively, which is critical to encouraging them to put up financing.
Another important consideration is the considerable technical expertise that infrastructure investments demand, which makes them more complex than most assets.
Similarly, a specialized network of actors would be needed to ensure that intermediation of infrastructure transactions is efficient and cost-effective, instead of fragmented and slow, as it is now.
For countries that lack China’s strong fiscal position, the need to attract private capital to infrastructure investment is obvious.
With nearly 70% of Sub-Saharan Africa’s population lacking access to electricity and 65% of South Asians lacking access to basic sanitation, there is no greater imperative than to plan, fund, build, and maintain infrastructure assets.
But private investment in infrastructure remains vital even in countries like China, because it brings the power and dynamism of the market, which improves the allocation of capital and promotes transparency.
Indeed, more private-sector involvement would make the kind of scandals that have occurred in China’s railway sector far less likely.
In short, redefining infrastructure as a new asset class is the only credible way to attract funding for infrastructure construction, and thus to boost long-term economic growth and the employment rate.
It is time for Asia’s leaders to step up.
The West’s Other Trump
BRUSSELS – In the second American presidential debate, Donald Trump promised that, if elected, he would appoint a special prosecutor to investigate Hillary Clinton.
“You’d be in jail,” Trump told her.
Trump’s threat to politicize the justice system has received the backlash that it deserves; but, sadly, his cynicism is not unique to the United States.
The current Polish government, led by the Law and Justice (PiS) party, which came to power just under a year ago, has displayed a similar authoritarian streak, flouting legal conventions to further its own ends.
PiS leader Jarosław Kaczyński has repeatedly called for an inquiry into former Polish Prime Minister and current European Council President Donald Tusk.
Kaczyński holds Tusk’s former government partially responsible for the April 2010 plane crash in Smolensk, Russia, which killed 96, including Kaczyński’s twin brother, Polish President Lech Kaczyński.
The Polish government delegation was traveling to a commemoration of the 1940 massacre in Katyn, where Stalin ordered the murder of 22,000 Polish army officers, police officers, and intelligentsia and blamed Hitler for the crime.
When the Cold War ended, the truth about the massacre finally came out, and was officially recognized by Russian President Boris Yeltsin.
Jarosław Kaczyński and other PiS members maintain that Russia – with help from some Polish officials – was responsible for the plane crash, too.
They have relied on this bizarre conspiracy theory in their rise to power, despite having no evidence to support it.
Indeed, transcripts from the plane’s recovered cockpit voice recorder indicate that the plane crashed during a bad-weather landing.
Armed with his conspiracy theories, Kaczyński wants to deny Tusk a second term at the helm of one of the European Union’s three main governing institutions, saying, “Should such a person be at the head of the European Council?
I have profound doubts.”
Meanwhile, Poland’s right-wing media has fanned the flames, with one magazine recently depicting Tusk in handcuffs.
Kaczyński’s anti-Tusk crusade is a Trump-worthy abuse of political power that foreshadows what life would be like for Trump’s political opponents if he were actually to win.
It also reflects a broader, raging battle for Poland’s soul.
Poland was once Central Europe’s post-Cold War democratic poster child.
But now the PiS is pursuing a wide-ranging power grab, seeking control of the country’s constitutional court, public media channels, and security services.
Instead of cementing Poland’s strategic importance to NATO and its rightful place as a powerful, respected EU member state, the PiS has become obsessed with reversing modernity.
As proof, one need look no further than the government’s assault on its own judiciary and democratic institutions, which is raising eyebrows in the US, Brussels, and across Europe.
Poland is experiencing a constitutional crisis that began when PiS-backed Polish President Andrzej Duda refused to swear in three Constitutional Tribunal judges chosen by the previous parliament.
The PiS then selected its own judges instead, while adopting legislation that essentially paralyzed the court.
The court declared the PiS’s judicial rule changes unconstitutional, but the PiS-led government refused to publish the court’s decision, thereby blocking it from taking effect.
It is now all but impossible for the court to assess the constitutionality of the current parliament’s legislation, despite the Polish constitution’s explicit provision authorizing judicial review.
Now that the PiS’s actions have been universally condemned, it is holding out until the end of the year, when the current constitutional court president’s mandate expires.
After that, the PiS will appoint a friendlier president, who will no doubt dance to whatever tune it plays.
But a newly appointed president likely won’t end Poland’s constitutional crisis, because with valid court judgments from this summer remaining unpublished, there is now a black hole in Poland’s constitutional order.
The EU has started legal proceedings against Poland, and it is calling on the Polish government to work with opposition parties to reform the court.
If Poland doesn’t comply, the EU could ultimately strip it of its voting rights.
But it is unlikely that the EU or other international bodies will ensure a solution to the Polish political problem.
Only Poles can do that.
In fact, huge protests against a recent bill that would have banned virtually all abortions (under penalty of imprisonment for up to five years) forced the government to back down and withdraw the proposed legislation.
This marked a victory for Polish women, and it suggests that Poland is more progressive than Kaczyński would like to believe.
Still, while the government may have suffered one major public defeat, the PiS’s underlying ideological illiberalism remains intact.
That means Polish civil-society advocates will have to fight many more battles in the coming months to contain and reverse the PiS’s lawlessness.
The Fertility Conundrum
BOSTON – It is perhaps inevitable that contraception and population growth are controversial topics, given the many perspectives brought to bear on them.
Reproductive-health activists focus on family planning and a woman’s right to control her own body.
Economists look at the impact on sustainable growth.
Governments fret about over-population and unemployment.
Health workers worry about sexually transmitted diseases and malnutrition.
Striking the right balance among these different viewpoints is no easy task – but much depends on getting it right.
New contraceptive technologies – in the form of condoms, pills, and implantable devices – provide reversible and permanent forms of protection.
But their usage varies widely – from just 4.8% of young women in Chad to 84.6% in China – reflecting differences in cost, availability, and cultural norms.
Contraception indisputably brings health and socioeconomic benefits.
A 2012 study reported that its use averted an estimated 272,040 maternal deaths in 2008, 44% fewer than might otherwise have occurred.
Contraception use has also helped less developed economies by raising women’s employment and earnings potential.
But perhaps one of the most important economic effects of contraception concerns the “dependency ratio” – the proportion of available workers to pensioners, children, and the infirm.
Lowering the birth rate lowers the overall dependency ratio – though at the risk of future labor shortages, weaker consumer spending, and reduced productivity.
And, as more people live longer, and the relative size of the working-age population falls, the dependency ratio can begin to rise, with serious socioeconomic repercussions, because older people require more health care and draw pensions.
On the other hand, rapid population growth as a result of higher birth rates can threaten the wellbeing of the poorest communities and countries, by altering the dependency ratio at the other end of the scale.
Sub-Saharan Africa and the world’s other poorest regions have recorded significantly more than 2% annual population growth in recent years, whereas the demographic trend in the advanced economies of Europe and Asia has been flat or declining
Simulations indicate that the optimal average number of children born to a woman over her lifetime is around 2.3.
This is the total fertility rate (TFR) required to maintain current population levels (the replacement rate).
Unfortunately, few countries strike the right balance, with country averages ranging from 6.9 (in Niger) to 0.8 (in Singapore).
The CIA World Factbook reports that 141 countries (approximately half of the world’s population) fall below the replacement rate, with population decline projected in some cases to reach 20% by 2050.
Some countries, such as Germany and France, are trying to raise their TFR to the replacement level.
Others are struggling to bring down their TFR, because of fears about future mass unemployment and social unrest.
In all cases, economic circumstances and social pressures will dictate the level and speed of population growth.
That is why much attention has focused on the impact of a growing global population on food demand.
A rising population has been associated with starvation and malnutrition in some parts of the world.
Until recently, the global population was predicted to surpass 11 billion by 2050, triggering Malthusian fears.
Thanks in part to lower fertility rates in industrialized countries, this projection has been adjusted downward, to about 8.9 billion.
But such fears remain.
The risk is that policymakers and campaigners will conflate the problems of food shortages and starvation with that of population management and its long-term social and economic consequences.
In fact, according to a forecast in 2002 by the United Nations Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO), global food production will exceed the needs of the global population by the year 2030, largely owing to the Green Revolution of the past half-century.
Arguably, the causes of food shortages are to be found in the organization, distribution, and waste of resources, not population growth.
The United Kingdom’s Institution of Mechanical Engineers estimated in 2013 that 1.2-2 billion tons of food (30-50% of total food production) is wasted annually.
This far exceeds the 230 million tons of food produced in Sub-Saharan Africa.
At the same time, the FAO estimates that 870 million people worldwide – 90% of them living in developing countries – suffer chronic undernourishment.
Furthermore, approximately half of the 10.9 million children who die each year do so as a result of poor nutrition, while more than 1.4 billion adults and 40 million children are overweight or obese.
None of this should divert attention from the need to achieve a balance between population growth, appropriate dependency ratios for countries at different stages of economic development, and the fight for women’s reproductive rights.
These are long-term issues that require international cooperation and collaborative research.
Indeed, like climate change, population balance is a global issue that must be addressed carefully and rigorously – and before it is too late.
Disrupting Putin’s Game Plan
MUNICH – No sooner did the Sochi Winter Games end than Russia bade farewell to the Olympic spirit by invading and occupying a foreign country.
With its aggression against Ukraine, the Kremlin has breached the United Nations Charter, the Helsinki Final Act, and other international agreements, including the Budapest Memorandum on Security Assurances and the Black Sea basing agreement, which spelled out Russia’s relations with Ukraine.
Crimea has been turned into a military zone, and its inhabitants might soon find themselves trapped in the firing line if the crisis continues to escalate.
Russians now face international diplomatic and economic isolation, thus exacerbating their country’s economic woes.
And Russian President Vladimir Putin’s reckless gamble risks dragging the world into a wider conflict.
In light of Putin’s dangerous behavior, the West must rethink its stance toward him.
Here is a leader who read a hidden, menacing agenda into a technical European Union document about export subsidies and anti-fraud provisions.
More broadly, here is a paranoiac who sees an implausible coalition of liberal Russians, Ukrainian fascists, the CIA, and Islamist terrorists trying to thwart his preferences, if not topple him, at every turn.
Indeed, what we are seeing is not an unfortunate over-reaction to recent events, but a result of meticulous preparation.
Armies do not mobilize 150,000 troops within days, or have vehicles and thousands of uniforms without insignias ready, or hold military exercises in peaceful regions of the world without warning.
It would be a mistake for NATO to respond to Russia’s provocations with similar saber rattling.
After all, the United States and the EU still have a range of tools to modify Putin’s calculus, or that of those bankrolling his regime.
Most important, the US and Europe must cooperate much more closely than they have so far.
The impression of disunity on sanctions plays into Putin’s hands.
Some EU members, like Germany, must live up to the expectations they have recently raised.
If German leaders are serious about instituting a “culture of responsibility,” they are obliged to act accordingly, even if doing so entails economic costs.
The West should also listen carefully to Ukraine’s neighbor, Poland, which probably has the deepest insight into the complexities of the crisis.
Most important, it is essential to adhere to certain key principles:
Use diplomacy.
Europe, the US, and Japan have already suspended their cooperation with Russia in the G-8.
Similarly, the OECD should put Russia’s accession process on hold.
Following punitive measures by the US, the EU has now decided on some “soft” sanctions.
But modest steps like suspending talks on visa liberalization will not impress the Kremlin much.
Stronger signals, such as cancellation or suspension of agreements concerning the South Stream gas pipeline and a trade embargo on arms and dual-use items, merit serious consideration.
Impose targeted sanctions against those responsible for Russia’s Crimean incursion.
An obvious tool here is to broaden the US Magnitsky Act, which prohibits the 18 people identified as being directly responsible for the detention, abuse, and death of the Russian lawyer Sergei Magnitsky from entering the US or using its financial system.
The Magnitsky Act should be amended to include the names of political and military leaders responsible for the invasion of Ukraine.
Moreover, the modified bill should be adopted by the US and the EU simultaneously – thus delivering a credible threat to freeze the foreign assets of Russia’s government, state-owned companies, individual officials, and relevant oligarchs.
Engage Russians.
The West needs to communicate to ordinary Russians the spuriousness of Putin’s zero-sum, us-versus-them narrative.
Closer relations between Ukraine and the EU pose no threat to Russia; on the contrary, a Ukraine closely integrated with its Western neighbors could boost Russia’s economy as well.
That may be irrelevant to a leader who is guided by visions of restored imperial glory, but not to the people under his rule.
Knocking holes in the Kremlin’s wall of propaganda will not be easy, but it should not be impossible in our hyper-connected world.
Support Ukraine with financial aid – as the EU has now done –and by securing its upcoming elections.
Military assistance should include, at a minimum, Western intelligence sharing and cooperation through the NATO-Ukraine Commission.
Should the situation deteriorate further, the West should also provide medical aid and surveillance assets.
If the 2008 Russo-Georgian war is any guide, NATO’s Cyber Defense Center should help Ukraine prepare for a large-scale digital offensive.
Defend NATO allies.
NATO should discuss concrete steps to protect its members.
Ukraine borders four NATO members (Poland, Slovakia, Hungary, and Romania), while a fifth (Turkey), along with Romania, borders the Black Sea.
Moreover, Estonia and Latvia are alarmed at Russia’s geopolitical ambitions, especially given the pretext of protecting ethnic kin.
Both have populations that are about 25% Russian – a legacy of their Soviet past.
Finally, Poland and Lithuania border Kaliningrad, Russia’s exclave in the middle of Europe (and the scene of its most recent combat-readiness exercise).
This is a time for diplomacy, and NATO must try to avoid direct confrontation, but not at all costs.
It must reckon that Russia’s actions might deliberately run counter to a peaceful settlement.
The alliance cannot afford to launch a lengthy and heated debate about the deployment of its forces and capabilities only at the moment diplomatic efforts fail.
When Ukrainians stood up against their corrupt elite, they became the first people to put their lives on the line for the goal of EU membership.
The result was unwarranted retaliation from Russia.
So this is not Ukraine’s war.
Ukraine is the immediate victim, but it is by no means Putin’s ultimate target.
This is a blatant attack on the principles of state sovereignty, inviolability of negotiated borders, and adherence to multilateral agreements that underpin today’s rule-based international system.
Countering Russia’s aggression is thus the responsibility of all who would uphold that system.
How Money is Made
BERLIN/SOUTHAMPTON – Last month, the BRICS countries (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa) announced the establishment of their own development bank, which would reduce their dependence on the Western-dominated, dollar-focused World Bank and International Monetary Fund.
These economies will benefit from increased monetary-policy agency and flexibility.
But they should not discount the valuable lessons offered by advanced-country central banks’ recent monetary-policy innovation.
In June, the European Central Bank, following the example set by the Bank of England in 2012, identified “bank credit for the real economy” as a new policy goal.
A couple of weeks later, the Bank of England announced the introduction of a form of credit guidance to limit the amount of credit being used for property-asset transactions.
Before the financial crisis hit in 2008, all of these policies would have been disparaged as unwarranted interventions in financial markets.
Indeed, in 2005, when one of us (Werner) recommended such policies to prevent “recurring banking crises,” he faced vehement criticism.
This March, however, the Bank of England acknowledged the observation that he and others had made – that, by extending credit, banks actually create 97% of the money supply.
Given that a dollar in new bank loans increases the money supply by a dollar, banks are not financial intermediaries; they are money creators.
The growing recognition of banks’ true function will be a game-changer in areas like monetary policy and financial regulation, enabling officials to tackle effectively problems like recurring banking crises, unemployment, and underdevelopment.
But it will take time to be fully accepted – not least because it challenges a fundamental tenet of traditional economics.
Indeed, according to this new paradigm, savings, while useful, are not an essential prerequisite to investment and thus to economic growth.
The United States, which experienced a prolonged period of growth without savings, is a case in point.
In general, economic growth depends on an increasing number of transactions and an increasing amount of money to finance them.
Banks provide that finance by extending more credit, the impact of which depends on who receives it.
Bank credit for GDP transactions affects nominal GDP, while bank credit for investment in the production of goods and services delivers non-inflationary growth.
The problem lies in bank credit-for-asset transactions, which often generate boom-bust cycles.
By extending too much of this type of credit, banks pump up asset prices to unsustainable levels.
When credit inevitably slows, prices collapse.
As the late-coming speculators go bankrupt, the share of non-performing loans on banks’ balance sheets rises, forcing banks to reduce credit further.
It takes only a 10% decline in banks’ asset values to bankrupt the banking system.
With an understanding of this process, policymakers can take steps to avert future banking crises and resolve post-crisis recessions more effectively.
For starters, they should restrict bank credit for transactions that do not contribute to GDP.
Moreover, in the event of a crisis, central banks should purchase non-performing assets from banks at face value, completely restoring banks’ balance sheets, in exchange for an obligation to submit to credit monitoring.
Given that no new money would be injected into the rest of the economy, this process – which the US Federal Reserve undertook in 2008 – would not generate inflation.
In order to stimulate productive bank credit – and boost the effectiveness of fiscal policy – governments should stop issuing bonds, and instead borrow from banks through loan contracts, often available at lower rates than bond yields.
This would bolster bank credit and stimulate demand, employment, GDP, and tax revenues.
Finally, a network of small not-for-profit local banks should be established to provide universal banking services, and loans to small and medium-size firms, like the scheme that has underpinned Germany’s economic strength and resilience over the last 200 years.
Beyond making the banking sector more robust, such an initiative would boost job creation per dollar in bank credit.
Of course, large multinational banks, which have long benefited from the perception that economies need savings, are likely to resist such reforms.
For decades, these banks have been selling “foreign savings” to developing countries by lending at high interest rates and in a foreign currency, fueling the accumulation of massive amounts of foreign debt, which would often be converted into equity.
In other words, they issued credit that contributed little to the local economy, and then drained local resources through interest and exploding foreign currency-denominated debt.
Just as the BRICS have rejected Western-led economic institutions, developing economies would do well to expel foreign banks and allow local financial institutions to create money for productive purposes.
After all, successful economic development – in countries like the US, Germany, Japan, and China – has depended on domestic credit creation for productive investment.
During the Great Depression of the 1930s, Michael Unterguggenberger, the mayor of the Tyrolean town of Wörgl, performed an experiment.
In order to reduce unemployment and complete much-needed public-works projects, he hired workers and paid them with “work receipts” that could be used to pay local taxes.
With the local authority effectively issuing money for work performed, the local economy boomed.
The central bank, however, was not pleased, and decided to assert its monopoly over currency issuance, forcing Unterguggenberger to scrap the local public money and causing Wörgl to fall back into depression.
Some 80 years later, the English city of Hull has begun to implement a similar scheme, using a digital crypto-currency that is, so far, not prohibited by law.
The unfettered creation of money by large private banks has generated overwhelming instability, undermining the fundamental principle that money creation should serve the public good.
This does not have to be the case.
By implementing safeguards that ensure that credit serves productive and public purposes, policymakers can achieve debt-free, stable, and sustainable economic growth.
Merkel’s American Minders
BERLIN – Germans used to joke that Chancellor Angela Merkel’s penchant for communicating via fleeting text messages effectively marked the end of traditional historiography.
Well, at least American spy agencies seem to have kept full track of the behind-the-scenes communications – in Berlin and beyond.
Regrettably, US President Barack Obama and his administration have yet to comprehend the scale and severity of the damage caused to America’s credibility among its European allies.
The problem is not that countries spy on each other (they all do). Rather, it is the extent of US intelligence gathering and America’s attitude toward allies that is most damaging.
Previous transatlantic clashes over diverse issues such as climate change, the detainees at Guantánamo Bay, and the Iraq War exposed a breakdown of mutual understanding, sometimes stemming from sharp differences over how best to achieve certain common objectives.
But the wiretapping crisis and other troubling revelations from the former American intelligence contractor Edward J. Snowden point to a deeper problem: a crisis of mutual distrust that risks becoming a serious transatlantic rift at a time when closer political, economic, and security cooperation between Europe and the United States is needed more than ever.
There is probably nothing more destructive to friendly relations among democratic states than behavior by an ally that causes the other side to lose face at home.
After all, it was Merkel who tried to calm the waters after the NSA scandal first hit Europe this summer.
That is why the alleged US wiretapping of her cellphone is so damaging for her, both personally and politically.
As someone who served in Merkel’s government from 2009 to 2011, I must admit that I was rather careless in the use of mobile communication devices while in office.
In principle, of course, one should always assume that foreign intelligence services attempt to listen in on other governments’ conversations.
But it makes a big difference whether such activities are conducted by Russia or China, or by an ally that repeatedly emphasizes the importance of close transatlantic friendship and cooperation.
Obama’s personality makes matters more complicated.
It is hard to recall any other US president who has been so personally disconnected from other heads of state.
Instead of immediately reaching out to a friendly country, he decided to lie low and send White House Press Secretary Jay Carney to issue a rather awkward statement that the US government “is not” and “will not” monitor Merkel’s communications.
Of course, it does not take much interpretive skill to recognize a clumsy attempt to avoid confessing that US intelligence services targeted Merkel in the past.
The Obama administration appears to have failed to ask itself some basic questions.
How could it justify spying on a leader who is among America’s closest allies in NATO and in the Afghanistan mission – a leader whom he invited to the Rose Garden to bestow the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the highest honor that America can give to a foreigner?
Moreover, Merkel was not the only target.
In the case of France, how could the Obama administration justify targeting an ally that has tried hard to build trust with the US by providing much-needed military and political cover in Libya and Syria?
French President François Hollande, too, must feel like a fool – not just as a result of US surveillance, but also because he probably received no advance warning from his intelligence services about Obama’s sudden decision to ask Congress to pass a resolution prior to using military force in Syria.
Finally, how can Obama explain to the EU (whose delegation in Washington, DC, was also bugged) that it is crucially important to enter into honest, serious, and comprehensive negotiations to conclude a Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership?
Prominent voices in Europe – including the president of the European Parliament and the leader of Germany’s Social Democrats (who is about to form a coalition government with Merkel) – are already demanding a suspension of the TTIP talks.
The potential economic cost of a delay or a failure to achieve closer transatlantic economic integration could total hundreds of billions of dollars – in addition to the incalculable damage done to America’s credibility in Europe.
There is much talk today about the risks of a new era of American isolationism and a lack of US leadership in the world.
It is important to remember that isolationism can be triggered not only by a potential retreat from global affairs, but also by the rather imprudent use of America’s hard and soft power on the world stage.
To escape the NSA mess, various options will be discussed.
The new Franco-German push for an intelligence-sharing agreement with the US is probably difficult to put into practice, especially considering that spy services operating around the world are not always fully controllable.
As a first step, Obama must rediscover the great communications skills that propelled him to the White House in the first place.
From a public-diplomacy perspective, his handling of the surveillance scandal has been a complete failure.
To contain the damage and begin to rebuild much-needed trust, Obama must issue a credible apology to Merkel, other Western allies, and their citizens.
In the American political context, issuing an apology, especially to foreign governments, is often viewed as a sign of weakness.
In the case of the NSA scandal, an unequivocal apology by Obama is the only viable solution to leave the past behind and move forward.
Unfortunately, the window of opportunity for such a gesture to be viewed in Europe as a much-awaited olive branch – and a sign of real American strength and conviction – is closing fast.
America’s Debt-Ceiling Debacle
NEW YORK – When Greece’s sovereign-debt crisis threatened the euro’s survival, US officials called their European counterparts to express bewilderment at their inability to resolve the issue.
Now, the tables have turned, with American leaders on the receiving end of such calls.
The most recent threat of a US debt default has been avoided, but only temporarily. Another battle looms early next year, when the US government’s debt ceiling will have to be raised again.
In Europe, the absence of a political union – considered a necessary precondition for sharing debt obligations and, thus, putting the euro on a sound footing – is widely held to lie at the root of the continent’s crisis.
But the US crisis suggests that political union is no panacea for managing sovereign debt.
For weeks, Republicans in the House of Representatives threatened to keep the government shuttered – thereby preventing it from extending its borrowing authority beyond the October 17 deadline – in order to challenge laws that were enacted by Congress as a whole and upheld by the Supreme Court.
In the eurozone, the main source of disagreement has been how debts in need of refinancing were incurred – that is, whether they contravened agreed debt limits.
In the United States, the bone of contention has been the purpose that the funds will serve.
The difference is ultimately minor, and should not be allowed to overshadow what is really at stake: democratic self-governance in an age of high public debt.
In 1773, the so-called Sons of Liberty staged the Boston Tea Party under the slogan, “No taxation without representation.”
And America’s founders clearly regarded legislative control over the budget as a key pillar of democratic governance.
Taxation remains the dominant source of government revenue in most developed countries.
But the role of debt finance has been growing – and, with it, the need to refinance old debt when total expenditure, including debt service, exceeds total revenue.
Broad access to deep and liquid international debt markets has enabled policymakers to bypass some of the most challenging aspects of democratic governance.
Rather than tackle thorny questions about how to allocate limited resources, democratic governments seem to believe that they can have it all: low taxes and ample debt finance to fund wars or electorate-pleasing programs.
Growing debt burdens suggest that this form of cheap politics has run its course.
But the problem runs deeper than that.
Excessive reliance on debt finance has undermined basic tenets of democracy, with government finance increasingly determined not by electoral cycles and political deliberation, but by repayment schedules.
In times of economic growth, debt finance provides an easy escape from difficult choices. When the economy falters, however, creditors – and those who are willing to entertain the prospect of default – can impose their will on everyone else.
This power follows from the nature of debt.
A tax is a quasi-equity claim of the government on its citizens’ financial expectations.
Gaining the consent of the majority of citizens to raise taxes can be a tall order politically, and has become more difficult as capital mobility has narrowed the tax base and triggered a race to the bottom on rates.
Debt, by contrast, is a contractual commitment to repay creditors who are largely oblivious to how the money is spent.
By incurring debt, states trade an element of sovereignty – the flexibility to alter course over time in response to the electorate’s demands – for the ability to fund expenditures without being compelled to navigate the political minefield of raising taxes.
Creating viable institutions for managing public debt in a democracy is difficult.
The mechanisms currently on offer are treaty-based, constitutional, and statutory debt ceilings, pegged as a ratio of GDP, or, as in the US, established in nominal terms.
Treaty-based debt ceilings are largely toothless, as Europe’s experience suggests.
Constitutional debt limits have yet to be tested in times of emergency, when new funding is needed quickly.
And, as the recent impasse in the US demonstrates, political minorities with effective veto power can abuse statutory ceilings in an economic downturn, when dependence on external debt finance increases.
Indeed, to the extent that reliance on debt finance undermines self-governance, debt-ceiling abuse for partisan gain becomes more likely.
The problem is that democracies have yet to learn how to manage debt effectively.
While political union may stabilize the euro, it will not sustain or strengthen democracy unless Europe’s leaders address this critical failing.
Even&nbsp;the world’s oldest continuous democracy is not immune to the erosion of self-governance.
Commitments never to raise taxes have left the US dependent on debt finance – and, more frightening, on those who are ready to veto refinancing it.
Central Banking’s New Club Class
NEW YORK – In the wake of the 2007-2008 financial crisis, the world’s central banks played a critical role in rescuing the global financial system.
They stepped in when private markets froze, acting as lenders and dealers of last resort, and provided additional liquidity to grease the wheels of finance.
These central banks offered their services primarily to domestic actors, but they also extended their largess to foreign private entities.
Indeed, even foreign states benefited after central banks entered into swap agreements, giving one another unlimited access to their respective currencies.
This has created a worrying precedent.
Originally created as a temporary fix in 2007, the swap lines established at that time connecting the US Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank, and the Swiss National Bank have been extended each time a new crisis has unsettled the markets.
More recently, however, six central banks announced that they had made their swap lines permanent.
But did these central banks have the legal authority to do so?
And, even if they did, should they have used it?
The original swap lines might fairly be classified as emergency measures.
But what may be permissible and justifiable in a financial emergency may not be appropriate as standard practice during normal times.
Central bankers might argue that we have entered a state of permanent market crisis analogous to the never-ending “war on terror.”
But even this frightening analogy does not answer the question of whether central banks should assume positions of power in international relations.
Of course, a central bank’s mandate is price stability in the national economy that it serves, and price stability is influenced by exchange rates.
So a case can be made that central banks should have the power to intervene in foreign-exchange markets, and that this power should – at least in times of crisis – include commitments to foreign central banks to provide unlimited liquidity in the domestic currency.
What is less clear, though, is whether the same justification can be used by central banks to create permanent swap lines with just a few other central banks of their choosing.
This is akin to an announcement on a cruise ship approaching an iceberg that the crew will definitely rescue first-class passengers but not necessarily others.
Not every country’s central bank – not even every “friendly” country’s central bank – has been invited to join the swap-lines club.
Membership is restricted to the United States Federal Reserve, the Bank of England, the European Central Bank, the Bank of Japan, the Swiss National Bank, and the Bank of Canada.
There may be a legal rationale for this neo-imperial elitism.
The so-called C-6 might argue that, given their price-stability mandate, only central banks of countries whose economic fate might destabilize domestic prices should receive privileged access to domestic currency.
But the choice of monetary partners is nonetheless a matter of judgment.
For example, why Canada and not Mexico?
Aren’t both members of NAFTA?
Why Switzerland and not Brazil, one of the largest emerging markets?
Picking partners is an inherently political act.
It bestows access to high-demand currencies on a select few, relatively strong, countries precisely when the weakest countries are at their most vulnerable.
Having been left outside the club, these countries have no option but to self-insure by accumulating foreign-exchange reserves.
Indeed, empirical research suggests that countries without explicit or implicit access to liquidity tend to hold much higher reserves than the privileged few – only to be blamed by the same privileged few for contributing to global imbalances by hoarding excess reserves.
The C-6 swap club’s members may be correct in thinking that global finance requires more proactive central banking.
But is it fair or right that they should be allowed to take matters into their own hands and determine a system of international monetary management designed to serve their own interests, with little regard for other, equally exposed, countries?
The joint announcement by the C-6 cements the great divide between first-class and coach economies.
We are being asked to trust that these select central banks will do the right thing.
Trust is important.
But when it comes to political decision-making, democratic control and accountability are essential.
The False Promise of Digital Democracy
MUNICH – Most people used to think of the Internet as a force for good.
It was supposed to allow us not only to shop, stay in touch with former classmates, and find a new sushi restaurant; it was also supposed to empower us politically by allowing the disenfranchised to make their voices heard, help activists mobilize supporters, and enable ordinary citizens to publicize evidence of official corruption or police brutality.
But doubts have crept in – and not only since the revelations of government agencies’ use of the Internet to spy on us, our leaders, and one another.
The Internet’s impact on politics is deeply ambiguous.
Unless and until it becomes a space where rules and rights apply like they do in the real world, that is unlikely to change.
Early enthusiasts dreamed that mere access to the Internet would help spread democracy.
This did not happen.
At the end of the 1990’s, 4% of the world’s population was using the Internet; today, almost 40% do.
But the share of countries classified as “not free” or “partly free” by the democracy watchdog Freedom House has hardly changed over the same period.
In the battle between networks and hierarchies, the hierarchies seem to be winning more often than not.
One reason is that governments have become as skillful at using the Internet and modern communications technology as activists.
Autocratic governments use it to track down protest and opposition leaders, as we have recently seen in Ukraine.
They employ armies of people to vet and skew online conversations.
Some people even argue that the Internet acts as a political release valve that helps dictators stay in power.
But even the most determined autocrat cannot fully control political activity online.
Tech-savvy young people tend to circumvent attempts at official censorship.
And yet Internet activists are not necessarily gaining power.
Internet-inspired movements usually have lasting impact only if they generate traditional political activity, such as street protests or the establishment of political parties.
For this, they need leadership, which net activists tend to reject, because they view themselves as pure grassroots movements.
In the absence of viable strategies and clear direction, most Internet-aided uprisings have dissipated quickly.
The Internet has thus turned out to be less potent than expected in the fight against tyranny.
Nor is its effect on established democracies straightforward.
While democracies have arguably become more vibrant, their politics have become more volatile.
Consider the media.
Only 16% of Americans in their 40’s read (print) newspapers these days; the share among 20-somethings is 6%.
Digital media offer great diversity, easy access, and opportunities to comment.
But they encourage people to retrieve only information and commentaries that fit their existing views.
While traditional media can present their readers with balanced coverage, digital media can fuel political polarization.
Moreover, political firebrands, populists, and radicals, from Italy’s Beppe Grillo to American Tea Party members, use social media and the blogosphere to appeal directly to potential supporters.
The Internet allows many political upstarts to amass a large following quickly, only to disappear just as fast.
But the ebb and flow can unsettle established politics – for example, when centrist parties move to the right to lure voters away from more extreme parties.
At the same time, young people seem to think that they have exhausted their civic duties by tweeting and blogging.
They no longer join political parties, trade unions, and other interest groups.
The average age of party members in Germany is over 50.
In the United Kingdom, a retiree over 60 is more likely to be a trade-union member than a worker under 30 is.
Without civil-society organizations, politics becomes more fragmented and less cohesive – and finding workable compromises becomes harder.
The revelations of snooping by the US National Security Agency (NSA) will hasten a more realistic assessment of the Internet’s effect on politics, providing a welcome opportunity to consider what has gone wrong and what could be put right.
A multitude of small steps could help – such as giving pro-democracy movements the technology needed to evade autocrats, presenting digital media in a balanced way, and making political parties more responsive to their members.
But the fundamental challenge is to suffuse the Internet with the same rules, rights, and values that pervade our democracies.
Freedom cannot be absolute, whether online or offline.
Human rights, and not only the right to personal privacy, must be respected in cyberspace.
Because no single body or government sets rules for the entire Internet, any digital code of conduct would have to emerge from the grassroots – and thus would be highly imperfect.
But perhaps the NSA has helped start the discussion: though we may not know which rules we want, we may now have gained a much better idea of which rules we do not want.
Reason and the End of Poverty
WASHINGTON, DC – The World Bank has set two new goals for itself: ending extreme and chronic poverty in the world by 2030, and promoting shared prosperity, defined in terms of progress of the poorest 40% of the population in each society.
Now that the United Nations General Assembly Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals has endorsed the Bank’s anti-poverty target, debate about how to achieve it has revived an old question: Will the benefits of economic growth trickle down on their own, reaching all, or will we need targeted redistributive policies?
Many people remain in the growth-only camp only because of an error in deductive reasoning; unlike committed ideologues, they can be weaned from their position.
These numbers suggest that growth alone is unlikely to get us to the 3% target.
But this is mere suggestion.
One can argue that we should nonetheless rely on growth and simply adopt measures that encourage more of it.
In a new paper, David Dollar, Tatjana Kleineberg, and Aart Kraay analyze empirically the relationship between growth and poverty.
Their comprehensive study draws on high-quality survey data from 118 countries and reaches a clear conclusion: the bulk of poverty eradication that took place in recent decades was driven by economies’ overall income growth.
More specifically, 77% of the cross-country variation in the income growth of the poorest 40% of the population reflects differences in average income growth.
Findings like these lead many people to conclude that eradicating poverty requires us to rely on overall growth, and that direct government policy interventions have little merit.
But this is a wrong conclusion, which illustrates a lapse of logic.
To see why, suppose that in 1930 an economist conducted an empirical study of what cured infectious diseases, and, analyzing masses of data from previous years, concluded that 98% of all treatable illnesses were cured by non-antibiotic medicines – “tradicines,” which include all traditional medicines of various schools.
This conclusion would most likely be valid, because the use of antibiotics before 1930 – just two years after Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin and years before it was fully workable as a cure – was rare and mostly inadvertent.
But now suppose that the economist goes on to argue that, therefore, it would be silly to give patients penicillin, because we know that 98% of all treatable diseases were cured by tradicines, and penicillin is not a tradicine.
That is a wrong deduction, based on evidence that does not exist.
What the economist’s study in 1930 showed is that tradicines accounted for 98% of the cases that were successfully treated.
It does not show that penicillin does not work.
This is a common mistake.
We often hear assertions like, “We must rely on the private sector to create jobs, because studies show that 90% of past jobs were created by the private sector.”
If we accepted this reasoning, we would have to accept a Soviet researcher’s assertion in the late 1980’s that we must rely on the state to create jobs, because 90% of past jobs were created by the state.
On job creation, there is both theory and evidence to support the conclusion that the private sector is the main driver of sustainable expansion (which is not to deny that there may be scope for tweaking public policies to make the private sector more employment-friendly).
But on poverty eradication, theory and evidence show that policy interventions, when skillfully designed, can play a significant role.
Some of these policies already exist; some have to be crafted – the antibiotics of our time.
In India, the government has tried for decades to get cheap food to the poor.
Cost-benefit analysis has led many to declare it a failed policy.
But the fault lies with the program’s method, which is to rely on the state both to collect the food from farmers and to deliver it to the poor.
Around 45% of food grain leaks out and disappears in this process.
This means that the program’s leaks need to be repaired, not that the entire scheme should be abandoned.
CANBERRA – One of the many things the world has learned from the Iran nuclear saga is that its leaders made a mistake, when negotiating the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) in the 1960s, in not doing anything to constrain uranium enrichment and plutonium reprocessing.
This failure apparently stemmed from the belief – long since proven wrong, certainly in the case of uranium – that the only states ever likely to possess that technical capability already possessed nuclear weapons, or (like Germany) were totally committed never to acquire them.
As a result, any member state can argue for its “inalienable right” under the NPT to pursue any stage of the nuclear fuel cycle.
Although any such right extends only to activities for “peaceful purposes,” the loophole is gaping.
Any technically capable state – and there are now dozens of them – can build uranium enrichment facilities with the official purpose of producing fuel for nuclear power or research reactors, but which are nonetheless inherently capable of producing the much higher-grade fuel needed for nuclear weapons.
It is not for nothing that such facilities have been described as “bomb starter kits,” and that Iran’s progress down that path – whether deliberately designed to give it a latent weapons breakout capability or not – has spooked so many others in the international community.
That is why there was so much pressure to produce the deal now on the table, which dramatically limits Iran’s enrichment capability.
While renegotiating the NPT itself to close the enrichment loophole seems for now a lost cause, there are other ways to address this proliferation risk.
One of the most important, and long-advocated, strategies is to demonstrate to countries that rely on nuclear power, or are planning to develop it, that they do not need their own uranium-enrichment program to ensure their fuel supply’s security.
Concern about fuel-supply security has always been Iran’s main publicly stated justification for acquiring its enrichment capability – a justification that its critics assert was manufactured simply to conceal a covert weapons agenda.
Whether or not that is the case, all current and would-be nuclear power producers are entitled to be anxious about having an absolutely assured fuel supply, given the major economic and social consequences they would face in the event of a disruption.
Yes, until now, the commercial nuclear-fuel market has worked well: no power reactor has had to shut down because of fuel-supply disruptions.
But the cut-off of the supply of other energy resources (notably Russia’s disruption of natural-gas supplies to Ukraine and, by extension, to Western Europe) has raised legitimate concerns about whether this could happen with nuclear fuel.
Although the issue has been much debated, until now there has been only modest progress in developing fuel-supply assurance arrangements that would meet this concern.
Russia, with the support of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), maintains a sizeable reserve of low-enriched uranium (LEU) at its international center in Angarsk; but, in the current security environment, there has been understandable international reluctance to rely on it.
The United Kingdom has proposed a supply guarantee of its own, though it has so far attracted little attention.
Now, in an important new development, to be officially launched this month (on August 27), Kazakhstan is establishing a major new international fuel bank, which it will operate on behalf of the IAEA.
The new facility should once and for all remove the main excuse that has been advanced, sincerely or not, for building and maintaining homegrown enrichment capability.
Scheduled to commence operations in 2017, the Kazakh fuel bank will store up to 90 tons of LEU, sufficient to refuel three typical power-producing light water reactors.
While Kazakhstan will physically operate the bank, the uranium will be owned and controlled by the IAEA, and made available to non-nuclear-weapon states if, for any reason, they cannot secure the LEU they need from the commercial market.
Provided the state in question is in compliance with its comprehensive non-proliferation safeguards agreement with the IAEA, it can draw the required fuel from the bank and transfer it to a fuel fabricator to make fuel assemblies for the reactors involved.
The Kazakh fuel bank has very wide and high-level international backing, helped by the country’s credentials.
A former nuclear test-site state, Kazakhstan willingly gave up the nuclear weapons on its territory when the opportunity arose with the dissolution of the Soviet Union, and it has been a strong and consistent advocate of nuclear arms control and disarmament ever since.
The bank has been funded by voluntary contributions, including $50 million from the Nuclear Threat Initiative, a United States-based NGO, $49 million from the US government, up to $25 million from the European Union, $10 million each from Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates, and $5 million from Norway.
Aside from the Iran deal, good news on nuclear weapons has been sparse in recent years.