Similarly, when eastern Nigeria decided it wanted to secede and form the state of Biafra in the 1960s, other Nigerians resisted, in part because Biafra included most of Nigeria’s oil.
They argued that the oil belonged to all of Nigeria’s people, not just the eastern area.
After 1989, the issue of self-determination became acute again in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.
In the Caucasus, Azerbeijanis, Armenians, Georgians, Abkhazians, and Chechens all demanded states on the basis of self-determination.
In Yugoslavia, the Slovenes, Serbs, and Croats managed to carve out independent republics in the early 1990’s, but the Muslims in Bosnia-Herzegovina were less successful.
The war in Bosnia devastated the civilian population, and war-crimes tribunals were convened in The Hague, starting in 1996, to convict those responsible for the massacres.
Part of what made the war in Bosnia so complicated for the international community was the problem of assessing how much of the fighting could be attributed to tensions among Bosnian Croats, Serbs, and Muslims, and how much of the violence was caused by Serbia’s intervention.
If this was not caused by simple aggression on the part of Serbia, then the only grounds for intervention would be to prevent a massacre.
As with Rwanda in 1994, the international community was united in its condemnation of the Balkan violence, but was unable to agree on effective joint action until late in the conflict, in 1995, when a NATO peacekeeping force was sent to the troubled area.
Self-determination has turned out to be an ambiguous moral principle.
Woodrow Wilson thought it would solve problems in central Europe in 1919, but it created as many as it solved.
Adolf Hitler used the principle to undermine fragile states in the 1930’s.
Today, with less than 10% of the world’s states being homogeneous, treating self-determination as a primary moral principle could have disastrous consequences in many regions.
The best hope for the future is to ask what is being determined as well as who determines it.
In situations where groups have difficulties living together, it may be possible to allow a degree of autonomy in the determination of internal affairs.
Internal self-determination could allow degrees of cultural, economic, and political autonomy similar to that which exists in countries like Switzerland or Belgium.
Where such loosening of the bonds is still not enough, it may be possible in some cases to arrange an amicable divorce, as happened when Czechoslovakia peacefully divided into two sovereign countries in 1993.
But absolute demands for self-determination are likely to become a source of endless violence unless handled carefully.
Demands for self-determination in today’s world must be judged on a case-by-case basis that assesses the motives, means, and consequences involved, and that does so in a multilateral framework.
The Dead Cat Bounce
NEW YORK – Mild signs that the rate of economic contraction is slowing in the United States, China, and other parts of the world have led many economists to forecast that positive growth will return to the US in the second half of the year, and that a similar recovery will occur in other advanced economies.
The emerging consensus among economists is that growth next year will be close to the trend rate of 2.5%.
Investors are talking of “green shoots” of recovery and of positive “second derivatives of economic activity” (continuing economic contraction is the first, negative, derivative, but the slower rate suggests that the bottom is near).
As a result, stock markets have started to rally in the US and around the world.
Markets seem to believe that there is light at the end of the tunnel for the economy and for the battered profits of corporations and financial firms.
This consensus optimism is, I believe, not supported by the facts.
Indeed, I expect that while the rate of US contraction will slow from -6% in the last two quarters, US growth will still be negative (around -1.5 to -2%) in the second half of the year (compared to the bullish consensus of +2%).
Moreover, growth next year will be so weak (0.5 to 1%, as opposed to the consensus of 2% or more) and unemployment so high (above 10%) that it will still feel like a recession.
In the euro zone and Japan, the outlook for 2009 and 2010 is even worse, with growth close to zero even next year.
China will have a more rapid recovery later this year, but growth will reach only 5% this year and 7% in 2010, well below the average of 10% over the last decade.
Given this weak outlook for the major economies, losses by banks and other financial institutions will continue to grow.
My latest estimates are $3.6 trillion in losses for loans and securities issued by US institutions, and $1 trillion for the rest of the world.
It is said that the International Monetary Fund, which earlier this year revised upward its estimate of bank losses, from $1 trillion to $2.2 trillion, will announce a new estimate of $3.1 trillion for US assets and $0.9 trillion for foreign assets, figures very close to my own.
By this standard, many US and foreign banks are effectively insolvent and will have to be taken over by governments.
The credit crunch will last much longer if we keep zombie banks alive despite their massive and continuing losses.
Given this outlook for the real economy and financial institutions, the latest rally in US and global stock markets has to be interpreted as a bear-market rally.
Economists usually joke that the stock market has predicted 12 out of the last nine recessions, as markets often fall sharply without an ensuing recession.
But, in the last two years, the stock market has predicted six out of the last zero economic recoveries – that is, six bear market rallies that eventually fizzled and led to new lows.
The stock market’s latest “dead cat bounce” may last a while longer, but three factors will, in due course, lead it to turn south again.
First, macroeconomic indicators will be worse than expected, with growth failing to recover as fast the consensus expects.
Second, the profits and earnings of corporations and financial institutions will not rebound as fast as the consensus predicts, as weak economic growth, deflationary pressures, and surging defaults on corporate bonds will limit firms’ pricing power and keep profit margins low.
Third, financial shocks will be worse than expected.
At some point, investors will realize that bank losses are massive, and that some banks are insolvent.
Deleveraging by highly leveraged firms – such as hedge funds – will lead them to sell illiquid assets in illiquid markets.
And some emerging market economies – despite massive IMF support – will experience a severe financial crisis with contagious effects on other economies.
So, while this latest bear-market rally may continue for a bit longer, renewed downward pressure on stocks and other risky assets is inevitable.
To be sure, much more aggressive policy action (massive and unconventional monetary easing, larger fiscal-stimulus packages, bailouts of financial firms, individual mortgage-debt relief, and increased financial support for troubled emerging markets) in many countries in the last few months has reduced the risk of a near depression.
That outcome seemed highly likely six months ago, when global financial markets nearly collapsed.
Still, this global recession will continue for a longer period than the consensus suggest.
There may be light at the end of the tunnel – no depression and financial meltdown.
But economic recovery everywhere will be weaker and will take longer than expected.
The same is true for a sustained recovery of financial markets.
The Death of a Nation
Belgium is in danger of falling apart.
For more than six months, the country has been unable to form a government that is able to unite the French-speaking Walloons (32%) and Dutch-speaking Flemish (58%).
The Belgian monarch, Albert II, is desperately trying to stop his subjects from breaking up the state.
Apart from the King (who might be out of a job), who cares?
First of all, the Walloons do.
Although the French-speaking Belgians started the European Industrial Revolution in the nineteenth century, they are now living in a deprived rustbelt in need of federal subsidies, a substantial amount of which comes from taxes paid by the more prosperous, high-tech Flemish.
A handful of right-wing Dutch dreamers care, too, for they have visions of uniting Belgian Flanders with the Dutch motherland.
Alas for them, however, the Flemish have no such desire.
Belgium, after all, became an independent state in 1830, precisely in order to liberate the Catholic Flemish, as well as the Walloons, from being second-class subjects in a Protestant Dutch monarchy.
But perhaps we should all care at least a little, for what is happening in Belgium is unusual, but not at all unique.
The Czechs and Slovaks already parted ways, as did the different nations of Yugoslavia.
Many Basques would like to break away from Spain, as would many Catalans.
Corsicans would love to be rid of France, and many Scots of Britain.
Then, of course, there is the Tibetan problem in China, the Chechen problem in Russia, and so on.
No doubt some of these peoples would be able to survive perfectly well on their own.
But history does seem to suggest that the cumulative effect of states falling apart is seldom positive.
Belgian separatists like to observe that Belgium was never a natural nation-state, but an accident of history.
But so are many, perhaps most.
The accident in the case of Belgium is usually placed in the early nineteenth century, the result of Napoleon’s European empire collapsing and Dutch arrogance.
In fact, one might just as well set the accident in the sixteenth century, when the Habsburg Emperor hung on to the Southern Netherlands (today’s Belgium) while the Protestant northern provinces broke away.
Be that as it may, nation-states were often formed in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries to promote common interests that transcended cultural, ethnic, linguistic, or religious differences.
This was true of Italy and Britain, no less than of Belgium.
The problem now is that interests are no longer the same, or even held in common.
The European Union, which actively promotes regional interests, has weakened the authority of national governments.
Why rely on London, say the Scots, if Brussels offers greater advantages.
When common interests no longer prevail, language and culture begin to matter more.
One reason why Flemish Belgians resent having to prop up the Walloons with their tax money is that they regard them almost as foreigners.
Most Flemish readers don’t read French-language newspapers or novels, and vice versa.
TV stations are separate. And so are schools, universities, and political parties.
Similarly, northern Italians don’t like their tax money being used to help the south, but at least they still have a language – more or less – in common, as well as TV stars, a national soccer team, and Silvio Berlusconi.
The Belgians only have a king, who is descended, like most European monarchs, from Germans.
Again, why should this matter?
Don’t we feel sympathy for the Tibetans in their struggle for freedom?
Why shouldn’t the Flemish go their own way?
It is one thing to support a people that is being oppressed by an authoritarian government.
And Tibetans are actually in danger of losing their culture.
It is more disturbing when people choose to break up nation-states because they refuse to share their wealth, for linguistic or ethnic reasons.
If Flemish citizens don’t want their taxes to go to the Walloons, what about helping out unemployed immigrants from Africa, a large chunk of which the Belgians once owned and exploited as a major source of their prosperity?
It should come as no surprise that the Flemish nationalist party (Vlaams Belang) is hostile to immigrants too.
So the fate of Belgium should interest all Europeans, especially those who wish the Union well.
For what is happening in Belgium now could end up happening on a continental scale.
Why, for example, should the prosperous Germans continue to have their tax money pooled to assist the Greeks or the Portuguese?
It is difficult to sustain any democratic system, whether on a national or European scale, without a sense of solidarity.
It helps if this is based on something deeper than shared interests: a language, a sense of common history, pride in cultural achievements.
The European identity is still far from being solid.
Perhaps the citizens of Belgium do not have enough in common anymore, and Flemish and Walloons would be better off being divorced.
But one hopes not.
Divorces are never painless. And ethnic nationalism unleashes emotions that are almost always undesirable.
We know what happened when the twin pulls of blood and soil determined European politics before.
Without having intended it, the EU now seems to be encouraging the very forces that postwar European unity was designed to contain.
The Death of King Fahad
Saudi Arabia’s decade long royal death watch is over.
King Fahad, the longest-serving king in Saudi Arabia’s history (24 years), is dead.
For six weeks, the King lay in a hospital fighting death, something he has done, in reality, ever since he suffered a massive stroke 10 years ago.
The identity of the new king is clear, but who will really wield power is not.
As when Marshal Tito was dying in a divided Yugoslavia, the King’s royal relations (who are also his political underlings) fear that the ruler’s death will unleash chaos.
This fear comes at a time when the wider Middle East is abuzz with talk of democratic change.
From Egypt to Lebanon to Iran, political passions are mounting, along with a renewed optimism.
Street demonstrations, elections, and political debate in cafes and on the Internet are flowering as never before.
Even the conservative states of the Arabian Peninsula are embroiled in lively disputes about women ministers, Shia representation, Islamist participation in the political process, and even the future of their ruling monarchies.
In these dynamic circumstances, Saudi Arabia stands out.
Indeed, Saudi Arabia seems trapped in a state of suspended animation, its body politic sick and infirm.
The country is caught between two choices: progressive reform or continuing paralysis and decay.
Divisions in the kingdom are sharper than ever, and the King’s death might deepen them further.
Two rival camps - the so-called reformers and the hard liners - are forming in the Al Saud, the world’s largest ruling family, with 22,000 princes and princesses.
The reformers have less authority but are the acceptable face of the Saudi dictatorship internationally.
Their new leader, King Abdullah, appears to have legitimacy because of his seniority in the family.
The reformers talk about partial municipal elections, national dialogue, and the rights of women, who they hint may one day even be allowed to drive cars!
Even these limited efforts are obstructed by the hardline Wahhabi camp, which controls the security forces, the judiciary system, and the real levers of domestic power.
Indeed, Prince Naif, the Minister of the Interior and leader of the hardliners, has either silenced or imprisoned hundreds of the key Saudi reformers.
One reason for the weakness of Abdullah’s faction is that he has scant support within the family, because the Al Saud center of power lies with the al Fahads - the six full brothers of the dead King Fahad, most importantly Prince Sultan, the Minister of Defense, and Prince Naif.
On the surface, the succession has proceeded as expected, with Crown Prince Abdullah becoming king now that Fahad has died.
In spite of this, Abdullah may not be able to shape the future, because he seems doomed to lose any showdown with Naif’s forces.
Abdullah’s power base is in the National Guard, and his claim on the support of Saudi Arabia's modernizing forces.
Both are insufficient to check Naif.
A key early test of Abdullah’s kingship will be if he can succeed in freeing the hundreds of political reformers now in prison, especially three respected academics whom he encouraged to make reform proposals, only to be incarcerated by Naif.
Now that King Fahad is gone, old scores among his numerous brothers and half brothers, not to mention the thousands of princes in the next generation, will need to be settled.
But don’t look for hope in the new generation, which is not necessarily young or progressive.
Indeed, the Al Saud clan’s third and fourth generations are divided not only in political and religious affiliation, but also range in age from 20 to 90 years old.
All await a chance to rule.
So Saudi Arabia’s people confront this key question: can an authoritative ruler emerge who will reunite the country in the progressive tradition of the late King Faisal?
The sad likelihood is that, given the power of the obstructionists under Naif, a decisive and energetic king is unlikely to emerge.
The direction the country will take in the longer term can best be assessed by whom Abdullah chooses to name as the successor to Prince Sultan, Naif’s chief ally who has already been named Abdullah’s heir.
If Abdullah (aged 83) can perhaps skip a generation and appoint a more open-minded younger figure, there may be hope.
But Naif (age 77), his full brothers - including Sultan (age 82) - and their supporters within the Wahhabi establishment appear too entrenched to allow that to happen.
Like the geriatric successions that preceded the collapse of the Soviet Union, the succession in Saudi Arabia seems to be only a step in an inexorable march toward political decay.
Russia found a young reformer in Mikhail Gorbachev too late.
It may also be too late for Saudi Arabia.
The Death of NATO
LONDON – NATO, whose foreign ministers will meet next week, is dying.
Death, of course, comes to all living things.
And, as NATO approaches its 60th birthday next spring, there seems no immediate urgency about writing its obituary; 60-year-olds may reasonably look forward to another decade, perhaps two or even three, of active and productive life.
But perhaps it is now time for some discreet reflection on the fact that “the old man will not always be with us.”
Human institutions, like human beings, can collapse with surprising speed once they have outlived their usefulness.
The dramatic dissolution of the Soviet Union stands as a reminder of what can happen to organizations when doubts take hold as to whether they still serve any real interests other than those of their own apparatchiks – and how suddenly such doubts can grow when they attempt to convert themselves into something they are not.
NATO has, of course, shown remarkable tenacity.
It should have disappeared when the Soviet Union collapsed and the Warsaw Pact evaporated; its job was done.
But then came the Balkans crises of the 1990s, culminating in the realization that only American military power could put a stop to Serbian President Slobodan Milosevic’s ethnic cleansing of Kosovo.
And then came the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, making the “out of area or out of business” choice seem a no-brainer.
So NATO remains in business, and in Afghanistan.
But NATO’s repeated demonstrations of resilience should not blind us to the fact that it no longer provides a healthy basis for the transatlantic security relationship.
As long as NATO’s raison d’être was to keep the Russians out and the United States in, NATO’s internal dynamic of American leadership and European obeisance was both inevitable and appropriate.
This unbalanced relationship still has advantages for both parties.
Americans may find their (old) European allies less pliable than before – but they can at least count on the absence of any serious alternatives for what NATO should become, or what it should do.
Europeans can continue to avoid responsibility for their own security, and to invoke the catechism of “NATO, the corner-stone of our security” as a substitute for serious strategic thought.
But each now resents the behavior of the other.
None of the ideas for another dose of NATO rejuvenation looks like the answer.
All the talk of an improved NATO-European Union partnership is mainly wasted breath.
“Intensified strategic dialogue in Brussels” in practice boils down to the chilling specter of interminable joint committee meetings at which one nation’s ambassador to NATO explains his government’s position to a compatriot diplomat who is accredited to the EU, and vice-versa.
The problem is not institutional relationships between the two organizations, except in the important but narrow case of Turkey and Cyprus, which remain bent on pursuing their bilateral feud without regard to the real risks to the personnel of their allies and partners deployed in Afghanistan and Kosovo.
The real problem is relations between the US and European countries, 21 of which belong to both organizations.
Nor does the answer lie in developing an EU “caucus” within NATO.
The 1990’s concept of a “European Defense Identity” within NATO proved to be unviable – and since then expansion of the alliance and proliferation of NATO “partners” has made the idea of a special collective role for EU members all the more improbable.
A double layer of decision-making would only cause an already ponderous organization to seize up.
There is nothing more dramatic to be done than to focus on upgrading the EU-US strategic dialogue.
The annual summits need to be made more substantial, and their focus shifted from transatlantic, bilateral issues to aligning EU and US global policies and actions.
The US president should keep an eye on the calendar of the European Council, which brings the EU presidents and prime ministers together four times a year, and solicit an occasional invitation.
The US mission to the EU should be scaled up, and EU representation in Washington turned into a proper embassy.
The more seriously the Americans show that they are willing to take the EU collectively, the more seriously the Europeans will take themselves.
Winston Churchill once remarked that you could always count on the Americans to do the right thing, after having tried all the alternatives.
In the same way, the Europeans will eventually find themselves having to speak with one voice and act as one body in the wider world, if only because a globalized world will not allow them the luxury of doing anything else.
As Charles de Gaulle forecast, “It is not any European statesman who will unite Europe. Europe will be united by the Chinese.”
Only collectively can Europeans be effective contributors to global security, or achieve a robust transatlantic security partnership.
As NATO enters its twilight years, the US should encourage the EU to grow into its global responsibilities.
For, despite all their differences and mutual dissatisfactions, Europe and the US know that each is the best friend either is likely to have for the foreseeable future.
The Death of Russian Womanhood
Valentina Tereshkova, the first female Soviet cosmonaut – indeed, the first woman to go into space – recently celebrated her 70th birthday.
In an interview, she stated her only wish: to fly to Mars, even with a one-way ticket.
It was an implicit wish for a spectacular form of suicide, for a spectacularly prosaic reason: the loss, experienced by thousands of Russian women of her generation, of her life’s existential foundation.
Tereshkova’s generation, though it encompassed almost the entire era of Soviet rule, had been raised in the tradition of Russian womanhood.
Much older than the Soviet regime, this tradition emphasizes a spirit of sacrifice – not just for loved ones, but also for great causes such as revolution, state, science, or art – that is deeply hostile to accumulation of money and material goods as the goal of life.
After “perestroika” and the 1991 collapse of the USSR, these women did not change their lives and attitudes.
They did not curse what they had glorified in the past and embrace what they had once condemned.
They did not participate in “privatization” of state property or enter show business to make money.
These women – and Tereshkova is undoubtedly among them – were shocked by the changes they saw before them.
Indeed, probably more horrifying to them than the collapse of the Soviet regime was the rampant prostitution of daily life, for it negated the meaning of Russia and of Russian womanhood.
What, then, might a woman of Tereshkova’s generation think of the changes during Vladimir Putin’s presidency?
One should be fair to Putin’s regime.
Along with its restraints on liberty and its dramatic increase in the power of the Kremlin bureaucracy, Putin has overseen the rise of a Russian middle class that has become increasingly similar to Western middle classes.
There has been no “return” to Soviet or pre-revolutionary times, despite the regime’s attempts to appropriate the symbols of Czarist Russia.
The prostitutes who lined up throughout downtown Moscow in the Yeltsin era have disappeared, and “dressing to kill” for a casual walk has gone out of fashion.
But the Putin regime still bears greater resemblance to the Yeltsin era than to any prior period.
So do most of the new generation of Russian women (and men): in their modern, calculating minds, there is little place for sacrifice, whether for family, art, culture, or science.
As a result, the Putin era has become utterly sterile, producing no great works of science, literature, or art.
Such pursuits have simply become passé – something that has never happened in modern Russian history, not even in the darkest days of Stalin’s purges.
This culturally desiccated world is much more alien than the red desert of the Martian landscape that Tereshkova and her cosmonaut friends – including her husband – dreamed of in their youth.
The collapse of the country for which she lived underscores her overwhelming sense of tragedy.
This might seem strange to the Western mind, for which the great Soviet space achievements and the USSR existed as separate entities: while everyone praised Soviet science, very few admired the totalitarian USSR.
But for Tereshkova and other women of her generation, the great Soviet state and the daring achievements of Soviet science were inseparable.
The grand expansion of the Soviet empire enabled humankind’s exploration of the cosmos and its potential expansion beyond Earth.
It is understandable that the collapse of the country, and of the spirit that nurtured Russian intellectuals – regardless of their political beliefs – for generations, is unbearable for Tereshkova and people like her.
But Tereshkova’s dream about travel to Mars is not just suicidal nostalgia for a time when she was young and surrounded by people who were ready to sacrifice their lives for a greater cause.
In fact, the allusion to space exploration has another dimension: the achievements of any great are not bound to one’s time or place of origin and can be transmitted to other cultures and generations.
Tereshkova’s dream is a symbol not only of her desperation, which is the desperation of the creative mind in today’s Russia, but also of continuing belief in the great potential of the human spirit.
The Death of the Globalization Consensus
CAMBRIDGE – The world economy has seen globalization collapse once already.
The gold standard era – with its free capital mobility and open trade – came to an abrupt end in 1914 and could not be resuscitated after World War I. Are we about to witness a similar global economic breakdown?
The question is not fanciful.
Although economic globalization has enabled unprecedented levels of prosperity in advanced countries and has been a boon to hundreds of millions of poor workers in China and elsewhere in Asia, it rests on shaky pillars.
Unlike national markets, which tend to be supported by domestic regulatory and political institutions, global markets are only “weakly embedded.”
There is no global anti-trust authority, no global lender of last resort, no global regulator, no global safety nets, and, of course, no global democracy.
In other words, global markets suffer from weak governance, and therefore from weak popular legitimacy.
Recent events have heightened the urgency with which these issues are discussed.
The presidential electoral campaign in the United States has highlighted the frailty of the support for open trade in the world’s most powerful nation.
The sub-prime mortgage crisis has shown how lack of international coordination and regulation can exacerbate the inherent fragility of financial markets.
The rise in food prices has exposed the downside of economic interdependence without global transfer and compensation schemes.
Meanwhile, rising oil prices have increased transport costs, leading analysts to wonder whether the outsourcing era is coming to an end.
And there is always the looming disaster of climate change, which may well be the most serious threat the world has ever faced.
So if globalization is in danger, who are its real enemies?
There was a time when global elites could comfort themselves with the thought that opposition to the world trading regime consisted of violent anarchists, self-serving protectionists, trade unionists, and ignorant, if idealistic youth.
Meanwhile, they regarded themselves as the true progressives, because they understood that safeguarding and advancing globalization was the best remedy against poverty and insecurity.   
But that self-assured attitude has all but disappeared, replaced by doubts, questions, and skepticism.
Gone also are the violent street protests and mass movements against globalization.
While these worries hardly amount to the full frontal attack mounted by the likes of Joseph Stiglitz, the Nobel-prize winning economist, they still constitute a remarkable turnaround in the intellectual climate.
Moreover, even those who have not lost heart often disagree vehemently about the direction in which they would like to see globalization go. 
For example, Jagdish Bhagwati, the distinguished free trader, and Fred Bergsten, the director of the pro-globalization Peterson Institute for International Economics, have both been on the frontlines arguing that critics vastly exaggerate globalization’s ills and under-appreciate its benefits.
But their debates on the merits of regional trade agreements – Bergsten for, Bhagwati against – are as heated as each one’s disagreements with the authors mentioned above.
None of these intellectuals is against globalization, of course.
What they want is not to turn back globalization, but to create new institutions and compensation mechanisms – at home or internationally – that will render globalization more effective, fairer, and more sustainable.
Their policy proposals are often vague (when specified at all), and command little consensus.
But confrontation over globalization has clearly moved well beyond the streets to the columns of the financial press and the rostrums of mainstream think tanks.  
That is an important point for globalization’s cheerleaders to understand, as they often behave as if the “other side” still consists of protectionists and anarchists.
Today, the question is no longer, “Are you for or against globalization?” The question is, “What should the rules of globalization be?”
The cheerleaders’ true sparring partners today are not rock-throwing youths but their fellow intellectuals.
The first three decades after 1945 were governed by the Bretton Woods consensus – a shallow multilateralism that permitted policymakers to focus on domestic social and employment needs while enabling global trade to recover and flourish.
This regime was superseded in the 1980’s and 1990’s by an agenda of deeper liberalization and economic integration.
That model, we have learned, is unsustainable.
If globalization is to survive, it will need a new intellectual consensus to underpin it.
The world economy desperately awaits its new Keynes.
The Debt Death Trap
NEW YORK – The Greek financial saga is the tip of an iceberg of problems of public-debt sustainability for many advanced economies, and not only the so-called PIIGS (Portugal, Italy, Ireland, Greece, and Spain).
Indeed, the OECD now estimates that public debt-to-GDP ratios in advanced economies will rise to an average of around 100% of GDP.
The International Monetary Fund has recently put out similar estimates.
Within the PIIGS, the problems are not just excessive public deficits and debt ratios (in different degrees and measures in the five countries). They are also problems of external deficits, loss of competitiveness, and thus of anemic growth.
These are economies that, even a decade ago, were losing market share to China and Asia, owing to their labor-intensive and low value-added exports.
After a decade that saw wages grow faster than productivity, unit labor costs (and the real exchange rate based on those costs) appreciated sharply.
The ensuing loss of competitiveness manifested itself in large and growing current-account deficits and slowing growth.
The final nail in the coffin was the appreciation of the euro between 2002 and 2008.
So, even if Greece and other PIIGS had the political resolve to reduce massively their large fiscal deficits – and that is a big if, given the political resistance to spending cuts and tax increases – fiscal contraction may, at least in the short run, make the current recession worse as higher taxes and lower spending reduce aggregate demand.
If GDP falls, achieving a certain deficit and debt target (as a share of GDP) becomes impossible.
This, indeed, was the debt death trap that engulfed Argentina between 1998 and 2001.
Restoring sustained growth requires real currency depreciation.
There are only three ways that this can occur.
One is deflation that reduces prices and wages by 20-30%.
But deflation is associated with persistent recession (see Argentina again), and no country’s society and political system can accept years of recession and fiscal austerity to achieve real depreciation.
Default and an exit from the euro would occur well before that.
The second path is to follow the German model of accelerating structural reforms and corporate restructuring to increase productivity growth while keeping wage growth moderate.
But it took a decade for Germany to reduce its unit labor costs that way; if Greece or Spain were to start today, the short run costs of resource reallocation would be large, while the benefits in terms of higher growth would take too many years to achieve.
Finally, the euro could fall sharply in value.
But the main beneficiary would be Germany.
And, in order for the euro to fall far enough, the risk of default in Greece would need to be so large, and the contagion to sovereign spreads of PIIGS so severe that the widening of those spreads would cause a double-dip eurozone recession before currency depreciation could yield benefits.
Short of a miracle, Greece looks close to insolvency.
At the onset of its crisis, Argentina’s budget deficit, public debt, and current-account deficit (as a share of GDP) were about 3%, 50% and 2%, respectively.
Those ratios for Greece are far worse: 12.9%, 120% and 10%.
So it will take a Herculean effort, luck, and support from the European Union and the IMF to reduce the probability of an eventual default and exit from the eurozone.
Greece is currently too interconnected to be allowed to collapse: since it has about $400 billion of public debt – three-quarters of which is held abroad, mostly by European financial institutions – a disorderly default would lead to massive losses and risk a systemic crisis.
Moreover, the contagion to the sovereign spreads of the other PIIGS would be massive, tipping over several of these economies.
So, despite revulsion on the part of Germany and the European Central Bank at the idea of a “bailout,” Greece needs large official financial support this year at rates that are not unsustainable to prevent its current illiquidity from devolving immediately into insolvency.
But official support will only kick the can down the road until next year.
The magic trifecta of sustainable debt and deficit ratios, a real depreciation, and restoration of growth looks unlikely to be achievable even with official financial support.
All successful rescues of countries in financial distress – Mexico, Korea, Thailand, Brazil, Turkey – require two conditions: the country’s credible willingness to impose the fiscal austerity and structural reforms needed to restore sustainability and growth; and massive amounts of front-loaded official support to avoid a self-fulfilling rollover crisis of maturing public and/or private short-term debts.
Reform without money on the table does not work, as nervous and trigger-happy investors would rather pull their money out if the country lacks the foreign-currency reserves needed to prevent the equivalent of a bank run on its short-term liabilities.
So, after a totally flawed plan that would have given money to Greece too late – only when the country risked a refinancing crisis – and at market rates that would make its debt unsustainable, the EU regained its senses and designed a new scheme that is closer to typical IMF conditionality: tranched support with some early front-loaded support and a semi-concessional interest rate.
Only time will tell if this plan will work: i.e. whether Greece will turn out to be illiquid but solvent, conditional on credible fiscal austerity and structural reforms and with the help of large amounts of financial support.
But, as with Argentina, Russia, and Ecuador, Greece may also be insolvent if adjustment fails to restore debt sustainability and growth.
For now, the official community has decided to stick with Plan A; if that fails, Plan B is default to reduce unsustainable debts and a Greek exit from the eurozone to allow depreciation and restoration of competitiveness and growth.
The Debt Delusion
WASHINGTON, DC &#45;&#45; A second big American interest-rate cut in a fortnight, alongside an economic stimulus plan that united Republicans and Democrats, demonstrates that US policymakers are keen to head off a recession that looks like the consequence of rising mortgage defaults and falling home prices.
But there is a deeper problem that has been overlooked: the US economy relies upon asset price inflation and rising indebtedness to fuel growth.
Therein lies a profound contradiction.
On one hand, policy must fuel asset bubbles to keep the economy growing.
On the other hand, such bubbles inevitably create financial crises when they eventually implode.
This is a contradiction with global implications.
Many countries have relied for growth on US consumer spending and investments in outsourcing to supply those consumers.
If America’s bubble economy is now tapped out, global growth will slow sharply.
It is not clear that other countries have the will or capacity to develop alternative engines of growth.
America’s economic contradictions are part of a new business cycle that has emerged since 1980.
The business cycles of Presidents Ronald Reagan, George H.W. Bush, Bill Clinton, and George W. Bush share strong similarities and are different from pre-1980 cycles.
The similarities are large trade deficits, manufacturing job loss, asset price inflation, rising debt-to-income ratios, and detachment of wages from productivity growth.
The new cycle rests on financial booms and cheap imports.
Financial booms provide collateral that supports debt-financed spending.
Borrowing is also supported by an easing of credit standards and new financial products that increase leverage and widen the range of assets that can be borrowed against.
Cheap imports ameliorate the effects of wage stagnation.
This structure contrasts with the pre-1980 business cycle, which rested on wage growth tied to productivity growth and full employment.
Wage growth, rather than borrowing and financial booms, fuelled demand growth.
That encouraged investment spending, which in turn drove productivity gains and output growth.
The differences between the new and old cycle are starkly revealed in attitudes toward the trade deficit.
Previously, trade deficits were viewed as a serious problem, being a leakage of demand that undermined employment and output.
Since 1980, trade deficits have been dismissed as the outcome of free-market choices.
Moreover, the Federal Reserve has viewed trade deficits as a helpful brake on inflation, while politicians now view them as a way to buy off consumers afflicted by wage stagnation.
The new business cycle also embeds a monetary policy that replaces concern with real wages with a focus on asset prices.
Whereas pre-1980 monetary policy tacitly aimed at putting a floor under labor markets to preserve employment and wages, it now tacitly puts a floor under asset prices.
This is not a matter of the Fed bailing out investors. Rather, the economy has become so vulnerable to declines in asset prices that the Fed is obliged to intervene to prevent them from inflicting broad damage.
All these features have been present in the current economic expansion.
Wages have stagnated despite strong productivity growth, while the trade deficit has set new records.
Manufacturing has lost 1.8 million jobs.
Prior to 1980, manufacturing employment increased during every expansion and always exceeded the previous peak level.
Between 1980 and 2000, manufacturing employment continued to grow in expansions, but each time it failed to recover the previous peak.
This time, manufacturing employment has actually fallen during the expansion, something unprecedented in American history.
The essential role of asset inflation has been especially visible as a result of the housing bubble, which also highlights the role of monetary policy.
Despite the massive tax cuts of 2001 and the increase in military and security spending, the US experienced a prolonged jobless recovery.
That compelled the Fed to keep interest rates at historic lows for an extended period, and rates were raised only gradually because of fears about the recovery’s fragility.
Low interest rates eventually jump-started the expansion through a house price bubble that supported a debt-financed consumer-spending binge and triggered a construction boom.
Meanwhile, prolonged low interest rates contributed to a “chase for yield” in the financial sector that resulted in disregard of credit risk.
In this way, the Fed contributed to creating the sub-prime crisis.
However, in the Fed’s defense, low interest rates were needed to maintain the expansion.
In effect, the new cycle locks the Fed into an unstable stance whereby it must prevent asset price declines to avert recession, yet must also promote asset bubbles to sustain expansions.
So, even if the Fed and US Treasury now manage to stave off recession, what will fuel future growth?
With debt burdens elevated and housing prices significantly above levels warranted by their historical relation to income, the business cycle of the last two decades appears exhausted.
It is not enough to deal only with the crisis of the day.
Policy must also chart a stable long-term course, which implies the need to reconsider the paradigm of the past 25 years.
That means ending trade deficits that drain spending and jobs, and restoring the link between wages and productivity.
That way, wage income, not debt and asset price inflation, can again provide the engine of demand growth.
Debt Without Drowning
LONDON – Since the 1970’s, economists have warned that a monetary union could not be sustained without a fiscal union.
But the eurozone’s leaders have not heeded their advice – and the consequences are becoming increasingly apparent.
Europe now faces a difficult choice: either fix this fundamental design flaw and move toward fiscal union, or abandon the common currency.
Choosing the latter option would have devastating consequences.
Indeed, while the desirability of establishing a monetary union may have been open to question in the 1990’s, dismantling the eurozone now would trigger profound economic, social, and political upheaval throughout Europe.
To avoid this outcome, Europe’s leaders must begin designing and implementing strategies aimed at bringing the eurozone closer to a fiscal union.
To be sure, a fiscal union such as that in the United States is a distant prospect that eurozone leaders should not expect to achieve any time soon – or even in their lifetimes.
But that does not mean that establishing a fiscal union is a chimera.
Small steps in the right direction now can make a significant difference.
A successful strategy would have to address one of the eurozone’s main design flaws: member governments issue debt in euros, a currency that they cannot control.
As a result, they cannot provide a guarantee to bondholders that the cash will be available to pay them at maturity.
The mistrust and fear that this elicits in the bond markets can lead to liquidity crises that, creating a self-fulfilling prophecy, drive countries closer to default.
They are then forced to implement austerity programs that lead to deep recessions and, ultimately, to banking crises.
While austerity measures are appropriate in countries that have overspent in the past, the austerity that panic-stricken financial markets force upon a country can trigger a major social and political backlash.
In fact, several southern European countries – such as Greece, Italy, Portugal, and Spain – are currently experiencing exactly that.
To overcome this fundamental design flaw, government debts must be pooled.
This would protect the weakest economies from destructive, panic-fueled movements in financial markets, which, in theory, can hit any member country – even those that are strongest today.
In developing a strategy for pooling government debt, Europe’s leaders must address the possibility of moral hazard (the temptation for weaker countries to relax their debt- and deficit-reduction efforts in response to the increased credibility conferred by stronger countries).
Indeed, given stronger economies’ unwillingness to be exploited in this way, the risk of moral hazard is the most significant obstacle to pooling debts in the eurozone.
But it is not the only obstacle.
A debt-pooling scheme must also address the fact that the strongest countries will inevitably face higher interest rates on their own debts when they become jointly liable for the debts of less credit-worthy governments.
To overcome these obstacles, a eurozone debt-mutualization scheme must satisfy three crucial requirements.
First, the share of government debt that can be pooled must be strictly limited, leaving each country responsible for a significant portion of its national debt, and therefore motivated to maintain sound public finances.
(Several initiatives have aimed to achieve this, notably Jakob von Weizsäcker and Jacques Delpla’s 2010 Blue Bond proposal.)
Second, an internal transfer mechanism between eurozone member states is needed in order to ensure that less credit-worthy countries compensate, at least partly, their more economically sound counterparts.
Finally, a supervisory authority must be established to monitor governments’ progress toward achieving sustainable debt levels – and to create clear consequences for those that break the eurozone’s budgetary rules.
The Padoa-Schioppa group recently proposed that rule-breaking governments should gradually lose control over their own national budgetary processes.
Opponents of debt mutualization, especially in northern Europe, often argue that, in the absence of political unification, it amounts to putting the cart before the horse.
But what other measures could be taken to bring the eurozone closer to a political union?
Military force – so often used in the past to unite diverse nations under a single political umbrella – is out of the question.
And simply waiting will have no effect.
The only practical approach is to take small, sequential steps, starting with debt pooling.
In fact, Alexander Hamilton adopted this approach more than 200 years ago, when he decided to mutualize the debts that individual US states had incurred during the Revolutionary War – a decisive move toward further political integration.
Rather than wait for political union to happen, Hamilton took action that eventually helped the US to become a full-fledged monetary, fiscal, and political union.
The eurozone is gripped by an existential crisis that is slowly, but inexorably, destroying the monetary union’s very foundations.
The only way to stem the erosion is to take determined action that convinces financial markets that the eurozone is here to stay.
A debt-pooling scheme that satisfies the requirements outlined here would signal that the eurozone member countries are serious about sticking together.
Without this gesture, further market turmoil is inevitable – and the eurozone’s collapse will become only a matter of time.
The Decent Work Imperative
NEW YORK – Over the past decade, the ranks of the unemployed have swollen to close to 190 million worldwide.
That number captures only a fraction of the problem, since 80% of the global workforce is in the informal sector, without any unemployment benefits or other social protection.
It is estimated that at least 43.5% of workers – 1.3 billion people – do not earn enough to lift themselves and their families above the $2-a-day poverty line.
Recent World Bank poverty recalculations are expected to raise the number even higher.
Evidently, the global economy’s growth in recent decades – including the last half-decade when many developing countries did quite well – has not created enough good jobs.
Nor have current economic and social policies compensated much for this shortfall.
Beyond the rising number of unemployed and underemployed, conditions for many of the employed have been deteriorating as well in most countries, especially for workers with little education and few skills.
Globally, casual labor, outsourcing, and job contracting and subcontracting are becoming the norm, weakening entitlements for workers and creating more job insecurity.
According to a recent report by the United Nations, The Employment Imperative: Report on the World Social Situation , national policies aimed at counteracting these trends and lowering unemployment have largely failed.
The report shows that in their desire to remain or become more competitive, governments and employers around the world have taken many steps to increase labor market flexibility.
In other words, entitlement to unemployment benefits is ceasing to be a social right.
While recognizing the challenges in designing policies to address such problems, there is an urgent need to move beyond rhetoric.
Collective efforts by the international community, national governments, and civil society, including the private sector, are required to meet the employment challenge in the twenty-first century.
At the international level, cooperation and coordination among countries are needed to counteract the pressures of the current “race to the bottom” in the global competition for investment and markets.
At the national level, reform of social protection systems in developed countries, and the expansion of such systems in developing countries, should seek to ensure greater economic security as well as labor flexibility.
Governments have been promoting individual savings accounts for pensions, health, and unemployment insurance; often, these are either mandatory or subsidized through tax incentives.
As individual savings accounts figure increasingly in social protection systems, governments need to provide adequate economic security for those who cannot benefit from such social protection schemes.
Decent work ­– promoted by the International Labor Organization since 1999 – means productive, rewarding, and secure jobs that provide safe working conditions, fair income, and social protection for the employed and their families.
Decent work also implies equality of opportunity and treatment as well as good prospects for both personal development and social inclusion.
This includes freedom for workers to express concerns, organize, and participate in decisions that affect their lives.
Ultimately, people will judge any change by what it means for their own lives.
Secure and decent employment is surely at the top of most personal agendas, as it should be with respect to national agendas.
Decent employment is the surest way for the poor to escape poverty, and must therefore be a priority of any serious effort to reduce poverty on a sustained basis.
Decent work for all is not a policy option, but an imperative.
The Decline and Fall of America’s Decline and Fall
CAMBRIDGE – The United States is going through difficult times.
Its post-2008 recovery has slowed, and some observers fear that Europe’s financial problems could tip the American and world economy into a second recession.
American politics, moreover, remains gridlocked over budgetary issues, and compromise will be even more difficult on the eve of the 2012 election, when Republicans hope that economic problems will help them unseat President Barack Obama.
In these circumstances, many are predicting America’s decline, especially relative to China.
And it’s not just pundits who think so. A recent Pew poll found that in 15 of 22 countries surveyed, most people believe that China either will replace or has replaced America as “the world’s leading superpower.”
In Britain, those putting China on top rose to 47%, from 34% in 2009. Similar trends are evident in Germany, Spain, and France.
Indeed, the poll found more pessimistic views of the US among our oldest and closest allies than in Latin America, Japan, Turkey, and Eastern Europe.
But even Americans are divided equally about whether China will replace the US as a global superpower.
Such sentiments reflect the slow growth and fiscal problems that followed the 2008 financial crisis, but they are not historically unprecedented.
Americans have a long history of incorrectly estimating their power.
In the 1950’s and 1960’s, after Sputnik, many thought that the Soviets might get the better of America; in the 1980’s, it was the Japanese.
Now it is the Chinese.
But, with America’s debt on a path to equaling its national income in a decade, and a fumbling political system that cannot seem to address the country’s fundamental challenges, are the “declinists” finally right?
Much will depend on the uncertainties – often underestimated – brought about by future political change in China.
Economic growth will bring China closer to the US in power resources, but that doesn't necessarily mean that China will surpass the US as the most powerful country.
China’s GDP will almost certainly surpass that of the US within a decade, owing to the size of its population and its impressive economic-growth rate.
But, measured by per capita income, China will not equal the US for decades, if then.
Moreover, even if China suffers no major domestic political setback, many current projections are based simply on GDP growth.
They ignore US military and soft-power advantages, as well as China’s geopolitical disadvantages.
As Japan, India, and others try to balance Chinese power, they welcome an American presence. It is as if Mexico and Canada sought a Chinese alliance to balance the US in North America.
As for absolute decline, the US has very real problems, but the American economy remains highly productive.
America remains first in total R&amp;D expenditure, first in university rankings, first in Nobel prizes, and first on indices of entrepreneurship.
According to the World Economic Forum, which released its annual report on economic competitiveness last month, the US is the fifth most competitive economy in the world (behind the small economies of Switzerland, Sweden, Finland, and Singapore). China ranks only 26th.
Moreover, the US remains at the forefront of such cutting-edge technologies as biotech and nanotechnology.
This is hardly a picture of absolute economic decline.
Some observers worry that American society will become sclerotic, like Britain at the peak of its power a century ago.
But American culture is far more entrepreneurial and decentralized than was that of Britain, where industrialists’ sons sought aristocratic titles and honors in London.
And despite recurrent bouts of concern throughout its history, America reaps huge benefits from immigration.
In 2005, foreign-born immigrants had participated in 25% of technology start-ups in the previous decade.
As Singapore’s Lee Kuan Yew once told me, China can draw on a talent pool of 1.3 billion people, but the US can draw on the world’s seven billion, and can recombine them in a diverse culture that enhances creativity in a way that ethnic Han nationalism cannot.
Many commentators worry about America’s inefficient political system.
True, America’s founding fathers created a system of checks and balances designed to preserve liberty at the price of efficiency.
Moreover, the US is now experiencing a period of intense partisan polarization.
But nasty politics is nothing new to the US: its founding era was hardly an idyll of dispassionate deliberation.
American government and politics have always experienced such episodes, and, though overshadowed by current melodramas, they were sometimes worse than today’s.
The US faces serious problems: public debt, weak secondary education, and political gridlock, to name just a few.
But one should remember that these problems are&#160;only part of the picture – and, in principle, they can be solved over the long term.
It is important to distinguish such problems from those that cannot, in principle, be solved.
Of course, whether America can implement the available solutions is uncertain; several commissions have proposed feasible plans to change America’s debt trajectory by raising taxes and cutting expenditures, but feasibility is no guarantee that they will be adopted.
Still, Lee Kuan Yew is probably right to say that China “will give the US a run for its money,” but not surpass it in overall power in the first half of this century.
If so, the gloomy predictions of absolute American decline will turn out to be as misleading as similar predictions in decades past.
And, in relative terms, while the “rise of the rest” means that America will be less dominant than it once was, this does not mean that China will necessarily replace the US as the world’s leading power.
The Decline of Ahmedinejad
Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmedinejad may be gaining support across the Muslim world for his fervent criticism of the United States, but inside Iran, he is losing strength.
His political rivals are gaining new positions of power, and the population is increasingly unhappy with the economy’s continuing decline.
Since its inception, the Islamic Republic has had a weak presidency; ultimate authority rests with the Supreme Leader, first Ayatollah Khomeini and now Ayatollah Khamenei.
The Islamic Republic’s first president, Abolhassan Bani Sadr, was dismissed from office a year after his election.
Ever since, the regime has been intolerant of a strong president, and has repeatedly demonstrated that the office is subservient to the Supreme Leader.
Ahmedinejad’s election two years ago came with great expectations, with the new president pledging to “bring oil prices to the dining table of all households in Iran,” and to crack down on corruption.
Yet many of his first appointments were rewards to his supporters and cronies in the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps and the Basij militia, armed groups that mobilized voters on his behalf during the campaign.
For example, an the Oil Ministry gave a $1.3 billion no-bid contract to an oil company associated with the Revolutionary Guard, and Ahmedinejad appointed his brother-in-law as cabinet secretary.
Steps like these may have been overlooked in better economic times.
But the Iranian budget is now running a 15%-of-GDP deficit, and foreign reserves are shrinking, despite the oil boom.
Instead of distributing oil revenues through a program of low-cost loans, as promised, the government has been forced to ration gasoline, as economic promise has given way to crisis.
Tensions have also been on the rise since Ahmedinejad fulfilled his campaign promise to enforce Islamic strictures on social life.
For two years, police have waged an intense campaign against women and young people.
Last summer, more than 150,000 women were arrested in Tehran for wearing “bad veils,” and barber shops have been given specific instructions on acceptable hairstyles for young men.
Demonstrations by bus drivers, school teachers, women’s rights activists, and students have been brutally suppressed, with dozens of arrests.
Photos and video clips of police beating civilians in Tehran and other cities have been disseminated on the Internet.
Among Iran analysts, it is thought that these moves were intended to revitalize the military, particularly given the possibility of conflict with the US.
But experts also note that the former commanders were close to Ahmedinejad and had made a great effort over the last two years to help him implement his agenda.
While Ahmedinejad continues his verbal attacks on the US, he does not control the policy-making apparatus that will decide about Iran’s nuclear program and its relations with the international community.
The threat of sanctions remains potent, and the Iranian business community – not to mention the public – has felt the sting of isolation.
Considering the tangled involvement of Iran’s leaders in the economy, the effect of sanctions should not be underestimated.
The economy remains the one area of Iranian life where Ahmedinejad retains considerable power.
But here, his record is weak, and his pronouncements only exacerbate the problem by increasing Iran’s isolation from the global economy.
So, as disputes with the West come to a head, it is important to recognize the power shifts underway inside Iran’s opaque political system.
Ahmedinejad may be making increasingly challenging statements, but he does not have the authority to act on them.
Indeed, only a military confrontation with the US can bring him back to the center of decision-making.
American policymakers should bear that in mind.
The Paranoid Style in Economics
NEW DELHI – Why do high-profile economic tussles turn so quickly to ad hominem attacks?
Perhaps the most well-known recent example has been the Nobel laureate Paul Krugman’s campaign against the economists Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff, in which he moved quickly from criticism of an error in one of their papers to charges about their commitment to academic transparency.
For those who know these two superb international macroeconomists, as I do, it is evident that these allegations should promptly be dismissed.
But there is the larger question of why the paranoid style has become so prominent.
Part of the answer is that economics is an inexact science, with exceptions to almost every pattern of behavior that economists take for granted.
For example, economists predict that higher prices for a good will reduce demand for it.
But students of economics will no doubt remember an early encounter with “Giffen goods,” which violate the usual pattern.
When tortillas become more expensive, a poor Mexican worker may eat more of them, because she now has to cut back on more expensive food like meat.
Such “violations” occur elsewhere as well.
Customers often value a good more when its price goes up.
One reason may be its signaling value.
An expensive handcrafted mechanical watch may tell time no more accurately than a cheap quartz model; but, because few people can afford one, buying it signals that the owner is rich.
Similarly, investors flock to stocks that have appreciated, because they have “momentum.”
The point is that economic behavior is complex and can vary among individuals, over time, between goods, and across cultures.
Physicists do not need to know the behavior of every molecule to predict how a gas will behave under pressure.
Economists cannot be so sanguine.
Under some conditions, individual behavioral aberrations cancel one another out, making crowds more predictable than individuals.
But, under other conditions, individuals influence one another in such a way that the crowd becomes a herd, led by a few.
The difficulties for economic policymakers do not stop there.
Economic institutions can have different effects, depending on their quality.
In the run-up to the 2008 financial crisis, macroeconomists tended to assume away the financial sector in their models of advanced economies.
With no significant financial crisis since the Great Depression, it was convenient to take for granted that the financial plumbing worked in the background.
Models, thus simplified, suggested policies that seemed to work –&#160;that is, until the plumbing backed up.
And the plumbing malfunctioned because herd behavior – shaped by policies in ways that we are only now coming to understand – overwhelmed it.
So, why not let evidence, rather than theory, guide policy?
Unfortunately, it is hard to get clear-cut evidence of causality.
If high national debt is associated with slow economic growth, is it because excessive debt impedes growth, or because slow growth causes countries to accumulate more debt?
Many an econometrician’s career has been built on finding a clever way to establish the direction of causality.
Unfortunately, many of these methods cannot be applied to the most important questions facing economic policymakers.
So the evidence does not really tell us whether a heavily indebted country should pay down its debt or borrow and invest more.
Moreover, what seem like obvious, commonsense policy solutions all too often have unintended consequences, because a policy’s targets are not passive objects, as in physics, but active agents who react in unpredictable ways.
For example, price controls, rather than lowering prices, often cause scarcity and the emergence of a black market in which controlled commodities cost significantly more.
All of this implies that economic policymakers require an enormous dose of humility, openness to various alternatives (including the possibility that they might be wrong), and a willingness to experiment.
This does not mean that our economic knowledge cannot guide us, only that what works in theory – or worked in the past or elsewhere – should be prescribed with an appropriate degree of self-doubt.
But, for economists who actively engage the public, it is hard to influence hearts and minds by qualifying one’s analysis and hedging one’s prescriptions.
Better to assert one’s knowledge unequivocally, especially if past academic honors certify one’s claims of expertise.
This is not an entirely bad approach if it results in sharper public debate.
The dark side of such certitude, however, is the way it influences how these economists engage contrary opinions.