NEW DELHI – The problems and dilemmas confronting Pakistan’s leadership – including a deepening vortex of mutual suspicions, sectarian killings, and brazen terrorism – are almost too numerous to count.
And that leadership – whether civilian, military, and also the now politically active judiciary – has proven congenitally ineffective, leaving the country with a broken economy and a paralyzed political system.
Central to the world’s concerns about the region is the complex reality of the two Taliban movements – one in Afghanistan, over which Pakistan’s powerful Directorate for Inter-Services Intelligence has a great deal of control, and one in Pakistan itself, which is waging an increasingly vicious guerrilla war against the Pakistani government.
With the United States and NATO due to withdraw all troops from Afghanistan by the end of 2014, there is a real possibility that the Taliban will not only regain power there, but will also turn Pakistan into a truly failed state.
Encouragingly, after a gap of seven months when no military supplies could reach Afghanistan via the Khyber Pass – a cutoff that followed the death of Pakistani soldiers at the hands of NATO troops firing across the border – NATO trucks in early July were finally allowed to cross again.
Somewhat guardedly, US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton announced: “(Pakistani) Foreign Minister (Hina Rabbani) Khar and I acknowledged the mistakes that resulted in the loss of Pakistani military lives.
We are sorry for the losses suffered by the Pakistani military.”
Her affirmation of commitment to preventing such an event in the future appears to have sufficed to re-open the border to NATO’s resupply through Pakistan.
This self-defeating crisis is now over, but can both sides really prevent further deterioration in their complex, mutually dependent relationship?
This question matters principally because Pakistan’s quest for national identity and territorial security is rooted in existential fear of its neighbors.
Unfortunately, as Michael Krepon of the Stimson Center, an American foreign-policy think tank, observes, official Pakistani tactics sustain the country’s “isolation and decline.”
Moreover, America’s tactics, Krepon argues, heighten “its estrangement with Pakistan.
As long as current policies remain fixed, new points of contention seem inevitable between Pakistan, its neighbors, and the United States.”
The big question across South Asia is whether or not the withdrawal of US/NATO troops will attenuate Pakistan’s dilemmas or deepen them.
Much will depend on how Pakistan addresses its internal turbulence, as well as how the situation in Afghanistan evolves.
Many Pakistanis, including Sartaz Aziz, a former foreign minister who sees a policy vacuum, are not sanguine.
Here, successive US governments have compounded South Asia’s problems by pursuing only their own national interests, at an incalculable cost to the natural, organic growth of the region’s countries.
Without Russia, China, India, Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Iran acting in concert, no lasting solutions can be found; they certainly cannot be imposed unilaterally by the US and NATO.
Thus, a dilemma arises: the presence of US/NATO forces in Afghanistan is not in harmony with the natural urges and balance of the region.
After all, Afghanistan can remain only where it is, with or without US troops, which is why its future will remain an issue of great concern to Pakistan (and to India).
How are these countries to harmonize their own national interests and priorities with those of the Western powers?
According to Kamran Shafi, a retired Pakistani army officer, Pakistan “has lost the trust of most, if not all of our friends.” Indeed, even Pakistan’s “brotherly” Saudi Arabia has extradited to India the man blamed by the Indians as one of the masterminds of the horrific terror attacks on Mumbai in November 2008.
In promoting and pursuing terrorism as an instrument of state policy, Pakistan seems intent on never regaining that trust, without which peace, unseen in South Asia since the partition of British India in 1947, is impossible.
South Asia now seems condemned to something akin to a 100-year war.
But, unlike Europe’s Hundred Years’ War, this struggle is shadowed by the potential for mutually assured destruction.
Given the potent Pakistani and Indian nuclear arsenals, the war could be very short indeed.
The Disintegration of Europe
LONDON – If a clear signal was needed that the European Union is falling apart at an alarming rate, Hungary’s construction of razor-wire fences along the border with its fellow EU member Croatia is it.
The crisis in the eurozone has, of course, fragmented financial flows, caused economies to diverge, eroded political support for EU institutions, and set Europeans against one another.
Now, as governments erect barriers and reinstate border controls, the refugee crisis is disrupting flows of people and gumming up trade.
And, as the EU unravels, the risk of Britain voting to leave is rising.
It is often argued that the EU progresses through crises, because they focus minds on the overwhelming need for further integration.
But such breakthroughs require at least four ingredients: a correct shared understanding of the problem, agreement on an effective way forward, willingness to pool more sovereignty, and political leaders able to drive change forward.
All four are now lacking.
EU leaders are weak, divided, and seemingly incapable of setting out a credible vision of the future benefits that European integration could provide, without which they cannot rally popular support and convince recalcitrant governments to bear their fair share of current costs.
In the absence of an effective, common response, Europe’s crises fester, feed on each other, and foment unilateralism.
The eurozone and refugee crises have common features that make them tricky to resolve.
Both involve disputes about sharing costs, complicated by a clash of values, at the center of which lies a newly dominant Germany.
The EU is hopeless at burden sharing.
Rather than agree on a fair division of costs, whether of the financial crisis or of welcoming refugees, governments try to minimize their obligations and shift them onto others – thereby increasing the collective costs.
A banking crisis that could have been resolved through a fair and decisive restructuring of unsustainable debts has ballooned into a much greater economic and political crisis that pits creditors against debtors, both within and among countries.
Likewise, EU rules stipulating that refugees should be granted asylum in the first member country they reach have proved both unworkable and unfair; because asylum-seekers mostly arrive in southern Europe and want to head north, Greece and Italy ignore the rules and facilitate their passage.
Transit countries such as Hungary try to divert refugees elsewhere.
Resettling the almost 750,000 people who have sought asylum in the EU this year – still only 0.14% of the EU population – has thus become an existential crisis.
Part of the problem is blinkered decision-making.
EU leaders focus narrowly on limiting short-term financial and political costs, rather than thinking strategically about broader longer-term consequences.
Restructuring Greek debt in 2010 would have implied a financial hit for French and German banks (and the governments that stood behind them), but a much smaller loss than that implied by the mushrooming costs of an enduring crisis.
Likewise, whereas welcoming refugees requires an initial investment of public funds, it can pay dividends as soon as the newcomers start working.
A graying continent needs dynamic young workers to do jobs that locals spurn (or for which they lack the skills), pay for and care for the old, start businesses, and pursue spark new ideas that boost economic growth.
The clash of values also impedes compromise.
Germans insist that debtors have a moral obligation to pay what they owe and atone for their sinful profligacy.
A Slovak prime minister who rejects refugees on the grounds that “Slovakia is built for Slovaks, not for minorities” is hard to buy off.
Even though the EU’s plan to resettle refugees would remove unwanted newcomers from Hungary, Viktor Orbán, the country’s authoritarian and nationalist leader, objects to it in principle, accusing Germany of “moral imperialism” in trying to foist its generous attitude toward refugees on its neighbors.
Until recently, German policymakers sought to atone for the country’s Nazi past by seeking a more European Germany and bankrolling the EU, thus helping to smooth over many disputes.
But, with Germany’s position as creditor-in-chief having thrust it into the driver’s seat, Chancellor Angela Merkel’s administration now seeks to create a more Germanic Europe.
Germany refuses to accept that its beggar-thy-neighbor economic policies – reflected in its massive current-account surpluses – are both a cause of the eurozone crisis and a major impediment to resolving it.
Instead, it bullies others to get its way, wrongly identifying its narrow interests as a creditor with those of the system as a whole.
Merkel has played a much more positive role in the refugee crisis.
Germany unilaterally suspended application of the EU’s asylum rules and pledged to accept all arriving Syrian refugees.
But Merkel’s failure to offer those refugees safe passage has exacerbated the chaos.
Subsequently reimposing border controls within the supposedly border-free Schengen Area set a terrible precedent, prompting Germany’s neighbors to do likewise.
Meanwhile, with the EU increasingly viewed as a source of economic crisis, political turmoil, and unwanted migrants, the risk that Britons will vote to leave in a referendum due before the end of 2017 is rising.
Britain is already semi-detached – outside of Schengen and with opt-outs from the euro and many home-affairs matters (including asylum policy).
With the government now seeking to negotiate even looser membership terms, Britain will end up more estranged from the EU even if it remains a member.
Polls are finely balanced and referendums unpredictable.
At a time of anti-establishment rage and political upheaval, anti-EU campaigners can peddle three fantasies of a post-EU future: a free-market, foreigner-free, or socialist Utopia.
The pro-EU camp, by contrast, has to sell the reality of the EU as it is, warts and all.
Until recently, EU integration seemed inevitable.
It might stall, but it would never go into reverse.
Countries joined; none left.
But with the EU already crumbling, Brexit could turn that dynamic on its head.
That is all the more reason to fix the EU before it is too late.
Strategies for Responsible Gene Editing
CAMBRIDGE – The discovery of a powerful new tool capable of addressing health and environmental problems as diverse as malaria, Lyme disease, and invasive species should be a cause for celebration.
But, because the tool, called CRISPR, can alter entire populations of wild organisms (and thus shared ecosystems), ensuring that these interventions are developed responsibly poses an unprecedented challenge for science and society.
Humans have been altering animals and plants through selective breeding for millennia; but, because these changes typically reduce the capacity for survival and reproduction in the wild, they do not spread to wild populations.
Alterations accomplished using CRISPR, which enables scientists to edit a cell’s DNA with unprecedented precision, are different in one crucial respect: The process can result in “gene drive,” a naturally occurring feature of some genes that enables them to spread through a population over generations, even if they do not help survival (and thus reproduction).
Simply put, we can now contemplate altering wild populations in very specific and consequential ways.
Those changes can be highly positive.
By altering certain features of mosquitos, we could reduce or even eradicate ancient scourges such as malaria and dengue that afflict hundreds of millions of people each year.
(Malaria alone kills a child every 90 seconds, on average.)
By permanently immunizing the relevant animal populations, we could prevent new cases of Lyme and other diseases that originate in wild organisms, or we could block newly emergent pathogens such as the Zika virus, which has been linked to an epidemic of stunted brain development in newborns in Latin America.
As for the environment, human activities have already impacted every ecosystem on Earth, with far-reaching consequences – for us and many other species – many of which are yet to unfold.
Gene drive elements could potentially reverse much of this damage.
For example, limiting invasive species – such as cane toads in Australia, mosquitoes in Hawaii, or rats and mice almost everywhere – could help to restore damaged biomes.
And eliminating pests’ attraction to our crops, without diminishing their capacity to fulfill their other ecological roles, would remove the need for toxic pesticides.
As we attempt to realize these tremendous potential benefits, however, we must bear in mind that the effects of gene drive interventions will be shared by entire communities.
Given the vast complexity of ecosystems, careful research will be needed to assess the consequences of each intervention before proceeding.
CRISPR gene drives also highlight a problem that goes beyond ecology: Existing systems for developing and evaluating new technologies are woefully inadequate for powerful new tools with broad impacts.
It should be self-evident that technologies like gene drives, which don’t require widespread adoption to have a widespread effect, should never be released without informed community consent.
Yet history shows the opposite pattern, with decision-making seldom factoring in environmental consequences or citizens’ opinions.
Nowadays, there are few opportunities for public input until after products are developed, when it is typically too late to make changes.
By ignoring potentially helpful contributions from an increasingly knowledgeable public, closed-door technological development has precluded balanced assessments and created acrimony – a dangerously irresponsible and wasteful outcome for both science and society.
CRISPR gene drives offer an opportunity to chart a new course.
For starters, public notification and broadly inclusive discussions should always precede and inform development of gene drive interventions in the lab.
A clear description of the potential impact of an experiment – as my colleagues and I have provided for the technology as a whole – must be followed by transparency throughout the development process.
This community-guided approach to research provides opportunities to identify and address potential problems and concerns during development.
If a perceived problem cannot be adequately addressed, researchers should be prepared to terminate the project.
Transparency and collective scrutiny would also help to ensure that scientists fulfill their fundamental responsibility to protect against laboratory accidents.
Experiments involving gene drive organisms are almost unique in terms of the potential harm that a mishap could cause beyond the lab.
Though DNA-level changes spread by one gene drive can be overwritten by another gene drive – an important safeguard against unwanted side effects and misuse – the ecological impacts would not be so easy to reverse.
To be sure, most gene drive experiments will pose little, if any, environmental risk.
Nonetheless, an accidental release would prove devastating to public confidence in researchers' ability to develop this powerful technology with wisdom and humility.
That is why my colleagues and I have detailed, demonstrated, and publicized several easily implementable confinement strategies.
Another feature of a responsible approach would be a commitment by scientists to evaluate each proposed gene drive intervention – say, immunizing mice so that they cannot transmit Lyme disease to ticks – individually, rather than making a blanket decision on the technology as a whole.
After all, the benefits and risks of each intervention would be entirely different.
A final safeguard against the irresponsible development of gene drive technology is to ensure that early interventions are developed exclusively by governments and nonprofit organizations.
Given the potential of financial incentives to skew the design and results of safety tests, keeping the profit motive out of the development and decision-making processes will encourage balanced assessments.
The bottom line is that existing models for technological development are inadequate for technologies with broadly shared effects.
Only with early discussion, transparent research, careful safeguards, and community guidance can we build a responsive model of scientific development well suited to ecological technologies.
Given the life-saving (and environment-saving) potential of CRISPR gene drive interventions, let us determine how to develop them – and when to decline to do so – together.
Cristina Kirchner’s Choice
BUENOS AIRES – Bolstered by Argentina’s economic stability and widespread sympathy for her widowhood, President Cristina Kirchner’s easy re-election has confirmed that she can, indeed, govern a complex, contentious, and at times self-destructive society without her husband, Néstor.
His presidency paved the way for hers, but she is a leader in her own right.
The question now is what kind of leader she will want to be in today’s more difficult domestic and international context.
The Kirchners lifted Argentina out of the deep crisis of 2001, presiding over GDP growth rates similar to those of China.
They partly restored Argentina’s social and political fabric, which had been weakened by the brutal adjustments made during that crisis, which triggered a president’s fall from power, default on the country’s debts, and a dramatic decline in living standards that left more than half of the population below the poverty line.
Their management of the economy, which included a deluge of subsidies, reduced unemployment and poverty.
The opposition underestimates the Kirchners’ achievements, arguing that the international context, particularly high commodity prices – and thus strong export revenues – bailed them out.
While that is true, high export prices alone were no guarantee for success.
But that tailwind may have been squandered, because the Kirchners have yet to make the structural changes – in industry, in the country’s energy policy, in education, and elsewhere – needed to free Argentina from extreme dependence on commodity prices.
As a result, if the price of soy continues to fall, subsidies – a source of corruption and patronage – will be an increasingly heavy burden for public spending.
According to unofficial figures, subsidies already represent 5% of GDP, and only painful adjustments can reduce them.
But what was an emergency remedy has become a long-term policy, because there is no economic activity to take its place.
Few in Argentina, which is enjoying a consumer boom, are worried about inflation.
But prices are already rising at a 20% annual pace, which, if unchecked, will lead to conflict with the powerful Peronist unions.
Moreover, given the country’s history of high inflation ravaging the economy, the problem needs to be addressed soon, before it gets out of hand.
Relations with Brazil expose other difficulties.
Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff’s government, which began its term this year with an understanding that economic growth will slow sharply, devalued the real in order to shore up the country’s competitiveness.
That was bad news for Argentina, because Brazil, its main trading partner, will now buy less and sell more, undermining Argentina’s external position.
In this difficult international context, Cristina Kirchner will need to rebuild relations with the United States and Europe, which have been impaired since the default in 2001.
Subsequent actions by her husband’s administration and her own have blocked improvement.
Néstor ridiculed President George W. Bush in front of the world: host to a summit of heads of state, he organized a parallel anti-summit with supporters of Fidel Castro and Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez.
More recently, Cristina’s foreign minister presided over the requisitioning of a US military plane on Argentinean soil.
These spectacles were intended for national consumption, but the Americans deeply resented them.
As for Europe, the Kirchner’s have not yet paid off Argentina’s debt – pending since the default – to the Paris Club of sovereign creditors.
All of this hinders foreign investment and access to international credit.
In the meantime, the US is opposed to concessionary loans for Argentina from the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank.
In this context, Argentina’s rich and powerful vote with their wallets and send their dollars overseas.
This year, the outflow is nearly $20 billion – almost a record.
Argentina is a country that lives in an almost continual state of emergency.
Its history has seen many coups, tens of thousands of people missing, a war with Great Britain, bouts of hyperinflation, a brutal economic crisis, default on foreign debt, and its most vulnerable citizens going hungry.
But there is also a theatrical intensity about the Argentine character: we are dramatic like the tango and somber like the novels of Ernesto Sábato.
That exceptional spirit benefited her husband, but the country’s institutions paid a high price.
Néstor convinced Parliament to allow him to modify the budget.
Later, he took the liberty of manipulating official statistics in order to hide inflation.
And, while building a system that would do whatever the government wanted, he began a struggle against critical journalism that continues under his wife.
With hard times approaching, will Cristina try to be a twenty-first-century Evita and create an epic by exploiting Argentines’ flamboyant tendencies, armed with an exceptional power or will she adopt Rouseff’s sensible attitude and combat inefficiency and corruption while strengthening governmental institutions?
If she chooses Rouseff’s approach, she will first have to resist the temptation of perpetual re-election.
She and her husband had hit upon a novel scheme: alternating power between them every four years.
Now a widow, she is exposed to the lame-duck syndrome, since she can’t be re-elected again.
The same Peronist caudillos that have obeyed her until now could start a war of succession if she does not find a way to continue in office.
If she wants to retain power four years from now, she might do just that.
After all, she now holds absolute control over a docile parliament.
In Argentina, as in many Latin American countries, presidents have so much power that other governmental institutions’ authority fades, eradicating the boundaries between the executive and the state.
If the only limits on Cristina are her own, Argentina will not weather the coming storm well.
Crony Central Banking in Hong Kong
HONG KONG – Joseph Yam, the head of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA) and a career civil servant, is retiring.
Ordinarily, that should not be a newsworthy event, yet it is, and for good reasons.
Donald Tsang, Chief Executive of Hong Kong’s government, has the opportunity to restore integrity and proper governance in one of the most important statutory bodies in the territory by choosing a person solely on the basis of unimpeachable honesty and competence.
Yam remains a hero to many in Hong Kong, including journalists unschooled in international finance.
To them, he is the guardian of the Hong Kong dollar, which has been fixed at 7.8 to the US dollar for 26 years.
During the 1998 financial crisis, devaluation would have hurt those who owned local real estate but had little earnings or assets in US dollars.
Not surprisingly, Hong Kong’s oligopoly of property tycoons opposed changing the peg despite the currency’s gross overvalue at the time.
The 7.8 exchange rate was maintained at the cost – borne by all citizens – of six years of economic stagnation.
The currency was in theory governed by a rules-based Currency Board, which the British invented for their smaller colonies.
It tied the local currency to the British Pound, giving local authorities no discretion in monetary policy.
While imperial in origin, the rationale behind the Currency Board was sound.
Colonies were short on expertise.
Freedom in money creation or in interest-rate policy could mean economic disaster – as, indeed, it did in many ex-colonies following independence.
Yam was always frustrated by the lack of policy freedom under the Currency Board.
Before the crisis struck in 1998 he put in place measures giving him room to manipulate liquidity and interest rates.
His deviation from the system also created loopholes that he did not know about or thought irrelevant.
This was precisely what the British empire-builders had wanted to prevent.
When, during the 1997-98 Asian financial crisis, global investment professionals turned their attention from Thailand and Korea to Hong Kong, they quickly spotted structural weaknesses in the way the currency was managed.
Local experts had previously warned Yam about this, but he dismissed their argument in a way that one economist who was present at a meeting with him described as “demeaning and contemptuous”.   Moreover, they left in shock in realizing Yam, and the financial secretary, Donald Tsang, nominally his boss but without real power, didn’t really understand the experts’ economic reasoning.
Hong Kong ’s government, led by the HKMA, launched an unprecedented intervention, buying up local shares to “defeat” the speculators, but failed to stop the stampede by global investors, including conservative pension and mutual funds.
Finally, with the government about to exhaust its entire foreign reserves, Yam realized that he had to change course.
He wisely accepted his critics’ suggestions, fixing the problems that he had denied existed.
He was awarded the highest public-service medal by the then Hong Kong Chief Executive Tung Chi-wah, who was later ousted by Beijing for incompetence.
At this writing, Yam is widely criticized in Hong Kong for failing to protect small investors against the dishonest sales tactics of a number of banks in their selling of toxic Lehman Brothers derivatives disguised as bonds.
He denies any responsibility, even though the HKMA oversees all financial institutions.
Yam is the highest-paid civil servant in the world, earning US$1.5 million last year.
His salary is seven times that of the chairman of the US Federal Reserve and nearly 3 times higher than that of his own superior, the Hong Kong Chief Executive.
He claims that he should be rewarded as a fund manager supervising a multibillion-dollar fund in the private sector.
But, whereas private-sector professionals are fired or have their salaries reduced for poor performance, Yam wanted private-sector pay with none of the downside risk.
The HKMA’s Compensation Committee had the sole responsibility for setting Yam’s salary.
But, during his 16-year tenure, Yam put his own appointees on that committee, choosing them from the financial sector that he regulates.
The Committee routinely rubber-stamped his salary demands.
Yam’s retirement presents an opportunity for Hong Kong’s government to redress a major issue of governance.
It should replace the compensation structure by the same civil-service scale applied to the government of which the HKMA is an integral part.
Hong Kong ’s civil servants are already the best paid in the world.
Anyone seeking to compare a public-service job with the private sector in negotiating an employment contract should simply seek work in the private sector rather than for the public good.
Anything else merely opens the door for corruption.
There is much speculation that Hong Kong Chief Executive Donald Tsang is about to appoint a generalist civil servant better known for his personal loyalty than for his financial expertise.
Nor is there any sign that the entire HKMA pay scale should be scrapped.
Either outcome would mean that the Chief Executive has missed an opportunity to send the right signal that Hong Kong stands for good public governance rather than cronyism.
Cross-Border Banking in the Balance
LONDON – The gravity of the eurozone crisis has finally sunk in.
The stakes could not be higher.
Governments and international financial institutions have scrambled to put together a solution within exceedingly tight political and economic constraints.
Many questions have yet to be answered about the design; implementation will be at least as challenging.
Eurozone leaders must now aim to preserve not only the single currency, but also the gains from financial integration in Europe.
No region of the world has benefited more from cross-border banking, yet these achievements are now at risk – and with them the European bank groups themselves.
The threat to cross-border banks comes not only from their deteriorating balance sheets in the face of lower sovereign-debt quality and weaker growth prospects, but also from the policy response itself.
The fact that Europe’s banks need massive amounts of new capital is by now generally accepted.
Yet, despite valiant attempts by the new European Banking Authority to mandate and coordinate the measures that are needed, a European solution must take account of the network of foreign subsidiaries across Europe.
Mobilizing support for European banks will be hard; extending it to subsidiaries will be even harder.
But, unlike the ill-advised exposure to sovereign debt across Europe, cross-border banking through foreign subsidiaries has been beneficial for investors, and for home and host countries alike – nowhere more so than in emerging Central and Eastern Europe, still the most important export market for the eurozone.
For core eurozone banks, this has been a region of extraordinary returns, and it is now integral to their operations.
In emerging Europe, foreign subsidiaries have helped to build financial systems that are less prone to instability, and have helped economies to converge more rapidly with average European income levels.
When the global crisis erupted in 2008, there was no regulatory framework to protect the cross-border networks, and large vulnerabilities, in the form of excessive leverage and foreign exchange, were exposed.
Much has been achieved since then: balance sheets have been strengthened and funding models adjusted.
Along with institutional reforms at the European level –&nbsp;particularly the creation of the European Systemic Risk Board and the European Banking Authority – regulation and supervision have been reinforced in subsidiaries’ host countries.
Some of this might make finance more costly, but it will also make banking operations less risky.
On balance, this is a good thing.
Even so, the threat to financial stability is possibly even graver today than it was in 2008, as the capacity of Western European governments to backstop banking systems is clearly reaching its limits.
Allowing foreign banks’ subsidiaries to become orphaned amid a worsening crisis in home countries would undermine confidence in emerging Europe’s financial systems, which could trigger asset-price declines and precipitous contractions in credit.
Ultimately, this would boomerang back on Western European banks, given their deep financial and real linkages with the region.
In 2008, such a catastrophic scenario was narrowly avoided, owing to policy intervention, including the coordination effort under the so-called Vienna Initiative (in which the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, among others, was involved).
A new pact to secure the achievements of financial integration is now urgently needed.
Authorities from these banks’ home and host countries must sit down together.
As with the Vienna Initiative, a “Vienna 2.0” would require commitments by all concerned parties.
In responding to the higher capital requirements imposed by authorities, and choosing whether to raise more capital or sell off assets, the banks must take into account the important role that their subsidiaries play in many countries.
For many banks, this happens naturally – their subsidiaries, as important value creators, are critical to their business models.
For some, however, the subsidiaries are smaller relative to the parents’ size – and thus less central to their strategies.
Home countries must also contribute.
Within the eurozone, any recapitalization, guarantees, and other funds offered to parent banks should be made available to subsidiaries in equal measure.
Any restructuring requested in return for capital support should take into account the cross-border nature of the groups and not discriminate against subsidiaries abroad.
Subsidiaries’ host countries, for their part, must reassure parent banks that financial regulation will remain predictable.
Some of the recent abrupt – and at times overly ambitious – measures to tax the industry or redistribute the burden of foreign-currency loans have undermined capital cushions and set back recovery in credit and growth.
All of this requires coordination.
The European Banking Authority has a chance to establish itself.
It must ensure that national interests do not undermine the integrity of the cross-border bank groups.
Ultimately, we need a Europe-wide deposit insurance and bank-resolution authority that can take over and restructure failed banks.
Just as the eurozone has fostered financial development and economic growth among its members, the current crisis now risks inflicting severe collateral damage far beyond its borders.
Any sustainable solution to the crisis must ensure the integrity of the bank groups and respect the interests of these banks’ home and host countries.
Ultimately, it is cross-border banking that is in the balance.
Creativity, Corporatism, and Crowds
NEW HAVEN – Economic growth, as we learned long ago from the works of economists like MIT’s Robert M. Solow, is largely driven by learning and innovation, not just saving and the accumulation of capital.
Ultimately, economic progress depends on creativity.
That is why fear of “secular stagnation” in today’s advanced economies has many wondering how creativity can be spurred.
One prominent argument lately has been that what is needed most is Keynesian economic stimulus – for example, deficit spending.
After all, people are most creative when they are active, not when they are unemployed.
Others see no connection between stimulus and renewed economic dynamism.
As German Chancellor Angela Merkel recently put it, Europe needs “political courage and creativity rather than billions of euros.”
In fact, we need both.
If we are to encourage dynamism, we need Keynesian stimulus and other policies that encourage creativity – particularly policies that promote solid financial institutions and social innovation.
In his 2013 book Mass Flourishing, Edmund Phelps argues that we need to promote “a culture protecting and inspiring individuality, imagination, understanding, and self-expression that drives a nation’s indigenous innovation.”
He believes that creativity has been stifled by a public philosophy described as corporatism, and that only through thorough reform of our private institutions, financial and others, can individuality and dynamism be restored.
Phelps stresses that corporatist thinking has had a long and enduring history, going back to Saint Paul, the author of as many as 14 books of the New Testament.
Paul used the human body (corpus in Latin) as a metaphor for society, suggesting that in a healthy society, as in a healthy body, every organ must be preserved and none permitted to die.
As a public-policy credo, corporatism has come to mean that the government must support all members of society, whether individuals or organizations, giving support to failing businesses and protecting existing jobs alike.
According to Phelps, Pope Leo XIII advocated a corporatist view in his 1891 encyclical Rerum Novarum, and Pope Pius XI amplified these ideas in his 1931 encyclical Quadragesimo Anno.
But, in reading these works, I do not find a clear or persuasive statement of any economic doctrine, except for basic notions of fairness and Christian charity.
In fact, an Ngrams search of books shows that the term corporatism began to become popular only after the mid-1930s, and achieved broad currency by the 1970s and 1980s.
The term seems to have been used most often by critics, often to denounce the defunct Fascist philosophy, or by those extolling elements of a “new” corporatism.
Surely, elements of corporatist thinking persist today.
People who might not stress that the government should protect failing businesses or redundant workers still have sympathies that might often lead to such outcomes.
Historically, an important spur toward corporatist thinking was Gustave Le Bon’s 1895 book The Crowd, which coined the terms “crowd psychology” and “collective mind.”
For Le Bon, “An individual in a crowd” – not only angry mobs on the street, but also other psychologically interconnected groups of people – “is a grain of sand amid other grains of sand, which the wind stirs up at will.”
Le Bon believed that crowds need strong leaders, to distance them from their natural madness and transform them into civilizations of splendor, vigor, and brilliance.
Mussolini and Hitler both took inspiration from his book, and incorporated his ideas into Fascist and Nazi ideology; and those ideas did not die with those regimes.
Still, the word “crowd” has taken on an entirely different meaning – and political valence – in our century.
Crowdsourcing and crowd-funding have created new kinds of crowds, of the sort that Le Bon never could have imagined.
As Le Bon emphasized, people cannot easily do great things as individuals.
They need to operate together within organizations that redirect crowd psychology, facilitate creativity, and are led by people of integrity.
Any such organizational technology, however, is subject to error and requires experimentation.
When the crowd-sourced Wikipedia was started in 2001, its success was not obvious.
Even one of its founders, Jimmy Wales, found it a little hard to believe: “It’s kind of surprising that you could just open up a site and let people work.”
When the United States’ Jumpstart Our Business Startups (JOBS) Act, which facilitated true crowd-funding of enterprises, was signed by President Barack Obama in 2012, it was an experiment, too.
Many critics said that it would result in the exploitation of naive investors.
We still do not know whether that is true, or how well the experiment will work.
But if the JOBS Act does not succeed, we should not abandon the idea, but try to modify it.
Ultimately, we need economic institutions that somehow promote the concerted creative actions of a wide swath of the world’s people.
They should not be corporatist institutions, dominated by central leaders, but should derive their power from the fluid actions of modern crowds.
Some of those actions will have to be disruptive, because the momentum of organizations can carry them beyond their usefulness.
But there must also be enough continuity that people can trust their careers and futures to such organizations.
Acknowledging the need to experiment and design new forms of economic organization must not mean abandoning fairness and compassion.
Cry, Beloved Burma
YANGON – Religious orders of monks have been the face of Burma ever since Buddhism was introduced here more than 1,000 years ago.
For a monk to involve himself in politics or to hold a political post is contrary to the ethical code of Theravada Buddhism.
But in Burma today, this spiritual philosophy, rooted in compassion and non-violence, has assumed unexpected dimensions of defiance and recalcitrance, as monks challenge the hegemony of the military junta that rules our country.
We are both Burmese Buddhist monks – a leader of the All Burma Sangha Coalition that led the recent protests, and a scholar teaching in the United States.
One of us is in hiding today, because Burma’s military government met the peaceful protests of our Buddhist brothers and sisters with violence and brutality.
Many monks and nuns have been abused and beaten, and thousands who have been arrested endure continued brutality.
More than 1,000 are missing, and many are presumed dead.
A few weeks ago, Burma’s monks began to march and pray and spread loving kindness in an effort to solve our nation’s problems peacefully.
Burma is a country rich in natural resources, but its people are poor.
When the government suddenly and capriciously increased the price of fuel by as much as 500% overnight, everyone was affected – and made even more desperate.
As monks, we believe in alleviating suffering wherever we see it, as part of the vows we have taken.
We could not ignore our people’s suffering.
We formed the Sangha Coalition when we saw that the country’s monks were united.
Those of us who are studying and teaching abroad share this unity, and have rallied to the support of those of us in Burma.
And it is not only the monks who are united.
When we started our peaceful marches for change, students, youth, intellectuals, and ordinary people joined us in the streets, in the rain.
We thought that we could appeal to some, if not all, of the generals – Buddhists themselves – who control our country to join us in trying to right the many ills befalling Burma.
At first, we tried to show our displeasure with military rule by refusing to receive alms from them.
We turned our begging bowls upside down as a gesture of our feelings.
We have not lost our loving kindness towards ordinary soldiers, nor even towards the leaders who ordered them to brutalize their own people, but we wanted to urge them to change while there was still time.
We know that some people in the army and organizations close to the regime have been reluctant to use violence against the monks.
We want to tell the people who are violent towards their own countrymen to stop and think whether their actions are in accordance with the dharma, whether they are acting for the good of Burma’s people.
Some of the soldiers who were ordered to beat us and to stop us from marching actually refused to do so, because they understood the truth of what we were doing.
We hoped to create a way out for the military leaders, a way to start a real dialogue with the people’s leaders and the leaders of ethnic groups, for the unity of the nation.
But that hope was short-lived.
The regime is now hunting down those who participated in the demonstrations and committing unspeakable acts of violence.
They have attacked monasteries and arrested monks and nuns by force.
Guards are everywhere, on all the streets, around the pagodas and residential areas.
Wounded demonstrators are reported to have been buried alive in mass graves, and there are confirmed reports of bodies washing ashore in the waterways near Yangon (Rangoon).
The regime is brutalizing the Burmese people, and lying to the world about its actions.
Brigadier General Kyaw Hsan, a representative of the military, recently told UN Special Envoy Ibrahim Gambari that the marchers in the streets were “bogus monks.”
But we are genuine, and thousands of us – from Rangoon, Mandalay, Pegu, Arakan, Magwe, and Sagaing – demonstrated for peace.
Some have said that the uprising in Burma is over.
That is what the junta wants the world to think.
But we believe that the protests represent the beginning of the end of military rule in our country.
The generals who ordered the crackdown are assaulting not only Burma’s people, but also their own hearts, souls, and spiritual beliefs.
The monks are the preservers of dharma; by attacking them, the generals attack Buddhism itself.
We know that the international community is trying to help us, but we need that help to be more effective.
We thank the many people and organizations abroad who are helping us regain the rights denied to us for more than 40 years.
But we also appeal to the international community to make its actions practical and effective.
The military government will do anything to remain in power, and their violent acts must be exposed to the world.
They may control the streets and monasteries, but they will never be able to control our hearts and our determination.
Cry, the Newborn Baby
Each year, four million babies die in their first four weeks of life – over 10,000 deaths a day.
Most of these neonatal deaths go unrecorded and remain invisible to all but their families.
Virtually all (99%) occur in low- and middle-income countries, but most research and funding focuses on high-tech care for the 1% of deaths occurring in rich countries.
The greatest risk of death is at the beginning of life: three-quarters of all neonatal deaths (three million) occur within one week of birth, and at least one million babies die on their first day of life, many at home without any formal healthcare.
Moreover, almost 40% of all child deaths occur in the neonatal period, with Africa and South Asia accounting for two-thirds of the total.
Unfortunately, child survival programs in the developing world have focused primarily on pneumonia, diarrhea, malaria, and vaccine-preventable causes of deaths after the first month of life, while safe motherhood programs have focused primarily on the mother.
Prevention of newborn deaths has thus dropped between the cracks of programs focusing on mothers and on older children.
This represents a tragedy that is as avoidable as it is immense.
A recent series on neonatal issues in the British science journal Lancet estimated that between 41% and 72% of neonatal deaths could be prevented if simple interventions were provided effectively where they are needed most.
In other words, up to three million babies needlessly die each year.
Well known, low-cost, and low-tech interventions do not reach those most in need – for example immunization against tetanus, exclusive breastfeeding, simple care for low-weight babies, and antibiotics for infection.
Such interventions are extremely cost-effective, and packaging these interventions together and linking them with other health programs reduces costs further.
Saving lives requires that mothers and babies in the highest-mortality countries be reached at the time of greatest risk.
Currently, only about half of all women worldwide deliver with a skilled attendant present.
In sub-Saharan Africa, less than 40% of women deliver with skilled care; in South Asia, the figure is less than 30%.
Latin America and Southeast Asia have rapidly increased coverage, but at the current rate of progress in Africa, 50% of women will still deliver without skilled care in the year 2015.
In Ethiopia, a quarter of pregnant women in the highest income group use skilled care at delivery, compared to 1% of the poorest women.
Low-income countries have demonstrated that rapid progress is possible.
Sri Lanka, Indonesia, Peru, and Botswana all halved neonatal mortality during the 1990s.
These countries’ success has depended on sustained high-level political commitment to providing high-quality maternal and newborn care.
In particular, integrated planning is essential.
In India, newborn health forms part of the national Reproductive and Child Health Program.
In Ethiopia, newborn care is being incorporated into a new community-based healthcare program.
Of course, there is no “one-size-fits-all” solution.
The numbers and causes of neonatal deaths, the capacity of the health system, and the obstacles faced differ between and within countries, as does support from policymakers and the availability of resources.
The additional cost of maintaining essential newborn health interventions at 90% coverage in the 75 countries with the highest mortality is estimated to be a mere $4.1billion per year.
This would supplement current spending of $2 billion, only about 30% of which is for interventions specifically aimed at newborns, while the majority is for interventions that also benefit mothers and older children.
Even with a weak health system, it is possible to achieve measurable mortality reduction.
But the world needs to act now to generate the political will and financial resources needed to save the lives of up to three million babies who die each year simply because they are born without the basic care that is their right.
Indeed, to continue to fail the world’s at-risk children is to deliver a verdict of wanton inhumanity against ourselves, for we are a knowing party to an entirely preventable mass destruction of human life.
Peru’s Self-Sabotage
SAN MARCOS – You may know Peru as the cradle of Incan civilization.
Or you may have tasted its outstanding cuisine.
But Peru boasts another impressive characteristic: it is among Latin America’s fastest-growing economies, with GDP up by 4.8% year on year in the first quarter of 2014.
Peru’s long-term prosperity, however, is far from certain.
In fact, Peru’s economic growth – which is based largely on exports of raw materials and hydrocarbons – is already slowing, from annual rates of 5.5-6.9% over the last three years.
And, though the government recognizes the need for growth-enhancing reform, its approach is all wrong.
Specifically, President Ollanta Humala recently won legislative approval of a set of “realistic” procedures to reduce the red tape perceived to be hampering investment in the extractive industries – the very industries on which the economy should become less dependent.
The new law seriously weakens Peru’s ability to regulate land use, set environmental quality standards, and rein in corporate misconduct through environmental-impact assessments.
The Peruvian government now has a serious problem.
Beyond diminishing Peru’s international credibility as a “climate champion” – an image that some members of the government have been attempting to cultivate – the law jeopardizes Peru’s natural environment and economic-growth prospects.
Peru’s government has not just failed to do what is needed; it has actively worked against its country’s long-term interests.
At a time when countries should be regulating land use more strictly, Humala’s “reform” eliminates zoning restrictions.
Moreover, under the new law, subnational governments will no longer be able to limit investments on environmental grounds – decisions that were guided by strict technical standards and highly trained experts.
Instead, a national authority – that is, a political body – will call the shots.
All of this makes Peru more vulnerable to corporate misconduct that results in environmental damage.
As if that were not enough, the new law, in a reversal of previous legislation, could lead to reduced sentences for offenders, and even allow them to operate with impunity for three years.
This is good news for mining, oil, and gas companies eyeing rich reserves under the Amazon rain forest and the Pacific shelf.
But, for indigenous communities, it will open a new chapter of dispossession, poverty, and strife; and, for all Peruvians, it amounts to a massive missed opportunity to put the country on a more sustainable development path.
The problem is not the government’s efforts to support businesses; measures to bolster business growth and development would be critical to any economic-reform plan.
But allowing companies with poor environmental records to operate with impunity is no solution.
A country where legislation is tailor-made to benefit a few, at the expense of the public interest, cannot achieve long-term inclusive prosperity – and is likely to experience social instability.
The new law is not the only problematic policy that Peru’s government has pursued.
Last month, the Congress also moved to weaken the government’s environmental oversight, claiming that this would add 1.5-3% to the economy’s growth rate.
The government pushed the proposal through in a little more than two weeks, with only token public consultation and no time for reasoned public debate.
Given strong opposition from civil-society groups, political parties, the United Nations, and even some business interests, the government’s behavior was both understandable and inexcusable.
In fact, more than 100 organizations rejected the package before it was approved, while calling for higher environmental standards and stricter enforcement.
They recognize that what Peru urgently needs is a new, future-oriented economic vision, focused on reducing its reliance on the extractive industries, whose days are numbered.
“Green” investment – which, as the World Bank recently proved using robust economic modeling, does not constrain economic growth – is a good place to start.
In September, Humala will go to New York to outline Peru’s “bold and ambitious” actions to head-off the global climate crisis.
In December, Peru will host the next round of UN climate negotiations, with governments from around the world gathering in Lima to pursue a comprehensive agreement that supports a transition from environmentally devastating fossil fuels to low-carbon energy solutions.
Peru’s recent actions have severely undercut its ability to act as a global climate leader, to everyone’s detriment.
Only with a new strategy based on economic diversification and investment in renewable energy can Peru achieve stable, inclusive, long-term prosperity – and make a real contribution to mitigating climate change.
America Returns to Cuba
BEIJING – Barack Obama’s visit to Cuba is the first by a US president since Calvin Coolidge went in 1928.
American investors, expat Cubans, tourists, scholars, and scam artists will follow in Obama’s wake.
Normalization of the bilateral relationship will pose opportunities and perils for Cuba, and a giant test of maturity for the United States.
The Cuban Revolution led by Fidel Castro 57 years ago was a profound affront to the US psyche.
Since the founding of the US, its leaders have staked a claim to American exceptionalism.
So compelling is the US model, according to its leaders, that every decent country must surely choose to follow America’s lead.
When foreign governments are foolish enough to reject the American way, they should expect retribution for harming US interests (seen to align with universal interests) and thereby threatening US security.
With Havana a mere 90 miles from the Florida Keys, American meddling in Cuba has been incessant.
Thomas Jefferson opined in 1820 that the US “ought, at the first possible opportunity, to take Cuba.”
It finally did so in 1898, when the US intervened in a Cuban rebellion against Spain to assert effective US economic and political hegemony over the island.
In the fighting that ensued, the US grabbed Guantánamo as a naval base and asserted (in the now infamous Platt Amendment) a future right to intervene in Cuba.
US Marines repeatedly occupied Cuba thereafter, and Americans quickly took ownership of most of Cuba’s lucrative sugar plantations, the economic aim of America’s intervention.
General Fulgencio Batista, who was eventually overthrown by Castro, was the last of a long line of repressive rulers installed and maintained in power by the US.
The US kept Cuba under its thumb, and, in accordance with US investor interests, the export economy remained little more than sugar and tobacco plantations throughout the first half of the twentieth century.
Castro’s revolution to topple Batista aimed to create a modern, diversified economy.
Given the lack of a clear strategy, however, that goal was not to be achieved.
Castro’s agrarian reforms and nationalization, which began in 1959, alarmed US sugar interests and led the US to introduce new trade restrictions.
These escalated to cuts in Cuba’s allowable sugar exports to the US and an embargo on US oil and food exports to Cuba.
When Castro turned to the Soviet Union to fill the gap, President Dwight Eisenhower issued a secret order to the CIA to topple the new regime, leading to the disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961, in the first months of John F. Kennedy’s administration.
Later, the CIA was given the green light to assassinate Castro.
In 1962, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev decided to forestall another US invasion – and teach the US a lesson – by surreptitiously installing nuclear missiles in Cuba, thereby triggering the October 1962 Cuban missile crisis, which brought the world to the brink of nuclear annihilation.
Through dazzling restraint by both Kennedy and Khrushchev, and no small measure of good luck, humanity was spared; the Soviet missiles were removed, and the US pledged not to launch another invasion.
Instead, the US doubled down on the trade embargo, demanded restitution for nationalized properties, and pushed Cuba irrevocably into the Soviet Union’s waiting arms.
Cuba’s sugar monoculture remained in place, though its output now headed to the Soviet Union rather than the US.
The half-century of a Soviet-style economy, exacerbated by the US trade embargo and related policies, took a heavy toll.
In purchasing-power terms, Cuba’s per capita income stands at roughly one-fifth of the US level.
Yet Cuba’s achievements in boosting literacy and public health are substantial.
Life expectancy in Cuba equals that of the US, and is much higher than in most of Latin America.
Cuban doctors have played an important role in disease control in Africa in recent years.
Normalization of diplomatic relations creates two very different scenarios for US-Cuba relations.
In the first, the US reverts to its bad old ways, demanding draconian policy measures by Cuba in exchange for “normal” bilateral economic relations.
Cuba would not be pressured to abandon state-financed health care or to open the health sector to private American investors.
Cubans look forward to such a mutually respectful relationship, but bristle at the prospect of renewed subservience.
This is not to say that Cuba should move slowly on its own reforms.
Cuba should quickly make its currency convertible for trade, expand property rights, and (with considerable care and transparency) privatize some enterprises.
Such market-based reforms, combined with robust public investment, could speed economic growth and diversification, while protecting Cuba’s achievements in health, education, and social services.
Cuba can and should aim for Costa Rican-style social democracy, rather than the cruder capitalism of the US.
(The first author here believed the same about Poland 25 years ago: It should aim for Scandinavian-style social democracy, rather than the neo-liberalism of Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher.)
The resumption of economic relations between the US and Cuba is therefore a test for both countries.
Cuba needs significant reforms to meet its economic potential without jeopardizing its great social achievements.
The US needs to exercise unprecedented and unaccustomed self-control, to allow Cuba the time and freedom of maneuver it needs to forge a modern and diversified economy that is mostly owned and operated by the Cuban people themselves rather than their northern neighbors.
The Narrative Roots of Public Policy
BUENOS AIRES – At the recent Summit of the Americas in Panama, Cuban President Raúl Castro chose to break with the agreed protocol.
Instead of speaking for eight minutes, he took six times longer to present a political history of his country that was only loosely based on fact.
Why?
As a card-carrying member of the economics profession, I have been trained to view the world from the perspective of the English philosopher Jeremy Bentham, according to whom the purpose of public policy is to create the greatest happiness for the greatest number of people.
Policies that do not abide by some variant of this utilitarian principle (as proposed by, say, John Rawls or Amartya Sen) are bound to be inefficient or unfair.
But recent advances in psychology and neuroscience may suggest that if we want to understand social and political behavior, or improve policies, we should be reading Hegel more than Bentham.
That may sound weird, given that Hegel was an Idealist and would never have expected neuroscience – a material reality independent of Geist (usually translated as Mind or Spirit) – to be relevant to his inquiry.
As Antonio Damasio argues in his aptly titled book Self Comes to Mind, the brain creates an autobiographical sense of self.
It is this created self that perceives, remembers, and aspires, that has telos (or purpose), and on behalf of which decisions are made.
It is also the autobiographical self – through the narrative that it creates about itself – that makes life something more than what the American writer, artist, and philosopher Elbert Hubbard once called “one damn thing after another.”
And our brains are wired to figure out what other selves are thinking and feeling.
I believe that this same structure applies to how we understand multi-person groups.
It is no coincidence, for example, that the law treats corporations as persons.
We think of the organization in which we work as if it was a person with rights, obligations, values, reputation, and temperament, on whose behalf managers regard themselves as acting.
The same applies to nations and states.
Our brains need to create a shared sense of self, an “imagined community,” as the political scientist Benedict Anderson put it, on whose behalf collective decisions are made.
This community is a “person” that has a past and a future that transcend us as individuals.
It has a history and a telos.
By contrast, a purely Benthamite view would lead to a view of politics as a set of disparate decisions based on a disembodied utilitarian calculus.
But this would feel like “one damn thing after another.”
The set of political decisions made over time must make some sense, and this sense must come from the narrative that is superimposed on historical events.
The narrative itself is socially constructed and only marginally bound by fact.
For example, according to President Barack Obama’s narrative, the United States has always been about a steady march toward freedom and equality, from the War of Independence to the abolition of slavery and the empowerment of women, minorities, and other previously marginalized groups, such as gays and those with handicaps.
To the extent that this narrative is inaccurate, it is aspirational.
It is the role of politics to create, sustain, and reshape this shared sense of self, of us (and hence of them).
It is an illusion, but a socially created illusion.
It is how Bavarians and Venetians in the 1860s, for example, became convinced that they were and had always been Germans or Italians.
Likewise, only a new narrative – a new Geist – can persuade the British today that they are really Europeans.
Liberals, as the political scientist Drew Westen has explained, often refrain from the narrative of shared identity, perhaps owing to awareness that great crimes are often committed in its name.
Hitler redefined the German Volk as the collective victim of an internal enemy that was tainting its blood – a type of narrative that, whether framed in terms of race, religion, or class, underlies genocide wherever it occurs.
But it was also a national “person” that Abraham Lincoln invoked in his Gettysburg Address.
In just 272 words, Lincoln synthesized America as an ideal based on the proposition that all men are created equal.
In this narrative, the Civil War was fought to ensure “that government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth.”
As the philosopher Alasdair MacIntyre argued in After Virtue, narratives frame individuals’ moral choices.
Marx’s comparative advantage was to read Hegel and create a narrative in which history is the history of class struggle, with the newly emergent industrial proletariat destined to develop “class consciousness” and overthrow the political and economic order created by the bourgeoisie.
Liberal democracy has been at a disadvantage in the battle for the narrative because it tends to treat the collective self as if it were just a rational median voter in search of a better job.
But that is inadequate.
Policies must fit within the prevailing narrative framework, while the great task of politics is to shape the narrative of tomorrow.
No wonder, then, that while Obama used his eight minutes in Panama to delineate concrete policy initiatives that would bring happiness to the greatest number, Castro spent 48 minutes reinventing the past.
Cuba’s Back
MEXICO CITY – After 47 years, the Organization of American States, at its annual General Assembly, has repealed its suspension of Cuba’s membership.
The so-called ALBA countries (the Spanish acronym for the so-called Bolivarian Alternative for the Americas), which includes Cuba, Venezuela, Honduras, Nicaragua, Bolivia, Dominica, and Ecuador, were able partly to outwit – and partly to “out-blackmail” – Canada, the United States, and the Latin American democracies in getting Cuba rehabilitated.
The OAS did, however, lay down two conditions.
Cuba must explicitly request reinstatement, and a dialogue must be initiated in accordance with the premises of the OAS Charter and other basic OAS documents, and in consonance with the principles on which those documents are based – most importantly, democracy and respect for human rights.
Like many diplomatic compromises, the outcome left everyone a bit happy and a bit disappointed.
Everyone could claim victory, and no one was obliged to acknowledge defeat.
But those compromises are like statistics or skimpy swimsuits: what they show is less important than what they hide.
Two fundamental considerations come to mind, and their ramifications in “up-for-grab” countries in Latin America, such as El Salvador, are particularly significant.
The first consideration involves the ALBA countries’ conduct of foreign policy.
Given that the smaller countries do not act independently of Venezuela, and that Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez does not act without Cuba’s guidance on weighty matters such as these, it is now clear that the Cubans and their allies will cut US President Barack Obama no slack on Latin American issues.
They could have easily let the OAS assembly go by, giving the new American president more time to prepare his Congress and public opinion for a delicate balancing act.
The key issue here is how to lift the now almost fifty-year old US embargo on trade, investment, and travel to Cuba unilaterally, while portraying it as the result of a negotiation.
The ALBA countries decided they would concede nothing to Obama, and attempt, instead, to back him into a corner: either the US would go along with the new OAS consensus, angering both parts of the Cuban-American lobby and the human rights community by abandoning principles and commitments, or the US would have to act alone (perhaps with Canada by its side), leaving it totally isolated in Latin America – the last thing Obama wants.
The ALBA group pushed hard for a vote, or a compromise on its terms, which it could then flaunt to the world and to domestic public opinion.
Obama had no choice but to go along.
The second consideration is that this behavior will continue.
The reason seems clear enough: Cuba needs international aid desperately, and there are not too many places where it can find it.
Hopes that Brazil and China would provide cash to Cuba have been dashed by the international financial crisis and geo-politics.
And Chávez, despite the recent increase in oil prices, can no longer afford to subsidize Cuba as he did during the boom years.
So it seems that the Cubans are hoping to find resources elsewhere, and the only possibility, as remote as it seems, is the Inter-American Development Bank.
In principle, IDB membership requires OAS membership, and therein may lie the reason why Cuba insisted so strongly on returning, and why it was ultimately disappointed in not obtaining unconditional re-admission.
It will nonetheless attempt to have its allies push for some sort of association with the IDB, while at the same time radicalizing its stance elsewhere, as it is now doing in El Salvador.
Indeed, the new Salvadoran president, Mauricio Funes, was elected on the ticket of the FMLN, the party that succeeded the old, hard-left guerrilla group of the 1980’s and 1990’s.
He is a moderate, modern leftist who has openly identified himself with Brazilian President Lula and Barack Obama, as opposed to Chávez.
But his party is as close to Cuba and Venezuela as one can get.
In a showdown over the composition of the cabinet just before his inauguration on June 1, the FMLN old guard won, threatening to take the conflict to the streets.
The Cubans, Nicaraguans, and Venezuelans will not cut Funes any slack, either, believing that history is on their side, and that now is the time to force every issue in sight.
They are probably right, up to a certain point, because the second lesson from the OAS assembly concerns the behavior of the Latin American democracies, mainly Mexico, Brazil, Chile, and Colombia.
They tried to accommodate the US (it is rumored that Obama phoned Lula and asked for his help), but were nonetheless unwilling to break with Cuba and Venezuela to side openly with the US.
They will not do so any time soon, on any issue that may spring up, if it means confrontation with the ALBA countries.
Fidel Castro knows this, and will take advantage of the democracies’ diluted commitment to human rights and democracy.