In particular, they must abolish agricultural subsidies, remove restrictions on trade in services, improve connectivity, facilitate cross-border trade and investment, and increase trade finance.
Finally, and most important, wealthy countries should support developing countries’ efforts to integrate themselves further into the global economy.
Given trade’s record of reducing poverty, this is a moral imperative; it is also indispensable for peace and stability.
To be sure, trade must deliver for all countries and for all people, from factory workers suffering plant closures in Europe or the United States to subsistence farmers trapped in informal economies in Africa and South Asia.
But those who suggest that trade is a zero-sum game are simply avoiding the hard questions: Who should bear the painful dislocation costs from trade and new technologies?
What policies will enable dislocated people to pursue new opportunities?
How can countries maintain productivity-led growth in an age of frequent and sudden disruption?
The challenges of global integration are not new, but nor can they be ignored.
Policymakers should mind the lessons of economic history.
Above all, they should bear in mind that even during past periods of rapid technological change, far more people benefited from free and open trade than from protectionist barriers.
No country in today’s world can seal itself off from foreign goods, services, capital, ideas, or people.
Instead leaders should foster more commerce to include more people.
They can do so by adopting international rules to manage openness and interdependency; establishing stronger social safety nets; investing in innovation, education and skills-training, and infrastructure; and creating a more conducive regulatory environment for businesses and entrepreneurs to foster stronger and more inclusive growth.
No country can deliver long-term prosperity to its people on its own.
Closer international cooperation and economic integration is the only way forward.
Big Danger at the Lower Bound
CAMBRIDGE – Markets nowadays are fixated on how high the US Federal Reserve will raise interest rates in the next 12 months.
This is dangerously shortsighted: the real concern ought to be how far it could cut rates in the next deep recession.
Given that the Fed may struggle just to get its base interest rate up to 2% over the coming year, there will be very little room to cut if a recession hits.
Fed chair Janet Yellen tried to reassure markets in a speech at the end of August, suggesting that a combination of massive government bond purchases and forward guidance on interest-rate policy could achieve the same stimulus as cutting the overnight rate to minus 6%, were negative interest rates possible.
She might be right, but most economists are skeptical that the Fed’s unconventional policy tools are nearly so effective.
There are other ideas that might be tried.
For example, the Fed could follow the Bank of Japan’s recent move to target the ten-year interest rate instead of the very short-term one it usually focuses on.
The idea is that even if very short-term interest rates are zero, longer-term rates are still positive.
The rate on ten-year US Treasury bonds was about 1.8% at the end of October.
That approach might work for a while.
But there is also a significant risk that it might eventually blow up, just the way pegged exchange rates tend to work for a while and then cause a catastrophe.
If the Fed could be highly credible in its plan to hold down the ten-year interest rate, it could probably get away without having to intervene too much in markets, whose participants would normally be too scared to fight the world’s most powerful central bank.
But imagine that markets started to have doubts, and that the Fed was forced to intervene massively by purchasing a huge percentage of total government debt.
This would leave the Fed extremely vulnerable to enormous losses should global forces suddenly drive up equilibrium interest rates, with the US government then compelled to pay much higher interest rates to roll over its debt.
The two best ideas for dealing with the zero bound on interest rates seem off-limits for the moment.
The optimal approach would be to implement all of the various legal, tax, and institutional changes needed to take interest rates significantly negative, thereby eliminating the zero bound.
This requires preventing people from responding by hoarding paper currency; but, as I have explained recently, this is not so difficult.
True, early experimentation with negative interest-rate policy in Japan and Europe has caused some disenchantment.
But the shortcomings there mostly reflect the fact that central banks cannot by themselves implement the necessary policies to make a negative interest rate policy fully effective.
The other approach, first analyzed by Fed economists in the mid-1990s, would be to raise the target inflation rate from 2% to 4%.
The idea is that this would eventually raise the profile of all interest rates by two percentage points, thereby leaving that much extra room to cut.
Several central banks, including the Fed, have considered moving to a higher inflation target.
But such a move has several significant drawbacks.
The main problem is that a shift of this magnitude risks undermining hard-won central bank credibility; after all, central banks have been promising to deliver 2% inflation for a couple of decades now, and that level is deeply embedded in long-term financial contracts.
Moreover, as was true during the 2008 financial crisis, simply being able to take interest rates 2% lower probably might not be enough.
In fact, many estimates suggest that the Fed might well have liked to cut rates 4% or 5% more than it did, but could not go lower once the interest rate hit zero.
A third shortcoming is that, after an adjustment period, wages and contracts are more likely to adjust more frequently than they would with a 2% inflation target, making monetary policy less effective.
And, finally, higher inflation causes distortions to relative prices and to the tax system – distortions that have potentially significant costs, and not just in recessions.
If ideas like negative interest rates and higher inflation targets sound dangerously radical, well, radical is relative.
Unless central banks figure out a convincing way to address their paralysis at the zero bound, there is likely to be a continuing barrage of outside-the-box proposals that are far more radical.
For example, the University of California at Berkeley economist Barry Eichengreen has argued that protectionism can be a helpful way to create inflation when central banks are stuck at the zero bound.
Several economists, including Lawrence Summers and Paul Krugman, have warned that structural reform to increase productivity might be counterproductive when central banks are paralyzed, precisely because it lowers prices.
Of course, there is always fiscal policy to provide economic stimulus.
But it is extremely undesirable for government spending to have to be as volatile as it would be if it had to cover for the ineffectiveness of monetary policy.
There may not be enough time before the next deep recession to lay the groundwork for effective negative-interest-rate policy or to phase in a higher inflation target.
But that is no excuse for not starting to look hard at these options, especially if the alternatives are likely to be far more problematic.
The Escalating Arab Wars
BEIRUT – The violence unleashed in Arab countries in the last four years may turn out to be just a first taste of what is to come.
Escalating brutality and the actions of governments have put Arab citizens under immense pressure.
Without a change of course, the outcome could easily be further conflict and a new wave of uprisings – this time not peaceful.
Not since the end of World War I have Arab countries undergone such a momentous upheaval.
Conflict has broken out in no fewer than nine Arab countries, and the carnage has reached unimaginable levels of inhumanity.
Tensions are mounting even in countries that are nominally at peace.
Long-standing value systems are weakening, and once-solid societal foundations are crumbling.
Fighting in Syria, Iraq, Sudan, Libya, and Yemen has torn apart entire communities.
Ethnic cleansing perpetuated by the Islamic State has reversed centuries of religious, ethnic, and cultural intermingling, and pushed close to two million people from their homes.
Indeed, although the Middle East and North Africa is home to just 5% of the world’s population, it has produced more than one-third of its refugees.
In Syria alone, 11 million people have been forcibly displaced within and outside the country.
These population movements are exacerbating preexisting social tensions across the Arab world.
In Lebanon, for example, the arrival of more than one million Syrians has sparked worries that the country’s sectarian balance could be altered, undermining its fragile political system.
These huge demographic upheavals are irrevocably transforming the region’s social and political identity.
Indeed, throughout the region, warring parties are relying on sectarian identity politics to mobilize support, further polarizing populations along religious, ethnic, and ideological lines.
Saudi Arabia and Iran are using Yemen’s internal divisions over historic political and socioeconomic grievances in their proxy war there, presenting the conflict as a manifestation of the historic Sunni-Shia rift.
Even in countries not at war, poisonous identity politics is becoming increasingly widespread and accepted.
In Egypt, for example, the public has been broadly supportive of a brutal crackdown on the Muslim Brotherhood and its Islamist supporters.
These convulsions are further impoverishing Arab countries and limiting future opportunities for their citizens.
Some 21 million Arab children are out of school, and more than 50 million Arabs are considered poor.
In Syria, 80% of the population is unable to meet its basic needs.
In Yemen, more than one-third of the population – some 11.5 million people – suffered from food insecurity prior to the conflict.
Another two million have since been added to the tally.
This turmoil has created a fertile breeding ground for militarized and radicalized youth.
Tunisia, the fêted success story of the Arab uprisings, has contributed the largest number of foreign fighters to the Islamic State – an estimated 3,000 (mainly young) people.
Anecdotal evidence shows that many of the parties in the various conflicts are using children to fight their wars.
In Yemen, around one-third of the fighters are children.
The Islamic State boasts that it is training children for future battles.
Rather than trying to ease dissatisfaction or attempt reconciliation, Arab governments are using brute force to shut down every possible space for dissent or debate.
In the name of national security, citizens are stripped of their nationality, demonstrators are shot in the street, and thousands are held in arbitrary detention.
In Egypt, danger lurks in the squares, universities, football stadiums, and even bathhouses, with the security services having detained anywhere from 22,000 to 41,000 citizens in the last year.
Torture and forced disappearances are also widespread.
In Syria, 85,000 individuals are said to have disappeared since the beginning of the conflict.
Another 12,000 have been brutally tortured.
Shutting out citizens from formal democratic processes is forcing political discontent further into the shadows, where it risks becoming militarized.
In Egypt, there have been growing calls for more violent and radical responses to the government’s clampdown.
In Jordan and Morocco, the authorities are facing a rising challenge in containing militant tendencies.
Indeed, as political leaders choose military repression over engagement, they will increasingly lose ground to groups like the Islamic State, the only entities in the region offering a clear – albeit brutal, and regressive – vision of the future.
At this point, an end to current hostilities in Syria, Iraq, and Yemen requires national, regional, and international consensus.
But averting further catastrophic violence in the region will require that governments go back to basics, introduce inclusive political processes, end state-sanctioned violence, ensure due process, and address socioeconomic injustices.
Obviously, that is a tall order.
The scale of the challenges requires courageous thinking, bold initiatives, and ingenuity by national and regional political and development leaders.
Otherwise, violence will engulf the region and far beyond.
Stage Three for the Euro Crisis?
BERKELEY – The first two components of the euro crisis – a banking crisis that resulted from excessive leverage in both the public and private sectors, followed by a sharp fall in confidence in eurozone governments – have been addressed successfully, or at least partly so.
But that leaves the third, longest-term, and most dangerous factor underlying the crisis: the structural imbalance between the eurozone’s north and south.
First, the good news: The fear that Europe’s banks could collapse, with panicked investors’ flight to safety producing a European Great Depression, now seems to have passed.
Likewise, the fear, fueled entirely by the European Union’s dysfunctional politics, that eurozone governments might default – thereby causing the same dire consequences – has begun to dissipate.
Whether Europe would avoid a deep depression hinged on whether it dealt properly with these two aspects of the crisis.
But whether Europe as a whole avoids lost decades of economic growth still hangs in the balance, and depends on whether southern European governments can rapidly restore competitiveness.
The process by which southern Europe became uncompetitive in the first place was driven by market price signals – by the incentives those signals created for entrepreneurs, and by how entrepreneurs’ individually rational responses played out in macroeconomic terms.
Northern Europeans with money to invest were willing to lend on extraordinarily easy terms to those in the south who wanted to spend, and ample pre-2007 spending made employers there willing to raise wages rapidly.
As a result, southern Europe adopted an economic configuration in which its wage, price, and productivity levels made sense only so long as it spent €13 for every €12 that it earned, with northern Europe financing the missing euro.
Northern Europe, meanwhile, adopted wage and productivity levels that made sense only as long as it spent less than one euro for every euro that it earned.
Now, if, as appears to be the case, Europe does not want its south to spend more than it earns and its north to spend less, wages, prices, and productivity must shift.
If we are not to look back in a generation and bemoan “lost” decades, southern European productivity levels need to rise relative to the north, and wage and price levels need to fall by roughly 30%, so that the south can pay its way with exports and northern Europe can spend its earnings on those products.
If the euro is to be preserved, and if stagnation is to be avoided, five policy measures could be attempted:
·         Northern Europe could tolerate higher inflation – an extra two percentage points for five years would take care of one-third of the total north-south adjustment;
·         Northern Europe could expand social democracy by making its welfare states more lavish;
·         Southern Europe could shrink its taxes and social services substantially;
·         Southern Europe could reconfigure its enterprises to become engines of productivity;
·         Southern Europe could enforce deflation.
The fifth option is perhaps the least wise, for it implies the lost decades and EU collapse that Europe is trying to avoid.
The fourth option would be wonderful; but, if anyone knew how to bring southern Europe's enterprises up to the productivity levels of the north, it would have happened already.
So we are left with a combination of the first three options, also known as “policies to restore European growth” – a phrase that appears in every international communiqué.
But the communiqués never get more specific.
Europe’s technocrats understand what adoption of “policies to restore European growth” means.
So do some of Europe’s politicians.
But European voters do not, because politicians fear that spelling it out would be a career-limiting move.
But if Europe does not adopt some combination of the first three options as policy goals over the next five years, it will face a stark choice: either lost decades for southern Europe (and perhaps northern Europe as well), or continued north-south payment imbalances that will have to be financed through fiscal transfers – that is, by taxing the north.
Northern Europe’s politicians should become more explicit about what “policies to restore European growth” actually mean.
Otherwise, ten years from now, they will be forced to confess that today’s dithering imposed enormous additional tax liabilities on northern Europe.
That might turn out to be the ultimate career bummer.
North Korea and Asia’s Widening Arms Race
North Korea’ test of a long range missile may have failed, but that will not relieve regional jitters.
Indeed, it will only confirm what is already underway – an arms race across the region.
Southeast Asia’s return to prosperity since the financial crisis of 1997 has brought a region-wide splurge on new weapons.
Most Southeast Asian countries are busily modernizing their armed forces.
So far, most have done so without compromising their autonomy in security matters.
But, with China’s military build-up causing nervousness everywhere, and with North Korea a perpetual source of insecurity, many governments in the region are starting to work with outside powers.
Indonesia’s President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono has perhaps been the most assertive.
In addition to becoming more active in world diplomacy, Yudhoyono will meet Russian President Vladimir Putin in Moscow this month to discuss buying Russia’s newest fighter jets.
Indonesia is seeking to form an air-defense squadron of 12 jets, with eight Russian fighters to complement the two Russian Su-27SK’s and Su-30MKM’s that it has already bought.
Elsewhere in the region, Singapore has apparently opted to purchase 12 new F-15SG fighter aircraft from the United States.
Thailand’s Prime Minister, Thaksin Shinawatra, met Putin late last year and tentatively agreed to purchase 12 Su-30MKM’s.
Malaysia has agreed to buy 18 Su-30MKM’s over the next two years, while Vietnam has purchased 36 SU-27SK’s, 12 of which are already in service.
With the exception of Singapore, it seems that Russian fighter-attack aircraft are the region’s weapon of choice at the moment.
Russia’s growing slice of the local arms market worries the US, the world’s biggest weapons supplier and still Asia’s greatest military power.
Thus, for example, last November, the US lifted its six-year embargo on military sales to Indonesia, imposed in 1999 in response to human rights abuses in East Timor.
Indonesia immediately expressed its intention to purchase C-130 transport aircraft, as well as fast patrol boats to conduct “anti-terrorism and anti-piracy measures.”
Yet Indonesia is also trying to align itself with Asia’s rising power, China, by seeking greater defense and security cooperation.
As a result of these improved relations, Indonesia has received Chinese short-range missile technology.
The possibility that Southeast Asia’s governments might begin to play America and China off against each other is one of the concerns that most animates the latest US quadrennial defense review, which is intended to “focus on the Pacific Ocean” in awareness of China’s growing naval power.
Undoubtedly, the US will try to build closer ties with Indonesia through greater military cooperation, because Indonesia borders the region’s key sea lines of communications.
In particular, Indonesia will inevitably become involved in the tug of war between the US and China for influence over the vitally important Malacca Strait.
Because China must import vast quantities of oil through the Malacca Strait, that sea lane has become a central element in the country’s security strategy.
For this reason, China is attempting to use economic and military aid as leverage to improve relations even with countries with which it has had military confrontations with in the past, most prominently Vietnam and the Philippines.
India, too, is now joining the military build-up.
It has actively led regional multilateral joint exercises, such as the naval joint exercise that India’s navy hosted in the Andaman Sea, in the eastern Indian Ocean, earlier this year. Nine Asian-Pacific countries took part, including Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, and Thailand.
Both India and China are each seeking greater influence over the strategically important country of Myanmar.
For example, after Myanmar signed an agreement with China in 2005 to supply natural gas, India responded by cutting its own gas deal with Myanmar.
South Korea has also, of course, joined the scramble.
President Roh Moo-hyun visited Malaysia and agreed to expand mutual economic cooperation mainly in information technology, bio-technology, and resources and energy.
Roh reportedly also discussed exporting defense materials worth $2.3 billion, including training aircraft, destroyers, and armed vehicles.
Moreover, in January 2006, Korean Defense Minister Yoon agreed with the Philippines to deliver two used patrol boats.
In this crowded power play, only Japan is left out, choosing for the most part to remain aloof and cultivate its relations with the US, which is now to supply anti-missile technology to counter the North Korean threat.
But, despite deep historical animosity over World War II, there are increasing calls in the region for Japan to expand its influence to counterbalance China.
In reality, Japan is not ready for this, because it still strongly adheres to “self-imposed restraints” against “influence over other countries in security and defense,” including weapons exports.
In the 1960’s, as its economic takeoff was proceeding, Japan initiated a serious dialogue with regional players, aiming to build stronger relations with countries that it had once conquered and occupied.
The Coming Confrontation with North Korea
KYIV – Imagine it is 2020.
The director of the CIA requests an urgent meeting with the US president.
The reason: North Korea has succeeded in making a nuclear bomb small enough to fit inside the tip of an intercontinental ballistic missile capable of reaching the continental United States.
The news soon leaks to the public.
High-level meetings to devise a response are held not just in Washington, but in Seoul, Tokyo, Beijing, and Moscow as well.
This scenario may seem unreal today, but it is more political science than science fiction.
North Korea just carried out its fifth (and apparently successful) test of a nuclear explosive device, doing so just days after testing several ballistic missiles.
Absent a major intervention, it is only a matter of time before North Korea increases its nuclear arsenal (now estimated at 8-12 devices) and figures out how to miniaturize its weapons for delivery by missiles of increasing range and accuracy.
It is difficult to overstate the risks were North Korea, the world’s most militarized and closed society, to cross this threshold.
A North Korea with the ability to threaten the US homeland might conclude it had little to fear from the US military, a judgment that could lead it to launch a conventional, non-nuclear attack on South Korea.
Even if such a war ended in North Korea’s defeat, it would be extraordinarily costly by any measure.
That said, North Korea would not have to start a war for its nuclear and missile advances to have real impact.
If South Korea or Japan ever concluded that North Korea was in a position to deter American involvement in a war on the Peninsula, they would lose confidence in US security assurances, raising the possibility that they would develop nuclear weapons of their own.
Such decisions would alarm China and set the stage for a regional crisis or even conflict in a part of the world with the greatest concentration of people, wealth, and military might.
There is another risk as well.
A cash-strapped North Korea might be tempted to sell nuclear arms to the highest bidder, be it a terrorist group or some country that decided that it, too, needed the ultimate weapon.
By definition, nuclear proliferation increases the chances of further nuclear proliferation – and with it the actual use of nuclear weapons.
The US has options, but none is particularly attractive.
As for negotiations, there is little if any reason to be confident that North Korea would give up what it considers to be its best guarantee of survival.
In fact, it has often used negotiations to buy time for further advances in its nuclear and missile capabilities.
Another option is to continue with a version of the current policy of extensive sanctions.
The problem is that sanctions will not be potent enough to force North Korea to give up its nuclear and missile programs.
This is partly because China, fearing large refugee inflows and a unified Korea in America’s strategic orbit should North Korea collapse, will most likely continue to ensure that it gets the fuel and food it needs.
As a result, it makes more sense to focus on diplomacy with China.
The US, after consulting closely with South Korea and Japan, should meet with Chinese officials to discuss what a unified Korea would look like, so that some Chinese concerns could be met.
For example, a unified country could be non-nuclear, and any US military forces that remained on the Peninsula could be fewer and farther south than they are now.
It is of course possible or even probable that such assurances would not lead to any meaningful diminution in Chinese support for North Korea.
In that case, the US would have three more options.
One would be to live with a North Korea in possession of missiles that could bring nuclear bombs to US soil.
The policy would become one of defense (deploying additional anti-missile systems) and deterrence, with North Korea understanding that any use or spread of nuclear weapons would lead to the end of the regime and possibly nuclear retaliation.
Cyber weapons might also be employed to obstruct and impede the progress of North Korea’s program.
The second option would be a conventional military attack, targeting North Korean nuclear and missile capabilities.
The danger is that such a strike might not achieve all of its objectives and trigger either a conventional military attack on South Korea (where nearly 30,000 US troops are based) or even a nuclear attack from the North.
Needless to say, Japan and South Korea would have to be prepared to support any US military response before it could be undertaken.
The third option would be to launch such a conventional military attack only if intelligence showed North Korea was putting its missiles on alert and readying them for imminent use.
This would be a classic pre-emptive strike.
The danger here is that the intelligence might not be sufficiently clear – or come early enough.
All of which brings us back to that possible day in 2020.
If much is unknown, what seems all but certain is that whoever wins November’s US presidential election will confront a fateful decision regarding North Korea sometime during her or his term.
A Korean Helsinki Process?
SEOUL – Last month, North and South Korea narrowly avoided a catastrophic military confrontation.
After 40 hours of strenuous negotiations, the South agreed to stop loudspeaker broadcasts into the demilitarized zone between the two countries, in exchange for the North expressing “regret” for the South Korean soldiers killed by a landmine blast in the DMZ three weeks earlier.
While the crisis featured North Korea’s familiar belligerence and aggressive rhetoric, there were also some interesting new twists.
Understanding these developments could help to generate enough momentum to initiate, after more than seven years of confrontation, genuine inter-Korean cooperation and help guide the peninsula toward a more peaceful and secure future.
The first new development is the South Korean leadership’s much firmer response to provocations from the North.
In 2010, the South Korean public was sharply critical of the military’s failure to retaliate immediately following the North’s sinking of the Cheonan, a South Korean warship carrying more than 100 personnel, and its shelling of Yeonpyeong Island later that year.
After the recent landmine blasts, by contrast, President Park Geun-hye would not back down from her demands that the North, which denied planting the mines, apologize.
Her approval ratings soared to 50%, from around 34% the previous month.
This shift, while popular in South Korea, carries serious risks for the peninsula.
If an unyielding South becomes engaged in another military game of chicken with the often-audacious and always-erratic North, the results could be catastrophic.
In this sense, an institutional framework for permanent inter-Korean peace is more urgent than ever.
The second development relates to China, which remained silent throughout the latest crisis – a significant departure from its stance in 2010, when it actively sided with North Korea on the international diplomatic stage.
Of course, it is impossible to know whether China’s response this time marks a genuine strategic withdrawal from its role as the North’s only ally and key economic benefactor.
China’s leaders may simply have decided that a tactical disciplining of the North’s leadership was in order.
But, at a time when China’s relationship with South Korea is deepening, the silence has been deafening.
If China really is distancing itself from North Korea, Kim Jong-un’s regime will be almost entirely isolated internationally.
Will Kim respond to that isolation recklessly, by continuing to antagonize the South, or pragmatically, by becoming more flexible?
That is not an easy question to answer.
It should be clear to Kim by now that his parade of provocations is not benefiting his country.
His bellicose behavior in 2013, for example, worsened his relationships with China, South Korea, and the United States simultaneously; and in the recent crisis, all he earned was a halt to mocking loudspeaker broadcasts.
But Kim is not exactly known for his pragmatism or diplomacy.
Kim’s intentions may become clearer next month, when the North is expected to commemorate the 70th anniversary of the founding of the ruling Korean Workers’ Party by conducting a nuclear test and launching a new intercontinental missile.
But China, South Korea, and the US – whose policies toward North Korea are now more closely aligned than ever – should not simply wait to see what happens.
They should initiate a dialogue with the North and take steps to dissuade Kim from continuing on his path of antagonism.
The third new development on the peninsula is a growing awareness among North Koreans of their country’s dire situation.
At this point, the shift is most apparent among North Korean soldiers in the DMZ, for whom the South’s recent broadcasts were highly demoralizing.
Today’s young soldiers represent the so-called Jangmadang (“black market”) generation that came of age under the marketization process that followed the massive famine in the mid-1990s.
Exposed to South Korean movies, music, and other products, they recognize the yawning gap between their government’s propaganda and the country’s grim reality.
The South’s loudspeaker broadcasts drove the point home.
As the marketization process continues, soon it won’t be just the soldiers who see through the regime’s propaganda.
The time for bottom-up change in the North may not be far off.
This opens up a new policy option for the West: impelling North Korea to dial back its foreign and security policy by deepening its economic and social engagement with the rest of the world.
The benefits for the North would drastically change the regime’s strategic calculus, particularly concerning nuclear weapons.
International linkages – or, rather, sanctions that blocked the benefits of such linkages – were vital to Libya’s decision to denuclearize and Iran’s willingness to reach an agreement with world powers regarding its nuclear program.
Sanctions have been less effective in North Korea, largely because the population did not know what it was missing.
Similarly, growing connections between groups within the Soviet bloc and the West played a major role in bringing about the 1975 Helsinki Accords.
The accords represented an effort to improve East-West relations during the Cold War, and included an emphasis on human rights.
Most important, they achieved the kind of sustained engagement that is badly needed on the Korean Peninsula today.
The aftermath of the August crisis may be the moment to think seriously about how to balance continued sanctions on North Korea with deeper economic and social ties.
Without such an approach, North and South Korea could, before long, be locked in another military standoff.
The next one may not end so well as the last.
Managing North Korea’s Collapse
LOS ANGELES – In the last few months, North Korea has again displayed remarkable temerity.
First, the regime threatened to conduct more nuclear tests if the United Nations does not withdraw its recommendation to prosecute the country’s leaders for crimes against humanity at the International Criminal Court.
Moreover, US officials claim that the regime mounted a clandestine cyber attack on Sony Pictures, allegedly over objections to “The Interview,” a slapstick movie premised on an assassination attempt against North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un.
Then, in yet another melodramatic twist, Kim offered in his New Year’s address to resume talks with South Korea.
The Kim regime’s actions obviously merit consideration.
But they should not divert attention from the real risks on the Korean Peninsula: Kim’s uncertain grip on power and the dangers that could be unleashed should his regime fall apart.
Indeed, none of the region’s key strategic players – China, the United States, and South Korea – seem to be adequately prepared for such a scenario.
That needs to change.
Crucially, the long-standing presumption that the US should take the lead in responding to what happens in North Korea also needs to be reconsidered.
The North’s behavior almost certainly reflects mounting turmoil among the elite.
For more than a year, the regime has been carrying out a purge of high-level officials, beginning with the execution of Kim’s uncle, Jang Song Taek, in 2013.
Subsequent executions of Jang’s entourage and advisers, the recall of Jang’s associates from posts abroad, and the attempted kidnapping in France of the son of one of his assistants attest to the level of alarm in Kim’s inner circle.
The elevation of Kim’s inexperienced 27-year-old sister, Kim Yo-jong, to a senior post, is another indication of growing anxiety.
The potential for instability has not gone unnoticed in China.
An article published late last year in the official media by a prominent retired People’s Liberation Army general describes the North Korean regime as terminal.
The article’s appearance is a clear sign that China’s leaders are debating how deeply they can afford to be drawn in if the regime collapses.
A similar discussion needs to take place in the US.
There is no question about what America’s responsibility would be if the Kim regime’s downfall led to all-out war.
The security agreement between the US and South Korea mandates a military response.
What is less clear is the role that the US should play in the event of a peaceful collapse.
America’s contingency planning is classified.
But publicly available evidence suggests that US forces and resources are expected to play the primary role.
In 2013, a former principal deputy director of national intelligence wrote that America’s interests could require major use of US armed forces.
Last year, the Rand Corporation estimated that as many as 270,000 troops would be needed just to secure the North’s nuclear weapons.
In light of the costly interventions in Iraq and Afghanistan, the US should give careful thought to its plans – and consider limiting its involvement as much as possible.
Sixty years after the end of the Korean War, South Korea is well equipped to take the lead in the event of a North Korean collapse.
With a trillion-dollar economy, world-class technology, a 500,000-strong military, and a vibrant, well-educated society, the country is capable of planning, manning, and paying for the aftermath of a peaceful end to the Kim regime.
In order to do so, however, South Korea will need to invest in its capabilities to stabilize North Korea and manage its transition.
Recent plans for major cuts in the South Korean military, along with a lack of public discussion about the country’s role in the wake of Kim’s fall, suggest that much work remains to be done.
If South Korea takes the lead, the US will be able to concentrate on its top priority: North Korea’s nuclear arsenal.
Whether the Kim regime collapses with a bang or a whimper, the country’s nuclear weapons will present both an immediate danger and a future proliferation threat.
Ensuring that these weapons are not used, moved, or exported is a task that will require the capabilities of the US armed forces.
Communication with China will be essential.
If North Korea collapses, the Chinese may well send troops.
As US and South Korean forces would most likely be operating on the same territory, they will need to avoid misperceptions or mistakes that could cause unintended clashes.
China’s military relations with its North Korean counterparts also could play a stabilizing role, particularly if the Kim dynasty’s demise unleashes internal strife.
Given the instability in North Korea, each country should define its role now.
Careful consideration, not events in Pyongyang, should drive their discussions, and the understandings and policies they produce.
North Korea Makes History
Historical turning points are normally easier to identify in retrospect.
But it will not require years to determine whether North Korea’s test of a nuclear explosive device qualifies as one. It does.
The question is whether it proves to be a turn for the better or for the worse.
Some argue that little has changed as a result of the test.
The world assumed for years that North Korea possesses enough nuclear material to make a half-dozen or more basic nuclear bombs.
The test made explicit what was implicit.
But what was assumed is now known.
So much has changed.
North Korea has challenged the world; the question is how the world responds.
The stakes could hardly be higher.
North Korea’s leaders have a history of aggressiveness, a demonstrated contempt for their people, and a record of selling just about anything (from drugs and counterfeit dollars to missile parts) to earn hard currency.
The danger is that they might be tempted to use a nuclear weapon, act irresponsibly in the belief that such weapons shield them, or sell one to terrorists.
A second danger concerns the regional consequences of North Korea’s test.
Northeast Asia is a dynamic arena, home to many of the world’s powers, including China, Russia, Japan, the two Koreas, and in many ways the United States.
This dynamism could lead to instability, owing to multiple sources of mistrust and the lack of strong regional institutions to help manage rivalries.
Global consequences exist as well.
North Korea is now the ninth state with nuclear weapons, joining the five permanent members of the UN Security Council, Israel, India, and Pakistan.
The danger is that we may fast be approaching a tipping point.
How the world responds to North Korea is likely to affect the calculations of other would-be nuclear powers, including Iran.
Maintaining peace in a world in which literally dozens of fingers are on nuclear triggers will be far more difficult—and the consequences of failure far more destructive.
Initial reactions to North Korea’s nuclear test were uniformly critical, culminating (thus far) in UN Security Council Resolution 1718, which condemns the test, demands that North Korea resume full cooperation with the International Atomic Energy Agency, and imposes a range of military, political, and economic sanctions.
Nevertheless, North Korea’s leaders are clearly betting that they can get away with what they have done, and that the world will get used to their nuclear weapons program, much as it did with Israel, India, and Pakistan.
They may be right.
Both South Korea and China are reluctant to support robust sanctions.
South Korea’s “Sunshine Policy” is best understood as “unconditional engagement.”
Not surprisingly, this “all carrot, no stick” approach has failed to affect North Korean behavior.
China, for its part, has made clear that it does not intend to inspect cargo moving in and out of North Korea across their long common border to ensure it does not contain items prohibited by Resolution 1718.
While China opposes North Korea’s pursuit of nuclear weapons, it is even more opposed to policies that could threaten the North’s stability and lead to massive refugee crossings into China or to a unified Korea with its capital in Seoul.
So the challenge remains to devise a response that will gain widespread international backing and influence North Korean behavior and capabilities.
One option is a “preventive” military strike.
The problem is that it would almost surely trigger a massive, costly war, and it would not necessarily succeed in destroying all of North Korea’s hidden capabilities.
Moreover, both China and South Korea strongly oppose such a scenario, while the United States is poorly positioned to implement it, given its involvement in Iraq.
A second option is living with a nuclear North Korea.
The danger is less that North Korea might use nuclear weapons (although it might) than that it might sell them.
President Bush’s warning that “the transfer of nuclear weapons or material by North Korea to states or non-state entities would be considered a grave threat to the United States, and we would hold North Korea fully accountable of the consequences of such action,” is meant to deter this outcome.
The problem, of course, is that deterrence sometimes fails.
The third option is diplomacy.
North Korea would be expected to give up its nuclear weapons and place its nuclear material under international safeguards in exchange for formal security assurances, energy resources, and a range of political and economic benefits.
Such efforts should be renewed as soon as possible; the US should agree to bilateral as well as six-party talks with the North, possibly in exchange for a moratorium on nuclear tests.
It will take a blend of the three options – the threat of military force, the reality of economic sanctions, and the resumption of diplomacy —to deal with North Korea’s challenge.
This will not be easy, but it is worth pursuing, because the alternative—a desperate, hostile, nuclear-armed, and isolated North Korea—should alarm everyone.
No Appeasement for North Korea
WASHINGTON, DC – Earlier this month, North Korea carried out its fifth nuclear test – its second this year.
Judging by the tremor detected, it was the North’s most powerful nuclear device ever.
The question now is how the international community should respond.
That question has become all the more acute because, though North Korean reports are not exactly reliable, the propaganda that accompanied the latest test hinted that the North was testing a weapon design, not just an explosive device.
And, as South Korean officials have suggested, it may not be the last test of this year.
In other words, North Korea may begin to stockpile weapons of mass destruction.
Not only have the North’s recent nuclear tests been more powerful than those of previous years; they have also been conducted alongside an equally robust series of tests of ballistic missiles, including submarine launches and multi-stage rocket launches, with much more powerful engines.
This means that North Korea may be close to perfecting a delivery system for whatever weapons it is developing.
No one can say for sure whether a deliverable weapon will come from North Korea in the next two years, four years, or later.
But there is little doubt that the North Koreans are not just seeking attention; they are seeking a powerful bomb and the means to use it.
As expected, the international community has unvaryingly condemned the tests.
But not everyone agrees on what else to do.
Some observers, including New York Times contributor Joel S. Wit and former intelligence officer Scott Ritter, declare that now would be an appropriate time to initiate talks with the North Koreans.
The logic behind such suggestions seems to come down to, “What have we got to lose?”
The answer is simple: plenty.
Such talks – “dialogue” as the Chinese often call it – would most likely bring with it a general acceptance of North Korea as a nuclear-weapons state.
Moreover, the North would be unlikely to engage in any such talks, much less impose a moratorium on weapons tests, unless some of their longstanding demands – such as the suspension of joint military exercises by the United States and South Korea – were met.
This Realpolitik approach, some seem to believe, will somehow diminish whatever power the North Koreans wield, essentially disarming them.
But the truth is that the North has done nothing to earn such appeasement.
And, in fact, if the international community were to make any such conciliatory gestures, the result would be a bolder North Korea.
But there is a good reason why the international community – and the United States, in particular – has refused to agree to North Korea’s terms, particularly the suspension of US-South Korea military exercises.
Joint military exercises are an essential part of any alliance.
If two countries agree to mutual defense, they need to ensure that their cooperation is practiced and perfected.
That is precisely why North Korea, which knows a thing or two about the need for tests and exercises, has made the issue a top propaganda priority.
Instead of giving into such demands, the US has long held that it will engage in talks with North Korea only if they are based on previous agreements, including the September 2005 joint statement, which obliged the North to abandon all nuclear programs.
This is a sensible position.
After all, launching new talks that ignored past obligations would cast doubt on the viability of any new accord.
To be sure, pursuant to a February 2007 agreement, North Korea did take concrete steps to disable its nuclear facilities, including demolition of the cooling tower at its main atomic reactor in the Yongbyon Nuclear Scientific Research Center in June 2008.
Such measures were supposed to brake the country’s nuclear momentum, by ensuring that restarting the program would be costly – perhaps even prohibitively so.
But, by restarting its nuclear program without rebuilding the cooling tower, North Korea has avoided many of those costs.
Kim Jong-un’s regime – which has as little regard for the environment as it does for international rules and norms – simply called for the steaming water used to cool the reactor to be dumped into a nearby river.
Against this background, the argument for talks is weak.
After all, negotiations are simply a means to an end, and if that end is unclear or unlikely, it makes little sense to engage in them.
Instead, the international community should reject North Korea’s demands outright, ending the regime’s fantasy that the world will simply accept it as a nuclear-weapons state.
Fortunately, the international community’s response to North Korea’s nuclear ambitions generally aligns with this imperative.
What is needed is more cooperation with China on sanctions enforcement, as well as deep and quiet talks with the Chinese that aim to address any strategic mistrust over the eventual political arrangements on the Korean Peninsula.
The US should also continue to strengthen its security relations with Japan and South Korea, including by developing and deploying antiballistic missile systems.
Direct measures like those that were allegedly used to hamper Iran’s nuclear program should be explored and accelerated.
None of this is to say that engaging North Korea is not an option.
On the contrary, previous agreements should remain on the table.
The September 2005 deal addressed North Korea’s key national interests: it gained assurances of peace and diplomatic recognition, in exchange for the dismantling of its nuclear program.
If the Kim regime really wants an opportunity to join the international community, it has everything it needs, written, agreed, and ready to be implemented.
If, however, it wants to continue its march toward nuclearization, it should know, beyond a shadow of a doubt, that it will remain a pariah.
Its status as a nuclear-weapons state will never be accepted.
North Korea’s Choice
NEW YORK – When the Republic of Korea was established in 1948, Korea was one of the poorest countries in the world.
GDP per capita was US$67 in 1953, immediately following the Korean War, and rose to only US$79 in 1960.
At that time, North Korea’s economy was much stronger than that of the South.
Natural resources were abundant in the North, and even electricity was supplied from North to South.
Most industry was located in the North, whereas the South was mainly agricultural.
Today, the South’s GDP is 40 times larger than that of the North.
Comparing the two Korean economies is virtually meaningless.
Such disparities do not arise from different historical experiences, because Koreans have shared a history for thousands of years as one nation.
The gap, instead, reflects recent historical choices.
By persistently adhering to a planned economy and obsolete ideology, North Korea is trapped in a vicious cycle, suffering from unstable food supplies and low, or sometimes negative, economic growth.
Nonetheless, North Korea has shown little interest in reform.
Instead, it has developed a nuclear weapons program that threatens stability in the region and places a heavy burden on its economy.
South Korea, which is enjoying unprecedented prosperity, is becoming increasingly uncomfortable with North Koreans’ economic despair.
Probably no two neighboring countries have such a huge economic gap, let alone countries that share the same ethnic and historical background.
The danger is that such a discrepancy can become a source of instability and conflict.
To overcome its economic deficiencies and attain social stability, the North has no choice but to abandon its nuclear weapons program and move toward reform and greater openness.
South Korea is trying to persuade the North to make this strategic decision. 
We are more than willing to help the North achieve economic growth, which is almost always the source of peace and security.
As such, North Korea’s economic recovery is vital for an enduring peace on the Korean Peninsula.
So, in accordance with the Six-Party Talks (North and South Korea, the United States, Russia, China, and Japan) my government wants to create a Korean Economic Community in collaboration with the North.
In cooperation with the international community, we will help North Korea raise its annual per capita income to US$3,000.
To this end, we will carry out joint projects in five key areas: education, finance, industrial infrastructure, quality of life, and economic development.
But an institutional mechanism is needed to implement this initiative, such as an inter-Korean consultative body. 
Of course, mere economic assistance or investment is not sufficient for a country to bail itself out of the vicious circle of underdevelopment and poverty.
A national economy can take off only when the necessary infrastructure, an adequate level of competition, and reasonable government policies are in place.
We know how difficult it is to achieve such conditions, because we had to do it ourselves.
Our vision for an inter-Korean economic community is based on sharing our experiences with the North.
True, inter-Korean relations have already expanded. But this expansion has not brought fundamental change to the two Koreas’ relationship.
An incident at Mt. Geumgang last July demonstrated the relationship’s vulnerable nature.
A middle-aged South Korean female tourist was shot to death while walking on the beach, having inadvertently crossed over the boundary of the tourist zone.
No North-South dialogue has emerged to investigate the incident, or to prevent a recurrence.
Under these circumstances, there are greater calls in South Korea for a new approach towards the North.
We now believe that inter-Korean relations should conform to principles and standards that any member of the international community should respect.
Another key consideration is to consolidate a sustainable peace structure on the Korean Peninsula.
This cannot merely be a state of affairs like the current one, in which hostilities are absent. It refers to an enduring peace, which is not easily affected by incidents or accidents and is able to prevent politico-military crises such as that caused by the North’s nuclear program.
The only way to realize such a peace is by completing North Korea’s denuclearization and establishing a peace regime on the Korean Peninsula.
As of today, the Six-Party Talks is the principal framework to open up the future of the North.
If the North abandons its nuclear weapons program, many benefits can be gained.
Relations between the North and its neighbors can improve, along with a greater probability of forming a Northeast Asia peace and security mechanism.
Fortunately, America’s removal of North Korea from its list of state sponsors of terrorism has re-started the denuclearization process.
But the North’s prior threat to resume work at the facilities suggests that this process may be fitful.
Moreover, since South Korea’s new government took office earlier this year little progress has been made in relations between the two Koreas.
But our vision will eventually open up ways to solve North Korea’s problems, not only bringing a better future for the North, but also making the Korean Peninsula a gateway for peace and prosperity in Northeast Asia.
Leaders in the North may mistakenly believe that they can circumvent or outmaneuver the South – the so-called strategy of driving a wedge between the Republic of Korea and the US.
But in the end, South Korea is the neighbor whom the North can truly trust and rely on the most.
The North should realize this and make a wise choice.
North Korea’s Powerful Weakness
CAMBRIDGE – When US President Barack Obama and Chinese President Xi Jinping met for their “shirt-sleeves summit” in California last month, North Korea was a major topic of conversation.
The subject was not new, but the tone was.
More than two decades ago, the International Atomic Energy Agency caught North Korea violating its safeguards agreement and reprocessing plutonium.
After the North renounced the subsequent Agreed Framework, negotiated by President Bill Clinton’s administration, in 2003, it expelled IAEA inspectors, withdrew from the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, and has since detonated three nuclear devices and conducted a variety of missile tests.
During those two decades, American and Chinese officials frequently discussed North Korea’s behavior, both privately and in public meetings.
The Chinese consistently said that they did not want North Korea to develop nuclear weapons, but claimed that they had limited influence over the regime, despite being its major supplier of food and fuel.
The result was a somewhat scripted exchange in which China and the US would accomplish little more than professing denuclearization as a shared goal.
China was sincere in expressing its desire for a non-nuclear Korean Peninsula, but the nuclear issue was not its primary concern.
It also sought to prevent the collapse of the North Korean regime and the resulting potential for chaos on its border – not only flows of refugees, but also the possibility that South Korean or US troops could move into the North.
Torn between its two objectives, China placed a higher priority on preserving the Kim family dynasty.
That choice gave rise to a seeming paradox: North Korea gained surprisingly powerful influence over China.
North Korea has what I call “the power of weakness.”
In certain bargaining situations, weakness and the threat of collapse can be a source of power.
To take a well-known example, if you owe a bank $1,000, the bank has power over you; but if you owe the bank $1 billion, you may have considerable bargaining power over the bank.
China is, in this sense, North Korea’s over-exposed banker.
As a result, China has tried to persuade North Korea to follow its market-oriented example.
But, with the Kim regime terrified that economic liberalization would eventually provoke demands for greater political freedom, China’s influence over the regime is limited.
As a Chinese official once told me in an unguarded moment, “North Korea has hijacked our foreign policy.”
North Korea has amplified its power by playing its weak hand audaciously.
The North’s leaders know that superior South Korean and US military forces would win a full-scale military conflict.
And yet, with 15,000 artillery tubes in the Demilitarized Zone, just 30 miles (48 kilometers) north of Seoul, the South Korean capital, they also know that they could wreak havoc on South Korea’s economy, whereas the North has relatively less to lose.
North Korea has long been adept at flaunting its willingness to take risks, provoking a crisis in 2010 by sinking a South Korean naval vessel and shelling a South Korean island.
This spring, it conducted a nuclear test and a series of missile tests, accompanied by a stream of bellicose rhetoric.
Now it appears that China is beginning to lose patience.
It has less confidence in the North’s inexperienced new ruler, Kim Jong-un, than it had in his father, Kim Jong-il.
Chinese leaders are also beginning to recognize the risks that North Korea is imposing on China.
With more nuclear tests, a demand for nuclear weapons could grow in South Korea and Japan.
Moreover, if this spring’s sharp rhetoric from the Kim regime is followed by provocations against South Korea like those that occurred in 2010, South Korea could respond forcefully, and China might be drawn in.
The signs of a change are intriguing.
Following the “frank” discussion of North Korea by Xi and Obama, Xi hosted a summit with South Korean President Park Geun-hye, without first meeting with its official North Korean ally.
Instead, two senior North Korean officials subsequently visited Beijing and were scolded for the North’s behavior.
By contrast, Xi and Park issued a joint statement proclaiming the importance of faithfully implementing United Nations Security Council resolutions that call for sanctions against North Korea, as well as a multilateral agreement in 2005 that obliges the North to exchange its nuclear-weapons programs for economic and diplomatic benefits.
Both leaders urged a resumption of the six-party talks on denuclearization, which have been suspended since 2009.
What comes next is uncertain.
North Korea has tempered its rhetoric and behavior, but the Kim regime has given no indication that it is willing to give up the nuclear-weapons program that it regards as vital to its security and prestige.
In the long run, economic and social change may help to resolve the situation.
China’s dilemma remains that if it pushes too fast for reform, the Kim regime may collapse.
Faced with that prospect, the US and South Korea could take steps to reassure China that they would not exploit such a situation by moving their troops to China’s border.
In the past, when the US has suggested quiet talks to discuss contingency planning in the case of regime collapse, China has been wary of offending and weakening North Korea.
But finding a formula to talk about such contingencies may be the next step for China as it seeks to overcome its quandary.
North Korea’s Missile Tantrum
SEOUL – Once again, tension is rising across Asia over North Korea’s missile program.
Unlike its previous “surprise” missile launches, North Korea’s government this time notified international agencies in advance that it will launch a “satellite” sometime between April 4 and 8.
The question for the world now is not whether the North Korean regime will launch its missile, but what happens afterward.
The United States, Japan, and South Korea have already publicly condemned the launch as a “provocative act” and a violation of United Nations Security Council Resolution 1718, adopted in October 2006, five days after North Korea conducted a nuclear weapons test.
But, instead of hot rhetoric, what is needed now is a cool-headed assessment of the military implications of the missile launch.
If Japan, the US, and others attempt to intercept or counter the missile, military tension – even possible combat – is likely to ensue.
How to prevent unnecessary military measures and countermeasures is the most immediate concern for the region’s governments.
Above all, the ongoing six-party talks (China, the US, Japan, Russia, South Korea, and North Korea) that have sought to bring North Korea’s nuclear program to an end must not become a casualty of the missile launch.
In dealing with North Korea, two fundamental issues must be addressed.
First, although governments are justified in criticizing North Korea for its foolhardy, counterproductive, and self-destructive behavior over many years, including numerous inhuman acts perpetrated against its own people and others, North Korea is not solely to blame for its “missile tantrum.”
Indeed, the Bush administration’s unilateral behavior, including the dismantling of the 1994 Geneva Agreed Framework with North Korea, the hyping of an enriched uranium deal, and the infamous “axis of evil” speech, have all increased the paranoia of an already paranoid regime.
So former President Bush’s foreign policy toward North Korea, especially during his first term in office, must take a fair share of responsibility for the present mess.
More fundamentally, no one should think that North Korea’s totalitarian communist system can be changed overnight.
No one inside or outside can remove its anachronistic dynastic-communist regime, and no outsider can hope to modify quickly the policy behavior of its fossilized military, party, and administrative bureaucrats.
These are the cold realities of North Korea today.
But cold realities do not necessarily have to turn into hot combat.
Indeed, the idea of warfare on the Korean peninsula should be unthinkable, given the grotesque levels of deaths that it would likely cause.
Even to contemplate such a possibility is proof of diplomatic failure, not a triumph of real leadership.
A leadership mismatch has, moreover, been a central obstacle in resolving the problem of North Korea’s weapons of mass destruction and the ultimate question of achieving a unified Korea.
Since the emergence of two separate regimes and systems on the Korean Peninsula in 1948, South Korea and the US (its only defense ally) have dealt with only two “supreme leaders,” Kim Il-sung and Kim Jong-il.
During the same period, there have been 10 South Korean presidents and 11 US presidents.
For the past 10 years, three South Korean presidents and three US presidents have been attempting to deal with the same “perpetual” leader – Kim Jong-il.
From Kim’s perspective, encountering such leadership changes and subsequent policy clashes are both bewildering and difficult to assimilate.
Just on the South Korean side, he has had to cope with Kim Dae-jung’s “sunshine policy” of engagement, Roh Moo-hyun’s on again, off again diplomacy, and current President Lee Myung-bak’s confrontational stance.
From the US, he has confronted engagement on the part of Bill Clinton, unilateral confrontation from George W. Bush, and the nascent “principled engagement” of Barack Obama.
This form of leadership mismatch has also disturbed relations between South Korea and the US.
The discrepancy between the two-term, four-year US presidency and one-term, five-year South Korean presidency has sometimes been problematic, and the respective policies toward North Korea of US and South Korean administrations have often collided.
When they do, both sides must spend an enormous amount of time and effort in reaching a consensus on North Korea, which leaves the isolated North breeding all sorts of conspiracy theories.
The Korean question is even more intractable and perplexing if the leadership changes of other concerned parties in the region such as China, Japan, and Russia are factored into the political equation.
The long-term result of all this is oscillation between dialogue and deadlock, which has led to periods of uncertain engagement or heated confrontation.
To break this sterile cycle, what is needed now is not more hot rhetoric about North Korea’s missiles, but a commitment to steady, patient diplomacy that transcends changes in the political cycle.
There is no quick fix in disentangling the Korean knot. Only persistence and commitment will do.
The Dear Sister Disappears
TOKYO – The Korean peninsula is stirring.
In December, South Koreans will go to the polls to choose President Lee Myung-bak’s successor in what is currently a three-way contest.
Meanwhile, China is seeking to seize opportunistically on the recent flare-up of a territorial dispute between South Korea and Japan to court the government in Seoul.
But, perhaps most important, one of the pillars of the North Korean dictatorship may now be cracking – at a time when the country must once again cope with a severe, man-made food shortage.
On September 25, the South Korean media reported rumors that Kim Kyong-hui, the sister of the late “Dear Leader,” Kim Jong-il – and the aunt of North Korea’s twenty-something leader Kim Jong-un – was seriously ill.
The reports have not been confirmed, but her name was missing from the list of attendees at a recent Supreme People’s Assembly.
In secretive North Korea, that seems to be a clear sign that something is afoot.
Singapore and China have been mentioned in Asian intelligence circles as possible treatment locations for Kim Kyong-hui.