This prompted various suggestions for reforming sovereign-debt markets.
Resuscitating ideas advanced in the wake of Argentina’s earlier default, some experts proposed creating an international bankruptcy court in the IMF.
Others suggested that Argentina might issue bonds under European – or even domestic – law.
But experience has shown that bondholders are not inclined to subordinate their claims to some untested international bankruptcy court.
The only thing they would like less are obligations whose terms were enforced by courts as easy to manipulate as Argentina’s.
As for borrowing in European currencies, Griesa was quick to declare that his rulings would cover such bonds as well.
Fortunately, there is a simple solution to these problems.
Investors could agree to insert language into bond contracts that leaves no room for vulture funds.
First, they could clarify the pari passu clause, specifying that it guaranteed comparable treatment for existing bondholders, not for existing bondholders and earlier bondholders whose claims were already extinguished.
Second, issuers could add “aggregation clauses” specifying that an agreement supported by a qualified majority of a country’s bondholders, say, two-thirds, would bind one and all.
There was already movement after Argentina’s earlier default to add “collective-action clauses” that allowed the holders of an individual bond issue to take a binding vote to accept a restructuring offer.
But this still allowed the vultures to block the process by buying up a third of a particular bond issue.
By contrast, purchasing a third of a country’s entire debt stock, as required for a blocking position when all bondholders vote together, is an altogether more costly proposition.
In 2003, in an article in the American Economic Review, Ashoka Mody and I made the case for these provisions.
They are basically what the International Capital Market Association of leading investors and issuers has now agreed to implement, subject to some additional details that need not be examined here.
Why didn’t it happen sooner?
The answer is that getting investors to agree is like herding cats.
In this case, it required strong behind-the-scenes leadership from the US Treasury.
The agreement is not perfect, and problems remain. Because new contractual provisions are not easily retrofitted into old bonds, it will take years before the clauses are included in the entire stock of debt.
Establishing an international bankruptcy court would be a far more efficient solution, but that doesn’t make it feasible.
Investors were wise to acknowledge that, in international capital markets, the perfect is the enemy of the good.
The Renminbi’s Grand Tour
REYKJAVIK – European and Chinese officials have made two notable announcements in recent weeks.
On June 18, China’s second largest financial institution, China Construction Bank, was designated as the official renminbi clearing bank for London.
The next day, the Frankfurt branch of the Bank of China, the country’s largest commercial bank, received the same designation for the eurozone.
Both announcements were greeted with great acclaim.
British Chancellor George Osborne hailed the creation of a London clearing bank as “hugely important” for the financial future of the City.
Joachim Nagel of the German Bundesbank lauded the Bank of China announcement as a “milestone on the road toward creating a renminbi trading center in Frankfurt.”
We should expect these kinds of enthusiastic pronouncements from European officials, who are desperate for good news, whatever its source.
But should the rest of us care?
After all, banks, firms, and even individuals already can buy renminbi for their pounds and euros.
A range of financial institutions, both locally and in Hong Kong, have long stood ready to provide this service.
The only difference is that the two big Chinese banks, when doing business in London and Frankfurt, will be permitted to purchase renminbi in China itself when their foreign customers demand it.
The People’s Bank of China (PBOC) will give them a quota for this purpose.
Other banks, when seeking to provide renminbi to their clients, are limited to bidding for the fixed supplies that circulate offshore.
This raises their costs and limits demand for their services.
Thus, by permitting two clearing banks to access renminbi onshore, Chinese officials are effectively subsidizing their London and Frankfurt operations and encouraging direct sterling and euro trades.
But London and Frankfurt would be reckless to bank on rapid growth in their renminbi transactions.
In its most recent survey of foreign-exchange markets, in April 2013, the Bank for International Settlements found that renminbi-dollar trades averaged $113 billion a day, whereas direct renminbi-euro trades totaled a mere $1 billion, while direct renminbi-sterling trades amounted to even less.
In practice, when Europeans want China’s currency, they use their euros and pounds to buy dollars, and then use those dollars to buy renminbi.
This reflects the fact that the market in dollar-denominated assets is exceptionally deep and liquid, which limits transaction costs.
In other words, European practice reflects the dollar’s “exorbitant privilege” as the only true global currency, freely accepted by currency traders and investors in China and around the world.
Chinese officials presumably believe that this situation will change over time.
Once banks offer new assets denominated in renminbi, more customers will be drawn into the market, thereby adding liquidity and reducing transaction costs for purchases of renminbi in European currencies.
The dollar’s asymmetric role will be superseded.
At that point, the renminbi, the euro, and sterling will all play consequential international roles.
Thus, the decision to designate renminbi clearing banks in London and Frankfurt is, in effect, one more step by China to foster the emergence of an international monetary system with several global currencies, not just one.
It is a step toward creating a better match between our multipolar global economy and its monetary and financial system – and thus a step toward ending the world economy’s dependence on the dollar, which European and Chinese policymakers have complained about since the global financial crisis erupted in 2008.
But it is only a step.
Deep and liquid markets are not built in a day.
In June 2013, when the PBOC unexpectedly tightened monetary policy, domestic interbank interest rates shot up to 25%.
Thus, even a quota that permits an offshore clearing bank to tap funding in China does not guarantee that it can obtain that funding at a reasonable price.
Moreover, if China develops financial problems, capital outflows may accelerate.
The Chinese authorities may then be forced to tighten the quotas made available to the clearing banks.
Market liquidity would be a casualty.
One can also question how much appetite European investors will display for renminbi-denominated financial assets.
In the past, demand for such assets has been fed by the expectation that the renminbi will continue to appreciate.
If Chinese growth slows, such expectations might well dissolve.
There is no doubt that, with time, the renminbi will acquire a more consequential international role.
Twenty-first-century financial technology will facilitate direct trading in a variety of different currencies, eliminating the need and custom of routing virtually all international transactions through the dollar.
Ultimately this will spell the end of America’s “exorbitant privilege.”
Just not yet.
And not anytime soon.
Leaners of Last Resort
OSLO – With Jeremy Stein’s return to his academic post at Harvard at the end of May, the US Federal Reserve Board lost its leading proponent of the view that monetary policy should be used to lean against financial excesses.
Stein’s view, expressed in a speech earlier this spring, is that central banks should be less aggressive in their pursuit of full employment in an environment of heightened financial risk.
His position is a refutation of former Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan’s doctrine that the central bank should not adjust policy in response to financial-sector excesses, but instead should concentrate on reacting to any problems that subsequently arise.
The question is whether Stein’s new view is justified.
In principle, the answer is straightforward.
If a central bank has two policy targets, then it needs two instruments: monetary policy to influence aggregate demand, and regulatory policy to limit financial risks.
In practice, however, the answer is more complicated, because the question has several components.
What should monetary policymakers do when regulators are prone to falling down on the job?
In particular, should they raise interest rates?
To what indicators should they look when determining whether regulators have failed to do their part?
And is monetary policy a sufficiently subtle instrument to address the resulting risks?
In the wake of the global credit crisis, the answer to the first question is not in doubt.
There is a clear victor in the “lean versus clean” debate.
Central banks cannot concentrate only on cleaning up after crises; the costs of financial instability are too high.
Rather, as recent events have amply shown, the monetary authority must lean against excesses as they develop.
That leaves the question of how to detect the existence of excesses, and the question of what, exactly, to do about them.
Stein proposes focusing on risk premiums in the bond market.
When yields on risky bonds decline toward those on safe assets, it is fair to conclude, he argues, that someone is taking on excessive risk.
The problem, then, is how to determine exactly when risk premiums are too low.
Some suggest focusing on rapid increases in the volume of bank and nonbank lending to the non-financial private sector as an indicator that lending is growing riskier.
Others recommend monitoring the leverage ratio, particularly the ratio of capital to assets in the banking system, on the grounds that banks are the weak link in the financial chain.
These suggestions are all indicative of central bankers’ instinctual desire to reduce complex decision-making to simple rules.
But the disagreement among experts shows that the search for simple rules is futile.
Here as elsewhere, central bankers have no alternative but to consider the broader context and rely on their judgment.
Finally, there is the question of whether monetary policy is the right instrument to use in response to the risks arising from financial instability and, if so, how aggressively to use it.
Inevitably, the answers are colored by the United States’ experience in 1929, when the Fed tightened policy in response to what it perceived as excesses on Wall Street, only to plunge the economy into the Great Depression.
In fact, exactly the same debate raged then.
On one side were Fed governors who argued that the only effective way to rein in financial excesses was to raise interest rates.
On the other side were officials, like George Harrison of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, who worried about the impact on the broader economy and preferred to use other instruments to address financial imbalances.
Harrison’s alternative was “direct pressure” – that is, using the Fed’s regulatory powers and moral suasion to persuade member banks to curtail their lending to the stock market.
Of the two views, Harrison’s was the more sophisticated.
The problem was that the Fed’s macro-prudential instruments were undeveloped.
No sooner did the Federal Reserve System’s member banks limit their provision of credit to purchasers of securities than non-member banks, insurance companies, and trust companies ramped up their lending, allowing the stock market to race ahead.
In the wake of this failed experiment, even Harrison was forced to acknowledge that reining in the market required policymakers to make lending more expensive for the financial sector as a whole.
The Fed then raised its policy rates in the summer of 1929 – and the rest, as they say, is history.
The implication is clear: Central banks should focus on developing more effective macro-prudential instruments.
They should widen the regulatory perimeter – that is, they should work to bring nonbank financial institutions under their regulatory umbrella.
They should use the resulting instruments and powers preemptively.
And they should adjust monetary policy to address potential financial risks as a last resort, not as their first line of defense.
Banking on the BRICS
BERKELEY – For the leaders of the BRICS countries (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa), the announcement in July of their agreement to establish a “New Development Bank” (NDB) and a “Contingent Reserve Arrangement” (CRA) was a public-relations coup.
The opportunity for a triumphal group photo was especially welcome for Brazilian President Dilma Rousseff, in light of her country’s ignominious World Cup defeat and slack economy, and for Russia’s President Vladimir Putin, given the international reaction against his government’s support of the rebels in Ukraine.
The agreement was also an opportunity for the five countries to reiterate their dissatisfaction with the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, and the role of the dollar in the global monetary system.
The BRICS possess just 11% of the votes in the IMF, despite accounting for more than 20% of global economic activity.
The US Congress refuses to ratify the agreement reached in 2010 to correct this skewed state of affairs.
And the United States has displayed no willingness to renounce its anachronistic privilege of nominating the World Bank’s president.
Meanwhile, the share of the dollar in global foreign-exchange reserves remains more than 60%, while 85% of global foreign-exchange transactions involve dollars.
Given the reluctance of underrepresented countries to sign up for the IMF’s precautionary credit lines, central banks desperate for dollars can obtain them only from the Federal Reserve.
The Fed was reasonably forthcoming in providing dollar swaps in the last crisis in 2008; but there is no guarantee that it will behave similarly in the future.
Thus, the BRICS’ dissatisfaction with the status quo is understandable.
The question is whether their NDB and CRA will make a difference.
The logic for the NDB is compelling.
The BRICS, and developing countries generally, have immense infrastructure needs.
China may not have an infrastructure deficit, but it has something else: large construction companies that welcome the opportunity to undertake additional projects abroad.
Hence the incentives of the NDB’s prospective creditors and borrowers are happily aligned.
Moreover, there already is a proliferation of regional development banks, from the Inter-American Development Bank and the Asian Development Bank to the more modestly capitalized African Development Bank.
These institutions cooperate with the World Bank.
Their existence creates no major problems for the Bretton Woods institutions.
There is no reason why the NDB should create problems, either.
With initial capital of just $100 billion, it is too small to make a major contribution to global infrastructure needs.
But inadequate capitalization can be corrected over time.
The CRA – intended to lessen the BRICS’ dependence on the Fed and the dollar – is another story.
The five participants agreed to earmark $100 billion of their foreign-exchange reserves for swap lines on which all members are entitled to draw.
But here the interests of prospective borrowers and lenders are not obviously compatible.
The next BRICS country experiencing a crisis will want to draw on the CRA.
But the other members will hesitate to lend more than token amounts, especially if there are repayment doubts.
In contrast to development finance, the incentives of potential lenders and borrowers are not aligned.
Permitting the lenders to impose policy conditions on borrowers, and to monitor their compliance, can redress this problem.
But imposing conditionality on sovereign states is a delicate matter – especially when the countries involved are as large, proud, and diverse as the BRICS.
It is difficult to imagine Brazil, for example, accepting policy conditions laid down by China.
Other attempts to establish networks of swap lines and credits, such as the Chiang Mai Initiative, which was negotiated in the wake of the Asian crisis, have been bedeviled by the same problem.
The Chiang Mai network is even larger than the CRA.
But, given the divergent interests of lenders and borrowers, it has never been used – not even in 2008, at the height of the global financial crisis.
The architects of the Chiang Mai Initiative attempted to finesse the problem by requiring countries that draw more than 30% of their swaps to negotiate a program with the IMF.
Ironically, the “Treaty for the Establishment of a BRICS Contingent Reserve Arrangement” contains exactly the same provision.
So much, then, for the CRA as an alternative to the IMF.
And, if inclusion of that provision was not revealing enough, then there is the fact that the BRICS’ commitments to the CRA are expressed in US dollars.
The NDB makes sense for the BRICS, and it has a future.
But the CRA is empty symbolism, and that is how it will be remembered.
A Requiem for Global Imbalances
BERKELEY – The start of 2014 marks ten years since we began fretting about global imbalances, and specifically about the chronic trade and current-account imbalances of the United States and China.
A decade later, we can happily declare that the era of global imbalances is over.
So now is the time to draw the right lessons from that period.
America’s current-account deficit, which was an alarming 5.8% of GDP as recently as 2006, has now shrunk to just 2.7% of GDP – a level that the US can easily finance from its royalty income and returns on prior foreign investments without incurring additional foreign debt.
Even more impressive, China’s current-account surplus, which reached an extraordinary 10% of GDP in 2007, is now barely 2.5% of national income.
There are still a few countries with worrisomely large surpluses and deficits.
Germany and Turkey stand out.
But Germany’s 6%-of-GDP surplus is mainly a problem for Europe, while Turkey’s 7.4% deficit is mainly a problem for Turkey.
In other words, theirs are not global problems.
Back in 2004, there were two schools of thought on global imbalances.
The Dr. Pangloss school dismissed them as benign – a mere reflection of emerging economies’ demand for dollar reserves, which only the US could provide, and American consumers’ insatiable appetite for cheap merchandise imports.
Trading safe assets for cheap merchandise was the best of all worlds.
It was a happy equilibrium that could last indefinitely.
By contrast, adherents of the Dr. Doom school warned that global imbalances were an accident waiting to happen.
At some point, emerging-market demand for US assets would be sated.
Worse, emerging markets would conclude that US assets were no longer safe.
Financing for America’s current-account deficit would dry up.
The dollar would crash.
Financial institutions would be caught wrong-footed, and a crisis would result.
We now know that both views were wrong.
Global imbalances did not continue indefinitely.
As China satisfied its demand for safe assets, it turned to riskier foreign investments.
It began rebalancing its economy from saving to consumption and from exports to domestic demand.
The US, meanwhile, acknowledged the dangers of excessive debt and leverage.
It began taking steps to reduce its indebtedness and increase its savings.
To accommodate this change in spending patterns, the dollar weakened, enabling the US to export more.
The renminbi, meanwhile, strengthened, reflecting Chinese residents’ increased desire to consume.
There was a crisis, to be sure, but it was not a crisis of global imbalances.
Although the US had plenty of financial problems, financing its external deficit was not one of them.
On the contrary, the dollar was one of the few clear beneficiaries of the crisis, as foreign investors, desperate for liquidity, piled into US Treasury bonds.
The principal culprits in the crisis were, rather, lax supervision and regulation of US financial institutions and markets, which allowed unsound practices and financial excesses to build up.
China did not cause the financial crisis; America did (with help from other advanced economies).
This is not to deny the enabling role of international capital flows.
But the flows that mattered were not the net flows of capital from the rest of the world that financed America’s current-account deficit.
Rather, they were the gross flows of finance from the US to Europe that allowed European banks to leverage their balance sheets, and the large, matching flows of money from European banks into toxic US subprime-linked securities.
Both critics and defenders of global imbalances almost entirely overlooked these gross flows in both directions across the North Atlantic.
The next time that global imbalances develop, analysts will – we must hope – know to look beneath their surface.
But will there be a next time?
A couple of years ago, forecasters were confident that global imbalances would reemerge once the crisis passed.
That now seems unlikely: Neither the US nor China is going back to its pre-crisis growth rate or spending pattern.
Nor are earlier trade balances about to reemerge.
America’s trade position will be strengthened by the shale-gas revolution, which promises energy self-sufficiency, and by increases in productivity that auger further re-shoring of manufacturing production.
Emerging markets, for their part, have learned that export surpluses are no guarantee of rapid growth.
Nor do large international reserves guarantee financial stability.
There are better ways to enhance stability, from strengthening prudential supervision to taxing and controlling destabilizing capital flows and letting the exchange rate adjust.
All of this suggests that the accumulation of foreign reserves by emerging and developing countries – another phenomenon over which much ink has been spilled – may be about to peak.
Then it will be just another problem laid to rest.
Chinese Industrialization and its Discontents
TOKYO – As the Third Plenum of the 18th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party convenes in Beijing, China stands at a crossroads.
Its recent growth record is stupendous; no country in history can match it.
But China’s economic imbalances are also stupendous.
The country has sustained its output growth by investing fully one-half of GDP, though no country can productively invest more than a third of national income for an extended period.
Household consumption accounts for only one-third of GDP, compared to two-thirds in a normal economy.
Associated with this low level of consumption is widening inequality – between the countryside and the cities, and between the political elites and the masses.
University graduates with rising aspirations cannot find the office jobs that they seek and will not accept the factory jobs that they are offered.
Social unrest, whether expressed in blogs or spontaneous demonstrations, is mounting.
China’s leaders understand all of this.
They acknowledge the need to rebalance the economy from investment to consumption, and they recognize that this means developing the service sector, where good white-collar jobs will be found.
They also appreciate the need to build a social safety net and strengthen rural property rights.
But Chinese officials worry that the shift from investment to consumption, and from manufacturing to services, will mean slower growth.
Less investment will mean less capital deepening.
Expanding the service sector, where productivity is low, will hold back aggregate output.
And if growth decelerates further – the annual rate has already dropped from 10% to 7.5% – social unrest may increase.
Knowing this, Chinese leaders may hesitate to move ahead with needed reforms, causing imbalances to continue to rise.
But this cannot go on indefinitely.
At some point, the ticking time bomb will explode, and the growth rate will crash.
So where should Chinese leaders look for help in meeting these challenges?
It may seem improbable, but they can find guidance from the United Kingdom.
Just as Chinese industrialization is unprecedented – no developing country has grown by more than 10% per year without interruption for two full decades – Britain’s industrialization 200 years ago was similarly unparalleled.
Britain was, of course, the homeland of the Industrial Revolution.
Its economic growth was faster than that of any economy in human history up to that time.
But Britain’s rapid growth created severe problems.
There was growing inequality, or so it appears from recent scholarly contributions to the so-called “standard-of-living debate.”
There was the alienation of smallholders’ property, in what was known as the “enclosure movement.”
And there were complaints about urban pollution and inhumane factory conditions in what William Blake called Britain’s “dark Satanic mills.”
Inevitably, there were eruptions of social unrest.
Recall the Luddites, who responded to the early nineteenth-century mechanization of the textile industry by smashing the new technology, and the Swing Riots, in which workers destroyed threshing machines.
British politicians responded by reforming the social safety net.
In 1834, the New Poor Law established national standards for social benefits.
In the face of considerable controversy, assistance continued to be provided without requiring the poor to enter oppressive workhouses.
Outdoor relief, as the alternative was known, was expanded as the most cost-effective way to address the poverty problem.
Second, political reform gave voice to the rising middle classes.
The 1832 Reform Act gave the vote to individuals with at least £10 of property – not an inconsequential sum, to be sure, but low enough to enfranchise the middle class.
The act also created a system of special courts to adjudicate disputes over voter registration.
Moreover, along with political reform came policy changes aimed at rebalancing the economy.
Abolition in 1846 of the Corn Laws, which had propped up the declining agricultural sector, facilitated structural shifts, first toward manufacturing and then toward services, notably financial services.
Finally, British politicians did not seek to maintain at any cost their country’s position as the world’s fastest-growing economy.
Admittedly, they faced criticism when the United States, Germany, and other countries overtook Britain in the late nineteenth century.
But, by not standing in the way of the economy’s natural evolution from agriculture to industry and then to services, they enabled the United Kingdom to enjoy a full century of sustained economic growth.
China may regard the nineteenth-century experience of a windswept island off the northwest coast of Europe as an odd source of inspiration.
But if Chinese leaders meeting at their party plenum accomplish half as much as their nineteenth-century English predecessors, they will have done very well indeed.
Minimum Wage or Living Income?
LONDON – Most rich countries now have millions of “working poor” – people whose jobs do not pay enough to keep them above the poverty line, and whose wages therefore have to be subsidized by the state.
These subsidies take the form of tax credits.
The idea is a very old one.
England implemented its “Speenhamland” system – a form of outdoor relief intended to offset rising bread prices – during the Napoleonic Wars.
In 1795, the authorities of Speenhamland, a village in Berkshire, authorized a means-tested sliding scale of wage supplements.
The supplements that families received varied with the number of children and the price of bread.
But the scheme was criticized for allowing employers to pay below-subsistence wages, because the taxpayer would make up the difference.
In 1834, the Speenhamland system was replaced by the New Poor Law, which confined relief to workhouses, under conditions sufficiently odious to force people back into the labor market.
Then, in the twentieth century, the Speenhamland principle was revived – and by none other than the free-market liberal Milton Friedman.
In 1962, Friedman proposed a “negative income tax,” whereby people earning below a certain threshold would receive supplemental income from the government, rather than paying taxes to it.
The idea was to get people off the dole and back to work.
It was implemented as the Earned Income Tax Credit in the United States and the Working Families Tax Credit in the United Kingdom.
At the same time, there have been efforts to raise the level of earned income by setting minimum-wage legislation.
But the minimum wage has never reached the floor set for a “living income” and has not, therefore, appreciably reduced the bill for wage subsidies.
In 2008, about 5.5 million working families in the UK received tax credits, including working and child credits, housing benefits, and local tax benefits.
Austerity policies have reduced this number to 4.3 million.
Given that there were 11.4 million working households in the UK in 2012, this means that an astonishing 38% did not receive a “living wage.”
Or, to put it another way: the market-clearing wage was unable to provide a living income for 38% of working families.
These are the “working poor.”
In his July 8 budget announcement, Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne proposed to cut £12 billion ($18.6 billion) from the welfare bill over the next four years as part of his deficit-cutting plan.
Of this, £9 billion will come from cutting the tax subsidies for working families.
To offset this cut, Osborne proposed to raise the minimum wage from £6.50 per hour to £9 per hour over the same period.
The increase will fall on employers, not the public purse, and so the reduction in credits and benefits is a net gain for Her Majesty’s Treasury.
An analysis by the Institute for Fiscal Studies has concluded that while the Treasury will save £12 billion, the gross increase in pay from the higher minimum wage amounts to only £4 billion.
As Paul Johnson, head of the IFS, put it: “There is simply not enough money going into the new minimum wage to anywhere near compensate in cash terms people on tax credits.”
But even if the minimum wage were raised sufficiently to offset the withdrawal of tax credits, transferring more of the cost of labor from taxpayers to employers would be the wrong strategy.
The reason is that for many – perhaps most – people, work will be a declining source of income.
After all, one prediction on which we can confidently rely is that automation will make increasingly large inroads into the world of human work.
Up to 50% of existing jobs may be at risk in the next 20 years.
It is at least an open question whether enough new jobs can be found to replace them, or, indeed, whether it is desirable to continue producing more and more products simply to provide human employment at ever shrinking wages.
As robots increasingly replace human labor, humans will need incomes to replace wages from work. Whereas tax credits point in the direction of replacement incomes, raising the minimum wage points in the opposite direction, by making income more dependent on jobs.
In fact, focusing on the minimum wage would almost certainly speed up the automation process. Previous evidence that minimum-wage legislation does not reduce the demand for labor might not stand up against the rapidly falling cost of automating the production of goods and services.
In short, if Osborne is serious about his pledge to provide a “living income” for all, he should be moving toward the idea of a “basic” or “citizen’s” income, independent of the job market.
A simple way forward would be to provide all citizens an unconditional tax credit, which could be built up gradually as the rewards from work fall.
Both free-market and socialist thinkers have long advocated implementing a basic-income scheme.
But the idea has always fallen foul of two objections: societies are too poor to afford it, and it would be a disincentive to work.
The first objection is surely no longer true of the advanced economies, while the second is irrelevant, given that the goal is not to strengthen the incentive to work, but to enable people to live without work.
An unconditional basic income would make part-time work a possibility for many who now have to work full-time at non-living wages.
And all workers would begin to gain the freedom to make the same choices regarding how much to work, and under what conditions, that owners of substantial capital now have.
Bear Hunting in Romania
NEW YORK – Nicolae Ceausescu liked to hunt bear.
With his retinue, he would retreat to a lodge in Transylvania and sally forth, locked and loaded.
He was accustomed to good fortune, for his huntsmen took precautions.
They would chain some poor beast to a tree, drug it to keep it still, and conceal themselves around the blind from which the Great Man would shoot.
One day, they did their job haphazardly.
Ceausescu took aim, then fell backward when the bear, inadequately sedated, reared on its hind legs as if to attack.
His shot flew into the treetops, even as three bullets entered the bear’s heart from the snipers who guaranteed the dictator’s marksmanship.
This day, I was told by a forester who claimed to have witnessed the incident, Ceausescu did not acknowledge the applause of his retainers.
This could be the story of the Romanian revolution, 20 years ago.
The bear is the country’s enslaved people.
They rise up from slumber.
The emperor, alarmed, fires wildly and misses his mark.
The sharpshooters hidden in the forest take aim and fire, only this time their target is not the bear, but Ceausescu himself.
Just as the glory of the French Revolution ended in the Terror, so Eastern Europe’s miracle year of 1989 ended in blood.
Elsewhere, communist regimes seemed almost to run from power.
The people who deposed them celebrated largely painless victories.
Not so in Romania.
There, the country’s communist masters ordered the security forces to fire on the people.
They obeyed.
A civil war was fought, albeit briefly.
Revolution transmuted into a crypto-coup d’état.
It began in mid-December in the gritty industrial town of Timisoara, close to the Hungarian border.
When Ceausescu ordered the military to stage a show of force against those who dared oppose him, commanders took him literally: they put on a parade, complete with marching band.
Farce quickly turned to tragedy in the face of the dictator’s rage.
“I meant tanks, you fool,” he said, in effect, to Gen. Iulian Vlad, threatening to put him in front of a firing squad if he did not comply.
That night, roughly a hundred Romanian citizens died in the streets, and hundreds more were wounded.
The rest is well-known history.
On the morning of December 21, Ceausescu stepped onto the balcony of the Central Committee in the heart of Bucharest to address the people – cadres of state workers assembled, as was customary, to cheer on cue.
But something went wrong.
From the rear of the huge crowd came shouts: “Ti-mi-soara!
Ti-mi-soara!”
Then came the fateful call, shouted by perhaps one or two people but soon picked up by others: “Down with Ceausescu!”
Never had Ceausescu heard anything like it.
His face sagged.
Flustered, he stopped speaking, waved his arms in timid bewilderment, the weak and ineffectual gestures of an imposter.
This moment of truth lasted only a few seconds, but it was enough.
He stood revealed.
Revolutions are probably never as they seem, but Romania’s was especially ambiguous.
For, at the moment of Ceausescu’s speech, it became in effect two revolutions – one that played out publicly in the streets, and the other a deep and behind-the-scenes struggle for power among elites.
I sensed this arriving in Bucharest on December 26.
Visiting the television station, seized by a new provisional government called the National Salvation Front, I found an odd mélange of revolutionary leaders.
I could understand the poets, students, dissidents, and allegedly disaffected government officials.
But Gen. Stefan Gruse, the army chief of staff who commanded the troops in Timisoara?
The newly appointed president, Ion Iliescu, who was Ceausescu’s former chief propagandist?
Perhaps the most incongruous presence was Gen. Victor Stanculescu, a favorite of the Ceausescu’s who only days before had reportedly organized their evacuation from the rooftop of the Central Committee.
Other reports credited him with subsequently organizing both their trial and a firing squad – even before the legal proceedings began.
The “trial” itself lasted less than an hour.
Scarcely seven minutes after the sentence was read out, had the executioners done their work.
The event was videotaped, to be aired to an astonished nation the next day, but in the rush the cameraman’s power cable was yanked from the wall as the convicted couple was dragged out to an open-air courtyard.
By the time he caught up, soldiers were already shooting.
Nicolae Ceausescu lay on his back, in the overcoat and suit in which he had fled, his blue-grey eyes staring vacantly at the sky.
Elena had fainted and was shot where she lay.
Beggar-Thy-Neighbor Exchange Rates?
GENEVA – When the Swiss National Bank (SNB) recently brought its interest rate down to 0.25%, it announced that it would engage in “quantitative easing,” following in the footsteps of the United States Federal Reserve and the Bank of England.
More surprising was the simultaneous announcement that it was intervening on the foreign-exchange market with the aim of reversing the appreciation of the franc.
Will this be the first salvo in a war of competitive devaluations?
Interest rates are traditionally low in Switzerland.
Like most other central banks confronted with the recession, the SNB has reduced its policy interest rate all the way to the zero lower bound.
Once there, traditional monetary policy becomes impotent, as the interest-rate tool is no longer usable.
This is why central banks are now searching for new instruments.
Quantitative easing represents one such attempt.
It remains to be seen whether it can effectively restore some monetary-policy influence.
However, an important issue is rarely mentioned: in small, open economies – a description that applies to almost every country except the US – the main channel of monetary policy is the exchange rate. 
This channel is ignored for one good reason: exchange-rate policies are fundamentally of the beggar-thy-neighbor variety.
Unconventional policies that aim at weakening the exchange rate are technically possible even at zero interest rates, and they are quite likely to be effective at the level of individual countries.
Boosting competitiveness through exchange-rate depreciation may not succeed in raising exports in a situation where world trade is rapidly contracting, but it can cushion the blow by switching demand toward domestically produced goods and services.
The risk is that those countries that suffer from the switch retaliate and depreciate their own currencies.
That could easily trigger a return to the much-feared competitive depreciations that contributed to the Great Depression.
The first casualty would be whatever small scope remains for international policy coordination.
The second would be the world international monetary system.
In fact, one key reason for the creation of the International Monetary Fund was to monitor exchange-rate developments with the explicit aim of preventing beggar-thy-neighbor policies.
This is why the Swiss move comes as a surprise.
It is true that the franc has appreciated in real terms by 8% since the crisis started in August 2007.
This is commonly attributed to the currency reputation as a safe haven during troubled times.
What this really means is that the appreciation is neither a consequence of monetary policy nor the other usual factors.
In any case, while the Swiss authorities’ discomfort with the situation is understandable, their decision is disquieting.
The Swiss franc is not the only currency that has appreciated in recent months.
Other small economies have undergone even sharper real appreciations.
For example, Poland and the Czech Republic have seen their currencies go up by close to 30% and 15%, respectively.
Major countries also have undergone currency appreciations – 30% for Japan and 15% for China.
These countries, too, are facing a recession, and, while the interest rate has not yet reached its zero bound everywhere, incentives to depreciate might grow in the near future.
In fact, the incentives are already there.
Some fairly large countries – Korea, Sweden, and the United Kingdom, to name a few – have already undergone some very large depreciations.
In fact, Poland’s currency recently started to depreciate.
None of these countries’ central banks has indicated that it was involved in depreciating its currency.
Of course, statements and intentions may not be identical.
It may be that the SNB merely acknowledges what other central banks do not.
In doing so, however, the SNB is violating a taboo: “Thou shall not engage in competitive depreciations.”
Alternatively, it may be that the SNB mostly wishes to talk the franc down to break the safe-haven effect.
Having promptly achieved depreciation, it may have succeeded.
In that case, the franc will not move much more, in any direction, and there will be no need for further interventions.
It may also be that notice has been taken of the precedent, and that those authorities that intend to use it to justify future moves are loathe to criticize it.
In that case, the generalized silence could indicate that all other central banks entertain the possibility of using that option, which would be most worrisome.
Smokeless China
BEIJING – In a few weeks, Beijing will implement a city-wide ban on smoking in all indoor public spaces, such as restaurants and offices, as well as on tobacco advertising outdoors, on public transportation, and in most forms of media.
If the initiative, agreed late last year by the municipal people’s congress, is successful, China may impose a similar ban nationwide.
A significant decline in smoking would undoubtedly bring enormous public-health benefits to China.
But is it feasible?
With an estimated 300 million smokers, China represents one-third of the world’s total and accounts for an average of roughly 2,700 tobacco-related deaths per day.
The costs of treating smoking-related diseases, not to mention the associated productivity losses, are considerable.
But China has so far struggled to reduce smoking or enforce bans effectively.
Indeed, despite ratifying the World Health Organization’s Framework Convention to Tobacco Control in 2005, China failed to fulfill its commitment to ban indoor smoking by 2011.
Moreover, tobacco output increased 32%.
Bans have since been implemented in 14 Chinese cities, including Shanghai, Hangzhou, and Guangzhou.
But they have done little to reduce smoking, owing not only to weak enforcement, but also to the prevailing view, held by 75% of Chinese adults, that smoking does not cause serious harm.
(Only about 16% of Chinese smokers report an intention to quit.)
Against this background, the Beijing municipal authorities’ plan to fine smokers up to CN¥200 ($32) for lighting up in public places appears unpromising at best.
The obvious question is why China’s government, which is not known to be shy about imposing paternalistic policies in other areas, does not simply ban cigarette production and use altogether.
After all, other countries and localities, from Scandinavia to New York City, have made smoking prohibitively expensive and illegal in most public places.
The reason why China has not taken this path lies in the jobs and revenue that the industry provides.
The state-owned China National Tobacco Corporation sells almost all of the cigarettes consumed in the country; indeed, it is the world’s largest cigarette manufacturer, supplying 2.5 trillion annually, which in turn generates CN¥816 billion (7-10% of GDP) in revenue.
Indeed, tobacco receipts finance as much as half of some provincial governments’ budgets.
Even in an authoritarian country like China, the loss of so much income, not to mention the ire of 300 million addicts, would make prohibition a huge challenge.
But there is an alternative that could help appease angry citizens and mitigate the revenue loss from an outright ban on smoking: electronic cigarettes.
Given that e-cigarettes merely heat a nicotine solution to produce an inhalable vapor, they release none of the carcinogenic tar of cigarette smoke, making them the ideal nicotine-delivery system for smokers seeking – or being forced – to reduce or halt their tobacco intake.
Aside from being far less damaging than cigarettes, e-cigarettes are a homegrown product, invented in China in 2003.
But, despite considerable progress in China’s e-cigarette industry – in 2013, Shenzhen province housed 900 manufacturers of the devices, up 200% from 2012, and accounted for over 95% of global e-cigarette production – traditional cigarettes still dominate the Chinese market.
As Yanzhong Huang of the Council on Foreign Relations recently pointed out, “If only 1% of China’s smoking population turned to e-cigarettes, it would mean a market of about 3.5 million e-cigarette users.”
The China National Tobacco Corporation could become the world’s largest e-cigarette maker.
One reason China has not managed to tap the e-cigarette industry’s enormous potential is a lack of adequate regulation.
Low entry barriers enable intense competition that diminishes producers’ profit margins, and shoddy products are rife, owing to low manufacturing standards.
If e-cigarettes are to replace traditional cigarettes and offset lost tobacco revenues, the government must regulate the industry more carefully to ensure safety and quality.
But such efforts will mean little without a shift in people’s attitudes.
Here, the ban on smoking in public places or during official activities imposed in 2013 on Chinese Communist Party and government officials could be helpful.
As Huang explains, if more officials turn to e-cigarettes, ordinary people might be inspired to follow suit.
Already, it seems that the directors of the China National Tobacco Corporation have complied with a government-mandated ban on cigarette smoking.
Whether they have become e-cigarette “vapers” is not known.
A smoke-free China – one that benefits from rising productivity and massive health-care savings – may seem like a pipe dream.
But a country-wide ban on smoking, with a reliable e-cigarette industry providing an alternative (both to smokers and to budgets), offers an intriguing way to turn the dream into reality.
Beijing Versus the Billionaire
BANGKOK – China’s government and Hong Kong’s wealthiest man, the much-admired Li Ka-shing, have been waging an acidic spat – one that increasingly looks like a bitter divorce being played out in tabloid newspapers.
Indeed, Chinese media have lately been directing a relentless stream of vitriol at Li.
His “crime”?
Buying low in Europe and selling high in China – that is, acting like an investor.
The trigger for this wave of scorn was Li’s sell-off of some of his prime Shanghai properties, after relocating his corporate registry from Hong Kong to the Cayman Islands.
This is a completely mundane and rational business decision, aimed at minimizing tax obligations.
Indeed, some 70% of all Hong Kong-listed companies have a Caribbean registry, and even a number of major mainland companies, including the Internet giant Alibaba, are registered in offshore tax havens.
But, in the Chinese media’s puerile narrative, the move exposes Li as “ungrateful” and “unpatriotic.”
He is “abandoning” China – which, it is claimed, enabled him to rise from extreme poverty to become one of the world’s wealthiest men – when the country needs him most.
This absurd account neglects the fact that Li was already one of the world’s wealthiest people before he ever invested in China.
Perhaps more important, it fails to recognize that Li’s Chinese land holdings still amount to more than 20 million square meters (215 million square feet) – nearly a quarter of the size of Manhattan – and that the number of retail outlets he owns in China has increased by 70% in two years.
But the facts are irrelevant.
This is a matter of politics.
As China attempts to tighten its grip on Hong Kong, Li is showing independence, and China’s new rulers – who, true to their communist roots, believe firmly in top-down control – do not like it one bit.
The ongoing squabble represents a significant shift in Li’s relationship with China’s government.
A former adviser to Deng Xiaoping and confidante of former President Jiang Zemin (whose political influence is now waning), Li was among the first to invest in China after the Tiananmen Square massacre of 1989.
He long touted the motto, “I don’t do anything against China’s interest, and I don’t say anything that may hurt China’s reputation.”
That changed in 2012, when Leung Chun-ying was appointed as Hong Kong’s chief executive.
China’s first choice for the position, Henry Tang, was forced to withdraw because of private indiscretions and a disgraceful bid to have his wife take the fall for a zoning violation.
Leung became China’s man in Hong Kong, responsible for doing the Chinese government’s bidding – including taking an uncompromising position against pro-democracy protests by students and intellectuals.
Indeed, even as China’s agenda in Hong Kong has become increasingly tough – and thus unpopular locally – Leung has proved himself to be absolutely loyal to China’s rulers.
Li, however, stood by Tang.
More problematic, he has occasionally dissented publicly from Leung’s various misguided policies.
As any student of the People’s Republic knows, expressions of political disagreement, however mild, can be lethal.
There is no “agree to disagree” in China; once the leader has spoken, there is only “obey.”
In Li’s case, the stakes are particularly high.
Unlike most of Hong Kong’s tycoons, who are considered excessively focused on political expedience, Li is viewed as a person of strong conscience and thus worthy of considerable respect.
He even enjoys the affectionate nickname “Superman.”
But now, China’s rulers, through Leung, are pushing potentially disastrous policies aimed, in Chinese Communist Party parlance, at “de-colonizing” Hong Kong.
For example, officials recently declared that judicial independence and the separation of powers are “colonial” legacies that should be discarded, with China’s government and Hong Kong’s chief executive, not the local courts, calling all the shots.
In this moment of transition, dissent from someone of Li’s standing could have precisely the kind of destabilizing impact that China’s leaders fear.
So Li has to be “de-deified.”
China’s attacks have pushed Li, after almost three weeks of stony silence, to do something he had never done before: strike back.
Not only did he point out that all of the accusations about his intentions to abandon China were false; he openly accused China of using tactics from the Cultural Revolution that left him “trembling with fear” and sent “shivers down the spine.”
Li concluded his statement with the message, delivered via three lines by two canonical Chinese poets from the ancient Tang and Song dynasties, that his home was where he felt safe.
The subtext to any literate Chinese was clear: “China may be my ancestral country, but I am a free man, free to choose my home.”
Li, an avid reader of world history and literature, has apparently not taken to heart the lesson that so many Chinese have learned, through great personal tragedies, since 1949.
The core values of China’s government are not informed by the humane civility of Tang or Song poets, but by the twisted dialectics of Marxism-Leninism and the amoral militaristic tradition of a party that still cherishes its often brutish and violent habits of governance.
As China’s leaders continue to push for more control over Hong Kong, spinal shivers are likely to become an increasingly common feature of life there.
Ben Bernanke’s Dream World
BERKELEY – US Federal Reserve Board Chairman Ben Bernanke is not regarded as an oracle in the way that his predecessor, Alan Greenspan, was before the financial crisis.
But financial markets were glued to the speech he gave in Jackson Hole, Wyoming on August 26.  What they heard was a bit of a muddle.
First of all, Bernanke did not propose any further easing of monetary policy to support the stalled recovery – or, rather, the non-recovery.
Second, he assured his listeners that “we expect a moderate recovery to continue and indeed to strengthen.”
This is because “[h]ouseholds also have made some progress in repairing their balance sheets – saving more, borrowing less, and reducing their burdens of interest payments and debt.”
Moreover, falling commodity prices will also “help increase household purchasing power.”
Finally, Bernanke claimed that “the growth fundamentals of the United States do not appear to have been permanently altered by the shocks of the past four years.”
Frankly, I do not understand how Bernanke can say any of these things right now.
If he and the rest of the Federal Open Market Committee thought that the projected growth of nominal spending in the US was on an appropriate recovery path two months ago, they cannot believe that today.
Two months of bad economic news, coupled with asset markets’ severe revaluations of the future – which also cause slower future growth, as falling asset prices lead firms to scale back investment – mean that a policy that was appropriate just 60 days ago is much too austere today.
But let me focus on Bernanke’s fourth statement.
Even if we project a relatively rapid economic recovery, by the time this lesser depression is over, the US will have experienced an investment shortfall of at least $4 trillion.
Until that investment shortfall is made up, the missing capital will serve to depress the level of real GDP in the US by two full percentage points.
America’s growth trajectory will be 2% below what it would have been had the financial crisis been successfully finessed and the lesser depression avoided.
There is more: state and local budget-cutting has slowed America’s pace of investment in human capital and infrastructure, adding a third percentage point to the downward shift in the country’s long-term growth trajectory.
After the Great Depression of the 1930’s, the vast wave of investment in industrial capacity during World War II made up the shortfall of the lost decade.
As a result, the Depression did not cast a shadow on future growth – or, rather, the shadow was overwhelmed by the blinding floodlights of five years of mobilization for total war against Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan.
There is no analogous set of floodlights being deployed to erase the shadow that is currently being cast by the lesser depression.
On the contrary, the shadow is lengthening with each passing day, owing to the absence of effective policies to get the flow of economy-wide nominal spending back on its previous track.
Moreover, there is an additional source of drag.
A powerful factor that diminished perceived risk and encouraged investment and enterprise in the post-WWII era was the so-called “Roosevelt put.”
Industrial-country governments all around the world now took fighting depression to be their first and highest economic priority, so that savers and businesses had no reason to worry that the hard times that followed 1873, 1884, or 1929 would return.
That is no longer true.
The world in the future will be a riskier place than we thought it was – not because government will no longer offer guarantees that it should never have offered in the first place, but rather because the real risk that one’s customers might vanish in a prolonged depression is back.
I do not know by how much this extra risk will impede the growth of the US and global economies.
A back-of-the-envelope estimate suggests that a five-year lesser depression every 50 years that pushes the economy an extra 10% below its potential would reduce average investment returns and retard private investment by enough to shave two-tenths of a percentage point from economic growth every year.
As a result, America would not just end this episode 3% poorer than it might have been; the gap would grow – to 7% by 2035 and 11% by 2055.
This is the shape of things to come if steps are not taken now to recover rapidly from this lesser depression, and then to implement policies to boost private capital, infrastructure, and education investment back up to trend.
Perhaps that would be enough to reassure everyone that policymakers’ current acquiescence in a prolonged slump was a horrible mistake that will not be repeated.
The New Loose Nukes
LOS ANGELES – Nobody would dispute the danger inherent in possessing nuclear assets.
But that danger becomes far more acute in a combat zone, where nuclear materials and weapons are at risk of theft, and reactors can become bombing targets.
These risks – most apparent in today’s chaos-ridden Middle East – raise troubling questions about the security of nuclear assets in volatile countries everywhere.
Two recent events demonstrate what is at stake.
On July 9, the militant group now known as the Islamic State captured 40 kilograms (88 pounds) of uranium compounds at Mosul University in Iraq.
The captured uranium was not weapons-grade; international inspectors removed all sensitive material from Iraq following the 1991 Gulf War (which is why it was absent when the United States invaded in 2003).
But what international response, if any, would have been initiated if the cache had been highly enriched?
On the same day, Hamas launched three powerful Iranian-designed rockets from Gaza at Israel’s Dimona reactor.
Luckily, two missed the target, and Israel managed to intercept the third.
But the episode represented a serious escalation of hostilities and served as an important reminder of the vulnerability of nuclear reactors in warzones.
In fact, Hamas made similar attempts to attack the Dimona complex in 2012, as did Iraq in 1991, with the aim of releasing the site’s contents to inflict radiological damage on Israel’s population.
(The perpetrators appeared clueless to the fact that certain weather conditions would have concentrated the radioactive debris in the Palestinian-majority West Bank.)
Of course, it is possible that these events are an aberration.
After all, the only conflict so far in which authorities have lost control of sensitive nuclear materials was the Georgia-Abkhazia War in the 1990s, when unknown forces seized a small amount of highly enriched uranium from a research institute.
Likewise, though there have been numerous attacks on nuclear reactors under construction, the sole threat to an operating plant in a combat zone outside of Israel occurred at the start of the fighting in ex-Yugoslavia, when Serbian nationalists considered attacking Slovenia’s Krško power plant and sent warplanes over the site.
The plant’s operators temporarily halted electricity generation to curb the risk of a radiation release, but nothing came of the threat.
Indeed, whenever nuclear assets have been least secure – during the Soviet Union’s collapse, China’s Cultural Revolution, and the Algiers putsch (when a group of mutinous retired generals set their sights on a nuclear device that France was testing in the Algerian desert) – they have not been compromised.
Even in Ukraine today, despite the escalating civil conflict, the country’s 15 nuclear power plants have remained untouched (though even with new defensive measures taken by Ukrainian officials, this could easily change).
It is impossible to know whether this benign pattern will hold.
But recent developments in the Middle East suggest that there are grounds for concern in other volatile countries, namely Pakistan, North Korea, and Iran.
Pakistan has a large nuclear weapons program and faces an expansive jihadi insurgency, which previously attacked military bases suspected of housing nuclear assets.
Though Pakistan has not experienced a nuclear breach, and the government insists that safeguards remain robust, the country’s increasingly frequent and severe bouts of instability raise serious questions about the future.
While North Korea’s nuclear arsenal is much smaller, persistent doubts about the regime’s sustainability make it a matter of grave concern.
In the event of the regime’s collapse – a distinct possibility – it would be difficult to prevent the diversion of its assets, or even the use of its weapons.