Obviously, this is not the first time the world has faced such problems, and the past can help to serve as a model for resolving them.
Late nineteenth- and early twentieth-century leaders sought to minimize the worst features of industrialization.
Child labor was abolished throughout the developed world, working hours and conditions became more humane, and a social safety net was put in place to protect vulnerable workers and stabilize the (often fragile) macroeconomy.
As we begin to seek enlightened solutions to the challenges that the Third Industrial Revolution presents, one overall theme looms large: The gains from technology must be channeled to a broader base of the population than has benefited so far.
That requires a major educational component.
In order to create broad-based prosperity, workers need the skills to participate in the brave new world implied by a digital economy.
Even that may not be sufficient, in which case it will become necessary to provide permanent income support to those whose jobs are displaced by software and machines.
Here, too, we should attend carefully to the lessons of the past.
King Ludd is Still Dead
CAMBRIDGE – Since the dawn of the industrial age, a recurrent fear has been that technological change will spawn mass unemployment.
Neoclassical economists predicted that this would not happen, because people would find other jobs, albeit possibly after a long period of painful adjustment.
By and large, that prediction has proven to be correct.
Two hundred years of breathtaking innovation since the dawn of the industrial age have produced rising living standards for ordinary people in much of the world, with no sharply rising trend for unemployment.
Yes, there have been many problems, notably bouts of staggering inequality and increasingly horrific wars.
On balance, however, throughout much of the world, people live longer, work much fewer hours, and lead generally healthier lives.
But there is no denying that technological change nowadays has accelerated, potentially leading to deeper and more profound dislocations.
In a much-cited 1983 article, the great economist Wassily Leontief worried that the pace of modern technological change is so rapid that many workers, unable to adjust, will simply become obsolete, like horses after the rise of the automobile.
Are millions of workers headed for the glue factory?
As Asian wages rise, factory managers are already looking for opportunities to replace employees with robots, even in China.
As the advent of cheap smartphones fuels a boom in Internet access, online purchases will eliminate a vast number of retail jobs.
Back-of-the-envelope calculations suggest that, worldwide, technological change could easily lead to the loss of 5-10 million jobs each year. Fortunately, until now, market economies have proved stunningly flexible in absorbing the impact of these changes.
A peculiar but perhaps instructive example comes from the world of professional chess.
Back in the 1970’s and 1980’s, many feared that players would become obsolete if and when computers could play chess better than humans.
Finally, in 1997, the IBM computer Deep Blue defeated world chess champion Gary Kasparov in a short match.
Soon, potential chess sponsors began to balk at paying millions of dollars to host championship matches between humans.
Isn’t the computer world champion, they asked?
Today, the top few players still earn a very good living, but less than at the peak.
Meanwhile, in real (inflation-adjusted) terms, second-tier players earn much less money from tournaments and exhibitions than they did in the 1970’s.
Nevertheless, a curious thing has happened: far more people make a living as professional chess players today than ever before.
Thanks partly to the availability of computer programs and online matches, there has been a mini-boom in chess interest among young people in many countries.
Many parents see chess as an attractive alternative to mindless video games.
A few countries, such as Armenia and Moldova, have actually legislated the teaching of chess in schools.
As a result, thousands of players nowadays earn surprisingly good incomes teaching chess to children, whereas in the days before Deep Blue, only a few hundred players could truly make a living as professionals.
In many US cities, for example, good chess teachers earn upwards of $100-$150 per hour.
Yesterday’s unemployed chess bum can bring in a six-figure income if he or she is willing to take on enough work.
In fact, this is one example where technology might actually have contributed to equalizing incomes.
Second-tier chess players who are good teachers often earn as much as top tournament players – or more.
Of course, the factors governing the market for chess incomes are complex, and I have vastly over-simplified the situation.
But the basic point is that the market has a way of transforming jobs and opportunities in ways that no one can predict.
Technological change is not all upside, and transitions can be painful.
An unemployed autoworker in Detroit may be fully capable of retraining to become a hospital technician.
Yet, after years of taking pride in his work, he could be very reluctant to make the switch.
I know a chess grandmaster who, 20 years ago, prided himself on his success at winning money in tournaments.
He vowed that he would never end up teaching children “how horsey moves” (the reference is to the knight, also called the horse).
But now he does exactly that, earning more from teaching “how horsey moves” than he ever did as a competitive chess player.
Still, it beats being sent to the knacker.
Of course, this time technological change could be different, and one should be careful in extrapolating the experience of the last two centuries to the next two.
For one thing, mankind will be confronted with more complex economic and moral questions as technology accelerates.
Still, even as technological change accelerates, nothing suggests a massive upward shift in unemployment over the next few decades.
Of course, some increase in unemployment as a result of more rapid technological change is certainly likely, especially in places like Europe, where a plethora of rigidities inhibit smooth adjustment.
For now, however, the high unemployment of the past several years should be mainly attributed to the financial crisis, and should ultimately retreat toward historical benchmark levels.
Humans are not horsies.
Трамп президенттігің салдары
ЛОНДОН – АҚШ-тағы президент сайлауына қатысты жаңсақ пікір айтқандарымыз эмоциямызды жиып, бір-екі ай күтейік, әрі Дональд Трамп әкімшілігінің әлемге не бере алатынын салқынқандылықпен ойланайық.
Сонымен, жетістігі мен салдарын қатар өрбіте отырып, Трамп президенттігінің ықтимал он нәтижесін тізіп көрейік.
Жақсы жаңалық – АҚШ-та экономикалық өсім басталады.
Экономика Барак Обама президенттігінің екінші мерзіміндегі 2,2 пайыз жылдық өсімнен де жылдам қарқын алады. Бұлай болатын себебі – Республикалық партияның мемлекеттік шығындар мен қарызға деген антипатиясы тек Обама сияқты демократ Ақ үйде отырған кезде оянады.
Ал Республикалық партия өкілі президент болса, онда партия шығындарды құлшыныспен арттырып, қарызды көптеп алуға кіріседі, президенттер Рональд Рейган мен Джордж У.
Буштың кезінде солай болған. Демек, Трамп Обама көп мәрте ұсынса да қабылдата алмаған Кейнс қаржылық ынталандырмасын жүзеге асырады.
Оның нәтижесіндегі дефицит Кейнс ынталандырмасынан гөрі «ұсыныс экономикасына» көбірек ұқсайды, бірақ олардың нәтижесі де ұқсас болмақ: экономика да, инфляция да өседі.
Энергетика және табиғатты қорғау заңдары төңірегіндегі айтыс-тартыстар баспасөзде басты жаңалық болып тұрғанда, ең үлкен экономикалық ықпал банктегі ережелердің өзгеруінен болады. Банктер әсіресе табысы орташа отбасыларға несие беру ережелерін жеңілдетуге  ынталандырылатындықтан, тұрғын үй құрылысы қарқын алып, қарыз алу арқылы тұтыну көлемі артады, ал бұл экономикалық өсімге серпін береді.
Шамадан тыс реттеу 2007 жылғыдай қаржы дағдарысы�� қайта тудыруы мүмкін, бірақ бұл да тек 2018 және одан кейінгі жылдары болуы мүмкін.
Төртіншіден, Трамп аз мерзімге болса да геосаяси тұрақтылықты қамтамасыз етуі мүмкін.
Обаманың либералдық интервенционизміне қарағанда Трамптың транзакциялық realpolitik-ті қолдауының арқасында Ресеймен және Қытаймен қарым-қатынас қалыпқа түседі, себебі әлем ықпал ету аймақтарына бөлінген.
Трамп Ресейге Украина мен Сирия мәселесінде еркіндік беріп, есесіне Орталық Еуропа мен Балқаннан аяғын тартқызады.
Қытай қауіпсіздігіне АҚШ-пен арадағы келісімдер кепілдік берген Жапония, Тайвань және басқа елдермен шектен асқан соғысқа килікпеген жағдайда Пекиннің Азияда үстемдік етуіне рұқсат етіледі. Таяу Шығыс геосаяси толқыныстардың ошағы болып қала береді, бірақ мұнда да Трамптың «демократияны ілгерілетуден» гөрі жергілікті диктаторларға көбірек арқа сүйеуі біршама тұрақтылық қалыптастырады (есесіне адам құқықтары нашарлайды).
Ең соңғысы, Трамп сайланған соң америкалықтар әлемде «демократияны дамытамыз» деген ойдан бас тартқанымен қоймай, өз демократияларының олқылықтарын да мойындауға мәжбүр болады.
Жалпыхалықтық дауыс беруде Трамптың 2 миллионға жуық дауысты кем жинауы Сайлаушылар алқасын реформалау әрекеттеріне жан бітіруі мүмкін.
Қазірдің өзінде дауыстардың 61 пайызын беретін штаттарда жалпыхалықтық дауыс беру жүйесін қолдайтын заң мақұлданды. Оның үстіне, Калифорния, Нью-Йорк сияқты тренд қалыптастыратын штаттардағы Трампқа деген жаппай наразылық сайлаушыларды штаттардағы ауаны ластамау мәселесі мен денсаулық сақтау және аборттан бастап, иммигранттарды емдеу, қару-жараққа бақылау орнату мәселелеріне қатысты прогрессивті заңдарды федералдық деңгейдегі консервативтік заңдарға қарсы қоя алатын заң шығарушыларды сайлауға итермелейді.
Енді нашар жаңалықтарға келейік.
1930-жылдардан бері алғаш рет АҚШ-та сауданы бір жақ толық жеңілетін ойын деп санайтын президент болады.
Трамптың сайлау науқаны кезіндегі протекционистік риторикасы дәл солай болады дегенді білдірмейтін шығар, бірақ егер ол берген уәдесінде тұрып, сауда кедергілерін орнатпаса, онда республикалықтар құлдырап бара жатқан өнеркәсіп орындары мен аймақтардағы негізгі сайлаушыларының қолдауынан айырылып қалады.
Демек, АҚШ еркін сауда, жаһандану және ашық нарықтағы ғаламдық көшбасшы рөлінен бас тартуға мәжбүр болады.
1980-жылдардан бергі ғаламдық экономикалық менеджменттегі ең ірі режим ауысуының барлық салдарын ешкім болжай алмайды, бірақ мұның дамушы елдердің экономикасы мен халықаралық компанияларға кері әсері болатыны анық, себебі олардың даму моделі мен бизнес стратегиялары еркін сауда мен капиталдың еркін ағынына негізделіп құрылған.
Екіншіден, қазірдің өзінде толыққа жақын жұмыс істеп тұрған экономикада салықтарды жаппай қысқартып, үкіметтік шығындарды көбейту инфляцияны арттырып, пайыздық мөлшерлемелерді жоғарылатады, немесе осы екеуінің аралас бір формасы көрініс табады. Сауда протекционзимі мен иммигрант жұмысшыларды шығарып жіберу ықтималдығын ескерсек, инфляцияның артуы мен ұзақмерзімдік пайыздық үстемелердің өсуі шектен асуы мүмкін.
Федералдық резерв бағаны ауыздықтау үшін қаржылық саясатты қанша агрессивті жүргізгеніне, немесе инфляцияның өсуіне жол беріп, экономиканы бір-екі жыл еркіне жіберіп қойса да, мұның қаржы нарығына салдары өте ауыр болмақ.
АҚШ экономикасының болжағаннан да жылдам өсіп келе жатқанын, ұзақмерзімді пайыздық мөлшерлемелердің артып бара жатқанын ескерсек, доллардың шамадан тыс күшеюі – үшінші үлкен қатер болмақ. Доллардың қазірдің өзінде-ақ асыра бағаланғанына қарамастан, ол өзін өзі қолдау үшін спираль бойынша жоғары өрлей беруі мүмкін.
1980-жылдардың басы мен 1990-жылдардың соңында солай болған. Мұндай жағдайда дамушы нарықтардағы үкіметтер мен компаниялардың доллармен алған қарыздарының пайыздық мөлшерлемелері нөлге жақындап қалады.
Төртіншіден, доллардың азаюы мен протекционизм саясаты бірлесіп дамушы елдерге ауыр зардап әкеледі. Бірақ даму стратегиялары еркін сауда мен сыртқы қаржыға онша иек артпайтын Бразилия, Үндістан, Ресей сияқты салыстырмалы түрде жабық экономикалар бұл қауіптен аман қалуы мүмкін.
Бесіншіден, Трамп жеңісінің ең қауіпті салдары – оның Еуропаға жұғу ықтималдығы.
Британиядағы референдумның Трамптың адам сенгісіз жеңісіне жол салып бергені сияқты қазір Трамп Еуропадағы популистік толқыныстардың басты индикаторы болып қалды.
Бұл еуроны тағы бір дағдарысқа ұшыратып, тіпті Еуропа одағының ыдырау қаупін тудыруы мүмкін.
Сауалнама нәтижелеріне қарасақ, истеблишментке қарсылар Италиядағы конституцияға қатысты референдум мен Австриядағы президент сайлауында келесі жеңістерін тойлауы мүмкін. Глобалистерге тек сауалнама нәтижелері қате болып шықса деп үміттенуден басқа ештеңе қалмай тұр.
Ten Reasons for Europe
PARIS – The euro, many now believe, will not survive a failed political class in Greece or escalating levels of unemployment in Spain: just wait another few months, they say, the European Union’s irresistible collapse has started.
Dark prophecies are often wrong, but they may also become self-fulfilling.
Let’s be honest: playing Cassandra nowadays is not only tempting in a media world where “good news is no news”; it actually seems more justified than ever.
For the EU, the situation has never appeared more serious.
It is precisely at this critical moment that it is essential to re-inject hope and, above all, common sense into the equation.
So here are ten good reasons to believe in Europe – ten rational arguments to convince pessimistic analysts, and worried investors alike, that it is highly premature to bury the euro and the EU altogether.
The first reason for hope is that statesmanship is returning to Europe, even if in homeopathic doses.
It is too early to predict the impact of François Hollande’s election as President of France. But, in Italy, one man, Mario Monti, is already making a difference.
Of course, no one elected Monti, and his position is fragile and already contested, but there is a positive near-consensus that has allowed him to launch long-overdue structural reforms.
It is too early to say how long this consensus will last, and what changes it will bring.
But Italy, a country that under Silvio’s Berlusconi’s cavalier rule was a source of despair, has turned into a source of real, if fragile, optimism.
A second reason to believe in Europe is that with statesmanship comes progress in governance.
Monti and Hollande have both appointed women to key ministerial positions.
Marginalized for so long, women bring an appetite for success that will benefit Europe.
Third, European public opinion has, at last, fully comprehended the gravity of the crisis.
Nothing could be further from the truth than the claim that Europe and Europeans, with the possible exception of the Greeks, are in denial.
Without lucidity born of despair, Monti would never have come to power in Italy.
In France, too, citizens have no illusions.
Their vote for Hollande was a vote against Sarkozy, not against austerity.
They are convinced, according to recently published public-opinion polls, that their new president will not keep some of his “untenable promises,” and they seem to accept this as inevitable.
The fourth reason for hope is linked to Europe’s creativity.
Europe is not condemned to be a museum of its own past.
Tourism is important, of course, and from that standpoint Europe’s diversity is a unique source of attractiveness.
But this diversity is also a source of inventiveness.
From German cars to French luxury goods, European industrial competitiveness should not be underestimated.
The moment when Europe truly believes in itself, the way Germany does, and combines strategic long-term planning with well allocated R&amp;D investments, will make all the difference.
Indeed, in certain key fields, Europe possesses a globally recognized tradition of excellence linked to a very deep culture of quality.
The fifth source of optimism is slightly paradoxical.
Nationalist excesses have tended to lead Europe to catastrophic wars.
But the return of nationalist sentiment within Europe today creates a sense of emulation and competition, which proved instrumental in the rise of Asia yesterday.
Koreans, Chinese, and Taiwanese wanted to do as well as Japan.
In the same way, the moment will soon come when the French want to do as well as Germany.
The sixth reason is linked to the very nature of Europe’s political system.
Churchill’s famous adage that democracy is the worst political system, with the exception of all the others, has been borne out across the continent.
More than 80% of French citizens voted in the presidential election.
Watching on their televisions the solemn, dignified, peaceful, and transparent transfer of power from the president they had defeated to the president they had elected, French citizens could only feel good about themselves and privileged to live in a democratic state.
Europeans may be confused, inefficient, and slow to take decisions, but democracy still constitutes a wall of stability against economic and other uncertainties.
The seventh reason to believe in Europe is linked to the universalism of its message and languages.
Few people dream of becoming Chinese, or of learning its various languages other than Mandarin.
By contrast, English, Spanish, French, and, increasingly, German transcend national boundaries.
Beyond universalism comes the eighth factor supporting the EU’s survival: multiculturalism.
It is a disputed model, but multiculturalism is more a source of strength than of weakness.
The continent’s fusion of culture makes its people richer rather than poorer.
The ninth reason for hope stems from the EU’s new and upcoming members.
Poland, a country that belongs to “New Europe,” is repaying the EU with a legitimacy that it had gained from Europe during its post-communist transition.
And the entrance of Croatia, followed by Montenegro and a few other Balkan countries, could compensate for the departure of Greece (should it come to that for the Greeks).
Finally, and most important, Europe and the world have no better alternative.
The Greek crisis may be forcing Europe to move towards greater integration, with or without Greece.
The German philosopher Jürgen Habermas speaks of a “transformational reality” – a complex word for a simple reality: divided we fall, whereas united, in our own complex manner, we may strive for “greatness” in the best sense.
Investors, of course, are hedging their bets.
Having ventured successfully into emerging non-democratic countries whose frailty they are starting to fear, some, out of prudence, are starting to rediscover Europe.
They may well be the wise ones.
The Disenchantment of Iraq
LONDON – Twenty-five years ago, on March 16, 1988, Saddam Hussein’s troops spread poison gas through the Kurdish town of Halabja.
The attack, which killed an estimated 5,000 people and injured up to 10,000 more, remains the largest chemical-weapons attack ever to target a civilian population.
In the light of the Halabja atrocity, and the regime’s broader genocidal Anfal campaign against the Kurds, and massive repression throughout the country, the question “Is Iraq better off now than it was under Saddam Hussein?” requires no great deliberation.
Iraqis are rid of a dictator responsible for the deaths of at least one million Iraqis, a man who plunged the country into three wars in 24 years, and whose policies (with the international community’s complicity) kept ordinary Iraqis under the strictest sanctions ever imposed by the United Nations.
Yes, Iraq is better off without this absolute despot.
But, for those of us who participated in the effort to reconstruct Iraq starting in 2003, this answer is far too glib.
We set the bar far higher.
The success of the war must surely be measured by whether its goals – particularly the establishment of a constitutional democracy and the country’s economic reconstruction – have been achieved.
By this standard, the war in Iraq was a monumental failure.
The United States-led Coalition Provisional Authority empowered a new group of political elites who fundamentally distrusted one another and, more important, failed to coalesce around a shared vision for governing the country.
Rather than giving these new politicians time to broker compromises, the Americans imposed a divisive constitutional process that exacerbated existing fissures, leading to the civil war of 2006-2007.
The Kurdish and Arab Shia religious parties sought a very weak central government in Baghdad, the latter because they feared a return to Sunni minority rule.
The Sunni Arab parties initially rejected any notion of a confederated state, but in time they came to believe that the Shia parties would never share power voluntarily.
The ongoing cycle of violence is a legacy of this struggle for control.
Today, many Sunni Iraqis aspire to the same autonomy from Baghdad that the Kurds enjoy in the north of the country.
The Shia parties, having tasted real power in Iraq for the first time, are now attempting to create a much more centralized state than either the Kurds or Sunni Iraqis – or the constitution, for that matter – will tolerate.
Indeed, Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki has largely succeeded in concentrating power in his own hands.
He has created a network of military and security forces that report directly to him, often outside the legal command structure.
He has intimidated the judiciary into ignoring institutional checks on his power, so that constitutionally independent agencies, such as the electoral commission and the central bank, are now under his direct control.
Moreover, Maliki has used the criminal courts to silence his political opponents.
Iraq’s Sunni vice president is a fugitive in Turkey, with multiple death sentences rendered against him for alleged terrorist activities, though the judgments were based on the confessions of bodyguards who had been tortured (one died during the “investigation”).
An arrest warrant has now been issued against the former finance minister, also a Sunni, on similar charges.
As for the economy, no one expected a replication of Germany’s post-1945 Wirtschaftswunder.
Still, Iraq has vast oil and natural-gas reserves, to which all of the major oil companies wanted access.
Everyone stood to benefit: the companies would profit handsomely, while Iraq would gain new technology and vast sums to rebuild the country’s devastated infrastructure.
The reality has been far different.
After ten years, Iraq’s oil production has finally recovered to its pre-war level.
But Iraq’s government has not completed a single infrastructure project: no new hospitals, schools, roads, or housing whatsoever.
Basic services such as electricity and waste collection have yet to be restored even in major urban centers like Baghdad.
(By contrast, reconstruction in Iraqi Kurdistan is occurring at breakneck speed.)
Iraqis are about to enter their 11th summer, when temperatures routinely exceed 50° C, with no more than sporadic power and running water.
This lack of progress is truly remarkable, given that Iraq’s annual budgets for the last five years have totaled nearly $500 billion.
Incompetence and corruption are rampant: Iraq routinely scores among the bottom ten countries in Transparency International’s list of the most corrupt countries in the world.
Likewise, Iraq’s unemployment and underemployment levels remain among the highest in the Middle East.
And, as Iraq observer Joel Wing has pointed out, public-sector employment doubled from 2005 to 2010, and now accounts for roughly 60% of the full-time labor force.
The brain drain among Iraq’s educated youth has accelerated in the last ten years, because many of them simply see no future in the country.
Amnesty International recently issued a report detailing the continued systematic abuse of fundamental human rights in Iraq.
Plus ça change, plus c’est la même chose.
True, Maliki’s nascent dictatorship is lighter than that of Saddam at his worst, and perhaps that is some progress.
But what has been gained may be far outweighed by what has been lost: the hope that if Saddam and his tyranny could just be removed, decency, stability, and normalcy could be restored.
That, finally, is the true tragedy of Iraq in 2013.
Ten Years after the Mouse Roared
CAMBRIDGE – Al Qaeda’s attack on the United States ten years ago was a profound shock to both American and international public opinion.
What lessons can we learn a decade later?
Anyone who flies or tries to visit a Washington office building gets a reminder of how American security was changed by 9/11.
But, while concern about terrorism is greater, and immigration restrictions are tighter, the hysteria of the early days after 9/11 has abated.
New agencies such as the Department of Homeland Security, the Director of National Intelligence, and an upgraded Counter Terrorism Center have not transformed American government, and, for most Americans, personal freedoms have been little affected.
No more large-scale attacks have occurred inside the US, and everyday life has recovered well.
But this apparent return to normality should not mislead us about the longer-term importance of 9/11.
As I argue in my book The Future of Power, one of the great power shifts of this global information age is the strengthening of non-state actors.
Al Qaeda killed more Americans on 9/11 than the attack by the government of Japan did at Pearl Harbor in 1941.
This might be called the “privatization of war.”
During the Cold War, the US had been even more vulnerable, in technological terms, to a nuclear attack from Russia, but “mutual assured destruction” prevented the worst by keeping vulnerability more or less symmetrical.
Russia controlled great force, but it could not acquire power over the US from its arsenal.
Two asymmetries, however, favored Al Qaeda in September 2001.
First, there was an asymmetry of information.
The terrorists had good information about their targets, while the US before September 11 had poor information about the identity and location of terrorist networks.
Some government reports had anticipated the extent to which non-state actors could hurt large states, but their conclusions were not incorporated into official plans.
Second, there was an asymmetry in attention.
A larger actor’s many interests and objectives often dilute its attention to a smaller actor, which, by contrast, can focus its attention and will more easily.
There was a good deal of information about Al Qaeda in the American intelligence system, but the US was unable to process coherently the information that its various agencies had gathered.
But asymmetries of information and attention do not confer a permanent advantage on the wielders of informal violence.
To be sure, there is no such thing as perfect safety, and, historically, waves of terrorism have often taken a generation to recede.
Even so, the elimination of top Al Qaeda leaders, the strengthening of American intelligence, tighter border controls, and greater cooperation between the FBI and the CIA have all clearly made the US (and its allies) safer.
But there are larger lessons that 9/11 teaches us about the role of narrative and soft power in an information age.
Traditionally, analysts assumed that victory went to the side with the better army or the larger force; in an information age, the outcome is also influenced by who has the better story.
Competing narratives matter, and terrorism is about narrative and political drama.
The smaller actor cannot compete with the larger in terms of military might, but it can use violence to set the world agenda and construct narratives that affect its targets’ soft power.
Osama bin Laden was very adept at narrative.
He was not able to do as much damage to the US as he hoped, but he managed to dominate the world agenda for a decade, and the ineptness of the initial American reaction meant that he could impose larger costs on the US than were necessary.
President George W. Bush made a tactical error in declaring a “global war on terrorism.” He would have done better to frame the response as a reply to Al Qaeda, which had declared war on the US.
The global war on terror was misinterpreted to justify a wide variety of actions, including the misguided and expensive Iraq War, which damaged America’s image.
Moreover, many Muslims misread the term as an attack on Islam, which was not America’s intent, but fit Bin Laden’s efforts to tarnish perceptions of the US in key Muslim countries.
To the extent that the trillion or more dollars of unfunded war costs contributed to the budget deficit that plagues the US today, Bin Laden was able to damage American hard power.
And the real price of 9/11 may be the opportunity costs: for most of the first decade of this century, as the world economy gradually shifted its center of gravity toward Asia, the US was preoccupied with a mistaken war of choice in the Middle East.
A key lesson of 9/11 is that hard military power is essential in countering terrorism by the likes of Bin Laden, but that the soft power of ideas and legitimacy is essential for winning the hearts and minds of the mainstream Muslim populations from whom Al Qaeda would like to recruit.
A “smart power” strategy does not ignore the tools of soft power.
But, at least for America, perhaps the most important lesson of 9/11 is that US foreign policy should follow the counsel of President Dwight Eisenhower a half-century ago: Do not get involved in land wars of occupation, and focus on maintaining the strength of the American economy.
The Sino-American Decade
HONG KONG – The California summit between US President Barack Obama and Chinese President Xi Jinping on June 7-8 comes at a time of heightened tension between the world’s two preeminent powers.
But divisive issues – from computer hacking to America’s “pivot to Asia” – must not claim all of the attention.
If Obama and Xi lift their heads above the parapets and begin charting a jointly agreed course through the coming decade, they may find that they have much in common.
The next ten years will be characterized by major structural adjustments and shifts in individual economies, and by a huge reconfiguration of the global economy as a whole.
Above all, much depends on the policies adopted by the two largest economies, China and the United States, and their cooperation and leadership in creating global public goods and maintaining a stable and open economic environment.
Cooperation will be needed in many areas.
One is the management of natural resources and the environment.
The growth of China and the developing world will lead to a doubling of global output in 10-15 years, and probably a tripling in the 15 years after that.
The growth model on which both advanced and developing countries relied in the past will not work at two or three times the scale.
Climate, ecology, food, water, energy, and livability will not withstand the pressure.
Global problems are hard to solve.
A productive starting point would be China-US collaboration on energy efficiency and security, greener growth, and climate change.
China’s 12th Five-Year Plan sets ambitious goals in this area.
In the US, progress is somewhat more decentralized, though new national policies have been adopted, including Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) standards for automobiles.
The US also is set to become energy independent, owing to the rise of shale oil and gas, with diminishing reliance on coal already bringing down per capita carbon emissions.
The complementarity of the Chinese and US economies is changing rapidly, but it is not declining in significance.
In the past, the US brought a large open market, foreign direct investment, and technology, while China supplied low-cost labor-intensive components in key global manufacturing supply chains.
Today, China provides a large and rapidly growing market for a widening array of previously unaffordable goods, and will increasingly produce as well as absorb new technologies.
In the process, it will shed lower-value-added jobs in its export sector as production moves to lower-cost developing countries.
Depending on policies on both sides, China may also become a foreign direct investor in the US economy in a wide range of areas – including infrastructure.
The US will continue to provide a large open market, even as China’s role in serving it will shift upward in value added and in global supply chains.
The US will also provide, share, and absorb technology and human talent, remaining at the top end of the higher-education spectrum and in basic and applied research.
Of course, there is also a healthy element of competition.
The sharp differences in comparative advantage that were apparent two decades ago are diminishing as the gap in income, capital depth (including human capital), and capabilities narrows.
Chinese multinationals with recognized brands will begin to appear, just as they did in Japan and Korea.
They will compete with multinationals from a wide range of countries, and will become architects of global supply chains.
Fair, rules-based competition in a rapidly expanding global economy is far from a zero-sum game.
The outlines of the structural changes needed to move toward a healthier, more sustainable growth pattern in the coming decade are relatively clear in China.
The remaining questions concern policy implementation and institutional development – issues that will be clarified in the course of 2013, as China’s new leaders formalize and communicate their reform priorities.
The US economy, meanwhile, retains many elements of dynamism and flexibility.
But, while GDP growth seems to be returning slowly to potential, the slow pace of recovery in employment and the residual secular shifts in income distribution remain causes of concern.
In particular, the shift of income from those who save less to those who save more implies uncertainty about the restoration of aggregate demand.
Political polarization has become another source of uncertainty.
Many centrists agree that an optimal fiscal policy would feature short-term stimulus, a multi-year medium-term deficit reduction plan, and measures to reduce long-term liabilities, especially if retrenchment protected growth-oriented public-sector investments.
But that is difficult to achieve in a context of deleveraging and fixation on debt.
If current trends continue, with the US economy recovering slowly but steadily, the pattern of convergence with China will continue.
East Asia as a whole will surpass the US in terms of aggregate GDP by 2015, with China contributing the highest proportion of the total.
China’s GDP is projected to catch up to that of the US and Europe in 10-15 years, at which point (if not sooner) both Chinese and US real GDP will exceed $25 trillion (in 2012 prices), more than three times China’s current GDP.
Each will account for approximately 15% of global output.
And yet this shift will be accompanied by very substantial global economic challenges and uncertainties, underscoring the importance of Sino-US cooperation.
A constructive, cooperative relationship can make a significant contribution to both countries’ efforts to adapt their policies and institutions to achieve sustainable, inclusive growth patterns.
Beyond the bilateral benefits, the rest of the global economy is dependent on Chinese and US leadership – both in terms of growth and in matters concerning global economic governance and coordination.
Trade and economic openness, financial stability and regulation, energy security, climate change, and many other issues confront the world collectively.
It is very difficult to imagine successful global rebalancing and progress without China and the US taking a leading role in the process.
The Decline of the West Revisited
LONDON – The terrorist slaughter in Paris has once again brought into sharp relief the storm clouds gathering over the twenty-first century, dimming the bright promise for Europe and the West that the fall of communism opened up.
Given dangers that seemingly grow by the day, it is worth pondering what we may be in for.
Though prophecy is delusive, an agreed point of departure should be falling expectations.
As Ipsos MORI’s Social Research Institute reports: “The assumption of an automatically better future for the next generation is gone in much of the West.”
In 1918, Oswald Spengler published The Decline of the West.
Today the word “decline” is taboo.
Our politicians shun it in favor of “challenges,” while our economists talk of “secular stagnation.”
The language changes, but the belief that Western civilization is living on borrowed time (and money) is the same.
Why should this be?
Conventional wisdom regards it simply as a reaction to stagnant living standards.
But a more compelling reason, which has seeped into the public’s understanding, is the West’s failure, following the fall of the Soviet Union, to establish a secure international environment for the perpetuation of its values and way of life.
The most urgent example of this failure is the eruption of Islamist terrorism.
On its own, terrorism is hardly an existential threat.
What is catastrophic is the collapse of state structures in many of the countries from which the terrorists come.
The Islamic world contains 1.6 billion people, or 23% of the world’s population.
A hundred years ago it was one of the world’s most peaceful regions; today it is the most violent.
This is not the “peripheral” trouble that Francis Fukuyama envisioned in his 1989 manifesto “The End of History.”
Through the massive influx of refugees, the disorder in the Middle East strikes at the heart of Europe.
This movement of peoples has little to do with the “clash of civilizations” foreseen by Samuel Huntington.
The more mundane truth is that there have never been any stable successors to the defunct Ottoman, British, and French empires that used to keep the peace in the Islamic world.
This is largely, though not entirely, the fault of the European colonialists who, in the death throes of their own empires, created artificial states ripening for dissolution.
Their American successors have hardly done better.
I recently watched the film “Charlie Wilson’s War,” which relates how the United States came to arm the Mujahideen fighting the Soviets in Afghanistan.
At the end of the film, as America’s erstwhile clients turn into the Taliban, Wilson, the American politician who got them the money, is quoted as saying “We won a great victory, but fouled up the end game.”
This “fouling up” is a continuous thread running through American military interventions since the Vietnam War.
The US deploys overwhelming firepower, either directly or by arming opposition groups, shatters local governmental structures, and then pulls out, leaving the country in shambles.
It is unlikely that US policymaking reflects the grip of some ideal view of the world, in which getting rid of dictators is the same thing as creating democracies.
Rather, the belief in ideal outcomes is a necessary myth to cover an unwillingness to use force persistently and intelligently enough to achieve a desired result.
However much military hardware a superpower owns, decay of the will to use it is the same thing as a decay of effective power.
After a time, it ceases to overawe.
That’s why Robert Kagan’s 2003 neo-conservative proposition, “Americans are from Mars, Europeans from Venus,” offered such a misleading guide.
True enough, the European Union has gone farther down the pacifist road than the US.
It is the weak nerve center of a flabby semi-state, with almost defenseless frontiers, where humanitarian rhetoric masks spinelessness.
But America’s sporadic, erratic, and largely ineffective deployment of power is hardly of Martian quality.
The decline of the West is juxtaposed with the rise of the East, notably China.
(It is hard to tell whether Russia is rising or falling; either way, it is disturbing.)
Fitting a rising power into a decaying international system has rarely occurred peacefully.
Perhaps superior Western and Chinese statesmanship will avert a major war; but this, in historical terms, would be a bonus.
The increasing fragility of the international political order is diminishing the global economy’s prospects.
This is the slowest recovery from a major slump on record.
The reasons for this are complex, but part of the explanation must be the weakness of the rebound in international trade.
In the past, trade expansion has been the world’s main growth engine.
But it now lags behind the recovery of output (which is itself modest), because the kind of global political order hospitable to globalization is disappearing.
One symptom of this has been the failure after 14 years to conclude the Doha Round of trade negotiations.
Trade and monetary agreements are still reached, but they increasingly take the form of regional and bilateral deals, rather than multilateral arrangements, thereby serving broader geopolitical goals.
The US-led Trans-Pacific Partnership, for example, is directed against China; and China’s New Silk Road initiative is a reaction to its exclusion from the 12-country TPP.
Perhaps these regional bargains will prove to be a step toward wider free trade.
But I doubt it.
A world divided into political blocs will become a world of trade blocs, sustained by protectionism and currency manipulation.
And yet, even as trade relations become increasingly politicized, our leaders continue to urge us to gear up to meet the “challenges of globalization,” and few question the benefits of cost-cutting through automation.
In both cases, politicians are trying to force adaptation on reluctant populations who crave security.
This strategy is not only desperate; it is also delusive, for it seems obvious that, if the planet is to remain habitable, competition in economic growth must give way to competition in quality of life.
In short, we are far from having developed a reliable set of precepts and policies to guide us toward a safer future.
Small wonder, then, that Western populations look ahead with foreboding.
Terrorism and Counter-Terrorism Reconsidered
The arrests in London of 21 terrorists who appear to have planned to blow up a number of airplanes over the Atlantic reminds us, if any reminder is needed, of the terrorist attacks on New York and Washington of September 11, 2001.
9/11 remains the date that has come to signify modern terrorism in all of its terrible capacity to cause death and destruction.
Five years may be too short a period for historians to judge the full significance of the event, but it does offer an opportunity to take stock.
At best, it is a mixed record.
Terrorist attacks have occurred subsequently in Indonesia, Madrid, London, Egypt, and most recently Mumbai.
Thousands of innocent men, women and children have been killed.
There is also the steady drumbeat of terrorist violence in Iraq – violence that risks pushing the country into full-scale civil war.
But the terrorists still have not done anything on the scale of 9/11.
The reason for this is worth thinking about.
It may reflect the ouster of the government of Afghanistan and the elimination of al-Qaida’s safe haven there.
Improved and better coordinated intelligence, law enforcement, and homeland security efforts at both the national and international levels have made it more difficult for terrorists to succeed.
And as the recent arrests in London suggest, it is also possible that the desire of some terrorists to accomplish something more dramatic than the 9/11 attacks may have complicated their ability to implement their plans and increased the prospect that they will be detected.
None of this should make anyone sanguine.
Globalization makes it easier for terrorists to acquire the tools of their trade and to move about.
The odds also favor terrorists, in that one success can compensate for multiple failures.
Modern technology, possibly including weapons of mass destruction, increases the possibility that any terrorist success will cause damage of great magnitude.
In addition, Iraq is producing a new generation of experienced terrorists along the lines that Afghanistan did two decades ago.
So what needs doing?
One answer put forward by the Bush administration is to promote democracy.
The thinking is that young men and women will be less likely to become terrorists if they are members of societies that provide them with political and economic opportunities to live meaningful and satisfying lives.
Unfortunately, the evidence does not support this.
Individuals growing up in mature democracies such as the United Kingdom can still become alienated and radicalized.
A more democratic Iraq has become a more violent Iraq.
Similarly, elections in Palestine did not persuade Hamas to turn its back on violence any more than elections in Lebanon dissuaded Hezbollah from initiating the current crisis in the Middle East.
Moreover, even if democracy were the answer, it is extraordinarily difficult to bring about, as Iraq shows.
Building a true democracy (as opposed to simply holding elections) is an enterprise that requires decades or even generations.
In the meantime, however, we require a policy to deal with the terrorism that confronts us.
What is more, democracy is irrelevant to those who are already committed terrorists.
Their goals of re-creating some 7th century caliphate or, in the case of Iraq, restoring Sunni domination are unlikely to be satisfied by free men and women openly choosing their political system and leadership.
So what, then, needs doing?
The first thing to do is to drop the metaphor of a “war on terrorism.”
Wars are mostly fought with arms on battlefields between soldiers of opposing countries.
Wars have beginnings and ends.
None of these characteristics apply here.
Terrorism can now be carried out with boxcutters and airplanes as easily as with explosives.
Office buildings and commuter trains and coffee shops are today’s battlefields.
There are no uniforms, and often those doing the killing are acting in the name of causes or movements.
And there is no end in sight.
To the contrary, terrorism is now part of the fabric of contemporary life.
There is another reason to jettison the martial vocabulary.
Terrorism cannot be defeated by arms alone.
Indeed, other instruments of policy, including intelligence, police work and diplomacy, are likely to play a larger part in any effective policy.
Second, it is essential to distinguish between existing and potential terrorists.
Existing terrorists need to be stopped before they act; failing that, societies need to protect themselves and have ready the means of reducing the consequences of successful attacks.
But much more than that can - and should - be done to persuade young men and women not to become terrorists in the first place.
The aim must be to create an environment in which terrorism is seen as neither acceptable nor necessary.
Terrorism must be stripped of its legitimacy; those carrying it out must be shamed.
No political cause justifies the taking of innocent life.
Arab and Muslim leaders need to make this clear, be it in public pronouncements by politicians, lectures by teachers, or fatwas by leading clerics.
The initial critical reaction on the part of several Arab governments to Hezbollah’s kidnapping of Israeli soldiers is a sign that such criticism is possible, as are selective comments by a number of Muslim religious leaders.
But terrorism also needs to be stripped of its motivation.
This translates into the United States and others spelling out the gains Palestinians can expect in a peace agreement with Israel and what Sunnis and Shia can reasonably expect in Iraq’s new political order.
Bringing about a lasting cease-fire in Lebanon will also help calm the emotions that will lead some to become terrorists and others to tolerate or support them.
The way ahead is clear: vigilance against violence coupled with political possibility.
Such a counter-terrorism policy will not eliminate the scourge of terrorism any more than modern medicine can eliminate disease.
But it does hold out the promise of reducing it to a scale that will not threaten the openness, security, or prosperity of modern societies.
The French Climate-Terror Connection
TOKYO – Since the November 13 terrorist bloodletting in Paris, the City of Light has been practically under martial law.
In this subdued and challenging context, world leaders are now convening in the city at the United Nations Climate Change Conference to hammer out a new global agreement to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions.
Could disrupting the talks have been part of the terrorists’ agenda?
It certainly seems possible.
After all, severe environmental conditions in much of the Middle East and North Africa’s Sahel region contribute to the sense of desperation that fuels Islamic extremism.
Given this, arranging the attacks in such a way that could distract from efforts to ameliorate those conditions – while advancing the terrorists’ other goals, of course – would seem like a “winning” strategy.
The situation in the Middle East and the Sahel is certainly dire, with rapid desertification devastating pastoral economies and the livelihoods of farmers, shepherds, nomads, and those who depend on them.
This combination of environmental and economic degradation has created fertile conditions for murderous Islamist movements, including Boko Haram in Nigeria, al-Shabaab in Somalia and Kenya, and the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria.
Where climate change threatens to lay waste to the environment, fanatics have banded together to lay waste to civilization.
To be sure, climate change is by no means the primary cause of Islamist extremism.
Failed economies and brutal secular dictatorships, together with deep-rooted ethnic and religious rifts, have fueled a volatile combination of fear, instability, and anger.
But no one should doubt that the framework of fanaticism has been abetted by the dire environmental conditions that now prevail in much of the Middle East and the Sahel.
And those conditions are set to deteriorate further, as rapid population growth puts even greater strain on resources.
The surge in carbon dioxide emissions has been fueled not just by industrialization; the UN expects Earth’s human population to reach 9.7 billion by 2050 and 11.2 billion by 2100.
Consider Mali, where Islamist militants attacked a hotel filled with foreigners just one week after the attacks in Paris.
Drought and desertification have exacerbated poverty – the country’s per capita GDP is just $765, placing it 168th worldwide – and extremely perilous living conditions are reflected in the world’s seventh-highest child-mortality rates: 123 of every 1,000 children will not make it to their fifth birthday.
In such a poor society, inadequate education leaves people without the knowledge they need to improve their lot, such as by limiting pregnancies or taking advantage of opportunities to boost economic productivity.
Add to that the lack of anything close to a reliable, much less clean, energy supply and the severity of the situation is obvious.
Under these conditions, it should not be surprising that Islamist terrorism has been a consistent scourge.
In short, much of the Middle East and the Sahel are locked in a vicious cycle of environmental degradation, economic failure, and Islamist extremism.
The question is how to break out of it.
The Paris summit is likely to be a buttoned-down diplomatic battle among countries for grants to support their pledges to mitigate and adapt to climate change.
Unfortunately, the effectiveness of the pledges that will be made – particularly in ravaged lands like Somalia, northern Nigeria, and Iraq’s Anbar province – is entirely uncertain.
The most important factor in the long-term effort to save societies in the Middle East and the Sahel from environmental and economic ruin – with major implications for combating Islamic extremism – will not be discussed in Paris next week.
That factor is education.
After all, to improve their health and preserve their environment, people need access to information about birth-control methods, modern farming and cooking practices, and much else.
And to improve their economic prospects, they need the knowledge and skills that employers require.
Former British Prime Minister Gordon Brown, who serves as UN Special Envoy for Global Education, is working tirelessly to promote access to education among the millions of refugees in the region.
It is time for more global players to support this effort, so that it can be expanded across the Middle East and the Sahel.
Education is the key to giving strained populations hope for a better future.
And hope is fundamental to negating the allure of extremism, in all of its forms.
Five Truths about Terrorism
SAO PAULO – American politics has been captured by terrorists.
In December 2015, polls showed that one in six Americans, some 16% of the population, now identify terrorism as the most important national problem, up from just 3% in the previous month.
This is the highest percentage of Americans to mention terrorism in a decade, although it is still lower than the 46% measured after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.
The effect of this change in public opinion has been particularly strong in the Republican presidential primary.
It certainly boosted the candidacy of Donald Trump, whose anti-Muslim rhetoric has been particularly tough (if not incendiary).
Some politicians are starting to call the battle against terrorism “World War III.”
Terrorism is a problem for the United States, as the attack in San Bernardino, California in December showed.
But it has been blown out of proportion, both by the presidential candidates and by a news media that adheres to the old adage, “If it bleeds, it leads.”
To put terrorism in proper perspective, Americans – and others – should bear in mind the following considerations.
Terrorism is a form of theater.
Terrorists are more interested in capturing attention and putting their issue at the forefront of the agenda than in the number of deaths they cause per se.
The Islamic State (ISIS) pays careful attention to stagecraft.
The barbaric beheadings that are broadcast and disseminated through social media are designed to shock and outrage – and thereby capture attention.
By exaggerating their effect and making every terrorist act a lead story, we play into their hands.
Terrorism is not the biggest threat facing people in advanced countries.
Terrorism kills far fewer people than auto accidents or cigarettes.
Indeed, terrorism is not even a big threat – or a small one, for that matter.
One is likelier to be struck by lightning than to be killed by a terrorist.
Experts estimate that an American’s annual risk of being killed by a terrorist is one in 3.5 million.
Americans are more likely to die in an accident involving a bathtub (one in 950,000), a home appliance (one in 1.5 million), a deer (one in two million), or on a commercial airliner (one in 2.9 million).
Six thousand Americans die annually from texting or talking on the phone while driving.
That is several hundred times more than die from terrorism.
Radical Islamic terrorism kills fewer Americans than attacks by disgruntled workplace and school shooters.
Terrorism is not World War III.
Global terrorism is not new.
It often takes a generation for a wave of terrorism to burn out.
At the beginning of the twentieth century, the anarchist movement killed a number of heads of state for utopian ideals.
In the 1960s and 1970s, the “new left” Red Brigades and Red Army Faction hijacked planes across national borders and kidnapped and killed business and political leaders (as well as ordinary citizens).
Today’s jihadist extremists are a venerable political phenomenon wrapped in religious dress.
Many of the leaders are not traditional fundamentalists, but people whose identity has been uprooted by globalization and who are searching for meaning in the imagined community of a pure Islamic caliphate.
Defeating them will require time and effort, but ISIS’s parochial nature limits the range of its appeal.
With its sectarian attacks, it cannot even appeal to all Muslims, much less Hindus, Christians, and others.
ISIS will eventually be defeated, just as other transnational terrorists were.
Terrorism is like jiu jitsu.
The smaller actor uses the larger actor’s strength to defeat it.
No terrorist organization is as powerful as a state, and few terrorist movements have succeeded in overthrowing one.
But if they can outrage and frustrate citizens of the state into taking self-defeating actions, they can hope to prevail.
Al-Qaeda succeeded in luring the US into Afghanistan in 2001.
ISIS was born in the rubble of the subsequent US-led invasion of Iraq.
Smart power is needed to defeat terrorism.
Smart power is the ability to combine hard military and police power and the soft power of attraction and persuasion.
Hard power is needed to kill or capture die-hard terrorists, few of whom are open to attraction or persuasion.
At the same time, soft power is needed to inoculate those on the periphery whom the die-hards are trying to recruit.
That is why attention to narrative and how US actions play on social media is as important and as necessary as precision air strikes.
Antagonistic rhetoric that alienates Muslims and weakens their willingness to provide crucial intelligence endangers us all.
That is why the anti-Muslim posturing of some of the current presidential candidates is so counterproductive.
Terrorism is a serious issue, and it deserves to be a top priority of our intelligence, police, military, and diplomatic agencies.
It is an important component of foreign policy.
And it is crucial to keep weapons of mass destruction out of terrorists’ hands.
But we should not fall into the terrorists’ trap.
Let the actions of thugs play out in an empty theater.
If we let them take over the main stage of our public discourse, we will undermine the quality of our civic life and distort our priorities.
Our strength will have been used against us.
Testing Medicine
Most people are surprised to learn that rigorous application of formal rules of evidence to evaluate medical research and decide on the best treatments is a recent phenomenon.
They might be just as surprised to learn that health policy is not yet subject to the same approach.
So-called “evidence-based medicine” entails a hierarchy of empirical proof that ranks medical studies according to their quality.
Physiological research on animals, or of human responses in laboratory settings, rank low on the hierarchy.
Observational studies that compare outcomes for patients who receive particular treatments and control subject who do not rank higher, but may still be misleading.
Convincing studies of drugs and surgical procedures usually come only from randomized trials, in which patients receive treatment or don’t according to a process analogous to a coin flip.
Well-conducted randomized trials incorporate additional safeguards against bias, including use of placebo medication that allows investigators to blind patients and caregivers to whether patients are, or are not, receiving active treatment.
Doctors have made many errors that they could have avoided had these principles been applied.
For example, for a decade leading doctors advocated hormone replacement therapy to lower cardiovascular risk in post-menopausal women.
These recommendations, based on physiological and observational studies, proved profoundly misleading.
Randomized trials ultimately showed no benefit, and a clear increase in breast cancer and vascular blood clots.
Similarly, cardiologists once prescribed drugs to reduce sudden death in patients after heart attacks.
The drugs suppressed arrhythmias – disturbances of the heartbeat associated with sudden death.
The logic seemed clear: suppress the asymptomatic but nasty-looking arrhythmias, and you will reduce sudden death.
Unfortunately, when investigators undertook randomized trials, they found that treated patients had a higher death rate.
Clinicians stopped using the drugs, but not before causing a large number of unnecessary deaths.
But awareness that principles of evidence-based medicine should also guide health policy has been slower to take root.
Here, although randomized trials are not feasible, it remains possible to follow evidence-based medicine’s primary rule: to base action on systematic summaries of the highest quality evidence available.
Consider the issue of whether countries should fund health care publicly, through taxes, or privately, through health insurance and user fees.
Private health insurance has proved enormously wasteful, with large administrative expenditures on activities that include developing insurance packages, marketing those packages, and assessing claims.
Public funding eliminates these activities, resulting in far lower administrative costs.
Likewise, user fees discourage the poor and elderly from accessing needed health services, whereas public funding largely eliminates inequities in the provision of care while producing health outcomes that are as good as, if not better than, mixed public-private funding models.
Public funding also benefits a country’s economy, because large employers are spared the expense of providing health benefits to their workers.
Thus, the evidence suggests that public funding of all key aspects of medical care – physician and hospital services, drugs, and devices –- offers benefits of equity, efficiency, and industrial advantage.
The medical community has come to accept the need for systematic reviews to guide decisions regarding drugs and surgical therapies, but their use in health policy is only now taking hold.
Systematic reviews have summarized the evidence regarding the provision of hospital services by large for-profit companies versus not-for-profit providers.
The primary studies forming the basis of these reviews come largely from the United States, where for-profit and not-for-profit providers work side by side in the same environment, and where large administrative databases allow accurate detection of death rates.
But, while these observational studies are threatened by bias from patient selection – sicker patients mean higher death rates, for example ­– the available administrative databases document patient characteristics such as age, severity of illness, and co-morbidity, including diabetes and high blood pressure.
This information allows statistical approaches that level the playing field, helping to protect against biases associated with patient selection.
These systematic reviews have shown that for-profit hospital care leads to higher death rates than not-for-profit care, despite higher charges to third-party payers.
Systematic reviews have demonstrated the same phenomenon in outpatient dialysis facilities – lower death rates in not-for-profit facilities – and have also shown higher quality care in not-for-profit nursing homes.
The reason that not-for-profit providers can achieve higher quality care with better health outcomes at lower cost is evident.
While for-profit providers have higher administrative costs and larger executive salaries, their main burden relative to not-for-profit provision is the need to generate returns for their shareholders.
These additional costs mean that approximately 20% of the total income that not-for-profit providers can devote to patient care is unavailable.
The result is cutting corners, deficiencies in care, and poorer outcomes for patients.
Principles of evidence-based medicine have transformed the way we look at clinical interventions and may prevent repetitions of public-health disasters such as the inappropriate promotion of hormone replacement therapy and anti-arrhythmic drugs.
Application of these principles to health policy can lead to wiser decisions about how to run our health systems.
The available evidence provides strong support for public funding of health services delivered by not-for-profit providers.
Obama inherited a fraught foreign policy agenda: a global economic crisis, two
difficult wars, erosion of the nuclear non-proliferation regime by North Korea and Iran, and deterioration of the Middle East peace process.
Obama’s dilemma was how to manage this difficult legacy while creating a new vision of how Americans should deal with the world.