And it has the authority to bolster the ECB’s credibility and thus its efforts to ensure future price stability and prevent financial contagion.
Europe needs a grand bargain, involving close coordination on structural reforms and fiscal and monetary policy.
Germany’s relative economic and political stability, far from enabling it to disengage from such efforts, makes it among the most important protagonists in their development and implementation.
The question is whether Germany’s leaders will recognize this before Europe’s economy falls into an even deeper slump.
Getting Bank Culture Right
WASHINGTON, DC – Banks and banking rely on trust.
But while trust takes years to establish, it can be squandered abruptly if a particular bank’s ethics are weak, its values poor, and its behavior simply wrong.
The events that triggered the 2008 global financial crisis, together with the subsequent scandals that have emerged – from the rigging of the London Interbank Offered Rate (Libor) to sanctions-busting and money-laundering – amount to a catalog of cultural failures within our financial institutions.
Yes, extensive measures have been taken since the crisis to strengthen the financial system.
But a profound weakness remains: To be blunt, it concerns the risk-taking culture that still prevails within some departments of global banks and in the financial system itself.
Too often, bank bosses’ promises to change the “corporate culture” and ensure their employees’ good conduct have not been matched by fully effective implementation.
In too many cases, banks are still failing to fulfill their obligations in serving their communities and the public at large.
It is true that the banking sector is paying a high price for its misdeeds: fines, litigation, and regulatory tightening have cost approximately $300 billion so far.
But the tax-paying public – innocent of any wrongdoing – has also had to bear costs, both direct and indirect.
And, while a handful of “rogue traders” (and, most recently, one Libor manipulator) have ended up in prison, it would be overly optimistic to conclude that the punishment has been sufficient to transform bank culture.
If banks and other financial institutions are to perform their crucial role in providing support for growth and employment, it is imperative that they take steps to regain the public’s trust.
But how?
More regulation is not necessarily the best path forward: The rules and norms that define a “right” and “wrong” culture are beyond the wit of regulators and supervisory bodies.
But the pressure to devise such rules is bound to mount if banks do not demonstrate that they are grappling effectively with the challenge of cultural change.
Sadly, until now, many banks have adopted an unconvincing piecemeal approach.
It is not enough to strengthen legal compliance.
A new report published by the Group of Thirty argues that banks must do far more.
Real change must go to the core of an institution’s day-to-day operations.
Banks must change compensation practices that reward excessive risk; protect whistleblowers; recruit and train staff to reflect proper ethics; and ensure that their boards of directors play a more active oversight role.
(I believe that if boards had been aware of the egregious behavior being perpetrated within some institutions, from product mis-selling to price-fixing, they would have acted to stop it.)
Let me be clear: Setting values and shaping an organizational culture take a long time and a great deal of work.
Successful reform requires changing people’s mindset and habituating them to self-regulation.
A written code – emphasizing the commercial benefits of ethical business conduct, and the negative consequences of falling short – is part of that effort and may help preserve and strengthen a culture; but a code alone is not enough.
Constant reminders and repetition are essential.
Employees must understand instinctively what may be done and what should never be done.
They must internalize a culture that values strict adherence to high ethical standards of conduct.
To that end, banks should make their values and culture integral to their hiring, firing, and promotion decisions.
Indeed, the values and conduct of a bank’s risk-takers should account for 50% of their annual performance review.
Failing to live up to a bank’s desired cultural norms should have an impact on an employee’s career – and, when necessary, end it.
Banking regulators and supervisors also have a decisive role to play.
They need to work with boards and senior management to ensure that major reforms are implemented and then consistently applied.
Regular exchanges of views between oversight officials and the banks should be regarded as a crucial component of this process.
Central bankers have been dismayed by many banks’ failure to move forward decisively to address the difficult internal issues of conduct and culture.
And now the concerns have grown to the point that delay is no longer an option.
Either the banks reform themselves, or public authorities will intervene still further.
Getting Corruption Right
NEW YORK – I just returned from India, where I was lecturing to the Indian Parliament in the same hall where US President Barack Obama had recently spoken.
The country was racked by scandal. A gigantic, ministerial-level scam in the mobile-telephone sector had siphoned off many billions of dollars to a corrupt politician.
But several of the MPs had also been taken aback on discovering that when Obama spoke to them, he read from an “invisible” teleprompter.
This had misled his audience into thinking that he was speaking extemporaneously, a skill that is highly regarded in India.
Both episodes were seen as a form of corruption: one involved money, the other deception.
The two transgressions are obviously not equal in moral turpitude.
But the Obama episode illustrates an important cross-cultural difference in assessing how corrupt a society is.
Transparency International and occasionally the World Bank like to rank countries by their degree of corruption, with the media then ceaselessly citing where each country stands.
But cultural differences between countries undermine the legitimacy of such rankings – which are, after all, based on surveys of the public.
What Obama was doing was a common enough practice in the United States (though one might expect better from an orator of his ability); it was not so in India, where such a technique is, indeed, regarded as reprehensible.
India certainly has corruption, like almost every other country.
But India also has a culture in which people commonly assume that everyone in public life is corrupt unless they prove otherwise.
Even a blind man will tell Transparency International: “I saw him take a bribe with my own eyes.”
Indeed, a distinguished Indian bureaucrat, a man of unimpeachable character, once told me that his mother had told him: “I believe you are not corrupt only because you are my son!”
So, if you ask Indians whether their governance is marked by widespread corruption, they will answer with gusto: yes!
But their exuberance biases India’s global ranking relative to more empirically minded countries.
A similar bias arises from the occasional tendency to view political patronage elsewhere as being more corrupt than the same practices at home.
For example, when the East Asian financial crisis broke out, there followed a systematic attempt to pin the blame on the affected countries: “crony capitalism” allegedly had somehow crippled their economies!
In other words, the acquaintances and benefactors of the East Asian leaders were “cronies,” whereas those of US leaders were “friends”?
In fact, it was clear that the culprits were the International Monetary Fund and the US Treasury, which had encouraged a shift to capital-account convertibility without understanding that the case for free capital flows was not symmetrical with the case for free trade.
But where substantial corruption can unambiguously be found, as it often can, one must recognize that it is not a cultural given.
On the contrary, often it is the result of policies that have fed it.
India in the 1950’s had a civil service, and a political class, that were the envy of the world.
If that seems shocking today, the loss of virtue must be traced to the all-pervasive “permit raj,” with its licensing requirements to import, produce, and invest, which grew to gargantuan proportions.
High-level bureaucrats quickly discovered that licenses could be bartered for favors, while politicians saw in the system the means to help important financial backers.
Once the system had taken root, corruption percolated downward, from senior bureaucrats and politicians, who could be bribed do what they were not supposed to do, to lower-level bureaucrats, who would not do what there were supposed to do unless bribed.
Clerks would not bring out files, or get you your birth certificate or land title, unless you greased their palms.
But if policies can create corruption, it is equally true that the cost of corruption will vary with the specific policies.
The cost of corruption has been particularly high in India and Indonesia, where policies created monopolies that earned scarcity rents, which were then allocated to officials’ family members.
Such “rent-creating” corruption is quite expensive and corrosive of growth.
By contrast, in China, the corruption has largely been of the “profit-sharing” variety, whereby family members are given a stake in the enterprise so that their earnings increase as profits increase – a type of corruption that promotes growth.
In the long run, of course, both types of corruption are corrosive of the respect and trust that good governance requires, which can undermine economic performance in its own right.
But that does not absolve us of the responsibility to define corruption properly – and to acknowledge obvious and important cultural differences in how it is understood.
Getting Investment in Europe Right
PARIS – The European Commission’s new president, Jean-Claude Juncker, has put public investment back on the agenda with his idea of a three-year €300 billion ($378 billion) capital spending plan.
The European Union’s leaders are expected to discuss his proposal in December.
Everyone seems to agree that more investment would help to strengthen a worryingly feeble European economy.
But, behind the superficial consensus, many questions remain unanswered.
For starters, this is not the first time that Europe has considered such an initiative.
In 1993, the Commission, under Jacques Delors, proposed a capital spending plan in its White Paper on growth, competitiveness and employment.
The plan was broadly endorsed, but no action was taken.
Likewise, in 2000, as part of its Lisbon Strategy, the EU sought to increase national spending on research and development to 3% of GDP.
It failed to reach this target.
More recently, in June 2012, EU leaders adopted a Compact for Growth and Jobs that was supposed to mobilize €120 billion.
The check is still in the mail.
It is indeed easy to pretend to act without taking effective action.
One way is to ask the European Investment Bank (EIB), the EU’s development bank, to lend more.
Such calls face two limitations: the EIB itself is careful not to jeopardize its financial rating by taking on too much risk, and its loans easily substitute for private financing.
More lending therefore can be pointless if it results in the EIB crowding out private financing of the best available projects.
A bridge financed by the EIB may be more affordable than one financed by capital markets, but it remains the same bridge and has the same economic impact.
The size of the EIB’s balance sheet is not a good measure of its effectiveness.
Instead, three investment levers should be used.
The first lever is budgetary: Governments that enjoy fiscal space should spend on economically sound projects.
Public investment is a complement to private investment; if designed and targeted well, it can trigger more private investment, rather than crowding it out.
For example, adequate transport and broadband infrastructure favors the burgeoning of business initiatives.
At a time when markets are willing to lend to solvent governments at historically low rates, there should be little room for hesitation.
Obviously, cheap financing does not justify public investment in projects with dubious social returns, or what development practitioners call “white elephants”: headline-grabbing projects of disputable value but supported by special interests.
Investments should be assessed on the basis of their overall economic impact, with proper procedures put in place to prevent public money from being wasted.
The second lever for investment is regulatory in nature.
Many large-scale investments that only pay off over the long term – for example, in energy, digital infrastructure, and transport – are concentrated in state-regulated sectors, giving governments the power to influence business decisions.
Predictability regarding the future course of regulation would unlock projects held back by uncertainty.
A credible outlook for the price of carbon, for example, would prompt new private-sector investment in cleaner technologies.
Similarly, an agreed European framework for projects that connect countries would remove obstacles to cross-border investment.
These conditions are a long way from being met, which means that profitable investments are not being made.
Changing that would not cost a single euro; it requires only political resolve.
The third lever is financial.
Investment demand has slackened not because interest rates are too high, but because there is not enough risk appetite within the banking system.
Financing in continental Europe is traditionally bank-based, unlike in the US, where capital markets reign supreme.
But banks are being told by regulators to reduce their leverage and to post higher capital when they embark on risky lending, and their creditors are being told that they should not expect to be bailed out if banks get into trouble.
This is intentional.
Governments and citizens in Europe have paid – and are still paying – an astronomically high price for the reckless lending and investment of the 2000s.
Understandably, they do not want to repeat the experience.
The consequence, however, is that high-risk, high-return projects are more difficult to finance than they should be.
If Europe wants to revive its economy and escape stagnation, it needs entrepreneurs to take more risk to innovate.
But its financial system is undergoing a transition from a bank-based to a market-based system that involves risk aversion.
This is where the public side – both national governments and the EU – should step in and share some of the risk with private players.
They should temporarily behave more like investors who scrutinize projects, contribute funding, and earn returns.
Using the EIB and national development banks to this end would help overcome the current impasse.
Would these three types of initiatives add up to €300 billion?
No one knows at this stage.
But this route would be the surest way to reach the goal.
Memperbaiki Tata Kelola Migrasi
DHAKA – Pada pertemuan Majelis Umum PBB tahun lalu, para pemimpin dunia berjanji akan bekerja sama memastikan perpindahan penduduk yang aman, tertib, teratur dan bertanggung jawab.
Tahun ini, mereka perlu melakukan aksi lebih banyak untuk merealisasikan janji tersebut. 
Negara-negara anggota PBB telah mengakui banyaknya keuntungan dari migrasi, termasuk perannya dalam menstabilkan pasar tenaga kerja global, menyebarkan pengetahuan dan ide, menciptakan diaspora yang memacu peningkatan perdagangan dan investasi dan mempertahankan ekonomi global melalui pengiriman uang, yang dipergunakan untuk membayar perawatan kesehatan anggota keluarga, pendidikan, dan perumahan di negara asal.
Tapi manfaat ini bisa menjadi sia-sia, seperti yang kita lihat pada krisis yang terjadi baru-baru ini di laut Mediterania, laut Andaman, koridor Amerika Tengah, Sahel, dan semenanjung Afrika, yang mana migrasi tidak dikelola dengan bertanggung jawab dan kooperatif.
Lebih dari 4,300 migran meninggal tahun ini pada saat mencoba mencapai tujuan mereka.
Di laut Mediterania, 3,200 orang meninggal dunia, dan di laut Andaman, sebelah timur teluk Benggala, ribuan migran berada di kapal tanpa kejelasan tujuan, atau disandera oleh orang yang mengatur perjalanan mereka.
Melihat kejadian ini, pemerintah di negara-negara anggota PBB harus mengakui kesenjangan antara cita-cita mereka tahun kemarin dengan kenyataan pahit yang dihadapi migran dan pengungsi hingga saat ini.
Para pemimpin dunia dapat memperbaiki situasi ini pada pertemuan Majelis Umum PBB bulan ini – dan secara khusus hari ini pada pertemuan mengenai migrasi dan pengungsi yang belum pernah terjadi sebelumnya.  
Para pemimpin dunia terlebih dahulu harus memperbarui komitmen mereka akan tata kelola migrasi global yang lebih kuat, dan setuju untuk mengadakan konferensi antar pemerintah yang pertama pada tahun 2018 untuk fokus secara khusus dalam penyusunan perjanjian global tentang migrasi yang baru, seperti usulan Sekretaris Jenderal PBB pada awal tahun ini.
Kemungkinan bahwa negara-negara anggota PBB setuju dengan perjanjian global yang baru adalah suatu perkembangan yang signifikan.
Sudah terlalu lama komunitas internasional telah berupaya untuk mengelola migrasi dengan efektif.
Tanpa institusi tata kelola global dan kerangka hukum untuk memandu kerjasama internasional, kebanyakan negara harus melakukan tata kelola unilateral dalam hal alur tata kelola migrasi mereka.     
Ketika negara gagal untuk mengelola migrasi dengan efektif, akibatnya adalah kekosongan yang diisi oleh pihak yang tidak bermoral: penyelundup, pelaku perdagangan orang, dan kejahatan terorganisir.
Sementara itu, negara, migran, dan komunitas yang menampung migran merugi karena mereka menanggung biaya migrasi tanpa menyadari manfaatnya.
PBB saat ini belum memberikan dukungan efektif terhadap negara-negara anggota, migran, dan masyarakat yang menampung mereka.
Negara-negara anggota PBB perlu menyetujui prinsip umum untuk membangun kerangka internasional untuk menangani migrasi, dan PBB sendiri harus menjadikan tata kelola migrasi sebagai salah satu misi utamanya, dibandingkan menyebarkan tugas tersebut ke beberapa lembaga berbeda.
Untungnya, International Organization for Migration (Organisasi Internasional untuk Migrasi) akan tergabung dalam sistem PBB pada hari ini.
IOM diharapkan akan memainkan peranan penting dalam menjadikan tata kelola pemerintahan lebih masuk akal dan efisien.
Negara saya sendiri, Bangladesh, memprakarsai ide perjanjian global khusus untuk meningkatkan tata kelola migrasi.
Sebagai ketua Forum Global Migrasi dan Pembangunan, Bangladesh berkomitmen untuk memastikan bahwa pelajaran perjanjian global mengambil pelajaran yang sudah ada.
Pengambil kebijakan harus memaksimalkan manfaat ekonomi dari migrasi; memfasilitasi jalur legal sehingga migran tidak memilih jalur illegal; mengurangi hambatan untuk bekerja dan mengirimkan uang; mengatur alur migrasi yang teratur; dan melindungi keselamatan migran, khususnya di area perang atau ketika migrasi mencapai level krisis, seperti yang terjadi tahun ini.   
Negara-negara dan organisasi non pemerintah harus tetap waspada terhadap eksploitasi migran, dan pemerintah harus berbagi tanggung jawab untuk menampung pengungsi.
Dan, untuk mengikuti perubahan cepat kondisi geopolitik, komunitas internasional harus mempertimbangkan kemitraan baru untuk mengatasi migrasi dan perpindahan manusia dalam jumlah besar.   
Pada akhirnya, tata kelola migrasi yang efektif memerlukan kerangka institusi dan hukum yang mampu menyatukan pertimbangan-pertimbangan yang kadang bertentangan.
Misalnya, kepentingan nasional negara-negara dalam mempertahankan kedaulatan, mengatur batas negara, dan menegakkan hukum dalam negeri harus seimbang dengan hak asasi migran, keinginan sah mereka untuk meningkatkan penghidupan, dan kebutuhan masyarakat untuk imigrasi dan peningkatan diversifitas.
Dengan mengatasi kekhawatiran tersebut bersama-sama, komunitas internasional dapat menegakkan prinsip kemakmuran bersama melalui pembagian tanggung jawab, yang merupakan inti agenda pembangunan berkelanjutan 2030 PBB.
Waktu telah tiba untuk mengarahkan dunia pada jalur kerjasama konstruktif, dibandingkan jalur populis unilateralisme destruktif yang lebih disukai.
Kita hanya perlu mengakui bahwa migrasi memberikan manfaat bagi kita semua agar dapat memaksimalkan keuntungan dan meminimalkan penderitaan.
Getting Past the American Election
The pundits have now weighed in mightily in interpreting the American presidential election.
Did the outcome - together with Republican gains in the Congress - represent an endorsement of Bush's positions?
Has the American electorate swung to the right?
Are Americans now more concerned about "values?"
Like price in economics, a single electoral choice compresses a lot of information.
It is a summary of whether, taking everything into account, a citizen prefers one candidate to another.
A host of surveys is required to figure out what it really means, for the United States - and for the world.
This much is clear, however: there is little confidence in Bush's economic policies.
The typical American family knows that it is worse off today than it was four years ago, and appears unconvinced that the tax cuts targeted at upper-income Americans brought the benefits heralded by the Bush administration.
But while Bush was not held back four years ago by the lack of a popular mandate in pushing his agenda, he may be emboldened by the seeming ringing endorsement to push even harder - such as making the tax cuts permanent and partially privatizing social security.
If adopted, these measures will further compound America's fiscal mess.
To the rest of the world, these are America's problems.
Yes, the soaring deficits may contribute somewhat to international financial instability.
Real interest rates may rise, as America borrows more and more.
If declining confidence in US fiscal policy leads to a weaker dollar, Europe and Asia may find it more difficult to export, and if the deficits prove a drag on the American economy, global growth may stall.
But for much of the rest of the world, the real concern is American unilateralism.
An interconnected world needs cooperation and collective action.
Historically, the US has exercised enormous leadership in a world committed to the proposition that no state should dictate collective decisions.
Unfortunately, over the past four years, America's president has lost the credibility necessary to exercise that leadership.
Even if the 59 million votes cast for Bush represented a ringing endorsement of his Iraq policy, it would not restore America's international credibility.
I believe most Americans reject Bush's unilateralism no less than his administration's economic policies.
Before the invasion of Iraq, they wanted America to go to the UN, and today they recognize that America alone cannot maintain order in the Middle East.
Even if Iraq is to bear more of the cost of its own reconstruction, there will have to be debt forgiveness, and this too requires international cooperation.
Those who voted for Bush may not be as outraged by American involvement in torture, or the misleading information about Iraq's weapons of mass destruction and connections with Al Qaeda, as those abroad.
But they do not want America alone to shoulder the burdens of international peace, and they are gradually coming to the realization that leadership and cooperation do not come automatically, simply because America is the only superpower.
Some worry whether Bush will use his electoral mandate to engage in more ventures.
As he himself put it, "I earned capital in the campaign … and now I intend to spend it."
Had the Iraq venture been more successful, these worries would have been justified.
There is little secret that there were discussions concerning Iran.
But the doctrine of preemptive war has been badly tarnished, and I remain hopeful that Congress and the American people have learned a painful lesson.
Peace will not quickly be restored to Iraq, and it is hard to conceive of opening up a major new front, when America can hardly manage what it has already undertaken.
Others will, of course, have to continue to bear the costs of the mistaken and mismanaged adventure in Iraq.
Instability in the Middle East will continue to limit oil supplies, discouraging the expansion of production.
High oil prices will dampen global growth in the remainder of 2004 and into 2005.
In the short run, the only response is more conservation, and America's allies should put pressure on America to conserve.
(Another reason stems from recent reports concerning the rapid melting of the polar ice cap, which seem to reconfirm worries about global warming.)
Presidents do make a difference, but every president operates within constraints.
The good news is that the constraints that Bush and the American government will face in the next four years will almost surely limit the damage they will cause.
The rhetoric and posturing, the lack of commitment to human rights or democratic processes, may be - and should be - upsetting, but there will be far more bark than bite.
While America may continue on a path of unilateralism, other countries' stance will make a difference.
Some suggest that the US constitution provided fewer constraints on the president in the conduct of foreign policy, because the requisite checks and balances were to be provided by the powers of the time - Britain and France.
Today, with the US as the only superpower, it is even more important for countries to stand up and express their views - and to stick by them even when pressured.
Some worry that this will worsen relations with the US.
But long-term relationships are based on friendship and respect; coherent, well-argued positions will earn that respect.
Today, many Americans, especially the young, feel far more respect for the countries that recognized the lack of evidence of Iraqi weapons of mass destruction than for those whose leaders repeated the American distortions.
It may be unfortunate that Realpolitik is the order of the day, but it is, so others must learn to play the same game.
Standing up for multilateralism and international rule of law may not only be the morally right thing to do; it is also in the interests of America's allies and, ultimately, America itself.
Getting Practical in Controlling Malaria
Many international assistance programs fail because they are badly designed and/or too complicated.
The result is that the poor don’t get the help they need, and taxpayers in rich countries lose confidence in the use of their aid funds.
A case in point has been malaria control.
If rich countries adopt simpler and more practical strategies to help Africa fight malaria, they can save millions of Africans while building enthusiastic support among their citizens.
Malaria is a killer disease transmitted by a specific species of mosquitoes.
It depends on warm temperatures, and thus is largely a tropical malady.
Africa turns out to be especially unlucky, because it has a combination of high temperatures and the mosquitos that are likely to transmit the disease.
As a result, Africa accounts for 90% of all malaria deaths in the world – including roughly two million children per year.
Yet even in Africa, Malaria is largely preventable and completely treatable at low cost.
Up until now, there has been far too little malaria control.
Prevention is best accomplished by modern anti-malaria bed nets, which are treated with insecticide.
These nets cover people while they sleep, and repel or kill the mosquitoes, which tend to bite during the night.
The nets reduce the number of bites, and the amount of illness, but they do not eliminate them.
If people get bitten despite the nets, they require treatment within a few hours of the onset of symptoms.
There are two major obstacles to solving the malaria problem.
First, Africa’s poor cannot afford insecticide-treated bed nets and the correct medicines.
Many end up taking cheap medicines that are not effective because the malaria parasite has developed resistance to them.
Second, African villagers lack access to cars or trucks, so they have to walk several miles to reach a clinic.
An infected child is often dead or comatose by the time a mother reaches a clinic.
If rich-country governments thought practically about malaria and recognized that it is a full-scale emergency, they could support simple and practical solutions: bed nets and timely access to medicine.
Rich countries would buy bed nets from companies that produce them and work with African governments to distribute them free of charge to every African household.
And they would work with African governments to ensure that the correct medicines are available for quick use within each village.
There are one billion people living in rich donor countries, and the total cost of comprehensive malaria control in Africa – giving bed nets at no cost to all Africans, and providing the right medicines within every village – is around $2.5 billion per year, or just $2.50 per citizen of the rich countries.
But the rich countries have instead adopted failed strategies.
Rather than giving away bed nets, rich-country organizations like the United States Agency for International Development try to sell them to the extreme poor, albeit at heavily discounted prices.
This policy reflects a shortsighted ambition to promote markets rather than the direct and over-riding goals of saving lives and removing bottlenecks to long-term economic development.
The tragic result has been extremely low use of nets throughout most of Africa, since impoverished people lack the purchasing power to buy nets.
Second, donor governments have failed to promote simple ways to ensure the availability of medicines in villages across the continent.
Rather than shipping medicines to each country on the basis of estimated needs, donor agencies have set up a complicated purchasing system that has led to years of delay in getting medicines to the villages.
The pharmaceutical industry, led by Novartis, has been way ahead of donor agencies.
Novartis has agreed to make these medicines available at the cost of production.
But, despite Novartis’s large production capacity, donor agencies have failed to order, buy, and ship the medicines in the required amounts.
Malaria control now faces a period of increasing urgency, as well as renewed hope.
Malaria is spreading, and new scientific evidence indicates that people infected with HIV are more likely to transmit it to others when they are also infected with malaria.
But there is also a growing realization that malaria is a disaster that must be addressed.
US President George W. Bush has launched an important new initiative to help 15 African countries to control malaria, and hosted an unprecedented White House summit in December to rally private-sector support.
Similarly, the Chinese government, the World Bank, and the Islamic Development Bank have recently announced plans to scale up their contributions to the fight against malaria.
A major new citizens’ initiative called Malaria No More is raising private funds to distribute anti-malaria nets.
People across Africa have shown that they are ready to mobilize their efforts if we offer practical means to help them.
The world’s safety, including the safety of people living in rich countries, depends on the global community’s ability to prove that it will come to the aid of all who are in desperate need.
Aid can work wonders if it is practical and directed to those in need.
Malaria control can demonstrate this world-saving lesson once again.
Getting Serious About Global Poverty
Institutions and governments, like people, make bold resolutions at the beginning of every year.
But, for the millions who face the crushing burden of poverty, mere proclamations that help is on the way are not enough to create jobs or foster development.
This year, the international community must move decisively from pledges to action in the effort to reduce poverty.
What will this require?
In 2005, the international community renewed its commitments to help the poorest countries meet the United Nations’ Millennium Development Goals (MDG’s), which aim to halve poverty by 2015.
These commitments include significant increases in debt relief and aid.
While there has been progress on implementing debt-relief measures, the international community must follow through on the other part of its pledge, by delivering increased aid and promoting its better use.
Multilateral lenders have long understood the importance of debt relief to poverty reduction.
Indeed, the joint IMF-World Bank Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative was launched in 1996 to coordinate efforts by multilateral organizations and governments to reduce poor countries’ debt burdens to sustainable levels.
So far, the results are encouraging.
Before the HIPC Initiative, eligible countries spent, on average, slightly more on debt service than on health and education combined.
Now, debt in the 28 countries for which relief has been approved has declined by an average of two-thirds, while their expenditures on health, education, and other social services have risen to almost four times the amount of debt-service payments.
In 2005, the international community went further, agreeing on the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI), which will write off 100% of many poor countries’ debts to the IMF, the World Bank, and the African Development Bank.
As a result, just this past December, the IMF approved immediate, full relief for 19 countries – including 13 in Africa, four in Latin America, and two in Asia – on all outstanding debt to the Fund disbursed before January 1, 2005.
Other countries are eligible, and the IMF is helping these states make rapid progress to qualify, with total debt relief expected to be more than $5 billion.
As with the HIPC Initiative of which it is a part, the MDRI will do more than reduce debt: it will free up resources that can be devoted to poverty reduction and economic development.
In 2006, for example, Zambia will see its debt fall by almost 10% of GDP, leaving more resources available for development.
Similarly, Guyana will have its debt reduced by more than 8% of GDP.
The level of debt relief will be even greater once the World Bank and the African Development Bank finalize their own programs in the months ahead.
Nevertheless, the debt relief now being implemented will only provide a small part of the assistance, both financial and technical, that low-income countries need to meet the MDG’s.
If they are to be met, donors must also deliver on their commitments for significant increases in aid.
The IMF has long called on donors to meet the internationally accepted target for overseas development assistance of 0.7% of GDP.
Some donors have now promised to do so, though only over time; others are not ready to go that far, but have promised more aid than they currently give.
The international community must show that it will follow through on these promises.
Donors must provide the help that developing countries urgently need.
At the same time, we must ensure that low-income countries use debt relief and aid efficiently.
One priority is to ensure that large, new infusions of aid do not produce unintended economic outcomes, such as rapid currency appreciation or inflation, which would make recipient countries’ exports less competitive.
Another priority is to ensure that low-income countries that are striving to meet the MDG’s, and which have large financing requirements, avoid a new spiral of indebtedness.
The gains from MDRI debt relief will amount to precious little if low-income countries emerge from their debt burdens only to start the cycle anew by amassing fresh debt.
But recipient countries must complement donor efforts, and continue to do their part as well, by maintaining a track record of reform and sound macroeconomic policies, and by making the best possible use of the higher levels of assistance.
Outside efforts can help reduce poverty, but it is, ultimately, the efforts of low-income countries themselves to sustain strong economic performance, improve governance, and develop stable and effective institutions that will have the most important impact on reducing poverty.
Low-income countries can also improve their prospects by strengthening their fiscal management, fostering private-sector development, and liberalizing trade.
If we keep our promises, 2006 can be a year of hope for those who have little else than the dream of a better life.
Getting Serious in Russia\u0027s War on Terror
Russia's decision to spend an extra 157 billion rubles (over $5 billion) to fight terrorism is a more impressive response than all the Kremlin's recent tough talk, including President Vladimir Putin's demand that more power be centralized in his hands.
Indeed, after the hostage crisis in the Dubrovka Theater in Moscow in 2002, the same sort of harsh words flowed, but no extra money was spent.
These new billions do seem to demonstrate renewed government resolve, but is throwing money at the war on terror enough?
The Kremlin refuses to publicly admit that today's terrorism has its roots predominantly in the Chechen war, which is now metastasizing throughout the Northern Caucasus.
Chechen fighters and their supporters demonstrate almost daily that the war continues, and countless bold pronouncements, like newly elected Chechen president Alu Alkhanov's recent assertion that "effective measures" have been found to combat terror, look like mere bloviation.
According to Finance Minister Aleksei Kudrin, huge amounts of money are needed to resolve the Chechen problem.
But financial inflows into Chechnya are often more destabilizing than helpful.
President Akhmat Kadyrov, the murdered Chechen president, was right to suggest that 80% of this money ends up in the pockets of Moscow and regional firms who benefit from the Chechen conflict continuing.
So neither money nor military power alone can end the bloodshed, and diplomacy with the less militant Chechen leader Aslan Maskhadov seems unlikely, for three reasons.
First, contacts between Maskhadov and a few Russian politicians haven't - at least as of yet - influenced the Kremlin's position.
Second, the subject for negotiations is unclear, because Putin has ruled out Chechen independence, and surrender by the separatists is just as unlikely.
Third, even if negotiations with less militant Chechens occur and succeed, terrorism will continue under the leadership of the religious fanatic Shamil Basaev.
The result of all this is spreading hopelessness.
The thirst for vengeance after the Beslan school massacre makes confrontation between Chechens and Ingushis increasingly possible.
Chechnya's neighboring republic, Dagestan, is witnessing increasing confrontations between radical and traditional Islamic groups, something now also seen in Kabardino-Balkaria.
Unless the Russian state develops a viable policy, fast, all of these areas threaten to become safe havens for terrorists.
What Russia needs is a political response to terror that takes into account its international dimension.
In the last four years, radical Islam has established itself in the Northern Caucasus.
This doesn't mean that all local Muslims have become jihadis.
In fact, the latter are a tiny minority.
But they are energetic, mobilized, and experienced fighters.
These people increasingly identify themselves with the global jihad, and have forged firm links with Muslim radicals in the Middle East, Southern Asia and Europe.
Russia must now follow America's lead in how to fight terror.
Since the attacks of September 2001, the United States has managed to avoid further attacks on its land.
True, the news coming from Iraq is horrible, but the US is fighting a full-blown war in Iraq; it is not engaged in a counterterrorist operation.
Russia's power structures, like those of America, must now be readied to conduct a very long struggle, entirely different from the old Soviet KGB way of suppressing dissent.
Russia's security forces need to learn to be pro-active, because the terrorists consistently seek to perfect their deadly methods.
The fight against terror turns on who will strike first; so far, the terrorists have been faster and more professional than the Russian state.
To conduct this struggle effectively, Russia must abandon two hoary stereotypes: that all terrorists are bandits, and that they somehow are acting under some Western intelligence supervision to weaken Russia.
The base of world terrorism consists of daring fanatics who believe in a sacred, fiery destiny.
Osama bin Laden doesn't work for money and wants to destroy the entire West, not weaken Russia in particular.
But the greatest obstacle that must be confronted if Russia is to wage war on terror effectively is the rampant corruption in the security forces.
It is well known, for example, that Basaev's fanatical killers paid off Russian militia to enter Budeonovsk in 1995 and kill hospital patients.
Yet nothing has been done to root out this tool of terror.
It is all too easy to reduce the fight against terrorism to tightening the political screws, to a strengthening of Putin's power, to restricting the movement of people within the country.
But none of these measures will frighten extremists in the Northern Caucasus or their al Qaeda allies.
The Kremlin must know this already.
Even Putin's predictable presidential rhetoric reveals a desire to initiate a real fight against terrorism.
But waging a serious war requires a serious reorganization of Russia's power structures, which will be very painful.
Despite Putin's so far unsuccessful fight against terrorism, his popularity remains high, so he has the political capital to make tough internal reforms.
But he must act now, for public support can be no substitute for resolute and effective action.
Getting to Yes (Again) with Germany
GENEVA – Europe’s slow-motion sovereign-debt crisis may appear unique, but it is not.
Just a few decades ago, Europe had the Exchange Rate Mechanism, which collapsed during a crisis very much akin to the one afflicting Europe today.
Will the outcome this time be different?
The ERM was an arrangement that pegged most European currencies’ exchange-rate movements within limited bands.
But ERM members’ monetary policies remained home-grown, which, no surprise, occasionally led to fiscal imbalances.
When capital markets smelled a problem among ERM members, they invariably shorted the most vulnerable currency and pushed that country’s authorities to devalue.
Authorities resisted, blamed speculators, and then, usually over a frantic few days, gave in.
Markets also tested the resolve of policymakers in otherwise sound ERM countries, particularly when there were big strikes or important elections.
In those cases, even a government with the proper economic fundamentals and its financial house in order could still run into trouble.
European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet is well aware of this: in the early 1990’s, he confronted such a crisis as Governor of the Bank of France.
Some contemporary observers of the ERM thought that there was an easy fix for these troubles.
If the central bank of the country that printed its “strong currency” (Germany) had been willing to provide unlimited support to a “weak currency,” things would have been sorted out.
Germany’s Bundesbank, it was suggested, would stand ready to buy “unlimited quantities” of lire or francs, so no one would dare to short either currency.
The notion of “unlimited quantities” was important: speculators would force officials to exhaust limited quantities, with the purchasing authority (the Bundesbank) eventually bearing the loss.
Monetary support would lead to fiscal transfers, making limited interventions a non-starter.
With unlimited support, by contrast, every single speculator could be quashed, and no loss would be borne (since intervention to support a weak currency would succeed).
The only problem was that both the Bundesbank and the German government always fiercely resisted such an arrangement, on the grounds that it could lead to the printing of unlimited quantities of Deutschmarks, and thus stoke inflation.
Instead, Europe developed the euro, which solved the problem of speculative attacks and monetary credibility by replacing individual currencies with a new one.
It was impossible to short the lira or the franc because there were no more lire or francs.
But Italy and France had to give something in return for this security: the ECB was made independent of all eurozone governments.
Yet the current debt crisis has resurrected the old problem, with debt now filling the role that currencies played under the ERM.
Some eurozone countries borrowed excessively and have been punished by the markets, perhaps deservedly so, while others, in the resulting climate of anxiety, have become targets for speculators.
On July 21, eurozone leaders agreed to make “more extensive” use of the new European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) by permitting it to purchase endangered eurozone countries’ debt in secondary markets.
But the EFSF’s “more extensive interventions” recalls the “unlimited quantities” of foreign-exchange intervention proposed to rescue the ERM.
If “more extensive” means piecemeal limited commitments that will eventually be exhausted, the scheme runs the risk of creating losses (just as the Bundesbank would have suffered losses had it engaged in limited defense of weak ERM currencies).
To rule this out, “unlimited interventions” would be needed.
But with whose resources, and under whose authority?
This explains the growing excitement about issuing “Eurobonds.”
The conversion of all eurozone national bonds into obligations jointly recognized by all eurozone governments is a replica of the solution to the ERM’s breakdown, which consisted in abandoning national currencies in favor of the euro.
This would cost Germany control over the quality of its credit, just as the replacement of the Bundesbank by the ECB implied Germany’s loss of control over the quality of its currency (though it was given a large role in designing the ECB).
What is missing in today’s proposals is the equivalent of the ECB’s independence, which ensured Germany’s participation in the euro.
It is no coincidence that one of the leading opponents – the ECB’s first chief economist, Otmar Issing – of the “unlimited interventions” policy under the ERM recently rebuked both the “extended-EFSF” and Eurobonds.
The current proposals, Issing argues, are “undemocratic.”
The concessions needed to ensure German participation are likely to be enormous.
With markets’ ability to monitor dubious borrowers, the guarantees will probably have to be institutional, constitutional, and political – probably formal control over European fiscal policy by a body at least as credible as the ECB, which would mean a dramatic reduction in the power of national parliaments.
Such radical changes would require the consent of all eurozone countries.
And the Bundestag (not Standard and Poor’s) would have to be happy.
Anything short of this is bound to fail.
Getting to \
There is a wise American saying: “If you are in a hole, stop digging.”
The six governments that are currently considering the next steps to prevent Iran from developing a nuclear bomb – the five permanent members of the UN Security Council and Germany – should heed that advice.
Otherwise, they could end up without any handle on the Iranian nuclear program, and only one – useless – option left, a military strike.
Yet the six governments seem determined to continue with what has been their strategy so far.
Their condition for negotiating with Iran is a prior halt of its nuclear enrichment activities.
Only in exchange for Iran’s permanent renunciation of enrichment will they provide major rewards – from lifting all sanctions and trade restrictions to security guarantees.
This strategy has not worked and will not work.
Under the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) of which Iran is still a member, countries are entitled to engage in enriching uranium for civilian purposes, and Iran claims that this is all it wants.
True, Iran’s total halt of its enrichment program would be welcome, not least because its government has hidden these activities for almost two decades from Treaty inspectors, suggesting other than purely civilian motives.
But the issue of enrichment has been blown up into such a symbol of national sovereignty in Iran that no government there, not only the current Achmadinejad administration, will climb down.
Indeed, when the UN Security Council formally demanded a stop to the enrichment program and imposed mild sanctions last December, Iran’s defiant answer was to increase enrichment activity.
So what to do now?
The Bush administration, predictably, is pushing for new and tougher sanctions, based on an implied warning in the earlier UN Resolution, and arguing, as it did in the run-up to the invasion in Iraq, that the UN’s credibility is at stake.
But the only real test of UN credibility in this conflict is whether it can succeed in restricting Iran as much as possible to a purely civilian nuclear program.
If the Security Council fails to agree on new sanctions – which is likely, given Chinese and Russian objections – it would be exposed as a paper tiger.
If, on the other hand, it works out a consensus on more economic and possibly even military punishment, the UN’s credibility would depend on whether these moves produce Iranian compliance.
That, however, is unlikely.
Tougher economic sanctions will not force Iran to comply; instead, sanctions will merely hit this oil- and gas-rich country’s trading partners.
More threats will only push the international community further along the spiral of escalation and, possibly, into military action.
There are those in Bush’s entourage who would like nothing better.
While even a major air attack would fall short of destroying all of Iran’s nuclear installations and, moreover, leave the technical know-how intact, it might at least slow down the program for a while and serve as a warning to other potential proliferators.
But it is a foolhardy gamble.
Today, Iran declares that it wants to observe the NPT, and that has no intention of building a nuclear bomb.
After a military attack by the United States, both promises would be history.
If the six governments want to avoid the escalation spiral and curb the proliferation dynamic, they need to change strategy and objective.
Instead of making a halt to uranium enrichment the be-all and end-all of their effort, their central objective should be to subject the Iranian activities to as much verification as possible: if Iran wants to enrich, so be it, but it must accept intrusive international inspections.
This is a bargain that the Iranians themselves have repeatedly hinted at.
The Six have refused because verification cannot provide an absolute guarantee against the diversion of some enriched uranium to military use.
But as the superpowers learned in the Cold War, the absence of airtight verification does not render inspections useless.
They would still submit the Iranian program to greater restrictions than is the case today.
And such an agreement would open the way to a wider agreement between Iran and the West for cooperation and regional stability.
That is why the Six should stop digging a deeper hole.
Instead of formulating new sanctions for the UN Security Council, they should use the next few months to explore confidentially what level of restrictions combined with verification Iran would consider in exchange for undisputed enrichment.
By all means, the Six should keep the option of more biting resolutions as an inducement to Iranian compromise.
But those who now call on the Security Council to issue rapid condemnations of Iran’s behavior should keep two things in mind: they are unlikely to have any effect, and the US has already used such resolutions as a pretext for launching military action on its own.
Getting to Yes With Iran
WASHINGTON, DC – With the release of America’s National Intelligence Estimate, according to which Iran has suspended its nuclear weapons program, the prospect of military confrontation with the Bush administration dimmed.
But months later, it is clear that the danger is not past, because Iran has not renounced the production of nuclear weapons, which its enriched uranium could eventually be used to fuel.
All parties need to find a formula to resolve the issue before it again threatens to erupt into conflict.
Western diplomacy in recent years has focused on Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmedinejad as the key to resolving the crisis.
But this approach is a blind alley.
Let us recall the fate of Ahmedinejad’s two immediate predecessors.
Muhammad Khatami (1997-2005) tried to implement dramatic political reform, while Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani (1989-97) tried to open the Iranian economy to the West.
Both failed, because Iran’s presidents do not run the country.
A solution to the nuclear dilemma – or any other problem in Iran’s foreign relations – is in the hands of the Supreme Leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei. 
Among his responsibilities, Khamenei serves as commander-in-chief of the military, controls the intelligence services, and appoints directors of the national media.
His appointees effectively control most ministries and Iran’s major cities.
In diplomacy, Khamenei tends to operate in a clever but recognizable fashion.
He sends different diplomats into negotiations with contradictory instructions.
Each claims to be acting with the Supreme Leader’s full authority, but ultimately are unable to make commitments because they have little idea of what Khamenei wants to do.
After a time, they are removed, and a new set of representatives is dispatched.
In order to dominate decision-making, Khamenei prefers weak presidents.
Ahmedinejad is no different.
His political base has faded, owing to Iran’s deepening economic crisis, which has been intensified by the conflict with the West over the nuclear issue.
His support in the parliamentary election next March seems particularly weak, which will no doubt please Western observers.
But the election results will not matter: parliament, too, has little influence over Iran’s foreign policy.
Some Western diplomats recognize the Supreme Leader’s role.
In practice, however, Western diplomacy tends to ignore Khamenei, who sabotages any effort to get around him as the final arbiter of Iranian policy. This might partly explain why Khamenei has been mistrustful of negotiations with the West.
Westerners don’t seem to understand who is in charge.
Indeed, some analysts argue that former President Bill Clinton’s efforts to achieve a breakthrough with Iran failed because they were addressed to Iran’s presidents.
The West should learn from the example of Russian President Vladimir Putin, who did not travel to Iran until he was allowed a direct meeting with Khamenei, during which Putin is reported to have made a proposal to end the nuclear stand-off.
There has been no answer yet, though there does seem to be some recent movement between Russia and Iran on the provision of nuclear fuel for Iran’s controversial reactors.
To be sure, Khamenei is reluctant to meet with non-Muslim foreign leaders.
But that shouldn’t stop the West from reaching out to him directly, or pressing him to publicly appoint the representatives who negotiate with the West.
One American politician who understands how to work with the Iranian power structure is former Congressman Lee Hamilton, now head of the Woodrow Wilson Center.
When Wilson Center researcher Haleh Esfandiari was arrested in Iran, Hamilton wrote to Khamenei, pleading for her release on humanitarian grounds.
Khamenei responded – reportedly the first time he answered an American – and Esfandiari was released in a matter of days. 
Khamenei would be hard-pressed to ignore a direct invitation from the US to negotiate on Iran’s most vital concerns.
His clear priority is the Islamic Republic’s survival, not the fate of particular Iranian politicians.
While Ahmedinejad’s apocalyptic vision makes it difficult for westerners to deal with him, Khamenei does not want to stumble into a military confrontation with the West, which would destabilize Iran and possibly lead to the regime’s downfall.
To resolve outstanding issues with Iran, the West should be dealing with the only person powerful enough to make deals and deliver concessions.
That person is Khamenei, not Ahmedinejad.
Ghettoizing Identity
PARIS – Once, as I picked up the Nobel laureate economist Amartya Sen at his hotel, the receptionist asked me if I was his driver.
After hesitating, I nodded yes.
Among my various identities that day, that of driver was the most obvious to her.
This sense of multiple identities is something that Sen himself highlighted mischievously in his book Identity and Violence : “The same person can be, for example, a British citizen, of Malaysian origin, with Chinese racial characteristics, a stockbroker, a non-vegetarian, an asthmatic, a linguist, a bodybuilder, a poet, an opponent of abortion, a bird-watcher, an astrologer, and one who believes that God invented Darwin to test the gullible.”
Only a minimum of introspection shows that our difficulty in answering the question, Who am I?, arises from the complexity we face in distinguishing between our many identities and understanding their architecture.
Who am I, indeed, and why should I accept people reducing me and the richness of my identity to only one of its dimensions?
Yet such reductionism lies behind one of today’s dominant concepts, multiculturalism, according to which one of our identities must prevail above all others, serving as the sole criterion for organizing society into distinct groups.
Nowadays, we are often told that there are only two ways for people to integrate into a society: the “British” model of cultural pluralism, and the “French” model, based on acceptance of Republican values and, above all, the concept of equality.
According to the conventional wisdom, Britain’s social model is based on coexistence between different communities, with each continuing to observe its conventions and customs while respecting the country’s laws – an informal federation of communities.
But that common wisdom is grossly mistaken, because British law grants immigrants from all the Commonwealth countries something extraordinary: the right to vote in British elections, even national ones.
Citizens know by experience that democracy does not consist in universal suffrage alone, but also requires a public sphere that is equally open to all.
In the United Kingdom, a large group of immigrants thus share with native Britons the right to participate in public debates on all matters of general interest, whether local or national.
Because fundamental equality is granted in this way, the British system manages to cope better than others do with a greater expression of distinctive identities.
Nowadays, however, Britain’s government itself seems to be forgetting the bedrock conditions of this British model by trying to satisfy the desire of particular communities’ for public recognition by officially promoting things like state-subsidized denominational schools.
According to Sen, this is regrettable because it leads to people giving one of their identities – religious, say, or cultural – priority over all others at a time when it is essential that children broaden their intellectual horizons.
By embracing the kind of separatism that such schools represent, the British are now saying, “This is your identity and you can have nothing else.”
That approach amounts to communitarianism, not multiculturalism.
In the last few years, the “French model” has also been subjected to misinterpretation, due to confusion about its basis – genuine inclusion in the life of society, which means genuine equality in terms of access to public services, the social welfare system, schools and universities, employment, and so on.
Republicanism grants each individual, regardless of his or her other identities equal rights in order to achieve universal equality.
It does not deny distinctive identities and gives each the right to express itself within the private sphere.
The temptation of communitarianism, which the French have debated for at least a decade, comes from the wish to turn the failure of genuine equality into something positive. It offers integration by default within the differentiated space of various communities – a sort of imprisonment by civilization, Sen would say.
But you cannot dress up failure in the clothes of success.
As long as urban areas are socially and economically deprived, communitarianism will only serve to mask the violation of the principle of equality.
Social groups are then measured in terms of their “ethnic” or “racial” differences.
Because the social conditions of the “French model” have been so neglected, the model is now a living contradiction of its core principle: equality.
To reverse the trend, French republicanism must, like English multiculturalism, contradict itself in order to fulfil itself.
The French must recognize that equality before the law is a core principle, but a weak one; it needs to be complemented by a stricter vision of how to achieve equality.
This vision should make republican efforts proportional to the importance of people’s handicap in order to free them from the burden of their initial conditions.
Genuine equality in the public sphere – which differs according to the values and history of each country – implies a minimal level of acceptance of a country’s history and values.
Sen says that what is being accepted here should be thought of as national identity.
But this identity must be open.
It is an identity we share by living together and by what we have in common, whatever the differences between our multiples identities.
The great British novelist Joseph Conrad, born Józef Teodor Konrad Korzeniowski to Polish parents in Russian-ruled Ukraine, said that words are the biggest enemy of reality.
The appeal of “national identity” must not be turned into a collective smokescreen behind which inclusion becomes a disembodied dream coexisting with the communitarianism that is now emerging from its failure.
The IMF’s Next Test
CAMBRIDGE – In October, central bankers, policymakers, private-sector executives, academics, and representatives of civil-society organizations will convene in Washington, DC, for the annual joint meeting of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
Among the most important outcomes this year will be the IMF Board of Governors’ decision regarding how to address current international monetary issues.
Global economic conditions remain precarious, with no signs of healthy GDP growth in the eurozone, a weak recovery in the United States, commodity-exporting countries like Australia suffering from diminishing Chinese demand, and an emerging-market slowdown that is now well into its third year.
In such an uncertain environment, even small changes in advanced countries’ monetary policy can destabilize developing economies.
For example, the mere announcement in May that the Federal Reserve would “taper” its purchases of long-term assets drove down the value of emerging-market currencies.
With the Fed considering exiting its quantitative-easing policy altogether and raising interest rates over the next year, global markets are set to experience significant turbulence.
The world needs strategies to mitigate this looming volatility.
The IMF – whose mandate is to maintain balance-of-payments stability worldwide – should be the institution that provides them.
Rather than waiting for a crisis to erupt before intervening, the IMF should provide “forward guidance” on how it will tackle potential disruptions in international financial markets.
Central banks are increasingly using such guidance to communicate monetary policy and anchor market expectations.
For example, the Fed has pledged to keep interest rates low at least until the unemployment rate falls to 6.5% – a move that has arguably lowered long-term borrowing costs.
Likewise, Mark Carney, in his first policy action as Governor of the Bank of England, announced forward guidance for short-term interest rates.
Although the effect of such interest-rate guidance on the economy cannot be determined without additional data, there are many arguments in its favor.
Perhaps the most telling recent example of a central bank using forward guidance effectively was European Central Bank President Mario Draghi’s July 2012 announcement that the ECB would do “whatever it takes” to ensure the euro’s survival.
That pledge alone stabilized borrowing costs and dramatically reduced interest-rate spreads for struggling eurozone countries.
Investors’ belief that the ECB would buy up government debt if bond yields rose too high was enough to restore calm; indeed, no central-bank intervention in secondary markets has been necessary since then.
The IMF’s policy tool here is the dollar amount that it is willing to pledge as a backstop in balance-of-payments crises.
By promising to intervene in vulnerable markets in the event of excessive financial volatility, the IMF, as the largest player, would reduce coordination problems among investors.
Moreover, by communicating ex ante its willingness to provide emergency funds, the IMF would reduce the stigma against countries that turn to it for assistance – a stigma that has led countries to delay requesting support until it is too late to mitigate domestic political damage.
The good news is that the IMF has already shown some interest in the idea of forward guidance.
At the annual meeting of central bankers in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, in August, IMF Managing Director Christine Lagarde suggested that the Fund would intervene to help emerging markets in crisis.
The bad news is that Lagarde’s vague announcement seems to have done little to shape market expectations or make governments more comfortable requesting IMF assistance.
This underscores a fundamental point: successful forward guidance requires, above all, credibility.
After the US investment bank Lehman Brothers collapsed in 2008, sparking a global financial crisis whose repercussions are still being felt, G-20 countries offered firm commitments to increase the IMF’s lending resources, thereby enabling the Fund to mitigate the effects of the crisis.
Today, G-20 leaders must again use their influence over IMF policy, this time to push for timely forward guidance and another round of reform of the international financial architecture.
The Fed’s decision in September to postpone tapering its quantitative-easing program has given emerging markets some breathing room, which they should use to bolster themselves against the inevitable reversal of easy-money inflows from the US.
This is also an opportunity for the IMF to formulate and announce its policy to address global financial market turbulence.
To be sure, there is no shortage of issues – such as poverty eradication, aid effectiveness, and international development – to be discussed at the upcoming IMF/World Bank meeting.
But the failure of IMF leaders to produce a forward-looking strategy to confront impending market turmoil would undermine progress in all of these areas.
The last thing that a still-fragile global economy needs is more uncertainty.
Giving the Well-Performing State Its Due
MADRID – The triumph of democracy and market-based economics – the “End of History,” as the American political philosopher Francis Fukuyama famously called it – which was proclaimed to be inevitable with the fall of the Berlin Wall, soon proved to be little more than a mirage.
However, following China’s intellectual pirouette to maintain one-party rule while embracing the capitalist credo, history’s interpreters shifted their focus to the economy: not everybody would be free and elect their government, but capitalist prosperity would hold sway worldwide.
Now, however, the economic tumult shaking Europe, the erosion of the middle class in the West, and the growing social inequalities worldwide are undermining capitalism’s claim to universal triumph.