China’s Triumph of the Will
MOSCOW – When the opening ceremony of the Beijing Olympic Games begins in a few days, viewers will be presented with a minutely choreographed spectacle swathed in nationalist kitsch.
Of course, images that recall Hitler’s goose-stepping storm troopers are the last thing that China’s leaders have in mind for their Olympics; after all, official Chinese nationalism proclaims the country’s “peaceful rise” within an idyll of “harmonious development.”
But, both aesthetically and politically, the parallel is hardly far-fetched.
Indeed, by choosing Albert Speer Jr., the son of Hitler’s favorite architect and the designer of the 1936 Berlin Olympics, to design the master plan for the Beijing Games, China’s government has itself alluded to the radical politicization of aesthetics that was a hallmark of twentieth-century totalitarianism.
Like those regimes, whether fascist or communist, China’s leaders have sought to transform public space and sporting events into visible proof of their fitness and mandate to rule.
Speer Jr.’s commission was to lay out a master plan for the access to the Olympic complex in Beijing.
His design centered on the construction of an imposing avenue to connect the Forbidden City and the National Stadium in which the opening ceremony will take place.
His father’s plan for “Germania,” the name Hitler selected for the Berlin that he planned to construct after World War II, also relied on such a mighty central axis.
China’s rulers see the Olympics as a stage for demonstrating to the world the exceptional vitality of the country they have built over the past three decades.
And that demonstration serves an even more important domestic political objective: further legitimizing the regime’s continuing rule in the eyes of ordinary Chinese.
Given this imperative, an architectural language of bombast and gigantism was almost inevitable.
So it is no surprise that the Beijing Games may resemble the hubristic Games that beguiled the Führer and enthralled the German masses in 1936.
Like the Beijing Games, the Berlin Olympics were conceived as a coming-out party.
Josef Goebbels’ Nazi propaganda machine was fully deployed.
Athletic imagery – used to brilliant effect in Leni Riefenstahl’s acclaimed documentary – appeared to create a link between the Nazis and the ancient Greeks, and to confirm the Nazi myth that Germans and German civilization were the true heirs to the “Aryan” culture of classical antiquity.
While designing the master plan for the Beijing Games, Speer Jr., an acclaimed architect and town planner, also sought, like his father, to create a futuristic global metropolis.
Of course, the language that he used to sell his scheme to the Chinese was very different from the words his father used to present his plans to Hitler.
Instead of emphasizing his design’s pomposity, the younger Speer insisted on its environmental friendliness.
The 2,000-year-old city of Beijing should be transported into hyper-modernity, whereas his father’s 1936 Berlin design was, in his words, “simply megalomania.”
Of course, the sins of the father should never be visited on the son.
But, in this case, when the son borrows essential elements of his father’s architectural principles and serves a regime that seeks to use the Games for some of the same reasons that animated Hitler, is he not willingly reflecting those sins?
Totalitarian regimes – the Nazis, the Soviets in 1980, and now the Chinese – desire to host the Olympics as a way to signal to the world their superiority.
China believes that it has found its own model to develop and modernize, and its rulers regard the Games in the same way as the Nazis and Leonid Brezhnev did, as a means of “selling” their model to a global audience.
Obviously, the Chinese were politically tone-deaf in choosing an architect whose name carried such dark historical connotations.
The name of Speer itself probably did not matter to the officials who chose him.
They sought to stage an Olympics that made manifest their image of themselves, and Speer Jr., looking back to his father’s mastery of the architecture of power, delivered the goods.
The realization of Speer Jr.’s Olympic vision, and that of his patrons, marks the end of a welcome interlude.
For years following the end of the Cold War, politics had been removed from the Games.
A gold medal signified the sporting abilities and dedication of individual athletes, not the supposed merits of the political system that produced them.
But now we have returned to an aesthetic of political mesmerization, reflected in the host government’s declared aim that China should win more gold medals than any country before.
As the Olympic torch relay – itself a creation of the Nazis, first employed in the Berlin Games – makes its way down Speer Jr.’s avenue of power, the world will once again be made to witness a triumph of the totalitarian will.
China’s Trouble with the Neighbors
BEIJING – China’s “good neighbor” policy is under unprecedented pressure; indeed, it is at its nadir since the Cold War’s end.
One after another, frictions with neighboring countries have arisen recently.
From the territorial disputes with Vietnam and the Philippines in the South China Sea to tensions with Burma (Myanmar) and Thailand, relationships that were sound, if not always friendly, have now soured.
Myanmar’s decision to shelve the Chinese-backed Myitsone Dam project shocked China.
Likewise, the killing of 13 Chinese boat crewmen on the Mekong River in October serves as a stark reminder that China’s presumably peaceful southern land border, which has been untroubled for nearly 20 years, today resembles the most hostile sort of neighborhood.
China’s people and government are especially dismayed by the Mekong killings, which seemed to demonstrate, once again, the government’s inability to protect its citizens from being murdered abroad, despite the country’s newfound global status. As a result, two compelling questions have arisen: Why do China’s neighbors choose to neglect its interests?
And why, despite China’s rise, do its authorities seem increasingly unable to secure Chinese lives and commercial interests abroad?
Chinese anxiety about these questions forms the atmosphere shaping Chinese policy.
With Muammar el-Qaddafi’s fall from power in Libya, Chinese companies lost investments worth roughly $20 billion, which Libya’s new government has implied are unlikely to be recovered.
Many Chinese were disquieted by their government’s decision to evacuate China’s citizens from Libya, and would have preferred a bolder effort to protect the countries’ commercial assets there.
Similarly, the Chinese government’s later, and quite sudden, about-face in recognizing the rebel Transitional National Council as Libya’s government aroused considerable sneering at home.
After all, China spent valuable political capital to oppose NATO’s airstrikes at the beginning of the intervention, only to end up backing the forces that NATO helped bring to power.
This was China’s utilitarian, commercially-driven diplomacy at its most transparently hollow.
For most Chinese, Libya is a far-away and out-of-reach country, owing to China’s limited capacity to project power.
So the emphasis on restoring Chinese commercial interests is accepted reluctantly if not completely understood.
But Myanmar and the other Mekong River countries are supposed to be the country’s “good neighbors,” and are completely within reach of Chinese power, so public anger over threats to the country’s interests in these places is intense.
Those interests include a new oil pipeline linking Myanmar to Kunming, the provincial capital of Yunnan province.
China is also working on “connectivity” projects – namely, a rail and highway network – aimed at boosting economic and social ties between China and the ASEAN countries.
The Myitsone and Mekong incidents have now cast a shadow over these projects, fueling fear of a chain reaction that could wreck China’s two-decade-long effort to achieve deeper regional integration.
Obviously, Myanmar’s new government does not want to aggravate sentiment in its already-unstable border areas, where rebel groups were using the dam project to rally new supporters.
The new government’s effort to share power with political forces in Myanmar’s volatile regions, and thus weaken local warlords, clearly contributed to the decision to halt construction.
The dam’s Chinese investors, for their part, relied too heavily on the depth of the two countries’ bilateral ties, and so heavily discounted the project’s political risks.
Their behavior also reflects the implied guarantee of official government mercantilism, as well as the complacency of China’s state-owned enterprises, which account for most Chinese overseas investment.
Operating on the assumption that the government will back them – or bail them out if they fail – they can afford to be cavalier.
The Mekong incident tells another grim story.
The river, which links five countries, has been long famous as a setting for trans-national crimes such as drug trafficking, gambling, and smuggling.
China’s booming economy has brought growing interaction between China and the Mekong’s underground economies.
The killing of the 13 Chinese boat crewmen was linked to this trend.
But China can best avoid similar tragedies not by flexing its muscles, but by building greater multilateral cooperation to combat transnational crime along the Mekong.
The Myitsone and Mekong episodes highlight China’s suddenly edgy relations with its southern neighbors.
Its good-neighbor policy, it turns out, has steered China’s regional diplomacy into uncharted waters.
Indeed, China’s neighbors will not be reliably good to Chinese interests unless and until China begins to provide essential public goods – not just commerce, but also full-fledged regional governance based on the rule of law, respect for human rights, and regional economic growth.
Otherwise, ruptures such as those at Myitsone and along the Mekong will recur, deepening China’s sense of isolation and panic.
China’s Painful Structural Transformation
SHANGHAI – For more than a year, headlines worldwide have been pointing to a Chinese economic slowdown.
But a closer look at regional dynamics within China tells a different story – one that is less about deceleration than changing gears.
According to China’s National Bureau of Statistics, the resource-rich province of Shanxi has suffered an economic slowdown, but the southwestern provinces of Chongqing and Guizhou have experienced vibrant growth.
Hebei and three other northeastern provinces are feeling the effects of recession, but the heavy-industry economies of Tianjin, Shandong, and Jiangsu are booming.
After the 2008 financial crisis, when slower growth became the “new normal” for many countries, China began to accelerate its economic rebalancing by shifting the drivers of growth from manufacturing and exports toward goods and services for domestic consumption.
This transition has had far-reaching implications for the future dynamics of China’s economy.
With its previous export strategy, the government’s main priority was to integrate domestic manufacturing operations into global production chains.
Now, however, its aim is an economy that meets domestic consumers’ diverse demands, and it is the industries closely connected to those demands that are quickly expanding.
Previously, the economic activities that are now flourishing weren’t categorized as manufacturing industries at all, but as “services.” But services do not exist in a vacuum.
All businesses need manufactured products, transportation, information and communications technology (ICT), logistics, real estate, finance, insurance, and more.
Thus, new demand for new services has virtuous-cycle effects in terms of capital investment in infrastructure and equipment.
Contrary to the conventional wisdom, the growth of services in China to meet domestic demand does not mean the end of manufacturing and capital investment, much less of economic growth.
Service sectors stand to make up for much, if not all, of the growth lost to lower output in export-oriented manufacturing branches.
China’s transportation, ICT, finance, insurance, real estate, education, and health-care sectors have long had inappropriately low labor productivity, which means they have significant room to grow faster.
According to a paper by the economists Jong-Wha Lee and Warwick J. McKibbin, service-sector productivity growth in Asia “benefits all sectors eventually, and contributes to the sustained and balanced growth of Asian economies.”
Examining economic development trends in South Korea, the authors find that the average value added per worker in transportation, real estate, and ICT is now higher than the average in manufacturing, and they point to similar dynamics in the United States, Japan, and China.
This finding suggests that rapid development in China’s service economy could reverse the externally triggered dampening of growth since 2008.
But, as the Japanese and South Korean transitions from export to domestic demand-driven growth demonstrate, structural transformation is a slow and painful process.
China is in the midst of that process, and it must be careful not to undermine existing sources of growth lest it fall into a structural trap where the cost of transition itself derails new gains.
It is not a good sign that the high costs in many Chinese provinces have been weighing down overall growth.
This points to fundamental challenges ahead, notwithstanding the significant economic potential of Chinese consumers.
For starters, economic development based on diversified domestic demand is more complicated than export-driven development, because these new sectors rely more heavily on sophisticated financial services, free and equitable market access, better educated workers, and higher investment in research and development.
As a result, the new businesses emerging from the shift to a new growth model are demanding far more from China’s current economic-governance system than it can bear.
Further structural reforms would go a long way toward fixing this problem, but they will also require China’s leaders to make tough political decisions that won’t please everyone.
Another fundamental challenge is China’s slow rate of urbanization, which is still lagging, even after 25 years of export-led growth.
Each of a thriving service economy’s major components – ICT, finance, insurance, transportation, and real estate – needs the others to prosper, and cities are what bring them all together – a phenomenon of network externalities.
Unfortunately, China’s enduring system of dividing urban and rural regions, together with poor urban planning, has led to fragmented and scattered metropolitan communities without diversified networks that would otherwise have helped boost productivity.
China’s cities will be a key ingredient of its long-term economic success.
Urbanization should start accelerating today, and over the next 10-15 years, with the expansion of metropolitan areas geared toward the needs of services-led economic growth.
If China can rise to that challenge, it will be well positioned to clear the remaining hurdles in its path toward high-income status.
China’s Next Stimulus
BEIJING – Since last November, economists and the media alike have been hailing supply-side structural reform as a groundbreaking solution to China’s economic woes.
After all, the logic in China goes, demand-side policies, in the form of Keynesian stimulus measures, are useful only for resolving short-term and aggregate problems.
Because China’s problems are long term and structural, the country should be focused on supply-side structural reform, even if it means accepting slower GDP growth.
Is this the right approach?
GDP growth is generated via the interaction between the supply side and the demand side of the economy.
For example, investment in human capital enables innovation, the products of which create demand and, in turn, economic growth.
Demand-side policy and structural adjustment are not mutually exclusive.
In aggregate terms, growth of supply determines growth potential, and growth of demand determines the use of that potential.
To change the economic structure and growth pattern, first the structure of demand must be changed.
For China, the supply side should be driven more by innovation and creation, rather than by increasing inputs.
On the demand side, it should be driven more by domestic consumption, rather than investment (especially in real estate) and exports.
But this shift is proving difficult, as structural factors cause China’s long-term potential growth rate to fall; the economy now seems set to fall below even that lower rate this year.
All of this suggests that continued structural adjustment is needed in China.
But the reality is that China has been engaged in such adjustment for a long time, with unsatisfactory results, indicating that complementary demand-side policies may be needed.
Moreover, while slower growth is unavoidable because of adjustment, there is a limit to how low a growth rate China can accept.
With China’s growth having already reached a 25-year low in 2015, that threshold may not be far off.
To be sure, many believe that China’s growth rate will stabilize in the second half of 2016.
If it does, China’s leaders could probably concentrate on structural adjustment, without considering additional stimulus.
But there is good reason to believe that China’s growth rate will continue to decline this year.
The fact is that China remains gripped by deflation, with prices and output in a downward spiral.
Despite a slightly positive consumer price index (CPI), the producer price index (PPI) has been falling for 47 months in a row.
Moreover, the GDP deflator has been negative since the beginning of 2015.
Two types of deflation spirals are currently at work in China.
There is the overcapacity-deflation spiral, in which overcapacity pushes down PPI, leading to falling corporate profitability.
Then there is the debt-deflation spiral, in which falling PPI causes real debt to rise, again weakening corporate profitability.
In both cases, firms are driven to deleverage and reduce investment, a response that leads to more overcapacity and further declines in PPI.
Furthermore, given that China’s corporate debt is already very high, the increase in real debt may have devastating consequences for financial stability.
Compounding the challenge confronting China is the fact that the economy’s major demand-side driver, real-estate investment, is declining more rapidly than the alternative source of demand, domestic consumption, is rising.
In 2015, the unsold residential floor space for China as a whole was 700 million square meters (7.5 billion square feet), while the average annual sale of floor space in normal times was 1.3 billion square meters.
Faced with double-digit growth in inventory, real-estate developers slashed investment.
By the end of 2015, real-estate investment growth dropped almost to zero.
This year, though investment increased somewhat in January and February, that rate is almost certain to fall significantly further.
Because real-estate investment accounts for more than 10% of China’s GDP, the impact of this trend on overall economic growth will be considerable.
In this context, China is not facing a choice between Keynesian stimulus or supply-side reform, but rather a challenge in balancing the two.
In order to avoid a hard landing that would make structural adjustment extremely difficult to implement – not, it should be noted, to prop up growth – another stimulus package that increases aggregate demand through infrastructure investment is needed.
Given that China’s fiscal position remains relatively strong, such a policy is entirely feasible.
The new stimulus package should be designed and implemented with much more care than the CN¥4 trillion ($586 billion) package that China introduced in 2008.
With the right investments, China can improve its economic structure, while helping to eliminate overcapacity.
The key will be to finance projects mainly with government bonds, instead of bank credit.
That way, China can avoid the kinds of asset bubbles that swelled in the last several years, when rapid credit growth failed to support the real economy.
To accommodate this approach, the People’s Bank of China should adjust monetary policy to lower government-bond yields.
Specifically, it should shift the intermediate target of monetary policy from expanding the money supply to lowering the benchmark interest rate.
Needless to say, in order to uphold monetary-policy independence, China has to remove the shackles from the renminbi exchange rate.
Structural adjustment remains absolutely critical to China’s future, and the country should be prepared to bear the pain of that process.
But, under current circumstances, a one-dimensional policy approach will not work.
Expansionary fiscal policy and accommodative monetary policy also have an important role to play in placing China on a more stable and sustainable growth path.
Beyond Structural Reform in China
HONG KONG – Global markets have breathed a sigh of relief.
Following the shock of the United Kingdom’s vote to exit the European Union, GDP data indicate that China’s economy seems to have escaped a slump, with annual growth averaging 6.7% in the first half of 2016.
But that does not mean that China is in the clear. On the contrary, the success of the structural rebalancing that China needs to ensure sustainable long-term growth is far from certain.
To be sure, President Xi Jinping’s government is committed to structural reform.
China’s leaders know that they can no longer rely on stimulating short-term demand.
Already this year, annual growth in fixed-capital investment has fallen by 2.4 percentage points, to 9%, with the private-sector investment up by just 2.8%.
The plan now is to implement supply-side structural reforms aimed at boosting productivity and improving the functioning of both the market and the state.
But, given China’s size and diversity, not to mention its deep integration into the global economy, communicating and implementing new policies across regions, sectors, and social groups will be very difficult.
If China is to succeed, its leaders will need to think beyond their traditional top-down approach.
Some 30 years ago, Deng Xiaoping used the slogan “delegating power and sharing dividends” to motivate local officials, state-owned enterprises (SOEs), and soon-to-be private entrepreneurs to embrace market-oriented reforms.
A similar approach could work today, as China’s leaders attempt to address the problems generated by the rapid expansion of imperfect markets managed by an imperfect bureaucracy.
Among the main problems China faces are over-leveraged local governments and SOEs, manufacturing overcapacity, excessive real-estate inventory, rising production costs, corruption, inequality, environmental degradation, and inadequate technological innovation.
Supply-side structural reform is intended to address these problems, producing a more sustainable, inclusive, open, and efficient economy.
But macro-level solutions alone might not be adequate to address supply-side structural problems, which often relate to the micro-level failure of business models, say, to produce adequate growth or productivity.
And, in fact, in a mature market economy, those problems are addressed largely by businesses themselves, perhaps with the involvement of municipal governments.
In China, however, national policy shapes business models, most obviously in the case of the SOEs.
That creates conflicts of interest, with the government struggling to balance the imperatives of growth, employment, efficiency, and social stability.
In some parts of China, supply-side structural problems are being addressed on the micro level.
In the cities of Foshan and Shenzhen in Guangdong province, the private sector and local governments are dealing relatively effectively with such issues.
This provides important insight into the approach that China’s leaders must take to addressing supply-side structural problems throughout the country.
Just as increased bureaucratic efficiency is important to harness market forces more effectively, micro-level market incentives are needed to sustain healthy growth.
For a country that has long relied on state control over the economy, this complicates matters significantly.
Not only are there considerable differences in how markets work in different regions and sectors; the interaction between the state and these markets will undergo major changes.
That can create far-reaching ambiguity, leading to tensions and confusion among officials, scholars, businesspeople, and the public.
This issue was evident in the hostile takeover of China’s top real-estate developer, Vanke.
The process has involved disputes among the incumbent executives, a private investment fund, and an SOE shareholder, as well as a default on corporate bonds issued by the state-owned Dongbei Special Steel that has spurred disputes among the Liaoning provincial government, the China Development Bank, and many other investors.
Markets do not know how to react to property-rights disputes that involve this many layers of government.
To minimize uncertainty, institutional reforms are needed.
Specifically, the central and local authorities must clearly delineate property rights with regard to land, capital, and natural resources, and establish industrial standards and best practices.
Such clarity is critical to curtail a surge in disputes over rights, which block productivity-enhancing market-oriented adjustments.
Of course, disputes would still occur, and on a scale that China’s legal system is not equipped to handle.
To resolve them quickly – and thus to deter the social and economic instability that could arise from escalating conflicts – China needs reliable, affordable, and independent mechanisms that separate specific economic interests from broader political and social objectives.
At the same time, China will need to cultivate micro-level competition, by developing exchange platforms and related financial services for small and medium-size enterprises.
Free of incentive-crushing financial repression, such firms would be able not only to contribute to growth and development, but also to help propel the needed market adjustments.
There is reason to believe that China’s supply-side rebalancing is moving in the right direction.
But unless China’s leaders also tackle the challenges posed by market and bureaucratic inefficiencies, the objective of strong and sustainable growth will remain out of reach.
Greening China’s Financial System
BEIJING – China’s establishment of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) has intensified debate about whether a new generation of development banks, led by emerging countries, is needed to ensure that financing decisions account adequately for principles of environmentally sustainable growth.
Far more important, however, is whether such principles underpin developing countries’ broader capital markets, which have become increasingly central to the international financial system.
The answer, as of now, seems to be yes.
Indeed, China and other major emerging economies appear committed to designing financial systems that serve the long-term imperatives of inclusive and sustainable development.
But they cannot create a genuinely inclusive and sustainable global economy alone.
Policy-directed investment vehicles, which have grown in number and significance in recent years, are critical to this effort.
While the AIIB and the forthcoming New Development Bank, operated by the BRICS countries (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa), are the most visible internationally, they are only the tip of the iceberg.
The world’s two largest development banks – the Brazilian Development Bank and the China Development Bank – together manage about $1.5 trillion in assets.
Recent reports commissioned by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) neatly summarize where we are with two key data points: While global investment in renewables increased by 17% last year, 116 of 140 countries registered a deterioration in their stock of natural capital.
In other words, financial markets are responding to environment-related risks and opportunities, but far too slowly to halt, let alone reverse, the potentially catastrophic damage being wrought by human activity.
This must change.
Finance needs to be directed more rapidly and decisively away from natural-resource-intensive and polluting investments and toward green opportunities.
While greener economic and industrial policies are vital, they are inadequate; policy and market failures in the financial economy must be addressed as well.
The OECD countries, despite being the source of modern history’s most devastating financial meltdown, have shown less appetite to advance sustainability as a design principle of their financial systems (the Bank of England’s ongoing prudential review of climate-related risks to the financial sector is a notable exception).
This contrasts with the approach of some developing economies, which not only face more immediate environmental and social challenges, but also take a “developmental” view of the financial system’s role.
Consider China, where a task force created by the Peoples’ Bank of China has just unveiled 14 ambitious proposals to green the country’s financial system.
The so-called “green finance task force” – co-convened by the PBOC’s Research Bureau and the UNEP Inquiry into Design Options for a Sustainable Financial System – initially comprised 40 ministers, regulators, academics, and financial actors, supported by international experts.
It was recently expanded to include more than 100 institutions, which are working together to create detailed execution plans for each proposal.
The proposals cover four broad areas.
• Specialized investment vehicles to support green investment, domestically and internationally.
• Fiscal and financial support, including interest subsidies for green loans, incentives for developing the green bond market, and better mechanisms for green firms to communicate their environmental performance in equity markets.
• New financial infrastructure, including carbon markets, a green ratings system, and a green investor network.
• Legal infrastructure, including clearer lender liability provisions, compulsory environmental liability insurance, and the disclosure of environmental information.
Green finance is at an early stage in China, just as it is in the rest of the world.
Fortunately, according to UNEP’s two-year inquiry into policy options for greening financial and capital markets, the movement is gaining traction in emerging countries such as Brazil, Kenya, and Indonesia, as well as developed economies like the United Kingdom.
China’s recent move marks the beginning of a new phase of its financial-market development, in which green-finance goals are central, rather than an add-on, to relevant initiatives.
According to Pan Gongsheng, the PBOC’s deputy governor, green finance will be a “key element” of “the 13th Five-Year Plan for the reform and development of China’s financial sector.”
The current shift toward green finance in developing countries can have a significant international impact.
China’s efforts, in particular, could take the world to a tipping point, through their effects on the country’s growing global financial footprint.
And, indeed, international action – from knowledge sharing to the development of suitable standards and oversight – is vital to advance green finance.
Fortunately, progress is being made here, too.
UNEP’s work has helped to invigorate a vibrant informal network involving central banks and other rule-makers and market actors.
The major rating agency Standard &amp; Poor’s is integrating climate risks into its sovereign-credit analysis.
And the G-20 recently asked the Financial Stability Board to consider the risks that a possible “carbon bubble” – caused by markets’ overvaluation of fossil-fuel companies’ oil, coal, and gas reserves, owing to a failure to account for future limits on extraction and use – pose to the global financial system.
Progressive national leadership and international coalitions – together with more deeply engaged multilateral institutions – are needed to build a more inclusive green global financial system.
Only such a system can effectively advance sustainable development.
China’s U-Turn
BEIJING – Hope and danger collided at the recently concluded National People’s Congress in Beijing.
The two-week conclave meets annually, and while it is unfair and inaccurate to characterize the Congress as a rubber-stamp exercise, delegates tend, in the main, to jump on the bandwagon of policies constructed by the central government, and by the Communist Party. 
The hope was that the Chinese leadership would finally do something – preferably something bold – to forestall further decline in the country’s major economic indicators.
Growth has slowed, exports have plummeted, and unemployment has jumped, and the prevailing view has been that a “blame America first” strategy makes the most sense.
Analysts kept waiting for Chinese officials to salvage capitalism by spelling out a plan to save its economy first.
The danger is that this is exactly what China’s leaders did.
China’s government is divided on a number of matters, but there is a strong, sharp-edged consensus that social stability is at risk unless a robust stimulus package emerges to stave off further job loss.
(Never mind that Chinese history lacks evidence of a clear, causal connection between unemployment and national unrest.)
Premier Wen Jiabao confirmed that a major effort was being made to extend and implement the previously announced four-trillion-yuan plan, and that more funds were available if conditions worsened. 
Data on the scope of the stimulus package – for example, investment per province or the number of new projects versus those that more cash would restart or reinvigorate (and these projects versus those that would be shut down) – are difficult to determine.
The transparency and consistency of official figures lags well behind the authorities’ hyped promises about government reform, streamlining of the bureaucracy, and the retreat of the Party apparatus.
Still, it is not what we don’t know about the stimulus plan that is troublesome.
China’s government, as prone to political maneuvering and policy gridlock as any, appears to agree that immediate economic growth is crucial and that an 8% annual rate is essential.
Many officials (and the analysts and advisers who support them) assumed that this magic number represents the minimum rate needed to provide jobs to workers and managers and absorb the more than six million new graduates who spill out of China’s campuses each year in search of employment. 
That 8% target will be met, because in China directed objectives are always attained, and often exceeded.
After all, political careers depend on acceding to the demands of the central government.
And yet China’s reliance on economic policies that require the heavy hand of the state to achieve officially decreed targets had been fading.
The government’s renewed focus on such a target is thus another indication that the global economic crisis has strengthened those Chinese officials and intellectuals who advocate a socialist system.
After all, it is much more difficult to make an argument for market economies when they are under siege.
The real danger of the new stimulus package is not ideological but environmental.
What the figure of 8% signals to provincial officials and industrial managers is that the emerging promise of green GDP – wherein a local government had to show not only growth, but also clean and energy-efficient growth – has been abandoned.
Few Party officials really wanted to be troubled by the complexities of such calculations anyway, but either abided by them or paid them lip service, for the sake of maintaining patronage and seeking promotion.
Now, with the Party’s ability to manage the economy seemingly at stake, its stimulus package implies a green light to bypass environmental regulations if jobs or growth targets are in jeopardy.
A big loser here is energy efficiency.
The proportion of new outlays devoted to energy conservation and reduction have been cut almost in half, just when reforms in the price structure of energy use were beginning to kick in.  Some measures aimed at redistributing the energy load – such as solar and wind power – have been retained.
But the funding for expanding these efforts will rest largely on provincial officials, who will be reluctant to compel local cadres to disrupt production and lay off even more workers.
Much of politics in China is local, but little of environmental protection is.
There is worse news elsewhere in the new plan.
A contest for China’s soul is now underway in that giant country, pitting two powerful forces and two very different stances toward the outside world against each other.
The outcome will have a major impact on whether China succeeds in becoming a nation capable of having truly constructive and durable relations with the outside world.
On one hand, China’s economic revolution has helped position it in the world as a confident powerhouse of trade, a more responsible global powerbroker, and even as a reassuring military presence.
On the other hand, China remains trapped by a past and a mindset steeped in a sense of victimization, which tempts it to export blame for internal problems.
The main question is whether China can escape the pull of this old psychological syndrome – which kept it preoccupied throughout the twentieth century with debilitating sentiments of weakness, insecurity, and humiliation – and allow itself to be guided by a new outlook on the world, and even on old enemies.
The anti-Japanese demonstrations are a symptom of the old syndrome, fueled by grievances born at a time when China was, indeed, aggrieved and humiliated.
With China’s growing economic clout, rising standard of living, and increasingly respected place in the world, one would hope that the Chinese and their leaders would find a way to let go of the dead.
Yet, even as the luster of the “China miracle” dazzles the world, the Chinese seem loath leave behind their dark feelings of victimization.
Instead of assuming a new national paradigm based on the reality of their accomplishments (national unity, robust international trade, and growing global influence), China’s leaders cling to the old paradigm of their country as victim, the “sick man of Asia” being “cut up like a melon” by predatory imperial and colonial powers like Japan.
That bitter memory of oppression and exploitation lingers in the minds of too many Chinese like the afterimage of a bright light long after it has been turned off.
The Japanese occupation of China was a particularly galling and humiliating period because Japan was an Asian, not a Western, power.
Moreover, like China, Japan was a society steeped in Confucian culture, which many Chinese reformers in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries blamed as a critical impediment to their own country’s development and modernization.
Of course, Japan did occupy China, committed unimaginable savagery, and has since paid no reparations or apologized in a convincing way.
Nevertheless, what benefit does China gain by continuing to raise these issues 60 years later?
What is worth the risk of alienating the world’s second largest economy and one of China’s most important trade partners?
First and foremost, aiding and inciting the expression of popular anger against Japan gives China’s Communist Party leaders a powerful and readily available vehicle for rallying domestic support, thereby legitimizing their own power.
At the same time, the demonstrations represent China’s experience of the world as an unequal place where the weak are inevitably bullied, exploited, and humiliated.
This mindset suggests that, despite the panoramic city skylines, the billboards, and the flashy five-star hotels say otherwise, China has a long way to go before it truly comes to understand and appreciate its actual accomplishments and status.
Indeed, surges of organized anger when China is attacked or insulted are hardly new.
The reaction of China’s leaders to the America’s accidental attack on China’s embassy in Belgrade in 1998, and to the collision of an American spy plane with a Chinese plane over the Pacific, was to permit, if not foment, large anti-foreign demonstrations.
In keeping with this syndrome, Foreign Minister Li Zhaoxing has accused Japan of having “hurt the feelings of the Chinese people” by not apologizing for their crimes, as if he were Minister of Psychology, rather than foreign affairs.
Of course, China’s wounded psyche and the desire for restitution from its former tormentors deserve sympathy.
In this sense, China, like many countries, could be said to have something of a bi-polar personality.
Much of the emotional force of Mao’s revolution derived from the widespread sense of unequal treatment and humiliation by foreign powers, and this revolutionary fervor has never been properly interred.
Just as Mao’s portrait has never been taken down from The Gate of Heavenly Peace, so whole elements of his revolution continue to survive in China’s institutions, ways of thinking, and modes of interacting with the world.
Like recessive genes, they sometimes suddenly re-express themselves.
The role of victim is all too familiar to the Chinese, perhaps even somewhat comforting, for it provides a way to explain (and explain away) China’s problems.
But it is also dangerous, because it derives from China’s old weaknesses rather than its new strengths.
The era of Japanese militaristic and imperialist power has long gone, and the world is beating a path to China’s door.
The last thing the country needs is to remain trapped in the past.
A Chinese Dinner for Two
LONDON – A great deal of water has flowed through the Taiwan Strait in the 70 years since the leader of China’s Communists, Mao Zedong, met the leader of his nationalist opponents, Chiang Kai-shek.
So the recent meeting in Singapore between their heirs, President Xi Jinping of the People’s Republic and his Taiwanese counterpart, Ma Ying-jeou, could legitimately be described as historic.
The diplomatic negotiation that preceded the meeting was exquisitely complex, even covering who should pay for dinner (they split the bill).
But, after a brief exchange of views behind closed doors, no joint statement was issued and only a heavily sanitized account of the meeting was made available to China’s state media.
So why did the meeting happen, and what does it portend?
Ever since Mao’s Communists won the civil war (which the last meeting between the parties, in 1945, had been called to try to avert) and Chiang Kai-shek’s Kuomintang forces withdrew to Taiwan, relations between the two sides have smoldered without ever really catching fire.
While there was no love lost between the United States and the Kuomintang leadership, the US gave Taiwan assurances of military protection, which deterred China from trying to unify the island with the mainland by force.
Mao’s adventures on the Korean peninsula, supporting the North against the South and its Western allies, helped to cement the Washington-Taipei axis, which, thanks to some nifty diplomatic footwork, survived President Richard Nixon’s rapprochement with China in the early 1970s.
America recognized the communists in Beijing as China’s legitimate government, while helping to sustain Taiwan in a limbo between sovereignty and the practical exercise of statehood.
The island ran its own affairs, becoming a rambunctious democracy in the 1980s, but never insisted on international recognition as a full-fledged sovereign state.
For China’s rulers, Taiwan was a “renegade province,” and it steadily picked off members of the international community who tried to treat it as anything more than this.
But there has also been a recognition of reality – especially economic reality – along the way.
People remember 1989 for the Tiananmen Square killings.
But that May and June, ministers like me flew to Beijing for what seemed to us all to be a positive and truly historic occasion.
China allowed Taiwan to attend the Asian Development Bank’s annual board meeting for the first time, provided it was called “Taipei, China.”
Some years later, when I was a European Union commissioner, after we had negotiated World Trade Organization membership with both the People’s Republic and Taiwan, we wanted to set up an EU office in Taipei to monitor the island’s compliance with the WTO’s rules.
Before doing so, I made a point of telling the Chinese government what we were doing – opening a commercial regulator, not an embassy.
Money of course talks for both China and Taiwan, and their economies are now closely linked, with large numbers of Taiwanese living and working in China (especially in the Shanghai area) and huge Taiwanese investments in Chinese manufacturing.
Taiwan’s Foxconn, the world’s largest electronics manufacturer (including Blackberries, iPhones, and Kindles), has 12 factories in China, including one in Shenzhen that employs hundreds of thousands of workers.
But, though Taiwanese politics is naturally dominated by the island’s relationship with the mainland, the reality of deep commercial ties between China and Taiwan has had no diplomatic equivalent.
The Kuomintang (also called the Chinese Nationalist Party) wants to improve relations without surrendering Taiwan’s independence.
Its opponent, the Democratic Progressive Party, wants to strike a more autonomous posture, though whether it would ever really go for anything more substantial than tweaking China’s nose is doubtful.
A survey three years ago suggested that 80% of Taiwan’s 25 million people would support a formal declaration of independence, provided that it did not prompt a Chinese invasion.
That is a rather large caveat.
China regularly warns Taiwan against any such reckless action, and the US puts the squeeze on the island’s leaders whenever they seem to be getting too uppity with the mainland.
There appear to be two reasons why Xi and Ma met.
First, they are clearly worried that the Kuomintang, which lost last year’s local elections in a landslide, will lose the general election in January as well.
Both hope that showing that China and Taiwan can get along without too much trouble will bring electoral benefits for the Nationalists.
In addition, at a time when the Chinese economy is slowing and regional tensions are rising because of China’s muscle flexing in the South and East China Seas, Xi seems eager to radiate peace-loving ambitions.
Having unsettled many of his neighbors, not just the Americans, his upcoming visit to Vietnam, and his prime minister Li Keqiang’s visit to South Korea, are of a piece with his dinner-hour diplomacy with Ma.
China’s real, long-term intentions are not entirely obvious, and maybe that’s part of its strategy: ambiguous signals play an important role in diplomacy.
But two things are clear.
First, Xi’s initiative shows the extent to which he dominates Chinese politics.
A weaker leader could not have taken such an ambitious step, which represents a real break with past Communist orthodoxy.
Second, peaceful reunification of the mainland and Taiwan remains unlikely, unless it takes place – as China continues to promise – on the basis of “one country, two systems.”
But the Taiwanese cannot be very reassured by what they see happening today in Hong Kong, which was promised the same thing before its return to China in 1997.
Taiwan’s system is democratic; China’s is not.
What the example of Hong Kong suggests is that China would have to force Taiwan to give up democracy and the rule of law – or embrace both itself – before it could welcome its “renegade province” back into the fold.
A New Playbook for China and ASEAN
KUALA LUMPUR – The ruling by the Permanent Court of Arbitration in The Hague against China’s territorial claims in the South China Sea is a watershed moment for international law and an unmistakable warning to China about its strategic assertiveness in Southeast Asia.
China says that it does not recognize the PCA ruling; but that doesn’t mean it is undisturbed by it.
The question now is how China will respond.
Will it change its often-aggressive behavior in the region, or will it continue to view the South China Sea mainly in terms of US-China competition?
If China assumes that a war-weary and risk-averse US will avoid conflict, it could simply assert its South China Sea claims by force.
But belligerence could backfire in several ways.
First, it would force the members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) to choose between China and the US, a decision that all of them would prefer to avoid.
Whereas ASEAN member states – particularly the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and Indonesia – generally have deep military ties with the US, they also value their economic ties with China.
The reality is that ASEAN states could choose to become independent players, rather than pawns in the US-China competition, implying that it is in China’s interest to maintain ambiguity in US-ASEAN relations.
Second, by militarizing outcroppings and artificial islands in the South China Sea, China is unwittingly strengthening ultra-nationalist groups in the ASEAN states.
This development forces moderate leaders in these countries to adopt a tougher stance toward China than they otherwise would, in order to preempt attacks from the ultra-right and assuage their generals.
A case in point is Indonesian President Joko Widodo’s recent visit to the Natuna Islands on a warship, a show of force in response to incursions there by Chinese fishermen and navy vessels.
China must know that the material advantages from closer ASEAN-China economic relations will not be enough to guarantee smooth diplomatic relations.
Most ASEAN member states are middle-income countries with educated elites who hold diverse views.
And even extremely poor and politically illiberal Myanmar has reduced its dependence on China in response to active wooing by the US.
China should rethink its insistence that negotiations over its territorial claims could be conducted only with individual ASEAN states, and not with ASEAN as a bloc – a stance that creates the impression that China is committed to bringing about the group’s breakup.
But China should not encourage ASEAN’s demise, because that would drive several now-neutral ASEAN states further toward the US.
Moreover, because ASEAN must represent ten countries with one voice, and must reach a consensus before it speaks, China has little reason to fear that a common ASEAN negotiating position would be totally unacceptable – particularly given recent history.
For example, a 2012 meeting of ASEAN foreign ministers failed to produce a joint statement, because Cambodia, a Chinese ally, would not agree to mentioning the South China Sea.
And in a meeting of the same group in Kunming, China, in June 2016, ASEAN had to withdraw a joint statement critical of China’s actions in the South China Sea when China, again, pressured Cambodia, as well as Laos, to object.
What this shows is that, in dealing with ASEAN, China gets to negotiate twice – first, through its closest allies within ASEAN in the formulation of common ASEAN positions, and then directly with an ASEAN team that could include one of its allies.
Certain ASEAN countries clearly value their relationships with China more than their relationships with other ASEAN countries; so, unless China has already ruled out any negotiation on the South China Sea, it should not rule out meeting ASEAN as a bloc.
The irony in China’s South China Sea claim is that the Communist Party has fallen into a trap set unintentionally by the Kuomintang, which it defeated in 1949.
It was the crumbling Kuomintang that in 1947 drew and promulgated the original “11-dash line” map – subsequently reduced to nine dashes by Mao Zedong, in a fraternal gesture to Vietnam – in a futile effort to rally the population to its side via imperial ambition.
There is no need for the winner of China’s civil war to follow the path of the loser.
And if China has to press this claim in order to appease ultra-nationalist elements, it should do so by deploying diplomats, rather than its military.
Of course, a win-win outcome from The Hague decision will also depend on ASEAN and US actions.
ASEAN and the US are highly skeptical of China’s repeated public promises of a non-hegemonic mode of international relations; but they should not be blind to China’s legitimate security concerns, which it will never neglect.
Both ASEAN and China must now exercise self-restraint and start negotiating in good faith to resolve the territorial disputes in the South China Sea in a way that addresses these concerns.
China’s Monetary-Policy Choice
SHANGHAI – China’s economy has followed a remarkable course in recent years: from record-breaking powerhouse to major global risk, at least in the eyes of some.
Indeed, with GDP growth this year almost certain not to reach the authorities’ 7% target, the world is now watching closely for signs of crisis and a much sharper slowdown.
How did China get here, and can it put its economic growth back on track?
China’s growth has been unsustainable for a while.
A stimulus package of less-than-prudent fixed-asset investment, adopted in response to the 2008 global financial crisis, sustained 9% GDP growth for two years.
But, after 2011, stimulus turned to macroeconomic tightening, causing investment growth to plummet from a nominal rate of over 30% to about 10% recently.
This prevents full utilization of production capacity and resources, and explains why GDP growth above 7% is simply not possible.
Excess capacity and falling growth are mutually reinforcing.
Not only does excess capacity have a negative impact on growth; perhaps more important, sharply declining growth also contributes to massive redundancy in some industries (especially resources and the heavy and chemical industries).
The question is why growth continues to slow.
One popular line of thinking focuses on long-term structural factors, such as demographic transition.
But, so far, few studies have indicated that structural factors are adequate to explain the extent of the decline in China’s potential growth rate over the last couple of years.
A more convincing answer lies in China’s monetary-policy stance.
Since assuming office in 2013, Premier Li Keqiang’s government has chosen not to loosen the previous government’s rigorous macro policies, instead hoping that the resulting pressure on existing industries might help to stimulate the authorities’ sought-after structural shift toward household consumption and services.
Economists welcomed this ostensibly reasonable approach, which would slow the expansion of credit that had enabled a massive debt build-up in 2008-2010.
China’s lower growth trajectory was dubbed the “new normal.”
But, for this approach to work, GDP growth would have had to remain steady, rather than decline sharply.
And that is not what has happened.
Indeed, although structural adjustment continues in China, the economy is facing an increasingly serious contraction in demand and continued deflation.
The consumer price index (CPI) has remained below 2%, and the producer price index (PPI) has been negative, for 44 months.
In a country with a huge amount of liquidity – M2 (a common measure of the money supply) amounts to double China’s GDP – and still-rising borrowing costs, this makes little sense.
The problem is that the government has maintained a PPI-adjusted benchmark interest rate that exceeds 11%.
Interest rates reach a ludicrous 20% in the shadow banking sector, and run even higher for some private lending.
The result is excessively high financing costs, which have made it impossible for firms in many manufacturing industries to maintain marginal profitability.
Moreover, the closure of local-government financing platforms, together with the credit ceiling imposed by the central government, has caused local capital spending on investment in infrastructure to drop to a historic low.
And tightening financial constraints have weakened growth in the real-estate sector considerably.
With local governments and companies struggling to make interest payments, they are forced into a vicious cycle, borrowing from the shadow banking sector to meet their obligations, thereby raising the risk-free interest rate further.
If excessively high real interest rates are undermining the domestic demand that China needs to reverse the economic slowdown, one naturally wonders why the government does not take steps to lower them.
The apparent answer is the government’s overriding commitment to shifting the economy away from investment- and export-led growth.
But it is doubtful that China can achieve the consumption-driven rebalancing that it seeks.
After all, no high-performing East Asian economy has achieved such a rebalancing in the past, and China has a similar growth model.
Given this, China’s current deflation should motivate its policymakers to pursue monetary easing, reducing real interest rates to a much lower level, even zero.
Such a move – for which China has plenty of room – would not only enable the reduction of existing debt burdens; perhaps more important, it would also allow for the rollover of debt as the economy accelerates.
Indeed, because most bank loans in China – unlike, say, in Europe – are now locked up in infrastructure and other physical assets, boosting demand is preferable to deleveraging.
The key is to lower interest rates enough to mitigate the financial risks of high leverage and enable the restructuring of local-government debts.
Lower borrowing costs would also boost China’s capital market, which is critical to provide equity financing to innovative small and medium-size businesses.
Of course, China needs to continue debt write-offs and swaps, and it must remain on the path of gradual structural reform.
But policymakers must recognize the damage being done by excessively high real interest rates.
Monetary loosening is vital to prevent growth from slowing further, and thus to ensure economic stability at home and maintain the momentum of recovery worldwide.
China’s Two-Child Consumption Engine
LONDON – The announcement in October that China is terminating its one-child policy marks the end of a 37-year historical aberration that has accelerated the country’s demographic aging by decades.
The social and economic consequences of the authorities’ drastic population controls, which reduced the average fertility rate in urban households from about three in 1970 to just over one by 1982, have been dramatic.
The question now is whether, and to what extent, the country’s new two-child policy will mitigate those consequences.
In fact, the impact of the two-child policy is likely to be just as far-reaching – and, overall, much more positive – than that of the one-child rule.
This is especially true in the long term, but the effects will become apparent even in the relatively shorter term.
One key reason for this is that an increase in the number of children per household will force a reduction in the aggregate savings rate, fulfilling a long-standing macroeconomic goal.
China’s current saving rate is so high that it is often blamed for fueling global imbalances and driving down interest rates worldwide.
Moreover, it is a major obstacle in China’s ongoing transition from an export-led growth model to one based on domestic consumption and services.
The two-child policy may prove indispensable in propelling this transition – a process that will begin sooner than most observers anticipate.
So far, economists have focused largely on the impending shifts in China’s demographic structure.
Driven by the one-child policy, the share of China’s population under the age of 20 fell from 51% in 1970 to 27% by 2010, while the share of people aged 60 and up rose from 7% to 14%.
As a result, the median age increased from about 20 to 35.
As retirees increasingly outnumber working-age people, the pressure on today’s younger generation will intensify.
Indeed, in the coming years, each member of the post-1980s one-child generation will need to support two older people, on average.
Of course, when the two-child generation becomes middle-aged, its members will each have to support only one elderly person, on average, alleviating the economic pressure associated with such a high old-age dependency ratio.
But that will take a few decades.
In the meantime, the post-1980s one-child generation will be supporting not only the elderly, but also a higher number of young people.
Although this will undoubtedly be tough for the one-child generation, an unintended side effect will be a surge in consumption, as its members will have little choice but to spend a lot more.
A comparison of families that had twins under the one-child policy and those that had just one child offers an indication of the scale of the change in consumption (though, of course, the inability of twins’ parents to spread out consumption spending over time means that it is not a perfect representation).
In terms of saving, urban households with two children saved 12.8% of their incomes, on average, in 2009, compared to 21.3% in families with an only child.
The difference is large across all income groups.
The child-fueled boost in household consumption will undoubtedly affect some sectors more than others.
At first, the surge in the number of children will boost the performance of stocks in children’s books, toys, and bicycles.
As that generation ages, demand for housing, life insurance, and pharmaceuticals will increase substantially.
One of the biggest differences will be expenditure on education.
According to the 2009 urban household survey, a one-child household in China spends an average of 10.6% of its total income on education, whereas a household with twins spends 17.3%.
As the number of households with two children increases, this change alone could cause the aggregate saving rate in China to drop by as much as 7-10 percentage points, from 30% today to about 22% over the next ten years.
There is, however, a caveat.
More children also mean less education investment per child, which could lead to lower human-capital attainment.
Indeed, the average twin receives far less support after age 15 than the average only child, creating large differences in education outcomes.
Twins are 40% more likely to go to a vocational high school than only children.
Nonetheless, China’s shift to a two-child policy is badly needed – and not just because it will achieve the intended long-term goal of balancing the country’s demographic structure.
While there are certainly pitfalls, including a difficult transition period, the policy could prove to be a boon to China’s efforts to put its economy on a more stable long-term growth path.
American Leadership in a Multipolar World
LONDON – Giving up the spotlight is never easy.
The United States, like many aging celebrities, is struggling to share the stage with new faces, especially China.
The upcoming meetings of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank – two institutions dominated by the US and its Western allies – provide an ideal opportunity to change that.
The US must come to terms with the reality that the world has changed.
The longer the US remains in a state of denial, the more damage it will do to its interests and its global influence, which remains substantial, if more constrained than before.
The world no longer adheres to the static Cold War order, with two blocs locked in open but guarded confrontation.
Nor does it work according to the Pax Americana that dominated in the decade after the Soviet Union’s collapse, when the US briefly emerged as the sole superpower.
Today’s world is underpinned by a multipolar order, which emerged from the rise of developing economies – most notably China – as major actors in trade and finance.
The US – not to mention the other G-7 countries – now must compete and cooperate not only with China, but also with India, Brazil, and others through expanded forums like the G-20.
To this end, the US must show leadership and adaptability.
It cannot refuse to support China’s efforts to expand its role in global governance.
Nor should it issue harsh rebukes to its allies when they do not follow suit, as it did when the United Kingdom announced its intention to join the new China-led Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank.
The US seems to be stuck in the Bretton Woods system, the rules-based order – underpinned by the IMF and the World Bank, with the US dollar at its heart – that emerged after World War II.
The Bretton Woods system institutionalized America’s geopolitical supremacy, leaving the old imperial power, the UK, to step aside – a step that it took graciously, if a little desperately, given its grave postwar economic situation.
Over the years, however, the Bretton Woods system, with its mix of liberal multilateralism and market-oriented economic policies, has come to symbolize the Anglo-American dominance of the global economy that much of the world now criticizes, especially since the global financial crisis.
In particular, the Washington Consensus – the set of free-market principles that influences the policies of the IMF, the World Bank, the US, and the UK – has generated considerable resentment, especially after the Asian financial crisis of the 1990s.
Against this backdrop, it is hardly surprising that China has been using its growing global influence to help engineer a new economic order – one in which the US dollar does not reign supreme.
Zhou Xiaochuan, the governor of the People’s Bank of China, China’s central bank, has repeatedly called for a shift toward an international monetary system that allows for the use of multiple currencies for payments and investment.
Such an approach would reduce the risk and impact of liquidity crises, while decoupling the international monetary system from the “economic conditions and sovereign interests of any single country.”
Of course, China believes that its own currency, the renminbi, should eventually play a central role in this new monetary system, so that it reflects China’s role not only as a leading engine of global economic growth, but also as the world’s largest creditor.
Indeed, together with the other systemically important economies (the US, the UK, Japan, and the eurozone) China drives trends that, for better or worse, extend far beyond its borders.
Since 2009, China’s leadership has been pursuing a set of policies that encourage the use of the renminbi in regional trade and reduce its dependence on the dollar in international payments.
But expanding the renminbi’s role in the international monetary system is just the first step toward institutionalizing a multipolar world order.
China has also spearheaded the establishment of new multilateral institutions, with AIIB following on the heels of the New Development Bank, created with other major emerging economies (Brazil, Russia, India, and South Africa).
By taking these steps, China’s leaders have called attention to the inadequacy of the existing international monetary system, and its institutional framework, in today’s complex, multipolar world economy.
In particular, China’s agenda highlights questions about America’s capacity to provide the needed liquidity to support international trade and finance.
To be sure, the US is right to wonder whether the new order that China hopes to build will be as open and rules-based as the American-led order – the one that gave China the market access it needed to achieve its spectacular economic rise.
But the answer to that question can be found only by engaging China on the issue of reform of global governance – not by denying that change is needed at all.
As the US stubbornly pursues a policy of containment toward China – exemplified in its fight against the AIIB’s establishment, its relentless accusations of currency manipulation, and its refusal to ratify IMF reforms that would increase China’s influence – it risks losing its ability to shape what comes next.
The result could be a world of fragmented blocs – an outcome that would undermine not only global prosperity, but also cooperation on shared challenges.
The Spring Meetings of the IMF and the World Bank offer an important opportunity to signal a new approach toward China.
And there could be no more credible signal than US support for the renminbi’s addition to the basket of currencies that the IMF uses to value its international reserve asset, the Special Drawing Right.
America will be in the spotlight once again.
But how will it perform?
Why China’s Cities Will Drive Global Growth
SHANGHAI – For 15 years, China has been a key engine of global growth.
But now that China’s investment-led boom has run its course, continued economic growth – in China and globally – will depend on urban Chinese consumers.
By 2030, people living in cities will drive 91% of global growth in consumption, and China is emphasizing both urbanization and a consumer-led growth model.
The McKinsey Global Institute’s latest research is optimistic that China’s strategy will succeed.
Urban incomes in China are now reaching a threshold where spending on both goods and services accelerates rapidly.
Annual household spending on personal products and on dining out will more than double, to $770 and $720, respectively.
Chinese consumers are also traveling more, with the China Outbound Tourism Research Institute predicting that more than 100 million Chinese will travel abroad by 2020.
China’s new consumer army will have the means and, more important, the willingness to spend its higher earnings.
According to McKinsey’s 2016 Global Sentiment Survey of more than 22,000 consumers in 26 countries, China’s working-age population has the world’s highest propensity to spend additional income, rather than save it or use it to pay off debt.
Just like Western baby boomers, Chinese urban consumers – who have grown up in post-reform China and have different views from their parents about saving versus spending – will make a generational break from the past.
That shift in mindset will fuel China’s transition to a consumer-led economy.
China’s working-age consumers, as children of the digital age, are driving innovation by interacting directly with companies to help reinvent products and services.
In a McKinsey survey, 55% of them said that they would be willing to recommend a product, service, or company to their friends or family on the social network WeChat.
Xiaomi, the Chinese smartphone company, conducts direct online polling of consumers to find out what innovations they would like to see.
The company has more than ten million “fans” on Weibo, the microblogging platform.
And now Western companies are following suit.
Volkswagen’s China operation engages with potential customers directly online, rather than relying solely on traditional dealerships.
The Fung Group (where one of us is a managing director), in partnership with IBM and Pico, has set up a “retail laboratory” in Shanghai to provide a controlled setting for businesses to observe – in real time – how consumers react to new technologies and products.
In addition to driving further innovation, Chinese consumers – even those with relatively low incomes – are also investing heavily in the next generation, with 12.5% of overall consumption growth expected to go to education between 2015 and 2030.
That’s the second-highest rate of any country MGI examined, behind only Sweden (12.6%).
By investing in the skills and capacity of the next generation now, Chinese consumers are building a strong foundation for continued growth and innovation in the future.
That continued growth will require China to shift its economic model further from production to consumption.
No pivot of this kind is easy, and many challenges lie ahead.
But China’s increasingly prosperous, educated, and confident consumers have the clout – and the numbers – to transform the way the world spends, possibly even more than Western baby boomers did in their prime.
Their mobile-first shopping habits, openness to travel and new experiences, and rising purchasing power suggest that the products and services they buy will influence consumer markets worldwide, fueling global economic growth.
The world economy needs them – and no consumer-facing company can afford to ignore them.
Asian Games Are Not Zero-Sum
CAMBRIDGE – Two society hostesses are rivals.
Both guard their social standing jealously – and may even punish a guest who attends the other’s party by withholding future invitations.
China and the United States seem to regard Asia-Pacific relations similarly: as a zero-sum game.
Are countries signing up for China’s Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), or for America’s Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP)?
Will China be welcomed, or humiliatingly rebuffed, in its effort to persuade the International Monetary Fund to include the renminbi in its unit of account, Special Drawing Rights (SDR)?
Is the US still the world’s largest economy, or did China surpass it in 2014?
However tempting it may be to focus on such questions, they are the wrong way to think about the global economy.
There is no reason why some countries should not join both China’s AIIB and America’s TPP, or why overlapping memberships should not expand over time – or, indeed, why the hostesses should not eventually attend each other’s parties.
Unfortunately, that is not how current issues of global economic governance are being framed.
When the United Kingdom, Germany, South Korea, Australia, and others unexpectedly decided in March to join the AIIB, it was widely reported (partly because of missteps by US policymakers) as a mass defection of US allies to a rival’s party.
But there is nothing wrong with joining the AIIB.
Asia needs more help with infrastructure investment than the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank can provide; China can play a useful leadership role; and the participation of countries with high governance standards can help prevent the cronyism, corruption, and environmental damage to which large-scale infrastructure projects are prone.
Likewise, the TPP negotiations are sometimes characterized as a US attempt to isolate China.
But, given the Asia-Pacific region’s high trade volumes, and its dense set of trading arrangements running in every direction, no one, including China, is about to be isolated.
And, with World Trade Organization negotiations, in which all countries could participate, stalled for years, the TPP and other regional initiatives (like Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation and various intra-Asia free-trade areas) are better than nothing.
Exchange rates are another area where zero-sum thinking prevails.
On April 9, the US Treasury released the biannual report mandated by Congress to identify countries engaging in “currency manipulation.”