The threats concentrated in the Middle East are diverse: regional conflicts, totalitarian religious ideologies, terrorism, nuclear armament programs, blockades to modernization, unstable regimes and hegemonic ambitions.
If one asks what interests the EU and its member states have in this crisis-riddled region, the answer is, that certainly European energy and economic interests are at stake, as well as the vital interests of Europe’s partners and allies (Israel in particular).
But first and foremost on the list are Europe’s.
How the Middle East develops will determine the extent of the risks for, or even probable challenges to, Europe’s security.
Success in containing, or indeed resolving, the conflict there will have overwhelmingly positive consequences for Europe’s security.
The Middle East today is defined by three central conflicts: the Israeli-Arab conflict, Iraq, and Iran.
The fusion of Iran’s nuclear program (and Iran’s hegemonic ambitions) with the situation in Iraq and with Hezbollah in Lebanon will lead to a “New Middle East” which, in all likelihood, will provoke a major confrontation.
This will involve far more than just the usual regional actors and conflicts.
The war in Lebanon has made it abundantly clear how far this dangerous process has already progressed.
The mission in Lebanon is a high-risk one for the UN force, and for Europe in particular.
The war did not bring forth a real decision.
Neither Hezbollah nor Syria, let alone Iran, have any interest in the UN mission’s success.
The Security Council resolution presupposes – in addition to separating the combatants – the enforcement of the internal and external sovereignty of Lebanon’s elected government of Lebanon, without saying how this is to be accomplished with a politically strengthened Hezbollah, militarily superior to the Lebanese forces.
Any attempt at disarming Hezbollah by the UN force would mean a war with Hezbollah (and with Syria and Iran in the background) &#45;&#45; a task the UN force cannot accomplish.
But were it to resign itself to mere observer status in Lebanon, the UN and Europe would lose all credibility.
Moreover, it is likely that, within a few months, UN soldiers would once again find themselves between the firing lines of the conflicting parties.
The mission therefore will have to walk the thin and risky line in pursuit of its robust mandate to stabilize the country.
Failure will be a constant danger and the military risk will be high.
Yet, in light of the situation there is no better alternative.
In view of the risk to its troops, Europe will be compelled to influence and even proactively bring about strategic changes to the political environment in the entire Middle East.
With its decision in favor of the mission in Lebanon, the EU crossed a military Rubicon.
It must now back up its growing weight in the Middle East with political initiative.
This must include three key elements: a negotiated solution for Syria; a resumption of negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians; and a common strategic understanding with the US of the political strategy of the West for the region (which addresses the region’s most dangerous conflict, Iran).
This common understanding will be the pivotal challenge for the future of the transatlantic relationship.
For Europe and its troops, the stakes in Lebanon are very high.
But this is about vital European interests.
War and chaos in the Middle East or just a moral or political vacuum will directly affect and upset the security of the EU and all its member states.
Europe therefore had to act, though that decision was obviously difficult.
The key question in the near future will be whether Europe actually has the military and political capabilities, the political staying power, and the common will to act in accordance with its core interests in the Middle East.
We will see.
In any case, one thing can already be said: Welcome to the real world.
The Debate About Debating Islam
PARIS – The argument began when the Algerian novelist and journalist Kamel Daoud wrote an article for the Italian newspaper La Repubblica about a spate of sexual assaults in Cologne, Germany, on New Year’s Eve, 2015.
The attacks were widely reported to have been carried out by groups of immigrants from North Africa and the Middle East, which Daoud explained by saying that many Muslims from the region suffer from extreme sexual deprivation, which, he wrote, generates an “unhealthy relationship with women, their body, and desire.”
Daoud seems not to have expected the reaction his article received, especially in France, where it was republished by Le Monde.
After withering criticism accusing him of Islamophobia, Daoud announced that he would cease his journalistic work and focus on writing novels.
But putting Islam off limits to criticism not only deprives a voice to authors like Daoud; it perfunctorily halts a much-needed discussion.
There can be no doubt that Daoud’s decision to write the article took extraordinary courage.
In 2014, shortly after the publication of his first novel, The Meursault Investigation, which retells Albert Camus’ The Stranger from the perspective of the murdered Arab’s brother, a Salafist imam declared a fatwa calling for Daoud’s death for apostasy and heresy.
But that didn’t stop him from tackling a controversial subject.
In the Muslim world, Daoud wrote, “Women are negated, rejected, killed, veiled, locked in, or owned,” their bodies denied the right to pleasure.
In the preaching of Islamists seeking recruits, he notes, are “descriptions of a paradise more similar to a bordello than the reward for pious individuals, fantasies of virgins for suicide bombers, morality police chasing down women showing too much skin, the puritanism of dictatorship, veils, and burqas.”
In the Islamist view, the liberation of Western women is not an expression of freedom, but a sign of the West’s moral decay.
Daoud concludes, “Islam is an outrage against desire.
And that desire is bound to explode from time to time in Western territory, where freedom is so naked.”
The response was quick and vicious.
On February 12, a “collective” of anthropologists, sociologists, and historians published a virulent attack in Le Monde.
Entitled “Kamel Daoud’s Fantasies,” it accused him of “recycling much worn-out Orientalist clichés” and “feeding the Islamophobic fantasies of a growing segment of the European public.”
To be sure, it is understandable that academics might question Daoud’s approach; his argument was based on a strain of “essentialism,” in which individual actions are reduced to cultural and religious forces, with no attention to the social, political, and economic conditions that might be at work.
And the critics were right to point out that Daoud omitted mentioning the many acts of violence with no connection to Islam that are carried out against women in Europe, Asia, and North America.
But Daoud’s critics overstepped the boundaries of legitimate discussion of ideas, accusing him of “trivializing” racist criticism and dressing it up in “humanistic thought.”
Indeed, they questioned his right to wish for a much-needed change in the way the Muslim world treats women and a reexamination of its sexual taboos.
“I still find it quite unethical,” Daoud responded, “that I was pushed into the role of sacrificial lamb to be brought on the altar of local hate, condemned for Islamophobia by today’s Inquisition.”
The episode created such a commotion in France that several authors – as well as many Franco-Algerian bloggers – came to Daoud’s defense, criticizing the attacks against him by Salafists and academics intent on bullying him into silence.
Even French Prime Minister Manuel Valls weighed in, saluting Daoud’s “original hard thinking” and denouncing his critics.
Referring to France’s national motto, Valls defended “liberty, that is, freedom to write and to think, equality among men and women, and fraternity and secularism, from which is derived our social unity.”
As he put it, “Leaving this writer to fend for himself would be like giving up on who we are.”
Sadly, Daoud’s travails are just one example of legitimate intellectual inquiry degenerating into political bickering over whether it is acceptable to criticize Islam.
This has dangerous implications for free thought, as well as for the future of Islam itself.
It is not uncommon today for political analysts to contort their arguments in order to avoid being denounced as Islamophobic.
As a result, rather than examining the systemic role that Islam plays in radicalization, for example, they describe radicals as having somehow fallen haphazardly into Islam.
For the sake of free thought alone, it is time to stop branding as a bigot anyone who dares discuss the religion critically.
Until we do, an honest debate about Islam in Europe will be impossible.
Why Deflation is Good News for Europe
BRUSSELS – In today's global economy, there is no price as important as that of crude oil.
More than 80 million barrels are produced (and consumed) daily, and a large part of that output is traded internationally.
Thus, the sharp fall in the crude-oil price – from about $110 last year to around $60 today – is yielding hundreds of billions of dollars in savings for oil importers.
For the European Union and the United States, the gain from that decline is worth about 2-3% of GDP.
For Europe, the benefits of cheap oil might grow over time, because long-term gas-supply contracts are to a significant degree indexed to the oil price.
This represents another advantage for Europe, where prices for natural gas were, until recently, several times higher than in the US, which had been benefiting from lower-cost shale energy.
But many observers have argued that cheap oil also has a downside, because it exacerbates deflationary tendencies in the advanced countries, which already seem to be mired in a low-growth trap.
The sharp fall in oil prices, according to this view, will make it even harder for these countries' central banks to achieve the 2% annual inflation rate that most have targeted in fulfilling their price-stability mandate.
The eurozone, in particular, seems to be in danger, as prices are now falling for the first time since 2009.
This deflation is bad, it is argued, because it makes it harder for debtors, especially in the troubled economies of the eurozone's periphery (Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain), to pay what they owe.
But this fear is unfounded, because it is based on a misunderstanding.
What matters for debt-service capacity is the debtors' income, not the general price level.
As oil prices fall, households' real (inflation-adjusted) income should rise, because they do not have to spend as much on fuel and heating.
Lower oil prices make life easier, not harder, for highly indebted households in the US or the eurozone periphery.
Falling consumer prices should thus be viewed as a good sign.
Most manufacturing enterprises will also benefit from lower energy costs, improving their ability to service their debts.
This, too, is particularly relevant in the eurozone periphery, where the non-financial sector accumulated too much debt during the credit boom that preceded the 2008 global financial crisis.
Moreover, though most of the savings implied by lower energy costs might initially show up in higher profits, over time, competition will force companies to pass on some of these windfall gains in the form of lower prices or higher wages.
This is another important consequence of cheap oil: lower prices make it more difficult to judge the point at which wage pressure becomes inflationary.
Because wages can increase to a greater extent without fueling inflation, the US Federal Reserve Board might be inclined to delay hiking interest rates, which it is now widely expected to do this summer.
Public finances should also benefit from the deflation engendered by lower oil prices.
Government revenues depend on the value of domestic output, not only consumption.
Though lower oil prices depress consumer prices, they should boost production and overall GDP.
Absent large price changes for raw materials, the consumer price index evolves along with the GDP deflator (the price deflator for the entire economy).
But that will not be true this year, because consumer prices are falling, whereas the GDP deflator (and nominal GDP) is still increasing.
This should lead to solid government revenues, which is good news for highly indebted governments throughout the industrialized world, but particularly for the eurozone periphery.
The fall in (consumer) prices that the eurozone currently is experiencing should thus be seen as a positive development for all energy importers.
The eurozone periphery, in particular, can look forward to an ideal combination of low interest rates, a favorable euro exchange rate, and a boost in real incomes as a result of cheap oil.
In a deflationary environment, lower oil prices appear to make it more difficult for the European Central Bank to achieve its target of an inflation rate close to 2%.
In reality, lower oil prices represent a boon for Europe – especially for its most beleaguered nations.
Overcoming Europe’s Twin Growth Challenges
MUNICH – As economic recovery finally begins to take hold in Europe, the imperative for policymakers is to ensure that growth can be sustained far into the future.
Fiscal and monetary stimulus may have been appropriate at the peak of the crisis, but they will do little to address the biggest threat to the continent’s long-term prospects: a toxic twosome of weak demographics and low investment.
Even assuming a steady inflow of immigrants, the combined workforces of the 28 European Union countries are projected to shrink by 12-16 million people over the next 15 years, according to the OECD and the European Commission.
A sharper rise in the number of newcomers could help ameliorate the situation; but higher immigration is not, on its own, an adequate solution to the EU economy’s long-term problems.
Europe’s only hope for sustained growth is to boost productivity, so that it can derive more value from its shrinking workforce.
The trouble is that it has been many years since the continent last saw significant productivity gains.
In Western Europe, growth in labor productivity (output per hour worked) has been decelerating for decades.
In the 1960s, labor productivity grew at a robust 4% annual rate, before slowing to 2% in the 1980s and dropping below 1% around the turn of the century.
Today it crawls forward at about 0.5% a year.
Meanwhile, total factor productivity, which takes into account technological innovation, has been stagnant.
The EU desperately needs economic growth to enable its member states to sustain their social security and welfare systems as their societies get older – a challenge that other regions and countries are facing as well.
But few confront Europe’s twin obstacles of anemic productivity growth and demographic decline.
China, for example, is facing a similar demographic challenge, as its labor force shrinks and the number of retirees rises rapidly. But China’s labor productivity has been growing by 9% a year, on average, over the last decade.
The decline in productivity growth in the EU is surprising, given the rapid onset of digitalization – often described as the industrial revolution of the twenty-first century.
In fact, part of the perceived slowdown can be attributed to measurement issues: In Europe, as well as the United States, the technological changes being wrought by smartphones and the Internet simply are not showing up in the productivity data.
Statisticians struggle, for example, to account for how consumers are benefiting from the increased quality and speed of delivery that often results from digitalization.
Furthermore, in the digital age, many services are being provided free of charge, which means they are not being counted as consumption at all.
Another factor that may be contributing to flat productivity is that many corporations run traditional physical business models parallel to new digital ones.
Adding high-tech systems to traditional processes can temporarily increase costs and thus depress productivity, especially if the new and old businesses are not well connected.
These issues should diminish with time; as that happens, part of the productivity lull should disappear.
But not all of the slowdown in productivity growth can be attributed to the cumbersome transition to a new technological era.
Even as the economy has started to recover, investment in Europe remains well below its level in 2008.
Long-term economic health will depend, in large part, on whether investment recovers and by how much.
And there are reasons for pessimism.
Weak investment activity partly reflects a gloomy view of the European market.
If workforces are stagnating or shrinking and growth is subdued, why spend on boosting output? Simply put, Europe’s problems have become intertwined.
The continent needs productivity-enhancing investment in order to compensate for its shrinking workforce; but its demographic weakness is causing companies to hold back.
Fortunately, there is much that can be done.
A renewed push to integrate European markets for services, digital goods, capital markets, and energy would remove barriers to business and bring new incentives to invest.
The Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership that the EU is currently negotiating with the US would also create a larger market, with less burdensome regulation and more competition.
On a national level, reform drives like those carried out in Ireland, Portugal, and Spain could improve business conditions and competitiveness across the continent.
Finally, all European countries could redouble their efforts to educate and train their residents for the digital era.
Policymakers must not rest on the optimistic assumption that Europe’s economy will recover on its own.
Rather, they should pursue policies that support investment, encourage innovation, and promote the development of skills.
As workers and companies struggle to compete in a rapidly changing – and increasingly winner-take-all – global economy, the need for policies that will ensure long-term growth could not be more urgent.
The Europe Question in 2016
NEW YORK – At the cusp of the new year, we face a world in which geopolitical and geo-economic risks are multiplying.
Most of the Middle East is ablaze, stoking speculation that a long Sunni-Shia war (like Europe’s Thirty Years’ War between Catholics and Protestants) could be at hand.
China’s rise is fueling a wide range of territorial disputes in Asia and challenging America’s strategic leadership in the region.
And Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has apparently become a semi-frozen conflict, but one that could reignite at any time.
There is also the chance of another epidemic, as outbreaks of SARS, MERS, Ebola, and other infectious diseases have shown in recent years.
Cyber-warfare is a looming threat as well, and non-state actors and groups are creating conflict and chaos from the Middle East to North and Sub-Saharan Africa.
Last, but certainly not least, climate change is already causing significant damage, with extreme weather events becoming more frequent and lethal.
Yet it is Europe that may turn out to be the ground zero of geopolitics in 2016.
For starters, a Greek exit from the eurozone may have been only postponed, not prevented, as pension and other structural reforms put the country on a collision course with its European creditors.
“Grexit,” in turn, could be the beginning of the end of the monetary union, as investors would wonder which member – possibly even a core country (for example, Finland) – will be the next to leave.
If Grexit does occur, the United Kingdom’s exit from the EU may become more likely.
Compared to a year ago, the probability of “Brexit” has increased, for several reasons. The recent terrorist attacks in Europe have made the UK even more isolationist, as has the migration crisis.
Under Jeremy Corbyn’s leadership, Labour is more Euroskeptic.
And Prime Minister David Cameron has painted himself into a corner by demanding EU reforms that even the Germans – who are sympathetic to the UK – cannot accept.
To many in Britain, the EU looks like a sinking ship.
If Brexit were to occur, other dominos would fall.
Scotland might decide to leave the UK, leading to the breakup of Britain.
This could inspire other separatist movements – perhaps starting in Catalonia – to push even more forcefully for independence.
And the EU’s Nordic members may decide that with the UK gone, they, too, would be better off leaving.
As for terrorism, the sheer number of homegrown jihadists means that the question for Europe is not whether another attack will occur, but when and where.
And repeated attacks could sharply reduce business and consumer confidence and stall Europe’s fragile economic recovery.
Those who argue that the migration crisis also poses an existential threat to Europe are right.
But the issue is not the million newcomers entering Europe in 2015. It is the 20 million more who are displaced, desperate, and seeking to escape violence, civil war, state failure, desertification, and economic collapse in large parts of the Middle East and Africa.
If Europe is unable to find a coordinated solution to this problem and enforce a common external border, the Schengen Agreement will collapse and internal borders between the EU member states will reappear.
Meanwhile, austerity and reform fatigue on the eurozone periphery – and among non-eurozone EU members such as Hungary and Poland – is clashing with bailout fatigue in the core.
Populist parties of the left and right – with their shared hostility to free trade, migration, Muslims, and globalization – are becoming more popular throughout Europe.
Syriza is in power in Greece; a leftist coalition is in office in Portugal; and the Spanish election could lead to significant political and policy uncertainty.
Virulent anti-migrant, anti-Muslim parties are becoming more popular in Europe’s core, including the Netherlands, Denmark, Finland, and Sweden.
In France, the far-right National Front came close to winning power in several regions earlier this month, and its leader, Marine Le Pen, may do well in the 2017 presidential election.
In Italy, moreover, Prime Minister Matteo Renzi is under attack by two anti-euro populist parties that have risen in opinion polls.
And Chancellor Angela Merkel’s leadership is now under threat in Germany, following her courageous but controversial decision to allow almost a million asylum-seekers to enter the country.
In short, the distance between what Europe needs and what Europeans want is growing, and that gap could spell deep trouble in 2016.
The eurozone and the EU are facing multiple threats, all of which call for a collective response.
But what we are seeing is its member states increasingly adopting a national approach, thus undermining the possibility of Europe-wide solutions (the migration crisis is a tragic case in point).
Europe needs more cooperation, integration, risk sharing, and solidarity.
Instead, Europeans appear to be embracing nationalism, balkanization, divergence, and disintegration.
Mengoptimalkan Efisiensi Energi di Eropa
BRUSSELS – Pada konferensi COP21 di Paris bulan Desember lalu, para pemimpin negara mengikat janji untuk menetapkan target-target nasional, termasuk sejumlah standar efisiensi energi yang diperlukan dalam penurunan emisi gas rumah kaca.
Kini, Komisi Eropa dihadapkan pada pilihan sulit: Apakah Komisi Eropa akan menetapkan target efisiensi energi yang ambisius tapi dapat diperoleh dan memaksa individu dan industri untuk membuat perubahan nyata?
Atau justru Komisi Eropa akan tunduk pada tekanan politik dan menentukan target sia-sia yang pasti tercapai dan tidak mencoba upaya tambahan sedikit pun?
Tahun 2014 menandai keputusan yang diambil ketika para pemimpin Eropa sepakat untuk meningkatkan efisiensi energi hingga 27% sebelum akhir 2030.
Dewan Eropa dipuji ketika itu atas kepemimpinannya.
Namun tidak seorang pun peduli bahwa efisiensi energi secara global dengan sendirinya pasti meningkat hingga 35% di tahun 2030.
Perjanjian PBB tentang Perubahan Iklim atau COP21 memberi kesempatan kedua bagi Eropa untuk menjadi teladan dan menjadi pemikul standar efisiensi energi secara global.
Kelompok peduli lingkungan, pemimpin bisnis, dan akademisi kini menantikan target-target baru yang akan dikeluarkan Komisi Eropa pada bulan Oktober, melalui rencana revisi Arahan Efisiensi Energi (Energy Efficiency Directive) yang terdahulu.
Dengan demikian, target semacam apa yang dinilai bermakna?
Jika pemimpin negara-negara Eropa serius dengan komitmen COP21, mereka harus mengupayakan penurunan 70% terhadap tingkat konsumsi tahun 2010 pada akhir tahun 2030 – yaitu dua kali lipat target Dewan Eropa di tahun 2014 lalu.
Penurunan sebanyak 70% memang ambisius, namun tidak mustahil.
Target tersebut mengandung alasan ekonomi dan lingkungan yang patut.
Secara ekonomi, negara yang mengurangi konsumsi energinya juga menaikkan produktivitas, sebab semakin sedikit energi yang dipakai berarti semakin rendah biaya yang dikeluarkan.
Meskipun penerapan upaya-upaya efisiensi energi menuntut adanya investasi awal yang besar, biaya tersebut akan ditutup dengan peningkatan produktivitas di masa depan, yang mana ini menjadi satu-satunya cara agar negara-negara maju secara bertahap akan sanggup memperbaiki standar hidup dan mempertahankannya.
Alasan lingkungan untuk pemberlakuan target ambisius bukan semata-mata meneriakkan ucapan “save the Earth” atau selamatkan bumi.
Tapi kita memang perlu menyelamatkan iklim yang menopang keberlangsungan dan kesejahteraan manusia.
Efisiensi energi secara global meningkat sekitar 1,5% per tahun, ini merupakan angka yang membesarkan hati dan tanda bahwa kebijakan-kebijakan lingkungan hidup yang berorientasi ke depan telah membuahkan hasil.
Akan tetapi konsumsi energi dunia masih bertambah sekitar 3% per tahun yang berarti kita justru memperkeruh keadaan, bukan memperbaikinya.
Enam negara dengan perekonomian terbesar di dunia – Cina, Amerika Serikat, Rusia, India, Jepang, dan Uni Eropa – masih menjadi pencemar terbesar.
Namun sebagian besar pertumbuhan saat ini dihasilkan oleh negara-negara berkembang yang berpartisipasi dalam perekonomian global.
Meskipun negara-negara tersebut menempuh kemajuan signifikan dalam penurunan emisi, setidaknya dalam waktu dekat atau kelak di masa depan, mereka juga akan dikenal sebagai negara-negara pencemar.
Globalisasi berdampak pada kenaikan harapan hidup dan perbaikan standar hidup di banyak negara miskin.
Tapi globalisasi juga menimbulkan masalah-masalah lingkungan baru yang menuntut adanya solusi ambisius.
Dengan demikian, penambahan efisiensi energi sebanyak 70% harus menjadi target minimal bagi Eropa – dan dunia secara keseluruhan – demi mewujudkan keberlanjutan nyata sesuai tingkat pertumbuhan global saat ini.
Untungnya ini semua ada dalam genggaman kita.
Sebuah studi di tahun 2015 yang diterbitkan oleh Ecofys, Quintel Intelligence, dan Lisbon Council menyimpulkan bahwa Eropa memiliki teknologi yang dibutuhkan untuk menggandakan tingkat efisiensi energi sekarang tanpa mengorbankan pembangunan ekonomi. Teknologi yang dimaksud termasuk pompa kalor, jaringan listrik pintar (smart grid), lampu LED, dan peralatan rumah tangga hemat energi.
Lalu mengapa teknologi tersebut belum dipergunakan juga?
Alasannya bukan karena sektor industri yang enggan atau menghambat Eropa; sebaliknya, kesadaran atas lingkungan di kalangan industri di Eropa sudah meningkat  drastis selama beberapa tahun terakhir.
Justru, pengguna energi terbesar di Eropa adalah rumah tangga, yang mana tingkat efisiensi energi bisa bertambah tiga kali lipat di masa mendatang jika disokong dengan kepemimpinan politik yang tepat, investasi yang memadai, serta komitmen jangka panjang dari penduduk Eropa sendiri.
Dengan demikian kita kembali pada Arahan Efisiensi Energi yang harus menjadi awal pekerjaan ini.
Komisi Eropa harus memberlakukan standar-standar setinggi langit agar kita termotivasi untuk meraih kesuksesan lebih besar daripada yang kita perkirakan.
Jika Eropa sanggup menggandakan tingkat efisiensi energinya pada tahun 2030, penduduk Eropa akan menoleh ke belakang dan merenung “mengapa baru sekarang”.
Europe’s Three Fault Lines
PARIS – Ten or 20 years ago, the existential question facing the European Union was whether it still had a purpose in a globalized world.
The question today is whether the EU can respond effectively to major external shocks.
Europe’s neighborhood is poor and dangerous.
South of Gibraltar, income per capita drops more than fivefold.
War has recently raged in Ukraine.
The Israel-Palestine conflict has continued for more than 50 years.
And the war in Iraq barely ended before the mayhem in Syria commenced.
For several decades after World War II, Europe could afford to overlook what went on beyond its borders: security was the business of the United States.
But things have changed.
The US retreat from Iraq signaled the limits of its engagement, and the problems in the EU’s immediate neighborhood – not just in Syria, but also to the east and the south – are now knocking on its door.
So it would seem that the EU’s top priority should be to protect itself and help stabilize its environment.
Yet three internal fault lines are making it difficult for the EU to achieve these ends.
Britain is wondering whether it should exit.
Western and Eastern Europe are at odds over the refugee crisis.
And France and Germany differ on priorities.
Britain’s torment over EU membership is rooted in history: In 1946, Winston Churchill famously advocated a United States of Europe – but without Britain.
Yet there is little substance to British Europhobia: nothing fundamental separates the United Kingdom from the rest of the continent.
Tellingly, the British Foreign Office’s rigorous review of how the EU operates did not deliver an agenda for the repatriation of competences.
The only significant demand expressed by Prime Minister David Cameron in his recent letter to the EU concerns internal migration.
Britain, the erstwhile champion of labor mobility, has now become wary of foreign workers and wants to limit their access to social benefits.
This is a potential sticking point in the UK-EU relationship; but it is hardly a reason to end a four-decade-old partnership.
Polls suggest that Britain’s referendum on continued EU membership, which Cameron has promised to hold by the end of 2017, will be a close call.
But it would be both a blunder and a tragedy were Britons to vote for “Brexit” as a form of protection against tumult on the continent.
The second fault line appeared alongside the refugee crisis.
By 2014, the EU’s “big bang” enlargement in 2004 could be hailed as a success story, having contributed significantly to swift and peaceful economic and political transition in Central and Eastern Europe.
True European unification seemed to be in the making.
Yet the refugee crisis has revealed that the EU’s western and eastern members do not share the same concept of a nation.
Most Western European countries have converged, at least de facto, on a non-ethnic, non-religious definition.
Most are home to significant ethnic and religious minorities.
This has not been an easy transformation, and there are differences in countries’ perceived ability to absorb more immigrants; but the change is irreversible.
Most Central and Eastern European countries, however, object.
Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán has developed a fierce anti-Muslim rhetoric.
His Slovak counterpart, Robert Fico, announced in July that his country would accept only Christian refugees.
Earlier this month, Czech President Miloš Zeman addressed a group called the Bloc Against Islam, telling its supporters that they were “not extremists.”
And Poland’s new European affairs minister, Konrad Szymanski, did not wait 24 hours after the Paris attacks before using them to denounce Europe’s flaws.
This is not a disagreement over policies. It is a divide over principles – the very principles of the EU’s treaties and Charter of Fundamental Rights.
In Germany, especially, any person persecuted on political grounds has a constitutional right to asylum.
Contrary to common misperceptions, German Chancellor Angela Merkel acted on the basis of moral values, not demographic self-interest, in letting in about one million refugees this year.
Germany rarely expects solidarity from its European partners.
At the height of the migrant crisis, it hoped, for once, to receive some.
The public, categorical rejection of Germany’s silent plea by countries that continue to benefit massively from European solidarity will not be easily forgotten.
The third fault line lies between France and Germany.
Since the November 13 attacks in Paris, security has become the overriding French objective.
Meanwhile, Germany is focused on organizing the reception and settlement of a massive influx of refugees.
This divide is more circumstantial than essential.
Terrorism may spread to Germany, and refugees may move across borders.
Yet, at least for the time being, public concerns and government priorities differ.
Both Merkel and French President François Hollande have expressed a commitment to mutual support.
France will welcome some refugees, and Germany will dispatch some troops to Mali.
But symbolic gestures are not enough.
The risk remains that each country feels that it has been left alone at a critical juncture.
More ambitious initiatives have been proposed.
Sigmar Gabriel and Emmanuel Macron, the German and French economy ministers, recently called for a common fund to address Europe’s refugee and security challenges and to finance joint policies.
The fund would serve as a concrete risk-sharing mechanism and would be a modest, yet meaningful step toward overcoming the deadlock over EU initiatives, if not toward mutualizing defense and security, as some scholars recommend.
Whatever form it takes, greater boldness is clearly needed.
Otherwise, the failure to address common risks and challenges may well result in citizens placing exclusive faith in the nation-state, rejecting solidarity, and calling for the permanent restoration of national borders.
It is no accident that the EU’s three fault lines have appeared at the very moment when it is confronted with unprecedented challenges.
External pressures reveal internal weaknesses.
Europe can either overcome them or succumb to them.
The EU’s twin refugee and security crises constitute its moment of truth.
Europe’s Politics of Dystopia
TOKYO – The recent victory of the conservative Law and Justice (PiS) party in Poland confirms a recent trend in Europe: the rise of illiberal state capitalism, led by populist right-wing authoritarians.
Call it Putinomics in Russia, Órbanomics in Hungary, Erdoğanomics in Turkey, or a decade of Berlusconomics from which Italy is still recovering.
Soon we will no doubt be seeing Kaczyńskinomics in Poland.
All are variations on the same discordant theme: a nationalist leader comes to power when economic malaise gives way to chronic and secular stagnation.
This elected authoritarian then starts to reduce political freedoms through tight-fisted control of the media, especially television.
Then, he (so far, it has always been a man, though France’s Marine Le Pen would fit the pattern should she ever come to power) pursues an agenda opposing the European Union (when the country is a member) or other institutions of supra-national governance.
He will also oppose free trade, globalization, immigration, and foreign direct investment, while favoring domestic workers and firms, particularly state-owned enterprises and private business and financial groups with ties to those in power.
In some cases, outright nativist, racist parties support such government or provide an even deeper authoritarian and anti-democratic streak.
To be sure, such forces are not yet in power in most of Europe.
But they are becoming more popular nearly everywhere: Le Pen’s National Front in France, Matteo Salvini’s Lega Nord in Italy, and Nigel Farage’s United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP) all view Russia’s illiberal state capitalism as a model and its president, Vladimir Putin, as a leader deserving of admiration and emulation.
In Germany, the Netherlands, Finland, Denmark, Austria, and Sweden, too, the popularity of populist, anti-EU, anti-migrant right-wing parties is on the rise.
Most of these parties tend to be socially conservative.
But their economic policies – anti-market and fearful that liberal capitalism and globalization will erode national identity and sovereignty – have many elements in common with populist parties of the left, such as Syriza in Greece (before its capitulation to its creditors), Podemos in Spain, and Italy’s Five Star Movement.
Indeed, just as many supporters of radical leftist parties in the 1930s made a U-turn and ended up supporting authoritarian parties of the right, the economic ideologies of today’s populist parties seem to converge in many ways.
In the 1930s, economic stagnation and depression led to the rise of Hitler in Germany, Mussolini in Italy, and Franco in Spain (among other authoritarians).
Today’s brand of illiberal leaders may not yet be as politically virulent as their 1930s predecessors.
But their economic corporatism and autocratic style are similar.
The reemergence of nationalist, nativist populism is not surprising: economic stagnation, high unemployment, rising inequality and poverty, lack of opportunity, and fears about migrants and minorities “stealing” jobs and incomes have given such forces a big boost.
The backlash against globalization – and the freer movement of goods, services, capital, labor, and technology that comes with it – that has now emerged in many countries is also a boon to illiberal demagogues.
If economic malaise becomes chronic, and employment and wages do not rise soon, populist parties may come closer to power in more European countries.
Worse, the eurozone may again be at risk, with a Greek exit eventually causing a domino effect that eventually leads to the eurozone’s breakup.
Or a British exit from the EU may trigger European dis-integration, with the additional risks posed by the fact that some countries (the UK, Spain, and Belgium) are at risk of breaking up themselves.
In the 1930’s, the Great Depression brought to power authoritarian regimes in Europe and even Asia, eventually leading to World War II.
Today’s resurgence of illiberal state capitalist regimes and leaders is nowhere close to inciting a war, because center-right and center-left governments still committed to liberal democracy, enlightened economic policies, and solid welfare systems still rule most of Europe.
But the toxic brew of populism now gaining strength may yet open a Pandora’s box, unleashing unpredictable consequences.
This rising tide of illiberalism makes avoiding a break-up of the eurozone or the EU ever more vital.
But, to ensure this, macro and structural economic policies that boost aggregate demand, job creation and growth, reduce income and wealth inequality, provide economic opportunity to the young, and integrate rather than reject refugees and economic migrants will be needed.
Only bold policies can halt Europe’s slide toward secular stagnation and nationalist populism.
Timidity of the type witnessed in the past five years will only increase the risks.
Failure to act decisively now will lead to the eventual failure of the peaceful, integrated, globalized, supra-national state that is the EU, and the rise of dystopian nationalist regimes.
The contours of such places have been reflected in literary work such as George Orwell’s 1984, Aldous Huxley’s Brave New World, and Michel Houellebecq’s latest novel Submission.
Let us hope that they remain confined to the printed page.
Europe’s Stillborn Security Strategy
MADRID – If a strategy is announced and nobody is listening, does it make a sound?
The European Union will find out the answer this June, when Federica Mogherini, its High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, presents a long overdue foreign and security strategy for Europe – just when all eyes will be on the United Kingdom’s referendum on EU membership.
The EU is adrift and desperately in need of a catalyst to renew its sense of purpose and dynamism.
The global strategy could serve that purpose, but not if it is issued at a time when attention is squarely focused on another challenge, especially one that could bring about fundamental change for the EU.
Given this, the strategy’s launch should be put on hold until after the referendum.
In the United States, the president is legally required to issue a national security strategy annually.
Though the requirement is adhered to only loosely – President Barack Obama has released just two strategies in the last seven years – the intent is clear: to establish a set of concrete national security priorities informed by the administration in office and the country’s changing circumstances.
In Europe, the approach is broader.
When the first – and only – strategy was launched in 2003, it was meant as a long-term guide, to endure through multiple European Commissions.
But it has lasted for too long, and is now well out of date – a reality that is apparent from its opening line: “Europe has never been so prosperous, so secure, nor so free.”
Last June, the European Council recognized the need for an updated strategy, and called on Mogherini to prepare a new foreign and security policy, to be submitted within a year.
To maximize their chances of success, Mogherini and the European External Action Service have kept the expert-led development process discreet, intentionally avoiding broad public debate.
Meanwhile, numerous difficult challenges – most notably, the ongoing refugee crisis – have buffeted Europe.
This has not only sustained the lack of public awareness of the foreign and security strategy development process, but has also altered the environment in which the strategy is to be introduced.
A process that was intended to enable Europe to respond better to external changes now must be rethought to reflect the recognition that it is the EU which is now set to undergo a fundamental transformation.
Such change will occur regardless of whether British voters choose to exit the EU.
If the UK leaves – taking its diplomatic, military, economic, and cultural prowess with it – the hit to the EU, in terms of its capacity to influence its external environment, is obvious.
If the UK stays, it will require the formalization of a looser conception of the EU – one that will raise core questions about the future of European integration.
Seen in this light, the UK’s upcoming referendum is more momentous even than the failed referenda on an EU constitution in 2005.
Releasing a new foreign and security strategy at the same moment will not just doom the plan to irrelevance; it will reinforce the perception that the EU institutions are out of touch with the real world, exacerbating the Union’s already-acute existential crisis.
Prolonging the plan’s development process would have the opposite effect, by helping to spur a broad – and attentive – discussion on what the new Europe, with or without the UK, should look like.
Beyond producing a relevant and useful foreign and security strategy, such a discussion can give the EU a new narrative, thereby invigorating public support for the European project.
To understand the need for such a narrative, one need look no further than the debate in the UK over its EU membership, which is focused almost exclusively on practical considerations and cost/benefit analyses.
Principles, solidarity, and vision are nowhere to be found.
Timing is everything in politics.
Last June, Europe’s leaders made the right call.
If the strategy had been ready for release at that time, it might have served as a pole around which a discussion on Europe’s purpose in the world could have coalesced.
But events, both internal and external, have overtaken the process.
It is time to adjust.
Releasing a new strategy that does not reflect Europe’s new reality would amount to an enormous missed opportunity – a tragedy, in fact, given how desperately the EU needs direction.
The European Council and Commission should bear this in mind as the June 2016 deadline to submit the strategy approaches.
Sometimes patience truly is the companion of wisdom.
Europe Against the Ropes
MADRID – On November 8, as Donald Trump was sealing his shocking victory in the United States presidential election, a conference in Brussels commemorated the legacy of the late Václav Havel, the first post-communist president of Czechoslovakia (and later the Czech Republic).
As the world enters the Trump era, that legacy could not be more important, especially for Europe.
It is hard to imagine two figures more different than Havel and Trump.
The former was an artist and intellectual who fought his entire life for truth, working tirelessly to bring out the best in people and societies.
The latter is a self-obsessed huckster who rose to power by playing on people’s basest emotions.
Havel’s values have much in common with those that drove, after World War II, the creation of the liberal world order, which has brought unprecedented peace and prosperity.
Trump’s election, however, suggests that the US may no longer uphold those values, much less continue to fulfill its post-WWII role in maintaining international order.
The resulting strategic lacuna creates an opportunity – indeed, a desperate need – for some other global actor to take up the mantle of leadership.
The European Union – which, more than any other global actor, has internalized and operationalized the ideals and principles that undergird the liberal world order – should be the one to do it.
The problem is that, for now at least, the EU does not look like it can.
The EU has made valuable contributions to the liberal world order, from setting an example on climate change to helping push forward a workable deal to contain Iran’s nuclear program.
But, so far, it has not shown a capacity for real global leadership.
Consider the disastrous 2009 Copenhagen climate-change conference, the bungled Libya intervention, or, most painful, its inadequate response to the ongoing migration crisis.
In short, while Europe has been a solid team player, it has not been a very good team captain.
This is not for lack of hoping.
Establishing the EU as a pole of global power was the goal of the much-maligned 2003 EU security strategy, to cite one example.
Following Trump’s victory, EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy Federica Mogherini declared that the EU is becoming an “indispensable power.”
But, as so often happens in Europe, there is a huge gap between rhetoric and reality.
The poorly attended emergency meeting of European foreign ministers following the US election is a stark reminder of just how far Europe has to go to fill the gaping hole that Trump’s abdication of America’s global responsibilities would create.
The truth is that the EU lacks both perspective and clout.
To be a pole requires magnetism, produced by either hard or soft power.
During the early 2000s, the heyday of EU enlargement, Europe had this pull.
And it may have had this pull as recently as the 2013 Euromaidan protests, when young Ukrainians died in the name of their country’s potential links with the EU.
Today, as the EU and its member states look inward, that attraction is gone.
Now, as Brexit plays out and the transatlantic partnership becomes unmoored, the EU could well unravel.
If not, the most likely alternative is that it becomes a platform on which its hegemon, Germany, can stand and lead.
In some ways, the EU is already well down this road.
It is a truism that nothing gets done in Brussels these days without the German government’s acquiescence.
Chancellor Angela Merkel’s unilateral pledge to welcome refugees and the German-led EU deal with Turkey to stem refugee flows underscore this reality.
This outcome would be highly problematic – even tragic.
The EU was supposed to be a supranational endeavor, shaped by the spirit of collective action for the common good that Havel championed.
Though Germany is surely a benign hegemon, mono-national domination of Europe controverts the very basis for the EU’s creation.
On a more practical level, Germany will not be a strong enough international champion for Europe.
In our increasingly Hobbesian world, demonstrations of conventional strength are needed.
Germany’s traditional aversion to hard power will hamper its ability to project its influence – and Europe’s – globally.
There are, to be sure, ways the rest of Europe can help.
Most notable, the long-stalled effort to coordinate and streamline European defense could be reinvigorated.
Fortunately, there have been signs of life on that front in recent weeks, with European foreign and defense ministers agreeing to move forward on cooperation.
Placing those efforts under de facto German leadership is not optimal, but it may be the best possible outcome, given the circumstances.
Ideal outcomes in Europe are not realistic.
And, as Havel pointed out, clinging to optimism – the belief that things will end well – is pointless.
Instead, we must find grounds for hope – the belief that things will eventually make sense.
The only way to do that is to be honest with ourselves and take a sober look at what we can and must do to ensure the most that can be achieved.
Europe has the potential to play a leading role in the world, but lacks the self-confidence and dedication to make it happen.
It is time to recognize that, and to acknowledge the real threat that the liberal world order faces.
Only then can we figure out how, realistically, to safeguard our interests and ideals in a challenging world.
This, I believe, would be Havel’s message today.
Securing Post-Brexit Europe
MADRID – It is said that good things come to those who wait.
If so, then the European Union’s new Global Strategy on Foreign and Security Policy, more than a decade overdue, must be a very good thing.
Actually, it is exactly what Europe needs.
But the timing of its release – in the immediate aftermath of the United Kingdom’s vote to leave the EU – could relegate it to irrelevance.
How the EU moves forward with the strategy will be a bellwether for the future of the European project.
The strategy, developed by Federica Mogherini, High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, does precisely what it should: it provides a coherent guiding vision and a flexible framework for adopting concrete policies.
It strikes the ideal balance between realism and ambition, recognizing the EU’s limitations and pinpointing the improvements that are needed.
The message is clear: the EU needs to get its act together within its neighborhood before it can grasp a broader role.
All of this is well and good, but it will amount to nothing if EU leaders do not “join up,” as Mogherini puts it, to ensure that the strategy fulfills its potential.
And, so far, the outlook does not look particularly promising.
“Brexit,” which has thrown global markets into turmoil and raised serious questions about the Union’s future, has eclipsed the release of the security strategy, which barely got a mention in the conclusions of the latest European Council summit.
Making matters worse, instead of inspiring much-needed soul-searching among EU leaders, the British referendum seems to have spurred many to allow national political interests, not to mention personal ambitions, to guide their thinking.
This self-serving impulse was on display in European Parliament President Martin Schulz’s fiery comments calling for the UK to invoke Article 50 (the withdrawal procedure) immediately – a move surely intended as a shot across the bow of his political rival, German Chancellor Angela Merkel, who had called for deliberation and time.
It can also be seen in French President François Hollande’s tough posturing, which seems motivated by the expectation of a battle with the far-right National Front’s Marine Le Pen in next year’s presidential election.
And it is abundantly clear in the struggle between the European Council and the European Commission for control over the forthcoming Brexit negotiations, in which the Council is concerned primarily about upholding the autonomy of the member states.
This is precisely the kind of short-sightedness that has long undermined the EU’s image in the world and, by reinforcing the impression of fecklessness and ineptitude, in the member states as well.
If it continues, Brexit could, as the doomsayers warn, be the EU’s downfall.
If, instead, EU leaders rise to the challenge that Brexit poses and come together to realize the vision set out in the new global strategy, the EU could emerge from this tumultuous period stronger than ever.
In uncertain times, Europe must decide how it will address the existential challenges it faces.
The sensible way forward is to minimize weaknesses by maximizing collective strengths.
The alternative – for each country to go its own way, as the British have chosen to do – would be reckless.
But the most dangerous approach – the one that would bring the most strife and insecurity – would be to continue pretending to be united, while acting independently.
Already, EU leaders have missed an important opportunity.
They could have woven the process of defining Europe’s aspirations, and of drafting a security strategy that reflected them, into broader discussions of what the EU should be, including at the most recent European Council summit.
They should not also miss the opportunity presented by the strategy that has been produced.
Such opportunities do not come along every day.
Whether the new EU strategy symbolizes the start of a new chapter for Europe or a dead letter about a defunct project will depend on whether European leaders can overcome their parochialism and commit to cooperation.
The early returns are not promising.
Europe’s Poisoned Chalice of Growth
CAMBRIDGE – After a double-dip recession and an extended period of stagnation, the eurozone is finally seeing green shoots of recovery.
Consumer confidence is rising.
Retail sales and new car registrations are up.
The European Commission foresees 1.3% growth this year, which is not bad by European standards. But it could be very bad for European reform.
It is not hard to see why growth has picked up.
Most obviously, the European Central Bank announced an ambitious program of asset purchases – quantitative easing – in late January.
That prospect rapidly drove down the euro’s exchange rate, enhancing the international competitiveness of European goods.
But the euro’s depreciation is too recent to have made much difference yet.
Historical evidence, not to mention Japan’s experience with a falling yen, suggests that it takes several quarters, or even years, before the positive impact of currency depreciation on net exports is felt.
So other factors must be at work.
One is that spending and growth are now under less pressure from fiscal consolidation.
The structural primary budget balance, the International Monetary Fund’s preferred measure of “fiscal thrust,” tightened by an additional 1-1.5% of GDP each year from 2010 to 2012, after which it remained broadly stable.
The subsequent two years of neutral fiscal policy has made a positive difference for economic performance.
And, however regrettable the uneven application of the EU’s fiscal rules, the European Commission’s recent decision to give France more time to reduce its budget deficit to 3% of GDP is welcome, coming as it did against the backdrop of a weak economy.
Another factor behind the upturn is the meaningful progress that a number of European countries, such as Spain, have made on structural reform.
Labor-market regulation has been loosened, and unit labor costs have come down.
This, too, is showing up as further improvement in Europe’s competitiveness.
A third driver of recovery is the fact that banks and financial markets are now better insulated from the turmoil in Greece.
French and German banks have been able to sell their holdings of Greek government bonds, largely to the ECB, which has acted as bond purchaser of last resort.
The ECB has also promised to support other countries’ bond markets in the event of a Greek accident.
Hence Europe’s recovery is less at risk of being derailed by instability in Athens.
Fourth and finally, even dead cats bounce.
Economic growth heals many wounds. It strengthens banks’ balance sheets by reducing the volume of non-performing loans.
It narrows government budget deficits by increasing tax revenues and limiting welfare spending.
By raising the denominator of the debt/GDP ratio, it enhances confidence in debt sustainability.
And it produces these benefits automatically, without officials having to do anything more.
Unfortunately for Europe, growth also reduces the perceived urgency of action where action is urgently needed – for example, Greece.
With the rest of Europe growing, other governments, believing themselves to be in a stronger economic position, are less inclined to compromise with Greece.
Everyone understands that compromise is preferable to the collapse of negotiations, disorderly default, and Greece’s forced exit from the eurozone. But the more confident the rest of Europe becomes of the sustainability of its recovery, the more it adopts a hard line – and the more likely a disorderly denouement becomes.
Similarly, the more that recovery and sustained growth strengthen banks’ balance sheets, the less urgency policymakers feel to address structural shortcomings, such as the implicit guarantees enjoyed by state banks and municipal savings banks in Germany, and the problems of family-controlled banks like Banco Espirito Santo in Portugal.
And even 2% growth will not render Europe’s triple-digit debt/GDP ratios sustainable.
Europe still needs debt restructuring, though the continent’s leaders refuse to acknowledge this.
Economic recovery merely enables them to delay the inevitable day of reckoning.
Finally, there are the more ambitious reforms – fiscal union and political union – that must complement monetary union if Europe is to avoid a similar crisis in the future.
If there is one lesson to be learned from Europe’s recent travails, it is that monetary union without fiscal and political union will not work.
Yet, given intense opposition to further fiscal and political integration, progress, if it is to occur, will entail difficult and divisive negotiations.
So any European growth that occurs without these measures will create an incentive to put them off.
The problem, quite simply, is that many of the underlying conditions that produced the eurozone crisis remain unaddressed.
If Europe now grows without making the hard decisions needed to address them, those decisions become correspondingly less likely to be made.
In developing countries, it is said that good times are bad times for economic reform.
Welcome to developing Europe.
Muzzled in the Name of Freedom
NEW YORK – Acts of terror can inflict terrible damage.
But they cannot destroy an open society.
Only those who govern our democracies can do that, by shrinking our freedoms in freedom's name.
Shinzo Abe, Japan's right-wing nationalist prime minister, does not need much encouragement to tighten up secrecy laws, give more powers to the police, or make it easier to use military force.
The grisly executions of two Japanese citizens caught by Islamic State terrorists in Syria have provided precisely the encouragement that Abe needs to pursue such measures.
But Japan has never been seen as a bastion of free speech, nor did it ever make great claims to be.
France does.
That is what the demonstration of solidarity in the face of last month's terrorist attacks in Paris was surely all about.
France, of all countries, would avoid the trap that snared the other great Western republic claiming to be a beacon of freedom in the world.
Fear of terrorist violence after the 9/11 attacks did more damage to freedom in the United States than the suicidal murder of thousands of its citizens.
Because of that fear, Americans allow themselves to be spied on indiscriminately by their own government, and permit terrorism suspects to be tortured and locked up indefinitely without trial.
France, like most other countries in the European Union, already has laws that ban hate speech.
You cannot legally insult people on the grounds of their race, beliefs, or sexual orientation.
And in France, as well as in some other countries, one can be prosecuted for denying the Holocaust and other historical genocides.
President François Hollande, who is not a right-wing nationalist like Abe, now wants to strengthen those bans.
He has proposed new laws that would make online entities like Google and Facebook responsible for any "hate speech" posted online by their users.
Former EU heads of state have also backed a proposal from European Jewish leaders to criminalize in every EU country not just anti-Semitism and genocide-denial, but also "xenophobia" in general.
Few people would wish to defend expressions of xenophobia or anti-Semitism.
But is it really wise to use the law to ban opinions?
First of all, such laws, if enacted, are unlikely to reduce the risk of terrorist acts.
Banning the expression of opinions will not make them go away.
They will continue to be expressed, more secretively perhaps, and as a result become even more toxic.
And the social and political basis for terrorism, in the Middle East and elsewhere, will not vanish just because of a public ban on xenophobic speech.
But there is a larger danger in using the law to police what people think.
It can stifle public debate.
That danger underlies the view, still operative in the US, that opinions, however obnoxious, should be freely expressible, so that they can be opposed by counter-arguments.
It would be naive, of course, to believe that religious or political extremists are interested in an exchange of views.
But inciting violence is banned in the US as well.
The First Amendment of the Constitution does not protect freedom of expression when it can be shown to create a risk of imminent violence.
Xenophobic views, or the denial of genocide, are repellent, but do not necessarily result in such a threat.
In most societies, including the US, the public expression of such opinions is limited by a rough consensus on what is socially respectable.
This consensus changes with time.
It is up to editors, writers, politicians, and others who speak in public to shape it.
Cartoonists, artists, bloggers, activists, and comedians sometimes like to challenge the consensus of respectability.
Some of these challenges might cause outrage (that, after all, often is the point).
But as long as they do not promote or threaten violence, it would do more harm than good to ban them by law.
Allowing the government to decide which opinions are permissible is dangerous not just because it smothers debate, but also because governments can be arbitrary or self-serving.
It would be useful in the current climate of fear to recall a famous hate-speech case in the US.
In 1977, the American Nazi Party planned to stage a demonstration in Skokie, a suburb of Chicago with a large Jewish population.
A local court, prompted by shocked and fearful public opinion, decided that the display of swastikas, distribution of leaflets, and the wearing of Nazi uniforms should be banned.
Such a demonstration, it was quite plausibly argued, would be an insult to a community that included Holocaust survivors.
But the ban was contested by the American Civil Liberties Union as an infringement of the First Amendment.
The argument of the ACLU lawyers, most of whom were liberal Jews, was not based on any sympathy for Nazi symbols or views.
Their argument was that if you allow the government to ban opinions you hate or despise, you weaken your right to contest a similar ban on views with which you might agree.
Freedom of speech, in other words, should mean freedom of hateful speech, too, as long as it does not threaten or promote violence.
Most European governments already take a stricter view of public insults than the US Constitution does.
It would be a great mistake to add even more restrictions.
Terrorist attacks are doing enough damage, in lives and property.
There is no reason for governments to make things worse by tampering with their citizens' liberties.
Inequality, Immigration, and Hypocrisy
CAMBRIDGE – Europe’s migration crisis exposes a fundamental flaw, if not towering hypocrisy, in the ongoing debate about economic inequality.
Wouldn’t a true progressive support equal opportunity for all people on the planet, rather than just for those of us lucky enough to have been born and raised in rich countries?
Many thought leaders in advanced economies advocate an entitlement mentality.