Unlocking human creativity and ingenuity is lifting millions out of poverty and helping improve national infrastructure.
As fossil fuels contribute to global warming, entrepreneurs in Asia, Latin America, and Europe are pioneering a variety of alternative energy solutions.
Startups such as Optima Energia in Mexico are harnessing wind, sun, and biofuels to offer sustainable and scalable energy options.
“An entrepreneur is a person with the vision to see a new product or process and the ability to make it happen,” writes Steven Koltai in his forthcoming book, Peace Through Entrepreneurship.
A former US State Department official who set up the Global Entrepreneurship Program (GEP) in 2009, Koltai describes entrepreneurship as a “job-creating machine.”
It is the difference between opening a restaurant and reimagining what the experience of eating could be like.
Entrepreneurs create new things that in turn create consumer demand for those things.
Last week, GEP, along with the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation, the Brazilian NGO ANDI, and the city of Medellín co-hosted the Global Entrepreneurship Congress in Medellín, Colombia.
The gathering brought together entrepreneurs, investors, researchers, and policymakers from more than 160 countries to share best practices and work to bolster startup growth and build the ecosystems in which they operate.
Medellin itself is busy transforming itself from a cocaine capital into a startup hub.
Silicon Valley seized on this phenomenon some time ago, rolling out the red carpet for world leaders such as Indonesia’s President Joko Widodo, India’s Prime Minister Narendra Modi, and China’s President Xi Jinping.
These world leaders are looking for the Silicon Valley secret: the magic ingredients that will create an equally vibrant innovation ecosystem in their countries.
Entrepreneurs themselves, however, do not depend on innovation or technology.
As Koltai points out, Starbucks built an enormous enterprise around serving a cup of coffee, a centuries old beverage.
Today Starbucks employs roughly 182,000 people worldwide – 50,000 more than Facebook, Google, and Apple combined.
An Argentine, Jordanian, Malaysian, or Spaniard who can visualize and create thriving global demand for a product or service – just as Spain’s Amancio Ortega did with Zara – is just as much an entrepreneur as the next Bill Gates is.
From Lahore to Lagos, Mexico City to Mumbai, governments are looking at their own populations as pools of talent waiting to be tapped.
It is time for diplomats to do the same.
They should support and encourage job creators and problem solvers, and turn development assistance into investments.
They should include entrepreneurship in economic policies and trade agreements.
They should press governments to allow entrepreneurs to develop their innovations as a component of human flourishing and as an essential source of sustainable solutions for often-intractable problems such as disease, climate change, migration, and war.
Indeed, entrepreneurship, as a channel for young men and women to express themselves, is a compelling weapon in the fight against terrorism and violent extremism.
It is an outlet to build and add value rather than destroy it.
This is especially important in the Middle East, which is, as the Brookings Institution has noted, experiencing “an unprecedented ‘youth bulge.’”
More than 30% of the region’s population – over 100 million people – is aged 15-29, and a significant number of these young people are unemployed.
For them, entrepreneurship and the ability to gain control over their own destinies isn’t an option; it is an imperative.
Similarly, entrepreneurship is not just a commercial or economic option for diplomats and policymakers.
In a world with ever more pressing challenges – from pandemics to poverty and resource depletion to religious extremists – it is becoming a vital tool of foreign policy.
Planetary Boundaries and Human Prosperity
STOCKHOLM – The future of humanity will depend on mastering a balancing act.
The challenge will be to provide for the needs of more than ten billion people while safeguarding our planetary life-support systems.
Recent scientific insights have made us better equipped than ever to strike that balance.
Doing so will be our generation’s great task.
Ending poverty has become a realistic goal for the first time in human history.
We have the ability to ensure that every person on the planet has the food, water, shelter, education, health care, and energy needed to lead a life of dignity and opportunity.
But we will be able to do so only if we simultaneously protect the earth’s critical systems: its climate, ozone layer, soils, biodiversity, fresh water, oceans, forests, and air.
And those systems are under unprecedented pressure.
For the last 10,000 years, the earth’s climate has been remarkably stable.
Global temperatures rose and fell by no more than one degree Celsius (compared with swings of more than eight degrees Celsius during the last ice age), and resilient ecosystems met humanity’s needs.
This period – known as the Holocene – provided the stability that enabled human civilization to rise and thrive.
It is the only state of the planet of which we know that can sustain prosperous lives for ten billion people.
But humans have now become the single largest driver of ecosystem change on earth, marking the start of a new geological age that some call the Anthropocene.
Scientists argue over the exact starting point of this epoch, but it can be dated to somewhere around 1945, when modern industry and agriculture began to expand briskly.
In the future, geologists will see telltale markers like radioactive carbon – debris from nuclear blasts – and plastic waste scattered across the planet’s surface and embedded in rock.
More recently, human activity has undergone what is being called the Great Acceleration: the rapid intensification of resource consumption and ecological degradation.
We risk disrupting the earth’s critical systems, and with them modern civilization itself.
The planet’s response to our pressures is likely to be unpredictable.
Indeed, the surprises have already begun.
As we overdraw on our planet’s accounts, it is starting to levy penalties on the global economy, in the form of extreme weather events, accelerated melting of ice sheets, rapid biodiversity loss, and the vast bleaching of coral reefs.
We face an urgent need to define a safety zone that prevents us from pushing our planet out of the unusually benevolent Holocene state.
The Planetary Boundaries framework, which a group of scientists, including one of us (Johan), first published in 2009, does just that.
It draws on the best science to identify the key planetary processes regulating the earth’s ability to sustain Holocene-like conditions.
For each of those processes, it proposes a boundary – a quantitative ceiling – beyond which we risk inducing abrupt changes that could push our planet into a state that is more hostile to humanity.
These nine boundaries include climate change, ozone depletion, ocean acidification, interference in the global nitrogen and phosphorus cycles, land-use change, global freshwater use, biosphere integrity, air pollution, and novel entities (such as organic pollutants, radioactive materials, nanomaterials, and micro-plastics).
Worryingly, our most recent update in January, which confirms the nine boundaries and improves their quantifications further, indicates that humanity has already transgressed four: climate change, nitrogen and phosphorus use, biodiversity loss, and land-use change.
Our challenge is to bring the earth’s systems back within the safety zone, while simultaneously ensuring that every person has the resources he or she needs to lead a happy and fulfilling life.
Between these planetary and social boundaries lies humanity’s safe and just operating space: the limits we must respect if we are to create a world that is ecologically resilient and free of poverty.
Meeting these goals will require a far more equitable distribution of the planet’s resources and far greater efficiency in how we use them.
If we are to ensure that our planet remains one on which all of humanity can thrive, we will have to pursue a new paradigm of prosperity.
Good and Bad Inequality
PRINCETON – In the pantheon of economic theories, the tradeoff between equality and efficiency used to occupy an exalted position.
The American economist Arthur Okun, whose classic work on the topic is called Equality and Efficiency: The Big Tradeoff, believed that public policies revolved around managing the tension between those two values.
As recently as 2007, when New York University economist Thomas Sargent, addressing the graduating class at the University of California, Berkeley, summarized the wisdom of economics in 12 short principles, the tradeoff was among them.
The belief that boosting equality requires sacrificing economic efficiency is grounded in one of the most cherished ideas in economics: incentives.
Firms and individuals need the prospect of higher incomes to save, invest, work hard, and innovate.
If taxation of profitable firms and rich households blunts those prospects, the result is reduced effort and lower economic growth.
Communist countries, where egalitarian experiments led to economic disaster, long served as “Exhibit A” in the case against redistributive policies.
In recent years, however, neither economic theory nor empirical evidence has been kind to the presumed tradeoff.
Economists have produced new arguments showing why good economic performance is not only compatible with distributive fairness, but may even demand it.
For example, in high-inequality societies, where poor households are deprived of economic and educational opportunities, economic growth is depressed.
Then there are the Scandinavian countries, where egalitarian policies evidently have not stood in the way of economic prosperity.
Early this year, economists at the International Monetary Fund produced empirical results that seemed to upend the old consensus.
They found that greater equality is associated with faster subsequent medium-term growth, both across and within countries.
Moreover, redistributive policies did not appear to have any detrimental effects on economic performance.
We can have our cake, it seems, and eat it, too.
That is a striking result – all the more so because it comes from the IMF, an institution hardly known for heterodox or radical ideas.
Economics is a science that can claim to have uncovered few, if any, universal truths.
Like almost everything else in social life, the relationship between equality and economic performance is likely to be contingent rather than fixed, depending on the deeper causes of inequality and many mediating factors.
So the emerging new consensus on the harmful effects of inequality is as likely to mislead as the old one was.
Consider, for example, the relationship between industrialization and inequality.
In a poor country where the bulk of the workforce is employed in traditional agriculture, the rise of urban industrial opportunities is likely to produce inequality, at least during the early stages of industrialization.
As farmers move to cities and earn higher pay, income gaps open up.
And yet this is the same process that produces economic growth; all successful developing countries have gone through it.
In China, for example, rapid economic growth after the late 1970s was associated with a significant rise in inequality.
Roughly half of the increase was the result of urban-rural earnings gaps, which also acted as the engine of growth.
Or consider transfer policies that tax the rich and the middle classes in order to increase the income of poor households.
Many countries in Latin America, such as Mexico and Bolivia, undertook such policies in a fiscally prudent manner, ensuring that government deficits would not lead to high debt and macroeconomic instability.
On the other hand, Venezuela’s aggressive redistributive transfers under Hugo Chávez and his successor, Nicolás Maduro, were financed by temporary oil revenues, placing both the transfers and macroeconomic stability at risk.
Even though inequality has been reduced in Venezuela (for the time being), the economy’s growth prospects have been severely weakened.
Latin America is the only world region where inequality has declined since the early 1990s.
Improved social policies and increased investment in education have been substantial factors.
But the decline in the pay differential between skilled and unskilled workers – what economists call the “skill premium” – has also played an important role.
Whether this is good news or bad for economic growth depends on why the skill premium has fallen.
If pay differentials have narrowed because of an increase in the relative supply of skilled workers, we can be hopeful that declining inequality in Latin America will not stand in the way of faster growth (and may even be an early indicator of it).
But if the underlying cause is the decline in demand for skilled workers, smaller differentials would suggest that the modern, skill-intensive industries on which future growth depends are not expanding sufficiently.
In the advanced countries, the causes of rising inequality are still being debated.
Automation and other technological changes, globalization, weaker trade unions, erosion of minimum wages, financialization, and changing norms about acceptable pay gaps within enterprises have all played a role, with different weights in the United States relative to Europe.
Each one of these drivers has a different effect on growth.
While technological progress clearly fosters growth, the rise of finance since the 1990s has probably had an adverse effect, via financial crises and the accumulation of debt.
It is good that economists no longer regard the equality-efficiency tradeoff as an iron law.
We should not invert the error and conclude that greater equality and better economic performance always go together.
After all, there really is only one universal truth in economics: It depends.
The Stock-Bond Disconnect
CAMBRIDGE – How should one understand the disconnect between the new highs reached by global equity indices and the new depths plumbed by real interest rates worldwide?
Several competing explanations attempt to reconcile these trends, and getting it right is essential for calibrating monetary and fiscal policy appropriately.
The most popular explanations downplay risk factors in a way that can be dangerously misleading.
For example, the “secular stagnation" theory claims that low interest rates tell the true story.
The global economy is suffering from a chronic demand shortfall, which can be remedied through sustained growth in government spending.
According to this view, soaring stock markets merely reflect low discounting of future profits.
Moreover, labor's share of profits seems to have fallen markedly in recent decades across the world's eight largest economies, with the possible exception of the United Kingdom.
Conversely, capital's share of profits has been rising, which of course raises the value of equities (though, stock prices have continued to rise in countries like the US and the UK where labor shares have begun at least a cyclical recovery, and where interest-rate hikes may soon be on the horizon).
Proponents of secular stagnation argue that government spending as a share of GDP, which has more than doubled in most advanced economies since the 1950s, should continue to rise.
Although one can readily agree that high-yielding government investments in education and infrastructure are especially justified today, the idea that demand permanently constrains supply in a significant way is dubious.
More refined studies of the recent recession suggest that the lasting so-called “hysteresis" effects on unemployment have been limited, at least in the US.
Another possible explanation of low interest rates is financial repression.
The European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan, like the Federal Reserve before them, are gluttonously buying bonds.
At the same time, a host of new regulations to promote financial stability are forcing banks, pension funds, and insurance companies to stock up on government securities.
Thus, today's low interest rates are more a reflection of distortions in financial markets than of low growth expectations.
Proponents of the financial repression explanation essentially view low interest rates as a hidden tax on bondholders, who receive a lower interest rate than they would otherwise.
This is not necessarily a bad thing, given that all taxes are distorting, and that there really is no way to deal with today's outsize debt burdens that does not impinge on growth in some way.
But the financial repression tax is not nearly as progressive as a more general wealth tax would be, because lower-income households typically have a smaller share of their assets in equities.
In any event, it is unclear how financial repression can be the whole story.
The fall in bond yields has extended to a far broader range of debt than just government paper.
Other factors are contributing to today's ultra-low interest-rate environment as well.
Adverse demographics and declining labor-supply growth in most advanced economies are undeniably important.
The puzzle, though, is that this trend has played out in a very gradual and predictable way, whereas the decline in interest rates has been more rapid and somewhat unexpected (certainly by central banks).
And it is difficult to argue that weak demographics is the main driver of strong stock prices, though some have tried.
Curiously, heightened risk and fears of further disruptions – not just another financial crisis, but also geopolitical instability and pandemics – do not seem to carry much weight in current policy discussions, though the idea has been around.
Though bonds are hardly a perfect hedge against such risks, they typically beat stocks (except, perhaps, in cases of global conflagration, when both fare badly).
In recent work with Carmen and Vincent Reinhart, we show that even relatively minor shifts in disaster risk – say, a rise from a normal 2-3% to 3-4% – can lead to a massive decline in global real interest rates, even taking them well into negative territory.
This can be the case even if expected growth is strong.
But the policy implications of this are not straightforward.
If the government has superior information and analysis, and correctly assesses that public fear is not justified, then of course it makes sense to take advantage of the information – by issuing more debt, for example.
If, on the other hand, the public is basically right about heightened disaster risks, the policy issues become much more complex.
The problem is that the government likely faces high costs if a disaster strikes, which implies a high option value to preserving fiscal space for when it is most needed.
The idea that hyper-low interest rates are merely symptoms of deficient demand or financial repression is dangerously simplistic.
Surely heightened public concern about the risk of future economic catastrophe in the wake of the financial crisis is still playing an important role, reinforced by lingering fragility in the eurozone and rising instability in emerging markets.
This makes the public understandably more cautious.
But if the risks that might help explain the price trends for stocks and bonds are real, policymakers, too, should be careful not to throw caution to the wind.
Pakistan’s Polio Tipping Point
ISLAMABAD – Early this month, tragedy struck Pakistan’s polio eradication campaign once again with the killing of two more polio workers and a policeman on patrol with the vaccination teams.
The latest murders in Pakistan preceded the killing of nine polio workers in Nigeria, and follow the slaying of another nine Pakistani health workers in December and the New Year’s Day murders of development workers affiliated with public-health efforts.
The continued targeting of such brave workers is posing a severe challenge to these countries’ public-health communities and their collective ambition to reach every child with lifesaving vaccines.
For Pakistan, the irony is that the country has been a success story for polio eradication, with the number of cases falling from 197 in 2011 to 58 in 2012.
Despite recent challenges, Pakistan put vaccinators back on the job in 28 districts, where 12 million children needed to be reached.
Widespread public support for polio eradication efforts has been reflected in a parliamentary resolution.
The Ulema Council, a group of influential clerics, has given its backing as well.
The most recent report by the Independent Monitoring Board of the Global Polio Eradication Initiative, released in November 2012, acknowledged Pakistan’s recent progress – in stark contrast to the bleak outlook of its previous report.
But it is critical that the country’s upcoming election does not jeopardize recent gains, particularly during the current low-transmission season, which is the best opportunity to stop the disease in its tracks.
All political factions must remain committed to the eradication drive if it is to succeed.
Indeed, despite progress in 2012, we have not been able fully to interrupt the spread of the poliovirus in Pakistan, owing primarily to obstacles affecting program implementation and management.
These challenges must be addressed through stronger governance at all levels, particularly given that state authority has been badly eroded in roughly a quarter of the country, where complex factors have created distrust in the name of ethnicity, politics, and religion, resulting in a massive breakdown in law and order.
Moreover, Pakistan shocked the global public-health community last year by adopting a constitutional amendment that led to the abolition of the national health ministry.
Unfortunately, the sudden devolution of health responsibilities to the country’s provinces occurred without adequate preparation or oversight.
The simultaneous scaling back of the local-government system, along with the divisive politics of coalition governments in Pakistan’s fragile democracy, continues to undermine implementation of the polio eradication program.
The resulting shortcomings in the country’s provincial health systems have manifested themselves not just in the inability to eradicate polio, but also in a recent measles outbreak, which has killed more than 300 children.
At the same time, local governments’ difficulties are having an adverse effect on provision of clean water and proper sanitation, which are vitally important for polio eradication and public health more broadly.
There have also been cases of refusal by parents to vaccinate their children, typically at the behest of clergy members, owing to the belief that such public-health efforts are in fact a covert sterilization program.
Indeed, refusal to vaccinate accounts for 2% of the children who are missed.
A recent smear campaign aimed at discrediting polio vaccination, in which several MPs publicly took part, has complicated matters further.
Daunting as all of this may be, stalling vaccination is not an option.
It is well established that when vaccination is impeded, the number of cases rises drastically, as was shown in Nigeria in 2003, where a ten-month delay led to the infection of thousands of people domestically, and to reinfection in more than 20 other countries.
A similar outcome was observed in Pakistan’s Swat Valley after the militant takeover of 2009 rendered the region inaccessible for months.
This month’s decision to hold back vaccination in Karachi after health workers there were threatened, though understandable, is nonetheless a cause for serious concern in this respect.
As in Nigeria, vaccination delays will be highly detrimental for neighboring countries.
Nomadic populations move freely back and forth across the vast and porous Afghanistan-Pakistan border.
In 2011, a polio outbreak in China was traced back to Pakistan.
India, polio-free for the last two years, is well aware that lasting domestic success depends on eradication efforts elsewhere.
Potential international risks go beyond the immediate neighborhood.
Already, Pakistan is responsible for the recent appearance of wild poliovirus in Egypt.
Fortunately, there is no evidence of transmission, but we may not be so lucky in the future.
Indeed, the risk that Pakistani pilgrims could carry the problem with them on the 2013 Hajj, the largest annual congregation of Muslims, is not just a theoretical threat.
A worst-case outcome there could set back the fight against polio by decades.
The scale of the challenge, and hence the multifaceted response that is needed, must not be underestimated.
Polio today has become an example of the complex problems plaguing Pakistan’s state and its society.
Pakistan must increase its efforts on polio eradication for reasons that go beyond fulfilling a global health promise (which is reason enough in its own right).
Success would be a sign of Pakistan’s ability to conquer complex challenges, and it would provide a blueprint for further development interventions.
In eradicating polio, Pakistan would not just play its part in eliminating the disease worldwide. It would also reclaim its own global prestige and potential for progress in other areas.
Memenangkan Perang Melawan TB
SEATTLE – Manusia telah berusaha mengatasi tuberkulosis sejak Zaman Batu.
Namun, kemajuan dalam upaya mengatasi penyakit tersebut baru dicapai pada abad terakhir.
Sebuah vaksin, yang digunakan pertama kali pada manusia, masih digunakan hingga saat ini di seluruh dunia.
Selain itu, serangkaian antibiotik, dimulai dari streptomisin yang diperkenalkan pada tahun 1940an, telah terbukti efektif untuk mengobati infeksi.
Sejak 1990, angka kematian tahunan yang disebabkan oleh TB telah berkurang hingga hampir separuhnya.
Sejak tahun 2000 hingga 2014, diagnosis dan pengobatan yang lebih baik telah menyelamatkan sekitar 43 juta nyawa manusia.
Meskipun demikian, perkembangan ini telah melambat, hal ini menandakan bahwa perjuangan masih panjang.
Penurunan jumlah kasus TB setiap tahunnya dalam abad terakhir hanya sebesar 1,65%; pada tahun 2014, TB telah memakan korban 1,5 juta jiwa.
Sementara itu, strain-strain penyakit telah mengembangkan kekebalan terhadap pengobatan yang ada.
Penyalahgunaan dan pengelolaan antibiotik yang kurang tepat telah menimbulkan multidrug-resistant TB.
Strain-strain ini harus diobati dengan obat generasi kedua, yang lebih mahal dan sering menimbulkan efek samping yang lebih parah.
Strain-strain yang resistan terhadap obat generasi kedua juga mulai bermunculan, strain-strain ini dikenal dengan sebutan extensively drug-resistant TB.
Mengingat besarnya beban ekonomi serta penderitaan yang ditimbulkan oleh TB pada manusia menandakan bahwa upaya yang komprehensif untuk mengatasi TB sangat dibutuhkan.
Menurut serangkaian artikel di jurnal kedokteran Inggris The Lancet, seorang profesor di bidang kesehatan global dan pengobatan sosial di Harvard Medical School yang bernama Salmaan Keshavjee telah menjabarkan strategi untuk mengatasi TB.
Keshavjee dan sekelompok ilmuwan, dokter dan advokat TB dari lembaga pemerintah dan lembaga swadaya masyarakat, rumah sakit dan universitas telah bertekad untuk mengurangi angka kematian TB hingga nol – selain itu, mereka juga menjabarkan langkah-langkah yang diperlukan guna mewujudkan tekad tersebut.
Langkah pertama adalah untuk meningkatkan upaya pengumpulan data.
Epidemi TB, seperti penyakit menular lainnya, berbeda-beda tingkatnya di berbagai belahan dunia; oleh sebab itu, upaya pemberantasan perlu untuk disesuaikan dengan kondisi setempat.
Program TB setempat perlu menggunakan data yang ada dengan lebih baik, memperluas pengumpulan data yang dilakukan secara rutin, memuktahirkan sistem penyimpanan data serta mengembangkan infrastuktur analitis yang diperlukan untuk mengukur dampak intervensi setempat.
Temuan-temuan ini perlu dibuat tersedia di negara di mana data dikumpulkan, selain itu, poin pembelajaran harus dibagikan kepada negara-negara tetangga serta negara-negara yang berada dalam satu kawasan dengan negara tempat pengumpulan data.
Terlebih lagi, petugas kesehatan harus memperluas upaya untuk mencegah infeksi baru dan mengobati kasus baru dengan cepat.
Rantai transmisi TB dapat diputus apabila petugas kesehatan secara aktif mencari pengidap TB dan dengan segera memberikan pengobatan sehingga para pegidap tidak lagi menular.
Strategi ini telah terbukti efektif berdasarkan evaluasi empiris dan model matematika.
Pada saat yang sama, diperlukan upaya untuk mengendalikan penyebaran penyakit, infeksi laten yang merupakan sumber dari hampir semua kasus TB baru.
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, bakteri yang menyebabkan penyakit ini, dapat tidak aktif dalam waktu lama, sehingga pada periode tersebut pengidap TB tidak menunjukan gejala bahwa dirinya telah terinfeksi.
Upaya untuk mengobati TB pada tahap ini dapat mencegah bakteri menyebar dan mengurangi beban global penyakit TB.
Identifikasi orang-orang yang terinfeksi namun tidak menunjukan gejala melalui peluncuran terapi pencegahan di populasi yang beresiko serta mengembangkan tes diagnostik yang lebih baik akan membantu mengurangi sumber bakteri.
Pengembangan vaksin yang lebih efektif memiliki dampak yang paling besar terhadap epidemi.
Vaksin Bacillus Calmette–Guérin diberikan kepada bayi di banyak belahan dunia, namun, keampuhanya untuk mengatasi TB paru sangat beragam.
Vaksin yang lebih baik sangat diperlukan untuk memberantas penyakit tersebut secara global.
Yang terakhir, setiap upaya untuk memberantas TB harus mengakui bahwa akar dari penyakit tersebut adalah kemiskinan dan pengucilan sosial.
Sejak pertengahan abad ke dua puluh, upaya dunia untuk mengatasi TB telah menekankan solusi biomedis dan terfokus pada pengobatan wabah.
Tetapi, sebelum antibiotik dikembangkan, peningkatan standar hidup telah membantu mengurangi dampak TB.
Penggabungan pendekatan biomedis dengan penekanan pada pentingnya gizi yang baik, perumahan yang layak dan kesejahteraan manusia diperlukan untuk menundukan penyakit tersebut.
Masyarakat dunia harus bekerja sama dan menerjemahkan pengetahuan serta strategi menjadi intervensi program di masyarakat yang mendapatkan pengaruh terparah oleh TB.
Dengan mengembangkan alat baru – seperti diagnostik cepat, pengobatan infeksi dan penyakit TB yang aman dan lebih singkat serta meningkatkan keampuhan vaksin TB – memperkuat sistem kesehatan, dan meningkatkan kondisi hidup populasi yang beresiko maka salah satu penyakit yang paling berbahaya dalam sejarah manusia dapat diatasi.
Hanya dengan cara demikian maka TB pada akhirnya dapat dibuat tidak relevan sehingga menjadi bagian dari lalu dan hanya dapat ditemukan di buku sejarah.
Erdoğan the Peacemaker?
ISTANBUL – Turkey’s Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan has taken on a daunting challenge.
After participating in the nuclear-security summit in South Korea at the end of March, he went to Tehran to urge Iran’s leaders to make a deal during the next round of nuclear talks between Iran and the United Nations Security Council’s five permanent members (Britain, China, France, Russia, and the United States) plus Germany.
And Erdoğan will host those talks in Istanbul in mid-April.
Erdoğan last traveled to Tehran in May 2010 to finalize an agreement that he had negotiated under which Iran was to send large quantities of its low-enriched uranium to Turkey in exchange for nuclear fuel for Iran’s research reactor.
The deal, mediated by Turkey and Brazil, was presented to the rest of the world as a groundbreaking confidence-building initiative.
But the US and its allies quickly rejected the agreement as an Iranian ploy designed to halt the growing momentum for additional sanctions.
Turkey’s insistence on pressing ahead with the deal caused tension with the US and fueled criticism at home and abroad that Erdoğan’s government was shifting away from its long-standing alliance with the West.
The memory of this short-lived crisis with the US is still fresh in Turkish government circles.
So why, despite having burned his fingers two years ago, is Erdoğan taking up the issue again?
What did he hope to accomplish in Tehran?
Much has changed in the Middle East during the past two years, and not to Turkey’s advantage.
As a result, Turkey is now seeking to contain a rapidly deteriorating regional security situation.
Events in Syria are forcing Turkish authorities to accept the harsh reality of the Assad regime’s resilience – and now its hostility towards Turkey.
Iraq, another of Turkey’s neighbors, faces the risk of a protracted sectarian power struggle following withdrawal of US troops.
Given this, Turkey’s main objective now is to prevent a military intervention against Iran.
From Turkey’s perspective, an Israeli or American strike against Iran’s nuclear facilities would destabilize the region further, as Iran would undoubtedly retaliate by fueling sectarian tensions and undermining the prospects of a settlement in both Syria and Iraq.
As a result, Turkey wants to prolong, at all costs, the time available for diplomacy.
But Erdoğan’s specific objective was more modest this time than it was in 2010, because Turkey does not want to play the role of mediator and will not seek to negotiate the details of an agreement.
Instead, Erdoğan emphasized to his Iranian counterparts the international community’s resolve to bring transparency to Iran’s nuclear program, and insisted on the importance of concrete progress in the next round of the nuclear talks.
He warned that Iranian intransigence would doom the talks to failure, raising the prospects of yet another military confrontation in the Middle East.
In particular, Erdoğan stressed the need for Iran to offer a gesture of goodwill about its nuclear program.
The Iranian regime should, at the very least, commit itself to halt uranium enrichment at 20%, a figure short of the threshold needed to produce weapons.
Having had direct meetings with both Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad and Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Erdoğan was in a unique position, as a prime minister of a NATO country, to convey these critical messages to a regime whose top-level decision-making processes remain as opaque as ever to the West.
Paradoxically, however, Erdoğan’s task, while more modest than in 2010, is also more difficult, owing to the prospect of new sanctions on Iran, including a ban on oil exports, that are to enter into force in July.
Advocates of sanctions argue that they are having a crippling effect on the Iranian economy.
The value of the Iranian rial has fallen by 50% against the US dollar since the beginning of the year, and the country is suffering from a severe shortage of foreign exchange. So now is not the time to pull back.
Moreover, US President Barack Obama, facing an election in November, does not wish to be accused of being soft on Iran, making it difficult for the West to reciprocate potential Iranian overtures.
Yet Erdoğan’s best ally in his risky gambit may be the US consumer.
Faced with rising gasoline prices as a result of the ongoing crisis with Iran, Americans’ concerns about the cost of driving have contributed to Obama’s shaky popularity ratings.
Thus, the Obama administration may find it more politically expedient to seek a deal with Iran.
If Iran displays a real willingness to compromise, the West should hold off on the new sanctions.
It will soon become clear whether Erdoğan’s visit succeeds.
If Iran decides to engage the international community with concrete confidence-building measures at the next round of multilateral talks, Erdoğan will take much of the credit for giving diplomacy a last chance – and quite possibly for averting a disastrous military confrontation in the Middle East.
Turkey’s Critical Election
ISTANBUL – In very few democracies could such a small shift in votes lead to outcomes as different as the ones that could result from Turkey’s general election on June 7.
A swing of less than 1% of the national vote could decide whether the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) is forced to form a coalition government – Turkey’s first after 13 years of single-party rule – leaving it unable to fulfill President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s longstanding desire to strengthen the presidency.
Turkish elections have been boring affairs since the AKP came to power in 2002.
The party’s results have been all but preordained: landslide victories and majority governments.
This year, however, the outlook is different: the results are far from certain, and the stakes could hardly be higher.
Riding on the outcome is not only Erdoğan’s political future, but also the potential for a long-term settlement with the country’s Kurds and the long-term soundness of Turkish democracy itself.
The uncertainty this time around is attributable to the predominantly Kurdish Peoples’ Democratic Party (HDP).
Kurdish political parties shied away from contesting past elections, owing to their fear of failing to clear the 10% popular-vote threshold needed to enter the parliament.
Instead, Kurdish politicians would run as independent candidates, who are not subject to the threshold.
Once safely in office, they would reunite under the banner of a party.
This year, however, the Kurdish political movement has decided to field its candidates as members of a single party.
This electoral strategy, though risky, could yield large rewards, with the outcome holding significant implications for the party’s immediate fortune – as well as for Turkey’s long-term prospects.
The HDP’s failure to clear the 10% threshold would open the way for an overhaul of the country’s political system.
With the Kurds and their candidates excluded from the parliament, the AKP would have to do only slightly better than polls are predicting to maintain its political dominance.
If the party is able to secure more than 45% of the national vote, the quirks in Turkey’s electoral law will give it more than 330 representatives in the country’s 550-seat legislature.
Such a result would give Erdoğan the power to put in place the presidential system of governance that he has long sought.
The AKP’s parliamentary majority would allow the party to draft a new constitution unilaterally and put it to a referendum within a year.
At the same time, the country’s southeastern regions could become vulnerable to civil unrest, as the Kurdish movement – faced with a total lack of national political representation during a time of institutional transition – agitates for greater local autonomy.
If, on the other hand the HDP can reach the 10% threshold, its fortunes – and Erdoğan’s – will swing in the other direction.
The party’s candidates would command a sizable minority delegation in parliament, and the AKP would likely become the senior partner of a coalition government.
Far from securing a dominant position, Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoğlu would be forced to choose between aligning his party with the HDP or the conservative Nationalist Movement Party (MHP).
A grand coalition with the main opposition party, the center-left Republican People’s Party (CHP), though theoretically possible, is not congruous with Turkey’s political culture.
Such a result would empower the executive, headed by Davutoğlu, to the detriment of the presidency.
With the possibility that Erdoğan could become an executive president no longer realistic, his power would quickly begin to wane.
Even assuming that the AKP remained the country’s largest party, the balance of power in Turkish politics would start to turn against him.
In liberal democracies, national elections are intended to provide the winning side with a popular mandate to govern and to set policy priorities until the next election.
Only rarely do they hold implications that will last longer than a single electoral cycle.
But that is the case today in Turkey, where the outcome of the upcoming popular vote is likely to determine the rules of political life for years to come.
The HDP is currently polling at around 10%.
A little nudge in either direction could make all the difference in the world.
The Strange Death of Turkish Secularism
JERUSALEM – The aftermath of Turkey’s failed military coup raises a fundamental question: will President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan continue to pursue his authoritarian path, perhaps with a vengeance, or will he reach out to his opponents and attempt to bridge the deep fissures in Turkish society?
The jury is still out, but judging from previous historical examples, serious challenges to authoritarian or semi-authoritarian leaders usually lead to a hardening of the regime, not greater moderation.
And Erdoğan’s moves since the coup’s collapse – mass arrests and purges of thousands of soldiers, judges, police, and teachers were announced almost immediately – seem to confirm the more pessimistic scenario.
Yet it would be a mistake to view what is now happening in Turkey exclusively through the prism of Erdoğan’s personality and his authoritarian inclinations.
He and his Justice and Development Party (AKP) represent a tectonic shift in Turkish politics, one with parallels in other Muslim-majority countries in the Middle East.
In trying to move the path of Turkish history away from the radical secularism of modern Turkey’s founder, Kemal Atatürk, the AKP initially appeared to veer from the Kemalist authoritarian mold.
Because Western observers were supportive of the secular nature of Kemalism, many overlooked that the regime was more similar to 1930s European fascism – a nationalistic one-party state with Atatürk himself at the apex of a personality cult – than to liberal democracy.
Only in the 1950s was the system slowly loosened.
Kemalist secularism was not the expression of a wide, popular movement from below; it was imposed by a small urban elite – military and intellectual – on a traditional and mostly rural society.
Kemalism not only introduced a variant of the Latin alphabet, which totally cut off Turks from any link to their history and culture; it also banned traditional forms of attire (fez, baggy trousers for men, headscarves for women) and forced a European dress code on the entire population.
All Arabic- or Muslim-sounding surnames had to be changed to Turkic ones.
No European society has experienced so wrenching a process of top-down cultural revolution.
In the West, secularization went hand in hand with the Enlightenment project of democratization and liberalization.
In Turkey – and in a less radical form under the Shah in Iran and under military dictators in countries like Egypt, Tunisia, Syria, and Iraq – the population never had a choice.
The AKP’s electoral victories since 2002 (as well as comparable developments in other Muslim countries) were, in a way, the return of the repressed.
Because the Kemalist system eventually liberalized politically (though not culturally), the emergence of a multiparty system eventually also empowered the traditional conservatives whose preferences had long been denied.
At the same time, economic modernization brought social mobility to the conservatives, which led to the emergence of a new bourgeoisie that clung to its traditional religious values and viewed the Kemalist elite – ensconced in the army, the bureaucracy, the judiciary, and the universities – as oppressors.
These voters formed the basis of the AKP’s electoral victories and democratic legitimacy.
The recent effort by elements of the army – the shield of Kemalist secularism – to overturn the will of the people (as it has done three times in the last half-century) confirms the continuing clash between secularism and democracy in Turkey.
At the same time, Erdoğan’s foreign policy in recent years has been anything but successful.
His initial commitment to “zero conflicts with neighbors” has led, instead, to deteriorating relations with Armenia, Russia, Israel, and Egypt – not to mention significant domestic blowback, including a wave of terrorist attacks, from involvement in Syria’s civil war.
None of this has eroded Erdoğan’s support at home, while the United States and the European Union found themselves supporting him, albeit through clenched teeth, against the latest coup attempt.
This attests to Western powers’ fundamental interest in a stable Turkey, which the EU needs in order to stop further waves of immigrants, mainly from Syria, and which the US needs for its war, limited as it is, against the Islamic State.
It is doubtful that Erdoğan’s pursuit of internal enemies – real and imagined – will prevent either the US or the EU from courting Turkish cooperation.
But Erdoğan’s brutal response to the coup attempt – which may include show trials, in addition to the “cleansing” of public institutions of both remnants of the secularist establishment and his former allies in the Gülen movement – will only deepen the chasms within Turkish society.
Indeed, terrorist attacks have been launched not only by the Islamic State, but also by Kurdish militants, whose demands for autonomy challenge the concept of an indivisible Turkish nation – a cornerstone of the Kemalist state.
Prior to the attempted putsch, Erdoğan made significant moves to reduce tension with Russia and Israel, and both efforts seem unlikely to be derailed by his post-coup crackdown.
Yet Syria’s civil war does not appear to be winding down, and the de facto implosion of Syria as a coherent state will continue to challenge Turkish politics and social cohesion, with more and more refugees trying to cross into Turkey.
Ultimately, Kemalist military-based secularism proved to be unsustainable: its demolition under the AKP enjoys broad support.
But the failed coup is likely to reinforce the illiberal aspects of the democracy emerging under Erdoğan, in which the will of the people and majoritarian rule runs counter to pluralism, human rights, and freedom of speech.
The stability of such a system in Turkey – where, despite popular opposition to the coup, hostility to Erdoğan is strong – remains to be seen.
Erdoğan’s Second Chance
ISTANBUL – The outcome of Turkey’s latest general election – voters have gone to the polls twice in the last five months – reveals important insights into the nature of the country’s democracy and the preferences of its citizens.
The first of Turkey’s two parliamentary elections this year, in June, was widely viewed as a referendum on President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s efforts to strengthen the powers of his office.
The result was clear.
Erdoğan’s Justice and Development Party (AKP) received just 41% of the vote, costing it the majority it had enjoyed since coming to power in 2002.
On November 1, however, after negotiations following the June elections resulted in a hung parliament, Turks voted again, and the outcome could not have been more different.
This time, the election was predominantly perceived as a referendum on the continuation of single-party rule, and the AKP won 49% of the vote, providing it with a comfortable majority.
In the run-up to the latest election, Erdoğan and the AKP emphasized the importance of the party’s parliamentary majority for Turkey’s political stability.
The opposition countered with the argument that a coalition government would counter the country’s deep political polarization, while helping to establish stronger checks and balances.
The promise of stability proved to be the more resonant message.
The political instability following June’s inconclusive election had been compounded by a sharp decline in domestic and regional security.
A renewed campaign of violence by the separatist Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) and attacks by the Islamic State, including suicide bombings in Ankara that killed more than 100 people, created a backdrop that reinforced the AKP’s message.
The outcome of the vote attests to the ineffectiveness of Turkey’s parliamentary opposition, which once again failed to make a dent in the AKP’s popularity, almost as if they had set out to disprove the theory that electorates simply tire of long-serving governments.
Instead the AKP obtained its landslide victory – a major achievement after 13 years of uninterrupted rule – by siphoning voters from its competitors.
The party received nearly five million more votes than it did in June, corresponding to a 20% increase in its popularity.
Two opposition parties, the conservative Nationalist Movement Party (MHP) and the predominantly Kurdish Peoples’ Democratic Party (HDP), together lost three million votes, while the center-left Republican People’s Party (CHP) held its ground, finishing second with 25% of the vote.
Voters punished the nationalist MHP severely for its obstructionism following the June election, when it refused all offers to join a coalition government.
With 12% of the popular vote, compared to 16% in June, the MHP lost almost half of its parliamentary seats.
The HDP was handicapped by its inability to distance itself from the PKK, which a large section of the electorate regards as being responsible for the upsurge in domestic violence.
Indeed, the HDP seemed at risk of failing to obtain the 10% of the vote it would need to enter parliament, an outcome that would have provided the AKP with a majority large enough to amend the constitution on its own.
In the end, HDP ended with 10.75% of the vote, down from 13% in the June elections, preventing Erdoğan from securing the compliant parliament he would need to establish an executive presidency.
Nonetheless, Turkey’s new government has been provided with a broad enough mandate to address some of the country’s most difficult and imminent policy challenges – most notably the peace process with the Kurds.
A previous effort had been suspended ahead of the election, as the PKK returned to violence and the AKP’s leadership adopted increasingly nationalist and hawkish rhetoric.
With the election over, however, there is hope that the new government will restart the negotiations.
If successful, the talks would have a major impact not only domestically, but also on the ongoing fight against the Islamic State.
The AKP’s majority will also enable it to continue to recalibrate the country’s foreign policy.
Turkey’s policies following the Arab Spring had led to a loss of influence and friends in the region; but recently the country has begun to adapt its approach to the realities on the ground.
For example, Turkey has lifted its objections to a role for Syrian President Bashar al-Assad in negotiations to end the civil war in Syria.
Similarly, a new commitment to the struggle against the Islamic State has eliminated a core point of friction with Turkey’s Western partners.
The main trap the new government must avoid is a return to a heavily paternalistic style of governance.
The AKP should take comfort in its large majority and start to view minority views and even peaceful dissent more benignly, in a way that befits a country negotiating accession to the European Union.
The lesson of the two elections is clear: Turkey’s voters want a strong, stable government, but not one that runs roughshod over its opponents.
Erdoğan’s Tragic Choice
CAMBRIDGE – Ever since Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan won his first general election in late 2002, he has been obsessed with the idea that power would be wrested from him through a coup.
He had good reason to worry even then.
Turkey’s ultra-secularist establishment, ensconced in the upper echelons of the judiciary and the military at the time, made no secret of its antipathy toward Erdoğan and his political allies.
Erdoğan himself had been jailed for reciting religion-laced poetry, which prevented him from taking office immediately when his Justice and Development Party (AKP) assumed office in November 2002.
In 2007, the military issued a statement opposing the AKP’s candidate for president – then largely a figurehead.
And in 2008, the party narrowly escaped being shut down by the country’s top court for “anti-secular activities.”
The old guard’s efforts largely backfired and served only to augment Erdoğan’s popularity.
His strengthening grip on power might have mollified him and led to a less confrontational political style.
Instead, in the ensuing years, his then-allies the Gülenists – followers of the cleric-in-exile Fethullah Gülen – managed to whip Erdoğan’s obsession into paranoia.
From 2008 to 2013, Gülenists in the police, judiciary, and media concocted a series of fictitious conspiracies and plots against Erdoğan, each more gory than the last.
They ran sensational show trials targeting military officers, journalists, NGOs, professors, and Kurdish politicians.
Erdoğan may not have believed all of the charges – a military chief with whom he had worked closely was among those jailed – but the prosecutions served their purpose.
They fed Erdoğan’s fear of being toppled, and eliminated the remaining vestiges of the secularist regime from the military and civilian bureaucracy.
The Gülenists had another motive as well.
They were able to place their own sympathizers in the senior ranks vacated by the military officers targeted by their sham trials.
The Gülenists had spent decades infiltrating the military; but the commanding heights had remained out of reach.
This was their opportunity.
The ultimate irony of July’s failed coup is that it was engineered not by Turkey’s secularists, but by the Gülenist officers Erdoğan had allowed to be promoted in their stead.
By the end of 2013, Erdoğan’s alliance with the Gülenists had turned into open warfare.
With the common enemy – the secularist old guard – defeated, there was little to hold the alliance together.
Erdoğan had begun closing Gülenist schools and businesses and purging them from the state bureaucracy.
A major purge of the military was on the way, which apparently prompted Gülenist officers to move pre-emptively.
In any case, the coup attempt has fully validated Erdoğan’s paranoia, which helps explain why the crackdown on Gülenists and other government opponents has been so ruthless and extensive.
In addition to the discharge of nearly 4,000 officers, 85,000 public officials have been dismissed from their jobs since July 15, and 17,000 have been jailed.
Scores of journalists have been detained, including many with no links to the Gülen movement.
Any semblance of the rule of law and due process has disappeared.
A great leader would have responded differently.
The failed putsch created a rare opportunity for national unity.
All political parties, including the Kurdish People’s Democratic Party (HDP), condemned the coup attempt, as did the vast majority of ordinary people, regardless of their political orientation.
Erdoğan could have used the opportunity to rise beyond Islamist, liberal, secularist, and Kurdish identities to establish a new political consensus around democratic norms. He had a chance to become a democratic unifier.
Instead, he has chosen to deepen Turkey’s divisions and erode the rule of law even more.
The dismissal and jailing of opponents has gone far beyond those who may have had a role in the putsch.
Marxist academics, Kurdish journalists, and liberal commentators have been swept up alongside Gülenists.
Erdoğan continues to treat the HDP as a pariah. And, far from contemplating peace with the Kurdish rebels, he seems to relish the resumption of war with them.
Unfortunately, this is a winning strategy.
Keeping the country on high alert against perceived enemies and inflaming nationalist-religious passions serves to keep Erdoğan’s base mobilized.
And it neutralizes the two main opposition parties; both are highly nationalistic and therefore constitute reliable allies in the war against the Kurdish rebels.
Similarly, Erdoğan’s offensive against Gülen and his movement seems driven more by political opportunism than by a desire to bring the coup’s organizers to justice.
Erdoğan and his ministers have endlessly griped about the United States’ reluctance to extradite Gülen to Turkey.
Yet, nearly two months after the coup, Turkey has not formally submitted to the US any evidence of Gülen’s culpability.
Anti-American rhetoric plays well in Turkey, and Erdoğan is not beneath exploiting it.
In his testimony to the prosecutors investigating the coup, the army’s top general has said that the putschists who took him hostage offered to put him in contact that night with Gülen.
This remains the strongest evidence that Gülen himself was directly involved.
A leader intent on convincing the world of Gülen’s culpability would have paraded his military chief in front of the media to elaborate on what happened that night.
Yet the general has not been asked – or allowed – to speak in public, fueling speculation about his own role in the attempted coup.
And so Turkey’s never-ending cycle of victimization – of Islamists, communists, secularists, Kurds perennially, and now the Gülenists – has gained velocity.
Erdoğan is making the same tragic mistake he made in 2009-2010: using his vast popularity to undermine democracy and the rule of law rather than restoring them – and thus rendering moderation and political reconciliation all the more difficult in the future.
Erdoğan has twice had the chance to be a great leader. At considerable cost to his legacy – and even greater cost to Turkey – he spurned it both times.
Manisan Turki untuk Putin
BRUSSELS – Jangan mudah percaya dengan musuh-musuhmu, meski tampak budiman.
Sekeping anjuran yang tepat disampaikan pada Presiden Turki Recep Tayyip Erdoğan seiring upaya untuk merajut kembali hubungan dengan Presiden Rusia Vladimir Putin dan kedekatannya dengan negara-negara Barat.
Pertemuan Erdoğan dan Putin di St. Petersburg bulan ini tampaknya berfokus untuk mencairkan suasana pasca penembakan yang dilakukan Turki terhadap pesawat perang Rusia di dekat perbatasan Suriah tahun lalu.
Tapi Kremlin memandang kunjungan tersebut sebagai peluang meyakinkan Erdoğan untuk “berpaling ke timur” dan bergabung dengan Rusia, serta Cina dan sejumlah negara di  Asia Timur, sebagai bagian dari keluarga autokrasi.
Pertanyaan ialah apakah Erdoğan betul-betul mau meraih tawaran tersebut atau tidak.
Jelas sekali Erdoğan berlakon dengan Putin, menjanjikan persahabatan dan kerja sama.
Dalam perannya, ia mengirimkan pesan kuat kepada sekutu-sekutu Barat – yang selama ini mengkritisi penangkapan ribuan rivalnya, termasuk banyak wartawan, setelah kudeta militer gagal yang terjadi bulan lalu – yang bernada penolakan seperti “Kami tidak membutuhkan kalian”.
Sebaliknya, Putin adalah pemimpin negara pertama yang menyerukan dukungan kepada pemerintahan Erdoğan pasca kudeta, mungkin ini alasan kenapa Rusia adalah tujuan pertama Erdoğan setelah situasinya mereda.
Tentunya Erdoğan juga ingin meraih peluang emas untuk menguatkan keamanan Turki dan kawasan.
Bagaimanapun juga, semua pihak – terutama NATO – enggan melihat perseteruan antar Turki dan Rusia.
Tapi jangan heran kalau Erdoğan punya hasrat membuat sekutu-sekutu NATO merasa gugup.
Dan sesungguhnya ia berhasil.
Setidaknya, Uni Eropa membutuhkan Turki untuk terus membatasi masuknya pengungsi ke daratan Eropa, sesuai kesepakatan pada bulan Maret lalu; indikasi apapun yang menandai sikap berseberangan dengan Eropa menjadi gejala kekhawatiran besar.
Barangkali ini bukan sekadar niat Erdoğan memperbaiki hubungan dengan Putin.
Jika ia betul-betul ingin menata ulang hubungan dengan Rusia, sadar bahwa aksi tersebut bisa mengorbankan hubungan dengan Uni Eropa dan Amerika Serikat, ini akan menyebabkan penyusunan ulang geopolitik secara besar-besaran.
Tapi kemungkinan terjadinya cukup kecil.
Kremlin mempunyai kepentingan kuat atas pemburukan hubungan Turki dengan negara-negara Barat.
Putin cukup lantang menyuarakan penolakannya terhadap kebijakan-kebijakan NATO – terutama perannya di negara-negara yang berbatasan dengan Rusia.
Mengingat rendahnya kepedulian Putin atas hak-hak asasi manusia, supremasi hukum, atau demokrasi, menyaksikan pemimpin UE dan AS saling berselisih dengan Erdoğan akibat penindasan pasca kudeta yang dilakukannya, pasti tampak sebagai momentum sempurna untuk melemahkan NATO.
Alasan lain mengapa Rusia sangat gencar untuk membuka tangan ke Turki adalah konflik berkepanjangan di Suriah, yang mana Kremlin sudah melakukan intervensi militer demi mempertahankan rezim Presiden Suriah Bashar al-Assad.
Putin perlu kemenangan di Suriah – dan pintu keluar.
Itu sebabnya ia ingin bersanding dengan Erdoğan, yang selama ini mensuplai senjata dan memberi dukungan pemberontak Sunni yang terus-menerus diburu angkatan udara Rusia.
Akan tetapi dukungan terhadap poros timur yang diserukan Turki sangat lemah.
Memang benar, Turki memerlukan wisatawan asal Rusia untuk membangkitkan perekonomian yang lesu.
Tapi manfaat ekonomi apapun yang bisa ditawarkan Turki akan kalah dengan manfaat yang diberikan UE – mitra dagang dan bisnis yang penting, berperan vital dalam menggerakkan modernisasi di Turki.
Belum lagi rekam jejak Putih sebagai mitra yang tidak terpercaya. Bagaimanapun juga, meski pemulihan hubungan dengan Rusia dapat menguntungkan Turki, Erdoğan tidak akan sanggup kehilangan hubungan dengan dunia Barat.
Walaupun aksi Erdoğan memasuki orbit Putin bisa dikatakan strategic error, banyak pemimpin lain yang sudah membuat kesalahan sama.
Itu sebabnya beberapa bulan berikutnya adalah periode yang ketat, ketika Turki dan UE mendiskusikan isu-isu panas.
Penindasan pasca kudeta oleh Erdoğan bukan satu-satunya sumber ketegangan Turki dan Barat, terutama UE.
Turki bersikeras bahwa kunjungan bebas visa bagi warga Turki ke UE, yang dijanjikan pimpinan UE bulan Januari lalu, harusnya dilaksanakan tahun ini.
Namun, karena Turki sejauh ini gagal memenuhi syarat-syarat yang ditetapkan, termasuk penyusunan ulang UU anti terorisme, kecil kemungkinan itu akan terwujud – sebuah akibat yang sangat mungkin dipicu oleh upaya kudeta.
Dengan demikian, kesepakatan soal migran yang dihasilkan di bulan Maret dalam kondisi sekarat.
Untuk membangun jalan ke depan, dialog berkesinambungan antar UE dan Turki sangat diperlukan.
Alih-alih membiarkan Erdoğan memanfaatkan hubungannya dengan Putin untuk memanipulasi sekutu-sekutunya di NATO, negara-negara Barat – dan terutama UE – harus mengutuk keras pergeseran Turki menuju autokrasi.
Dunia Barat harus menyadarkan Erdoğan bahwa jalur yang ia ambil justru menjauhkannya dari keanggotaan EU dan dapat merugikan negaranya jika kehilangan hubungan ekonomi yang diandalkan Turki.
Erdoğan harus memutuskan.
Ia punya pilihan untuk memperbarui komitmen negaranya terhadap kerja sama lebih erat dengan UE, mengingat segala kemakmuran yang dapat diperoleh, atau terus menjerumuskan Turki ke masa depan yang diwarnai despotisme dan isolasi, sesekali diisi dengan telepon pemberi semangat dari Kremlin, tapi tidak lebih dari itu.
Dua opsi saja. Demi rakyat Turki, semoga Erdoğan tersadar.
The Ghost of Hirohito
NEW YORK – The completion by Japan’s Imperial Household Agency of the 61-volume record of the life of Emperor Hirohito (1901-1989) has generated much interest and attention in Japan.
The entire formidable work was recently opened to limited public viewing, with a plan to publish it over the next five years.
But it is already clear that the new record inadvertently reflects Japan’s continuing inability to address some fundamental questions about its past.
Having taken a quarter-century to compile, the project relied on some 40 new sources, most notably the diary and notes of Saburo Hyakutake, an admiral who served as Court Chamberlain from 1936 to 1944.
But, while acknowledging the enormous scale of the undertaking, specialists seem to agree that the new account offers no earth-shattering findings or innovative interpretations concerning Hirohito’s many and changing roles in the most tumultuous period of Japan’s modern history.
Perhaps this is not surprising, coming from a conservative imperial institution’s official team of editors.
The record takes to new lengths the idea that the historian’s task, as Leopold von Ranke put it in the nineteenth century, is to show “what actually happened.”
It is said to be an excellent chronicle of the court’s day-to-day goings-on, revealing, for example, that the emperor celebrated Christmas as a boy, that he had nose surgery in his youth, and how often he met with whom.
To be fair, such tidbits can be interesting and useful.
But the new account fails to explain or analyze crucial events of Hirohito’s reign.
Readers will be disappointed if they want to learn more about Japan’s entry into the Pacific War, its defeat, the Allied occupation (especially Hirohito’s relationship with General Douglas MacArthur), or&nbsp;Hirohito’s later reluctance to visit the Yasukuni Shrine, where Imperial Japan’s war dead, including Class-A war criminals, are honored.
What is already known about Hirohito is sketchy.
That he was a tragically conflicted man is not news.
As a young sovereign (imperial regent at age 20; emperor at 25), he had to assume contradictory roles: divine pater familias of the Japanese state and Supreme Commander of the imperial armed forces that were colonizing Japan’s Asian neighbors.
He could not have been the bravest or most decisive man, given that he was unable to resist rising militarism.
But to say that he was powerless (and thus blameless) or did nothing to oppose it would also be wrong.
The conflict between Hirohito’s divine and secular roles became most acute in the autumn of 1941, when Japan’s leaders debated whether to go to war with the United States and its allies.
On September 6, an imperial conference was convened to approve a timetable for war mobilization in the event of a breakdown in US-Japanese diplomatic talks.
As was true of all imperial conferences, Hirohito was expected to remain silent and approve a policy that already had been decided.
Breaking with protocol, however, Hirohito cautioned against giving up on diplomacy too soon, and then recited his grandfather Emperor Meiji’s poem from the beginning of the Russo-Japanese War, in 1904: “Beyond all four seas, all are brothers and sisters/Then why oh why these rough winds and waves?”
Thus, Hirohito might have been seeking to express his view that Japan should avoid a war with the US, especially given that the country had been fighting a savage and unsuccessful war of conquest in China for more than four years.
But, whatever Hirohito’s true intentions (which we cannot know for certain), the larger fact remains that he went along with the war mobilization.
And, while the new official record depicts this well-known episode in some detail, it sheds no new light on how Hirohito understood his own action.
Just as he dithered over going to war with the US, Hirohito was hopelessly ambivalent about how to end it.
The new record reports that Hirohito told his closest adviser, Privy Seal Kōichi Kido, on September 26, 1944: “If one could come to a peace without the question of disarmament or war responsibility, I don’t care [if] our conquered territories [are taken away].”
This is reportedly the first indication in the new account about Hirohito’s desire to end the war.
But, whatever his true desire, his subsequent actions were – once again – not those of a man actively trying to find a path to peace.
For months, he told himself and others that first “Japan must have another brilliant military gain” over the US, so that it would have a modicum of diplomatic clout in negotiating a postwar settlement.
Needless to say, many Japanese and non-Japanese lives were lost during those months of indecision.
Indeed, the very existence of the Japanese nation was endangered, as most cities were bombed, Okinawa was invaded, and atomic bombs were dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
In the end, Japan was disarmed, postwar trials were held, and most of the country’s imperial conquests were reversed.
And yet Hirohito still managed to sidestep the question of his own responsibility in a war that was so obviously fought in his name.
Amid the postwar devastation, he became a symbol of peace.
The most important lesson of the new imperial record, then, might be quite different from what its compilers had intended.
Japan’s notorious collective inability to come to terms with its past is deeply entwined with its inability to understand this emperor.
Admittedly, the new account makes only selective use of primary sources, quite a few of which have not been declassified in their entirety.
It is possible that more revelations will emerge in the future.
But, for now, Hirohito remains a singularly unfathomable and isolated character who defies common understandings – alas, to the detriment of a better understanding of “what actually happened.”
Turkey’s Failed Bureaucratic Coup
ANKARA – Last week, Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan intensified his government’s response to the corruption investigations that have been roiling the country since December, restructuring the leadership of the judiciary and police.
But it would be a mistake to view this as a fight between the executive and the judiciary, or as an attempt to cover up charges that have led to the resignation of three ministers.
What is at issue is the law-enforcement authorities’ independence and impartiality.
Indeed, amid charges of fabricated evidence, Erdoğan now says that he is not opposed to retrials for senior military officers convicted of plotting to overthrow his government.
The recent developments reflect the widening rift between Erdoğan’s government and the Gülen movement, led by Fethullah Gülen, a self-exiled Islamic preacher currently residing near Philadelphia.
The Gülen movement was an important backer of the governing Justice and Development Party (AKP) and its efforts to establish civilian control over the military during the AKP’s first two terms in office.
Now, however, the movement appears to have been plotting a coup of its own.
Many members of the judiciary and the police force associated with the wave of corruption charges brought against government officials, businessmen, and politicians’ family members are connected with the Gülen movement.
What started out as an investigation into alleged graft soon became an opposition-supported smear campaign.
Turkey’s current struggles raise important questions about the appropriate relationship between bureaucrats and elected officials in a pluralist democracy.
Answering them will require a debate that transcends issues like the separation of powers and judicial independence and elucidates the appropriate relationship between politics and religion.
For that, understanding the historical context of the current crisis is crucial.
When Turkey became a democracy in 1950, the previous system’s secular Kemalist elites attempted to harness the power of the military and the bureaucracy to control the elected government.
In fact, the Turkish military, with the judiciary’s support, explicitly intervened in the civilian government’s functioning in 1960, 1971, 1980, and 1997, each time in the name of protecting secularism.
In response, various religious groups, including the Gülen movement, encouraged their followers to take positions in the bureaucracy and the military.
In the 1990’s, military-backed secularist governments struck back, attempting to purge religious bureaucrats and military leaders: those who did not consume alcohol, or whose family members wore headscarves, were immediately suspected.
With the normalization of Turkish democracy following the AKP’s victory in 2002, restrictions on the recruitment, employment, and promotion of religious citizens in the upper echelons of the bureaucracy were eliminated – a process that especially benefited members of the Gülen movement, with its extensive education, media, and business networks.
Gülen followers – who claimed to support liberal democracy and the tolerant, modern form of Islam embraced by the AKP – seemed like natural allies of Erdoğan’s government.
For a decade, Gülen-connected companies played a widely acknowledged – and appreciated – role in Turkey’s economic growth and development, while Gülen-movement schools trained students to pursue public-service jobs.
As long as bureaucrats were recruited and promoted based on merit, the AKP had no problem accepting the over-representation of Gülen followers in certain branches of government.
This acceptance was rooted in the belief that Gülen members would adhere to the fundamental requirement in a pluralist democracy that bureaucrats – whether Muslims in Turkey, Mormons in the United States, or Buddhists in Japan – do not allow their religious convictions to trump their commitment to public service and the rule of law.
What the government did not imagine was that a new vision of bureaucratic tutelage over the civilian government would emerge.
Although Gülen followers have disagreed with several of the government’s policies, they largely backed the AKP in the last three elections.
What drove them to reject the party completely was a policy debate on restructuring “cram schools” – expensive private institutions that prepare high-school seniors for their university entrance examinations.
The Gülen movement operates at least one-quarter of these schools, which form a key component of the movement’s multi-billion-dollar education network and help it recruit new members.
The movement’s members thus viewed the debate over cram schools as a direct challenge to their influence.
But their reaction was disproportionate – not least because the government’s plans were not finalized.
Moreover, the proposal had nothing to do with the Gülen movement; the government was responding to citizens’ complaints about having to pay extravagant fees to prepare their children for free public universities.