Unfortunately, not all are equally interested in open borders and close cooperation: Turkmenistan stands aside and Uzbekistan’s borders remain substantially closed.
Cooperation clearly is not only for the region’s governments; businesses, traders, and civil society must be involved as well.
Yet it will be up to the leadership in the region to overcome obstacles to openness and co-operation.
Market-oriented reforms and good governance are preconditions for effective cross-border ties.
The international community, which has a shared interest in a prosperous, stable, and cohesive Central Asia, can and should play a supporting role in these efforts.
The Promise of Euro-Atlantic Missile Defense
BRUSSELS – The new strategic arms reduction treaty (START) that Russian President Dmitri Medvedev and US President Barack Obama just signed in Prague is an historic achievement, and an inspiration for further progress in global arms control.&nbsp; But at the same time, here and now, we must also prepare to defend against another, less encouraging trend.
The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery is a threat to both the NATO allies and Russia.
A look at current trends shows that more than 30 countries have or are developing missile capabilities.
In many cases, these missiles could eventually threaten Europe’s populations and territories.
Iran is a case in point.
In February 2009, Iran introduced the SAFIR 2 space launch vehicle.
This is a key stage in the development of intermediate- and intercontinental-range missiles. If Iran completes this development, the whole of Europe, as well as all of Russia, would be within its range.
Proliferators must know that the NATO allies are unwavering in their commitment to collective defense, including nuclear deterrence.
Confronted with the spread of missile technology, and unpredictable regimes and leaders, we owe it to our populations to complement our deterrence capabilities with an effective missile-defense capability.
We are not starting from scratch. NATO allies have been looking at various missile-defense options for some time.
NATO itself is developing protections for our deployed troops. But with the new US approach to missile defense, there are now much better opportunities for an effective NATO-wide system that would enhance the territorial defense of our populations and nations.
A true joint Euro-Atlantic missile defense would demonstrate NATO’s collective will, not only to defend against the new threats of today and tomorrow, but also to send a clear message that there is nothing to be gained from missile proliferation.
It can also provide an opportunity for Europeans to demonstrate again to the US their willingness to invest in self-defense capabilities, and to play an active role in a process that, until now, has been conducted largely over their heads, by the US and Russia.
But there is another reason for developing missile defense: to create a new dynamic in European and Euro-Atlantic security.
There is&nbsp;much talk these days about the Euro-Atlantic security architecture. Russia, in particular, has focused on treaties, conferences, and political arrangements.
In this respect, the news that the US and Russia have agreed on a follow-up treaty to START that will substantially cut both countries’ nuclear arsenals provides a good backdrop.
This new agreement makes the world safer, and it will give impetus to cooperation with Russia in other fields, particularly NATO-Russia relations.
Since taking office last summer, I have invested considerable time and effort in revitalizing the NATO-Russia relationship, with progress made in several areas, including a joint review of common threats and challenges.
But it is time to look at missile defense as another opportunity to bring us together.
We need a missile-defense system that includes not just all NATO countries, but Russia, too. The more that missile defense is seen as a shared security roof – built, supported, and operated together – that protects us all, the more people from Vancouver to Vladivostok will know that they are part of one community.
Such a security roof would be a strong political symbol that Russia is fully part of the Euro-Atlantic family, sharing the costs and benefits.
Of course, there are practical challenges.
We would have to make our systems interoperable, share intelligence assessments, and link sensitive technologies.
But such cooperation is a concrete way to build mutual trust and confidence.
For these reasons, the time has come to move forward on missile defense.
We need a decision, by NATO’s next summit in November, that missile defense is an Alliance mission, and that we will explore every opportunity to cooperate with Russia.
But Russia also must decide to view missile defense as an opportunity, rather than a threat.
If that happens, we can move forward to create a missile-defense system that not only defends the Euro-Atlantic community, but that also brings it together.
The end of the Cold War has given us an enormous opportunity to achieve our goal of a Europe whole, free, and at peace.
But, in the United States, unlike in Europe and Asia, discussion of hydrogen energy and fuel cells as systemic, game-changing technologies is largely absent.
That needs to change: these clean, renewable energy sources promise not only zero-emission baseload power, but also a zero-emission fuel for cars and trucks, the biggest polluters of them all.
By now, many have heard about plans by big carmakers – including Honda, Toyota, and Hyundai – to launch hydrogen fuel-cell cars commercially around 2015.
Daimler, Ford, and Nissan plan to launch such cars around 2017.
Germany plans to build at least 50 hydrogen fueling stations by 2015 as the start of a countrywide network.
Japan and Korea have announced similar plans.
But a bigger, largely unreported, message is that some European countries, especially Germany, have launched projects that combine renewables like solar and wind with hydrogen for energy storage, implying clean, zero-emission, stable power grids that require no coal, oil, or nuclear power.
Indeed, the bottom line of a new study by two American researchers, Willett Kempton and Cory Budischak, is that the combination of renewables and hydrogen storage could fully power a large electricity grid by 2030 at costs comparable to those today.
Kempton and Budischak designed a computer model for wind, solar, and storage to meet demand for one-fifth of the US grid.
The latest effort, scheduled to get underway outside Brussels this year, is the delightfully named “Don Quichote” project (“Demonstration of New Qualitative Innovative Concept of Hydrogen Out of wind Turbine Electricity”), designed to highlight utility-scale energy storage and transport, and to provide power for fuel-cell forklift trucks.
The project’s partners are a Belgian grocery chain, the European Commission, and various European organizations and companies.
Canada’s Hydrogenics is providing the electrolyzer and a fuel cell.
Meanwhile, near Berlin, five companies launched a €10 million ($13 million) pilot project at Berlin’s main airport in Schoenefeld in December, expanding and converting an existing hydrogen fueling station to CO2 neutrality by linking it to a nearby wind farm.
Earlier last year, two German utilities, Thüga and E.ON, announced two gas demonstration plants.
And the world’s first renewable energy/hydrogen hybrid power plant, producing both electricity and hydrogen as car fuel, started production in the fall of 2011.
The previous year, German Chancellor Angela Merkel laid the plant’s cornerstone herself, sending a strong signal of her seriousness about Germany’s shift to clean, renewable energy.
Indeed, the much-noted Energiewende, or energy turnaround, that she announced in 2010 is arguably one of the most audacious acts of environmental statesmanship yet.
According to the author and environmentalist Bill McKibben, Germany is in the international forefront of fighting climate change: “The clear alternative and the best news from 2012 came from Germany, the one big country that’s taken climate change seriously....There were days last summer when [Germans] generated more than half the power that they used from solar panels.”
In fact, hydrogen technology will be an integral part of Germany’s evolving renewable/alternative energy-based system.
Germany’s move toward renewable energy is likely to have a much broader positive impact.
A six-article series, “The German Nuclear Exit,” in the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientist argues that the move away from nuclear energy is already “yielding measurable economic and environmental benefits.”
More broadly, Lutz Mez, a political scientist at Berlin’s Free University, argues that the country’s shift has “observably decoupled energy supply from economic growth,” and that the “evolving Energiewende, rather than the nuclear phase-out” implies “continuing reforms of social, economic, technological, and cultural policy in Germany.”
What, one wonders, are lagging nations waiting for?
The Promise of Iraq’s Constitution
The constitutional process now under way in Iraq represents a hopeful milestone for all Iraqis.
After decades of successively imposed constitutions, an elected assembly has overseen the process of drafting a new permanent constitution, and the draft text will be voted on by ordinary Iraqis on October 15.
Much of the current talk about the draft’s various provisions thus misses the point.
Regardless of whether the referendum succeeds or fails, and regardless of the details of the constitutional text, what is most important is the establishment of constitutional processes and institutions in Iraq, before and after the referendum.
Concerning the pre-referendum phase, the National Assembly largely succeeded in this task.
Although Iraq’s interim constitution gave the Assembly exclusive control over the drafting process, the Assembly wisely reached out beyond its membership in creating a constitutional drafting committee.
Iraqi leaders were well aware of the decreased participation in the election by a significant portion of Iraq’s multi-ethnic and multi-confessional mosaic, particularly the Sunni community.
Accordingly, they sought out those who were under-represented in the Assembly, but whose sense of participation in and ownership of the process was essential, not merely to the constitutional exercise, but to binding the nation’s wounds.
This was no mere gesture.
Reaching out was an important component of establishing the rule of law, and it also sent a message that Iraq had truly turned a corner – that no single party sought to dominate Iraq.
This was an important signal that those elected to the National Assembly understood that democracy does not mean merely the will of the majority.
Instead, all Iraqis were allowed to participate in the process, and, though consensus was not ultimately reached, that, too, was a part of the democratization process.
In the end, Iraq’s voters will decide whether this is a constitution under which they wish to be governed for the foreseeable future.
Those who chose not to participate in last January’s elections will most certainly do so now, both in the referendum and in the upcoming elections to a new Assembly in December.
A second important feature of the drafting process was the extent to which the National Assembly complied with the requirements of Iraq’s interim constitution, the Transitional Administrative Law (TAL).
At the time of the transfer of authority in June of 2004, many pundits predicted that an elected National Assembly would ignore an interim constitution drafted by an unelected Governing Council and promulgated by an occupying authority.
Yet that did not happen. 
The TAL set a rigorous schedule for the Assembly to complete an initial constitutional draft, and the Assembly essentially abided by those limits.
The deadline extension that it passed was in keeping with both the spirit and the letter of the TAL.
At long last, it can be said that an Iraqi legislature understood that it was constrained by constitutional principals and the rule of law.
The test for institution building, however, will come once a constitution has been approved and a new government installed.
Regardless of who wins the elections, there will be temptations to tinker with the constitutional text.
Such temptations are understandable, and need not be animated by improper motives.
However, given the little weight given to constitutions in Iraq’s modern history, it is likely that the political class will leave the text alone.
Barring some compelling need, the calculus might well arise that it is more important to abide by the constitution for some time – and to be seen to be abiding by it – than it is even to improve its provisions.
Changes can always be proposed after a decent interval passes.
It goes without saying that it will be essential to establish that governance in Iraq is institutional, not personal.
The American administration was absolutely right to resist the call to turn Iraq over to a caudillo, as some wanted.
Iraq’s salvation from the nightmare that it endured over the previous 35 years lies not in any one man; indeed, reliance on “one man” was the central ingredient in Saddamist rule. 
Here again, Iraq’s immediate past history allows one to be optimistic.
The Iraqi Governing Council was not dominated by any single member, and Iraq’s subsequent governments have also operated collegially.
Giving life to constitutionally defined political institutions is far more important to the course of Iraq’s immediate future than the specific provisions that the constitution contains.
That has been the missing ingredient, not only in Iraq, but also in other countries ruled by despots.
Constitutions frequently enshrine lofty principals, and nobly assure protection of fundamental rights.
The question is whether those guarantees are given meaning on the ground.
If the immediate past is a guide, one has reason for optimism in Iraq.
Janji “Regrexit” (The Promise of Regrexit)
LONDON – Sebelum terjadinya pemungutan suara yang memutuskan Inggris hengkang dari Uni Eropa, krisis pengungsi merupakan permasalahan terbesar yang dihadapi Eropa.
Memang, krisis tersebut berperan besar dalam mengakibatkan bencana Brexit.
Keputusan Brexit – keluarnya Inggris dari UE – sangat mengejutkan; keesokan hari sehabis pemilihan, disintegrasi UE praktis tidak terelakkan.
Hasilnya memacu krisis-krisis lanjutan di negara-negara anggota UE lainnya, terutama Itali, dan menambah ramalan buruk tentang kelangsungan UE.
Namun, seiring dengan berkurangnya keterkejutan akibat referendum Inggris, sesuatu yang tidak terduga tengah terjadi: tragedi tersebut tidak lagi tampak seperti fait accompli.
Banyak pemilih Inggris mulai merasakan “buyer’s remorse” atau penyesalan si pembeli ketika dugaannya menjadi kenyataan.
Nilai tukar poundsterling jatuh.
Isu referendum kedua di Skotlandia semakin menghangat.
Beberapa mantan pemimpin kampanye “Leave” mengalami pergulatan internal yang merongrong kubu mereka dan para pengikutya mulai melihat kegelapan yang akan menimpa dirinya serta negaranya.
Tanda-tanda pergeseran opini publik kini menjadi kampanye yang sudah didukung lebih dari empat juta warga yang menuntut Parlemen untuk menyelenggarakan referendum kedua.
Meskipun Brexit hadir sebagai kejutan negatif, reaksi spontan terhadapnya bersifat positif.
Kedua kubu – terutama mereka yang tidak memilih pada referendum (mayoritas pemuda di bawah 35 tahun) – semakin termobilisasi.
Ini adalah bentuk partisipasi akar rumput yang belum pernah dihasilkan UE.
Kekacauan pasca-referendum memberi gambaran pada rakyat Inggris atas kerugian yang akan mereka alami jika meninggalkan UE.
Jika sentimen semacam ini menyebar ke negara-negara lainnya di Eropa, perpecahan UE yang tidak terelakkan justru bisa menciptakan momentum positif bagi penguatan kawasan.
Proses tersebut bisa bermula di Inggris.
Suara terbanyak tidak bisa diputarbalikkan namun sebuah petisi bisa mengubah lanskap politik dengan menyingkap entusiasme baru untuk keanggotaan UE.
Pendekatan ini bisa direplikasi di seluruh Uni Eropa, menciptakan gerakan menyelamatkan UE melalui restrukturisasi besar-besaran.
Saya yakin bahwa ketika efek Brexit menjadi terang dalam beberapa bulan ke depan, semakin banyak warga akan terdorong untuk ikut dalam gerakan tersebut.
Satu hal yang tidak patut dilakukan UE akan menghukum pemilih Inggris sembari mengabaikan kekhawatiran mereka atas kelemahan Uni Eropa.
Para pemimpin Eropa harus mengakui kesalahan-kesalahan mereka dan mengenali defisit demokrasi pada pengaturan kelembagaan yang berlaku.
Daripada memperlakukan Brexit sebagai perundingan perceraian, lebih baik memanfaatkan peluang ini untuk membangun ulang UE – jadikan UE sebagai lembaga dambaan bagi negara-negara yang terancam hengkang seperti Inggris dan lainnya.
Jika para pemilih yang tidak puas di Perancis, Jerman, Swedia, Italia, Polandia, atau negara lainnya di UE merasakan manfaat dari keanggotaan UE dalam kehidupannya, UE akan bangkit dan menguat.
Namun sebaliknya, kehancuran organisasi ini bisa terjadi lebih cepat sebelum disadari pemimpin dan rakyatnya.
Titik masalah berikutnya adalah Italia, negara yang tengah tertimpa krisis perbankan dan referendum pada bulan Oktober nanti.
Perdana Menteri Matteo Renzi terperangkap dalam sebuah dilema: jika ia gagal menyelesaikan krisis perbankan tepat waktu, ia akan kalah dalam referendum.
Hal itu dapat membesarkan Gerakan Bintang Lima (Five Star Movement), mitra gerakan pro-Brexit besutan Partai Independen asal Inggris di Parlemen Eropa.
Untuk memecahkan masalah tersebut, Matteo Renzi memerlukan pemimpin Eropa namun mereka terlampau lamban dan tidak fleksibel.
Pemimpin-pemimpin Eropa harus mengakui bahwa UE di ambang kehancuran.
Alih-alih saling menyalahkan, mereka harus bekerja sama dan menerapkan upaya-upaya luar biasa.
Pertama, harus ada perbedaan jelas antara keanggotan UE dan Eurozone.
Negara-negara maju yang tidak menjadi anggota Eurozone tidak boleh didiskriminasi.
Jika Eurozone menginginkan integrasi lebih erat, perlu dibentuk kantor urusan perbendaharaan dan anggarannya sendiri, yang berfungsi sebagai otoritas fiskal di samping otoritas moneter yang sudah ada, yakni Bank Sentral Eropa.
Kedua, UE harus memanfaatkan dana pinjaman yang tersedia demi kebaikannya.
Sebuah tindakan yang tidak bertanggung jawab adalah gagal memanfaatkan kapasitas peminjaman UE ketika keutuhannya sedang berisiko.
Ketiga, UE harus memperkuat pertahanan untuk melindungi kawasan dari musuh-musuh eksternal yang rela memanfaatkan kelemahan UE sekarang.
Aset terbesar UE adalah Ukraina, yang mana penduduknya siap mati membela negaranya.
Pertahanan dalam negeri mereka juga berarti pertahanan bagi UE – sesuatu yang jarang di Eropa akhir-akhir ini.
Ukraina beruntung memiliki pemerintah baru yang memiliki tekad kuat dan bersikeras melakukan reformasi yang dirindukan warganya serta pendukung eksternal.
Tapi UE dan negara-negara anggotanya tidak menyediakan dukungan yang layak diterima Ukraina (Amerika Serikat jauh lebih suportif).
Keempat, rencana UE untuk mengatasi krisis pengungsi memerlukan revisi mendalam.
Rencana tersebut dipenuhi dengan miskonsepsi dan inkonsistensi yang membuatnya tidak efektif.
Rencana tersebut juga sayangnya tidak didukung oleh anggaran yang memadai.
Belum lagi upaya-upaya koersif yang menimbulkan resistensi.
Saya mengusulkan solusi mendetail atas permasalahan-permasalahan tersebut dalam tulisan berbeda.
Jika UE melakukan perbaikan-perbaikan di atas, UE bisa menjadi organisasi yang memiliki daya tarik.
Ketika itu terjadi, perubahan traktat – dan integrasi lebih erat – bisa kembali berlangsung.
Apabila pemimpin-pemimpin Eropa gagal bertindak, kelompok yang ingin menyelamatkan UE untuk membangun ulang kesatuannya akan mengikuti jejak aktivis-aktivis muda Inggris.
Sekarang, tanpa ditunda-tunda lagi, pembela UE harus mencari cara membuat pengaruhnya terasa nyata.
The Prophet and the Commissars
MOSCOW – Prophets, it is said, are supposed to be without honor in their homeland.
Yet Moscow has just witnessed the extraordinary sight of Alexander Solzhenitsyn – the dissident and once-exiled author of the Gulag Archipelago and One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich – receiving what amounts to a state funeral, with Prime Minister Vladimir Putin acting as chief mourner.
So, even in death, Alexander Solzhenitsyn will, it seems, remain a force to be reckoned with.
But will he be a force in keeping with the liberating vistas of his greatest works?
Sadly, art in Russia is always used to reinforce the narcissism of power.
Solzhenitsyn was used in this way twice.
The paradox is that, in the Soviet era, his art was used, briefly, as a force for liberation, because Nikita Khrushchev allowed the publication of One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich in order to buttress his anti-Stalin thaw.
In today’s supposedly free and democratic Russia, however, Solzhenitsyn is idealized for his nationalism and Orthodox messianism, his contempt for the West’s supposed decadence, all messages that Putin’s regime proclaims loudly and daily.
The old Soviet iconography has broken down completely; despite heroic efforts, not even Putin could restore Lenin, Stalin, and the old Soviet pantheon.
Yet the Kremlin understands that something is needed to replace them as Russia adapts to its new oil-fueled autocracy.
Solzhenitsyn, one of the most famous and heroic dissidents of the Soviet era, now seems certain to become a towering figure in the iconography of Putinism.
Throughout his presidency, Putin repeatedly invoked Russia as an ancient, powerful, and divinely ordained state going back a thousand years, a civilization separate from the West, neither Communist nor a western liberal democracy.
That message echoes Solzhenitsyn’s famous commencement address at Harvard in 1978: “Any ancient deeply rooted autonomous culture, especially if it is spread on a wide part of the earth’s surface, constitutes an autonomous world, full of riddles and surprises to Western thinking.
For 1,000 years, Russia has belonged to such a category.ampquot;
For Solzhenitsyn, a survivor of the gulag system enforced by the KGB, the desire to see Russia as a great nation, its eternal spirit superior to the West’s vulgar materialism, found him in old age supporting ex-KGB man Putin, who once said that there is no such thing as an ex-KGB man and who sees the Soviet Union’s collapse as the greatest geo-political catastrophe of modern times.
Despite this, Solzhenitsyn seemed to accept Putin as a “good dictator,” whose silencing of his critics enhances Russia’s soul. 
It is a sad testament to Russia’s current mindset that it is Solzhenitsyn the anti-modernist crank who is being remembered, not Solzhenitsyn the towering foe of Soviet barbarism and mendacity.
Today, his writing is seen as buttressing the state, not individual freedom.
Works such as The Red Wheel series of novels, a tedious account of the end of Imperial Russia and the creation of the USSR, or his last book, written in 2001, entitled Two Hundred Years Together on the history of Russian-Jewish coexistence, seem backward, preachy, conservative, unenlightened, at times even anti-Semitic, and smack of Solzhenitsyn’s own grim authoritarianism.
Both Putin and Khrushchev sought to use Solzhenitsyn for their own purposes.
Putin vowed to revive the moral fiber of the Russians, their glory and international respect.
To achieve this goal he sought to restore high culture to a position of primacy in Russian life, and to put mass media in its (politically) subservient place.
Putin held up Solzhenitsyn as a model for those who stand for the ideal of Great Russia – “an example of genuine devotion and selfless serving of the people, fatherland, and the ideals of freedom, justice, and humanism.”
Under Khrushchev, however, Solzhenitsyn’s work was used to liberate the country from the grip of Stalinism.
In choosing to allow One Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich to be published, Khrushchev knew that he was undermining the entire Soviet era up to that point.
But, with Khrushchev’s overthrow in 1964, Leonid Brezhnev lost no time in restoring orthodoxy and purging books that threatened the Party’s reputation.
Solzhenitsyn was banned, driven first underground and then into exile.
Yet Khrushchev, isolated and in disgrace, continued to see a bond between himself and the great author.
As Solzhenitsyn wrote in his memoir The Oak and the Calf : “as late as 1966, he [Khrushchev] sent me New Year’s greetings—which astonished me because I was on the brink of arrest.
Perhaps (in his disgrace) he did not know.”
One lesson of the 1989 revolution in Eastern Europe is the value of having truly democratic-minded figures lead the escape from communism.
Poland had Lech Walesa; Czechoslovakia Václav Havel.
Both kept their countries calm during wrenching transitions.
Russia, sadly, had no one with the moral authority to soothe people’s passions.
Only Solzhenitsyn and Andrei Sakharov came near to Walesa and Havel in terms of moral authority, but Sakharov was dead by the time communism collapsed, and Solzhenitsyn’s ideas were too conservative, too tied to Russian nationalism, for him to become a symbol of democracy in a multi-national Soviet Union.
The tragedy of Solzhenitsyn is that, although he played a mighty role in liberating Russia from totalitarianism, he had nothing to say to ordinary Russians after their liberation, except to chastise them.
Yet perhaps one day we Russians will escape our false dreams, and when that day comes, the heroic Solzhenitsyn, the Solzhenitsyn who could never surrender or be corrupted, will be restored to us.
But it is now that we need that Solzhenitsyn most.
For to paraphrase Milton’s Paradise Lost on the illumination of Hell, “Solzhenitsyn’s is no light, but rather darkness visible.”
What Use Are Economists?
CAMBRIDGE – When the stakes are high, it is no surprise that battling political opponents use whatever support they can garner from economists and other researchers.
That is what happened when conservative American politicians and European Union officials latched on to the work of two Harvard professors – Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff – to justify their support of fiscal austerity.
Reinhart and Rogoff published a paper that appeared to show that public-debt levels above 90% of GDP significantly impede economic growth.
Three economists from the University of Massachusetts at Amherst then did what academics are routinely supposed to do – replicate their colleagues’ work and subject it to criticism.
Along with a relatively minor spreadsheet error, they identified some methodological choices in the original Reinhart/Rogoff work that threw the robustness of their results into question.
Most important, even though debt levels and growth remained negatively correlated, the evidence for a 90% threshold was revealed to be quite weak.
And, as many have argued, the correlation itself could be the result of low growth leading to high indebtedness, rather than the other way around.
Reinhart and Rogoff have strongly contested accusations by many commentators that they were willing, if not willful, participants in a game of political deception.
They have defended their empirical methods and insist that they are not the deficit hawks that their critics portray them to be.
The resulting firestorm has clouded a salutary process of scrutiny and refinement of economic research.
Reinhart and Rogoff quickly acknowledged the Excel mistake they had made.
The dueling analyses clarified the nature of the data, their limitations, and the difference that alternative methods of processing them made to the results.
Ultimately, Reinhart and Rogoff were not that far apart from their critics on either what the evidence showed or what the policy implications were.
So the silver lining in this fracas is that it showed that economics can progress by the rules of science.
No matter how far apart their political views may have been, the two sides shared a common language about what constitutes evidence and – for the most part – a common approach to resolving differences.
The problem lies elsewhere, in the way that economists and their research are used in public debate.
The Reinhart/Rogoff affair was not just an academic quibble.
Because the 90% threshold had become political fodder, its subsequent demolition also gained broader political meaning.
Despite their protests, Reinhart and Rogoff were accused of providing scholarly cover for a set of policies for which there was, in fact, limited supporting evidence.
One clear lesson is that we need better rules of engagement between economic researchers and policymakers.
A solution that will not work is for economists to second-guess how their ideas will be used or misused in public debate and to shade their public statements accordingly.
For example, Reinhart and Rogoff might have downplayed their results – such as they were – in order to prevent them from being misused by deficit hawks.
But few economists are sufficiently well attuned to have a clear idea of how the politics will play out.
Moreover, when economists adjust their message to fit their audience, the result is the opposite of what is intended: they rapidly lose credibility.
Consider what happens in international trade, where such shading of research is established practice.
For fear of empowering the “protectionist barbarians,” trade economists are prone to exaggerate the benefits of trade and downplay its distributional and other costs.
In practice, this often leads to their arguments being captured by interest groups on the other side – global corporations that seek to manipulate trade rules to their own advantage.
As a result, economists are rarely viewed as honest brokers in the public debate about globalization.
But economists should match honesty about what their research says with honesty about the inherently provisional nature of what passes as evidence in their profession.
Economics, unlike the natural sciences, rarely yields cut-and-dried results.
For one thing, all economic reasoning is contextual, with as many conclusions as potential real-world circumstances.
All economic propositions are “if-then” statements.
Accordingly, figuring out which remedy works best in a particular setting is a craft rather than a science.
Second, empirical evidence is rarely reliable enough to settle decisively a controversy characterized by deeply divided opinion.
This is particularly true in macroeconomics, of course, where data are few and open to diverse interpretations.
But even in microeconomics, where it is sometimes possible to generate precise empirical estimates using randomization techniques, the results must be extrapolated in order to be applied in other settings.
New economic evidence serves at best to nudge the views – a little here, a little there – of those inclined to be open-minded.
In the memorable words of the World Bank’s chief economist, Kaushik Basu, “One thing that experts know, and that non-experts do not, is that they know less than non-experts think they do.”
The implications go beyond not over-selling any particular research result.
Journalists, politicians, and the general public have a tendency to attribute greater authority and precision to what economists say than economists should really feel comfortable with.
Unfortunately, economists are rarely humble, especially in public.
There is one other thing that the public should know about economists: It is cleverness, not wisdom, that advances academic economists’ careers.
Professors at the top universities distinguish themselves today not by being right about the real world, but by devising imaginative theoretical twists or developing novel evidence.
If these skills also render them perceptive observers of real societies and provide them with sound judgment, it is hardly by design.
The Public and Its Problems
CHICAGO – On a recent visit to Europe, I found economists, journalists, and business people thoroughly frustrated with their politicians.
Why, they ask, can’t politicians see the abyss that yawns before them, and come together to resolve the euro crisis once and for all?
Even if there is no consensus on what a solution might be, can’t they meet and thrash out a plan that goes beyond their repeated half-measures?
It is only because of the European Central Bank’s bold decision to lend long term to banks that we have seen some respite recently, or so their argument goes.
Politicians, in contrast, are failing Europe by being forever behind the curve.
Why do they find it so hard to lead?
One answer that can be easily dismissed is that politicians simply don’t understand the gravity of the situation.
Political leaders need not be economic geniuses to understand the advice that they hear, and many are both intelligent and well-read.
A second answer – that politicians have short time horizons, owing to electoral cycles – may contain a kernel of truth, but it is inadequate, because the adverse consequences of timid action often become apparent well before they are up for re-election.
The best answer that I have heard comes from Axel Weber, the former president of Germany’s Bundesbank and an astute political observer.
In Weber’s view, policymakers simply do not have the public mandate to get ahead of problems, especially novel ones that seem small initially, but, if unresolved, imply potentially large costs.
If the problem has not been experienced before, the public is not convinced of the potential costs of inaction.
And, if action prevents the problem, the public never experiences the averted calamity, and voters therefore penalize political leaders for the immediate costs that the action entails.
Even if politicians have perfect foresight of the disaster that awaits if nothing is done, they may have little ability to persuade voters, or less insightful party members, that the short-term costs must be paid.
Talk is cheap, and, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, the status quo usually appears comfortable enough.
So leaders’ ability to take corrective action increases only with time, as some of the costs of inaction are experienced.
Calamity can still be averted if the costs of inaction escalate steadily.
The worst problems, however, are those with “inaction costs” that remain invisible for a long time, but increase suddenly and explosively.
By the time the leader has the mandate to act, it may be too late.
A classic example was Winston Churchill’s warnings against Adolf Hitler’s ambitions.
Hitler’s plans were outlined in Mein Kampf for all to read – and he did not disguise them in his speeches.
Yet few in Britain wanted to give them credence, and many thought that communism was the greater threat, especially in the bleak years of the Great Depression.
The Nazis’ dismembering of Czechoslovakia in 1938 made the sincerity of Hitler’s ambitions all too clear.
But it was only after the invasion of Poland the following year that Churchill was appointed First Lord of the Admiralty, and he became Prime Minister only after the invasion of France in 1940, when Britain stood alone.
Britain might well have been better off had Churchill held power earlier, but that would have meant costly rearmament, which was unacceptable so long as there was a chance that Hitler proved to be a paper tiger.
And, of course, it would also have meant entrusting Britain’s fate to a politician who, though now regarded as an indomitable leader, was widely distrusted at the time.
Non-linear costs of inaction are most obvious in the financial sector.
At the same time, financial-sector problems may be particularly difficult to address: if politicians emphasize the need for action too strongly in order to get a mandate, they might precipitate the very turmoil that they seek to contain.
Between the Bear Stearns crisis and the failure of Lehman Brothers, the United States government could do little to get ahead of the growing problem (though, of course, the government-backed mortgage underwriters Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were placed under conservatorship in the interim).
It took the post-Lehman panic for Congress to authorize the Troubled Asset Relief Program, which threw a financial lifeline to banks and the auto industry, among others.
And only frenetic action by the Federal Reserve and Treasury (with authorities around the world joining) prevented a systemic meltdown.
A subprime-mortgage problem that was initially estimated to imply losses of a few hundred billion dollars imposed far higher costs on the entire world.
Similarly, eurozone politicians have obtained a mandate to take bolder action only as the markets have made the costs of inaction more salient.
Even setting aside Germany’s understandable attempt to limit how much it would have to pay, it is difficult to see how politicians could have gotten ahead of the problem.
While the ECB has bought the eurozone some time, the calming effect on markets may be a mixed blessing.
Have Europeans seen enough of the abyss to tolerate stronger action by their leaders?
If not, markets might have to deteriorate further to make possible a comprehensive resolution to the eurozone crisis.
Similarly, with government bond yields as low as they are in the US, the public has little sense of urgency about its fiscal problems, though some doomsayers, like Peter Peterson of the Blackstone Group, have been trying their best to awaken it.
One hopes that the coming US presidential election will lead to a more enlightened public debate about tax and entitlement reform.
Otherwise, a rapid escalation of yields in the bond market might be necessary for the public to accept that there is a problem, and for politicians to have the room to resolve it.
Don’t blame the leaders for appearing short-sighted and indecisive; the fault may lie with us, the public, for not listening to the worrywarts.
Whose Economic Reform?
PARIS – Together with fiscal consolidation, structural reform is the new European mantra.
International organizations and European Union bodies regard such reform as a prerequisite of economic recovery, growth, and alleviation of the unemployment plague.
Indeed, the agreement reached between the Greek government and the “troika” (the International Monetary Fund, the European Central Bank, and the European Commission) includes a 48-page list of detailed reforms.
Not all countries are given such a long to-do list, but, since new EU legislation was adopted in 2010, specific recommendations are addressed to all.
For example, the brief addressed to Italy includes recommendations on the efficiency of public administration, the fight against corruption, corporate governance in the banking sector, the labor market, schools, taxation, opening up the services sector, and infrastructure.
To be sure, European countries urgently need to implement deep reforms.
Poor productivity growth and stubborn unemployment are evidence that their economies require comprehensive transformation.
But if this observation provides the rationale for reform, it does not provide a firm enough basis for drawing up effective economic-revival plans.
The design of a reform strategy requires solving two problems.
The first is one of purpose.
Successful societies are a diverse lot.
Some are unequal, and others are egalitarian.
Some cherish large welfare states, and others starve them.
Some rely on extensive collective agreements, and others exclude them altogether.
Some are based on arm’s-length transactions, and others rely on recurring relationships.
Scholars refer to “varieties of capitalism” to highlight the absence of a single template for success.
But if there are different models, what should the priorities for reform be?
International organizations generally point out – rightly – that in most cases a country can improve economic efficiency without changing its economic model.
For example, there is often ample room for achieving the same income redistribution at lower budgetary cost, or for ensuring that collective wage agreements take into account the interests of those without a job.
So national models can be reformed while retaining arrangements that meet social preferences.
This answer, however, is somewhat facile.
So pro-growth reform not only requires substituting efficient arrangements for inefficient ones; it also demands confronting hard choices, which is, at bottom, a political endeavor.
For this reason, it is not something that any international organization can even suggest in lieu of a country’s voters.
The second problem in designing structural reform is one of strategy.
As the economist Dani Rodrik has pointed out, standard analysis generally results in a laundry list of desirable reforms that does not tell governments where to begin.
Apprehensive leaders start with the most politically expedient items, while bold leaders start with the most challenging prescriptions; but there is no guarantee that either of these approaches will deliver the expected result.
Even a seemingly rational strategy of correcting the largest inefficiencies first is not necessarily the appropriate one.
One reason is that the effectiveness of reform may depend on conditions prevailing in other sectors: good universities, for example, cannot remedy the consequences of poor secondary education.
Moreover, eliminating one distortion may be ineffective or even counterproductive: in an economy plagued with rents, partial reform may simply result in shifting them across sectors and agents, rather than reducing them to the benefit of consumers.
As a result, considerable political energy may be consumed in pushing through measures that deliver very little.
Instead, reform should start with the most binding constraint to performance (which one that is depends on the whole set of hindrances that confront the economy).
In addition, outcomes may depend on cyclical conditions.
Advocates of structural reform generally claim that they aim to increase output and welfare in the medium term, and that the short term does not matter.
But, while some reforms – for example, those improving access to credit or eliminating rents that harm consumers – can indeed help to boost growth during a demand shortfall like the one that Europe is now experiencing, others can have the opposite effect.
For example, labor-market reforms that make it easier for companies to reduce staff may weaken demand further, underscoring the importance of considering reforms’ short-term effects.
What all of this suggests is that an economic-reform agenda cannot result from a mechanical exercise.
At some point, hard choices about priorities and sequencing must be made.
This is not to say that international organizations and the EU are of no help.
On the contrary, these bodies can be very valuable insofar as they carry out international comparisons and point out deficiencies.
But there is a line in the sand beyond which only governments can set priorities and act.
That, after all, is what voters elect them to do.
The Quality of Mercy
PRINCETON – The recent release of Abdel Basset Ali al-Megrahi, the only person convicted of blowing up Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, in 1988, sparked outrage.
Around the same time, the Philadelphia Eagles, an American football team, offered a second chance to former star Michael Vick, who was convicted of running a dog-fighting operation in which unsuccessful fighters were tortured and killed.
And William Calley, who commanded the platoon that massacred hundreds of Vietnamese civilians at the village of My Lai in 1968, has now broken his media silence and apologized for his actions. 
When should we forgive or show mercy to wrongdoers?
Many societies treat crimes involving cruelty to animals far too lightly, but Vick’s penalty – 23 months in prison – was substantial.
In addition to imprisonment, he missed two years of his playing career, and millions of dollars in earnings.
If Vick were never to play football again, he would suffer punishment well beyond that imposed by the court.
Vick has expressed remorse.
Perhaps more importantly, he has turned words into deeds, volunteering at an animal shelter and working with the Humane Society of the United States to oppose dog fighting.
It is hard to see what good would come from not allowing him to complete his rehabilitation and return to doing what he does best.
Megrahi was convicted of murdering 270 people, and sentenced to life imprisonment.
He had served only seven years when Kenny MacAskill, the Scottish Justice Minister, released him on compassionate grounds, based on a medical report that Megrahi has terminal cancer, and only three months to live.
The question of remorse has not arisen, because Megrahi has never admitted guilt, and did not drop an appeal against his conviction until just before his release.
Doubts have been raised about whether Megrahi is really near death.
Only the prison doctor, it seems, was prepared to say that he did not have more than three months to live, while four specialists refused to say how long he might have.
There has also been speculation that Megrahi’s release was related to negotiations over oil contracts between Britain and Libya.
Finally, some question whether Megrahi really was the perpetrator of the crime, and this may have played a role in MacAskill’s decision (although, if so, that would have been better left to the courts to resolve).
But let us leave such questions aside for the moment.
Assuming that Megrahi was guilty, and that he was released because he has only a short time to live, does a prisoner’s terminal illness justify compassionate release?
The answer might depend on the nature of the crime, the length of the sentence, and the proportion of it that remains to be served.
For a pickpocket who has served half of a two-year sentence, it would be excessively harsh to insist on the sentence being served in full if that meant that he would die in prison, rather than with his family.
But to release a man who served only seven years of a life sentence for mass murder is a very different matter.
As the victims’ relatives point out, in planning his crime, Megrahi showed no compassion. Why, they ask, should we show compassion to him?
MacAskill, in a statement to the Scottish Parliament defending his decision, refrained from quoting from the best-known speech on mercy in the English language – that of Portia in Shakespeare’s The Merchant of Venice – but Portia’s words would have fitted the core of his statement.
Portia acknowledges that Shylock is under no obligation to show mercy to Antonio, who is in breach of his agreement to him.
“The quality of mercy is not strained” – that is, constrained, or obligatory – she tells Shylock, but rather something that falls freely, like rain.
MacAskill acknowledged that Megrahi himself showed no compassion, but rightly points out that this alone is not a reason to deny him compassion in his final days.
He then appeals to the values of humanity, compassion, and mercy as “the beliefs we seek to live by” and frames his decision as being true to Scottish values.
We can reasonably disagree with MacAskill’s decision, but we should acknowledge that – unless there is more going on than appears on the surface – he was motivated by some of the finest values we are capable of exercising.
And, if we believe that Megrahi was not sufficiently punished for his crime, what are we to make of the treatment of former Lieutenant William Calley?
In 1971, Calley was convicted of the murder of “no less than 22 Vietnamese civilians of undetermined age and sex.”
He was also convicted of assault with intent to murder a Vietnamese child.
Yet three days – yes, days – after his conviction, President Richard Nixon ordered that he be released from prison and allowed to serve his sentence in a comfortable two-bedroom house.
There he lived with a female companion and a staff to assist him.
After three years, he was released even from this form of detention.
Calley always claimed that he was following orders.
Captain Ernest Medina, his commanding officer, ordered him to burn the village down and pollute its wells, but there is no clear evidence that the order included killing non-combatants – and of course if such an order were issued, it should not have been obeyed.
(Medina was acquitted of murder.)
After decades of refusing to speak publicly, Calley, who is now 66, recently said that “not a day goes by” when he does not feel remorse “for what happened that day in My Lai.”
One wonders if the relatives of those murdered at My Lai are more ready to forgive Calley than the relatives of those killed at Lockerbie are to forgive Megrahi.
The Quest for Investment
The Hong Kong meeting of the Doha Round of trade negotiations has left a palpable sense of frustration in the developing world over the slow pace of agricultural liberalization agreed to by the rich countries.
It may thus appear naive and counterproductive to raise the bar and suggest that we need to go beyond trade and move investment to the top of our priority list.
Yet can any “development round” worthy of its name ignore this challenge?
It had originally been intended that the Doha Round would address investment, but the developing countries chose to downgrade the issue and concentrate on agriculture instead.
This tactic has proven to be a two-edged sword.
In China, Brazil, Malaysia, and Mexico, foreign direct investment (FDI) accounts for 8% to 12% of gross fixed capital formation – without generating debt.
Although the least developed countries attract less than 3% of north-south investments, these flows account for more than 3% of their GDP, a level higher than the average for developing countries.
In hopes of stimulating FDI, bilateral agreements have multiplied, but they rarely lead to balanced commitments.
Competition among countries to attract investors is intense, and only a few, such as China or India, are able to negotiate on equal terms with the industrialized world.
The developing countries, therefore, have an interest in calling for multilateral dialogue on investment conditions in order to obtain certain collective guarantees.
Indeed, without returning to the illusion of economic planning, these countries need to be able to set conditions for foreign investors that aim to maximize the local impact on employment, technological diffusion, strategic partnerships, and so forth.
At the same time, developing countries may need to promote local private sectors and “infant industries” through temporary protectionist measures, which would help them to upgrade their output on the road to liberalization.
There is nothing heretical about such proposals.
After all, the developed countries have done much the same thing.
In the nineteenth century, the United States restricted foreign investment in several sectors, including finance.
Today, both the US and the European Union keep a close watch on international acquisitions. The emerging countries of Asia similarly depart from the pure liberal model.
Even Ireland, the champion of economic liberalization, has now turned to a more selective approach.
Refusal to recognize the legitimacy of such strategies caused the collapse of the Multilateral Agreement on Investment in 1998, after three years of negotiations between the OECD countries.
The project was perceived – rightly so – as amounting to a surrender of sovereignty, because it introduced a rigid principle of non-discrimination between foreign and local companies that would eliminate the host country’s room for maneuver without offering anything in return.
Such a prospect would be even less acceptable to developing countries.
Under what conditions can one reasonably hope to restart a multilateral agreement on investment?
To be viable, such an agreement must recognize the legitimate need for some regulation. It would also need to help poor countries cope with the quasi-generalization of “social and environmental responsibility” standards that are increasingly shaping corporate practices and consumer demand.
It should incorporate an investor code of ethics, as well as a formula for sharing the costs of implementing such standards among the state, foreign operators, and local sub-contractors.
Of course, imposing the same investment conditions in all countries could take away the incentive to invest in the least attractive of them.
But an agreement could be reached to establish categories of countries, the most important aim being to prevent dumping between countries that are at the same stage of development.
To succeed, a multilateral negotiation would also need to address the expectations of foreign operators, who want assurances that their investments are safe.
An agreement should contain provisions to improve the business environment – its transparency and predictability – by setting a framework for state intervention without stripping government of its prerogatives.
This would reduce the probability of crises while putting in place mechanisms for cost-sharing should they occur.
No multilateral investment agreement will be able to address all of the institutional problems and market failures that prevent capital from flowing to developing countries.
Some economists point to imperfect information, which precludes companies from considering the higher returns on investment available in the developing world.
If this view is correct, an agreement could create new instruments for disseminating information, while signaling poor countries’ commitment to welcoming FDI.
Other analysts point to the increasing returns that accompany greater concentration of investment – a force that works to the disadvantage of poor countries.
At the very least, a multilateral negotiation would provide an occasion to recognize the existence of the problem, reflect on how best to coordinate investments, and help move development assistance accordingly.
Despite the complexity involved and the need for technical assistance to the weakest nations in the negotiation, a multilateral investment agreement should be among the top priorities on the international agenda.
Indeed, whereas agricultural trade issues put rich and poor countries’ national interests on a collision course, promoting investment flows to the developing world could unify all countries around a shared objective.
The Questions of Europe
In the weeks since France and the Netherlands rejected the European Union’s proposed Constitutional Treaty, the EU’s leaders have been busy pointing fingers at each other or blaming French and Dutch citizens for misunderstanding the question they were asked.
But no pan-European statesman has emerged, and no major European institution has even had the courage to provide its own analysis of the current situation, much less propose a strategic scenario for the future.
To be sure, French and Dutch citizens did not respond to the question that they were supposed to answer.
Their vote was a protest against globalization, a rejection of the contemporary world, with its distant and incomprehensible governing mechanisms.
Like the anti-globalization movement, the new anti-Europeanism can be regarded as a demand for a different European model – an “alter-Europeanism.”
The issue, therefore, is not what Tony Blair, in his inaugural speech to the European Parliament, called a crisis of leadership.
No statesman has emerged because the crisis runs deeper.
The two world wars and the Cold War shaped European integration as a project of peace, a defense of the West’s fundamental values, and common economic prosperity.
This phase culminated with the collapse of communism in 1989, but the chance to overcome the Continent’s historical divisions now required a redefinition of the European project.
The treaties of Maastricht (1992) and Amsterdam (1997) created a new organizational structure for the EU and laid the foundations for political institutions equal to Europe’s economic power.
When politicians debated the EU’s future, they spoke of “finality” – the end formula of European integration, as defined in a famous lecture by German Foreign Minister Joschka Fischer in 2000.
The accompanying intellectual debate, inaugurated by the philosophers Jürgen Habermas and Jacques Derrida, defined the nature of European identity, above all, against the foil of the United States, but also in terms of the challenges posed by globalization.
That debate must continue, even if the French and Dutch referenda appear to have killed the Constitutional Treaty.
The EU will continue to be governed under the Nice Treaty of 2000, but this leaves no room for further political integration (or enlargement), nor does it ensure the effective functioning of the Union’s institutions.
Drafting a new constitutional treaty would probably require even more time than was needed for the current proposal, and it is also unlikely that the necessary changes could be introduced through an intergovernmental conference.
The only viable course, then, is to use today’s “pause for reflection” to revive the existing Constitutional Treaty.
This would require prolonging the ratification deadline until 2008.
It also requires specifying a common date for ratification (through simultaneous referenda or parliamentary votes) for all countries that have not yet done so, including France and the Netherlands.
In other words, the current “pause for reflection” is not the time to change the draft’s text (although the intergovernmental conference could move the third part, which harmonizes the earlier treaties, to an annex).
Rather, the task is to alter the political and socio-psychological context of the ratification process by addressing key questions.
First, how should relations between national and common European interests be defined?
At issue is not only the allocation of competencies, but also the more fundamental matter of when to rely on intergovernmental institutions and when to turn to the European people as a whole.
The European Council, which represents member states in the structures of the Union, could be given a more public character.
It could then be seen, in a bicameral system, as a kind of “Chamber of Nations” within the framework of what Jacques Delors called a “federation of nation states.”
The second question concerns the EU’s scope.
Europe is a peculiar combination of geography and history, but the boundaries of the EU – and thus the prospects for its further enlargement – are determined by its absorptive capacity and the adaptive abilities of candidate countries.
Is enlargement the only effective policy of stabilization and peace?
Or can the “neighborhood policy” become an instrument for supporting development and stabilization, much as the Marshall Plan once was for Western Europe?
Third, instead of futile opposition between “liberal” and “social” models of economic development, we need a confrontation of the experiences of Great Britain and Sweden, on the one hand, and Germany and France, on the other.
Are these experiences mutually exclusive, or is convergence possible?
What policies reduce unemployment?
Which measures can ensure the EU’s global competitiveness?
How can we narrow the existing differences in development and material welfare within Europe?
Fourth, the EU’s aspiration for a common foreign and security policy must be addressed.
The threats facing the world today are supranational, so counteracting them must be supranational, too.
But this is impossible without a clear European identity – and thus a common interest to be asserted and defended.
In the aftermath of the French and Dutch referenda, the European Commission and the European Parliament have sketched plans for a Europe-wide debate on these issues.
But such a debate also demands an organizational framework to engage European civil society, national parliaments, and pan-European mass media.
Democracy carries certain costs, but they are always lower than the costs of evading popular participation.
Only a new European debate that embodies the common action of European citizens and institutions can combat “alter-Europeanism” effectively.
The time may not have come for a true European constitution, but confronting, rather than evading, the fundamental issues that the EU faces could create the proper context for reviving the constitutional treaty and preparing the Union for the challenges of our time.
The Rape of Freedom in Burma
Gender-based sexual violence obstructs peace and development, particularly when it is a weapon used by military dictatorships against their own peoples.
Burma is now permeated by such state-sponsored violence.
Systematic sexual violence became visible in Burma when the Shan Women’s Action Network (SWAN) and the Shan Human Rights Foundation (SHRF) published Licence to Rape , which documents 625 cases of rape committed by the military in eastern Burma between 1996 and 2001. The report noted that nobody had been prosecuted.
Burma is suffering the impact of decades of civil war.
Civilians have become the main victims of a strategy aimed at undermining the guerrillas, which has resulted in forced labor, the use of human minesweepers, and massive relocations of entire villages.
There are now an estimated 600,000 to one million internal refugees.
SWAN and SHRF argue that rape is used as a weapon in the Burmese military’s war against ethnic minorities.
Women and girls are particularly vulnerable ­– owing to gender as well as ethnicity – to a horrific practice whose aim is to demonstrate the army’s power and punish those who confront it.
When the army enters a village, chaos erupts.
Villagers are killed or ordered to pack their belongings and leave.
Several of the reported rapes took place under such conditions, or when women are taken for forced labor.
Many victims have fled Burma.
SWAN and SHRF learned of many cases from women who arrived in Thailand.
In February 2006, we visited a refugee camp on the Thai-Burma border and learned first hand of war and abuse.
Licence to Rape has attracted wide attention in Southeast Asia.
Kraisak Choonhavan, Chairman of the Thai Senate’s Foreign Relations Committee and Vice Chairperson of the ASEAN Inter-Parliamentary Myanmar Caucus (AIPMC), called for an investigation by the United Nations.
So did the UN General Assembly and the UN Human Rights Commission.
Rape brings stigma, shame, and reluctance on the part of victims to speak out about what happened to them.
But an increasing number of women and girls from Burma have begun to tell of their experiences of rape and other forms of sexual violence in the country’s war-torn areas.
Army deserters confirm that rapes have occurred.
And the UN Special Rapporteur on violence against women has published material that corroborates information in Licence to Rape and adds numerous new cases from Burma.
Nevertheless, four years on, a UN investigation has yet to take place, because the military junta refuses to grant the UN access to the country.
Incidents of rape continue to be reported, and the Burmese military surely must know what is happening.
But the junta engages in Orwellian doublethink.
It has rejected the reports, instead launching its own investigations whose conduct and staffing leave no room for confidence in their credibility.
National governments and the international community have an obligation to protect women and children against abuse.
In 2000, the UN Security Council recognized that gender-based violence thwarts security and adopted Resolution 1325, which calls on parties in conflict to respect the rights of women and children, and particularly to prevent gender-based violence.
In 2004, the governments of ASEAN vowed to end the impunity states like Burma have enjoyed and signed the Declaration to Eliminate Violence Against Women in the ASEAN Region.
Burma is failing miserably to live up to the standards of decency that the Southeast Asian region is setting for itself.
It has ratified the UN Convention to Eliminate Discrimination Against Women and the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Moreover, a national committee exists for the advancement of women. But such measures are of no use when the military remains firmly in control, the rule of law is absent, and the government refuses to admit to the systematic sexual violence committed by its soldiers as they terrorize the population.
ASEAN cannot afford to stand by idly. Neither can the international community.
Such abuse of power is inadmissible, and we expect ASEAN to address the military’s use of rape in the conflict in Burma.
We urge the UN Security Council to raise the issue.
All of Burma’s people deserve security, and refugee women and girls who have experienced gender-based violence need the world’s solidarity and support.
Whose Central Bank?
BERKELEY – Broadly speaking, for at least 115 years (and possibly longer) – that is, at least since the publication of the Swedish economist Knut Wicksell’s Geldzins und Güterpreis (Interest and Prices) in 1898 – economists have split into two camps with respect to what a central bank is and the purposes it should serve.
One camp, call it the Banking Camp, regards a central bank as a bank for bankers.
Its clients are the banks; it is a place where banks can go to borrow money when they really need to; and its functions are to support the banking sector so that banks can make their proper profits as they go about their proper business.
Above all, the central bank must ensure that the money supply is large enough that mere illiquidity, rather than insolvency, does not force banks into bankruptcy and liquidation.
The other camp, call it the Macroeconomic Camp, views central banks as stewards of the economy as a whole.
A central bank’s job is to uphold in practice Say’s Law – the principle that output is balanced by demand, with neither too little demand to purchase what is produced (which would cause unemployment) nor too much (which would cause inflation) – because Say’s Law certainly does not hold in theory.
In other words, a central bank’s primary responsibility is not to preserve the health of the firms that make up the banking sector, but rather to maintain the robust functioning of the economy as a whole.
In the United States, from September 15, 2008 – the day that the investment bank Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy – until then-US Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner announced in May 2009 that in his judgment the major US banks either had or could quickly raise adequate capital cushions, the two camps’ interests and conclusions were identical.
For both, reducing the imbalance between aggregate supply and aggregate demand required, first and foremost, preserving the banking system; and preserving the banking system required boosting aggregate demand to bring it closer to aggregate supply.
There was a lot of bank rescue in economic stimulus; and there was a lot of economic stimulus in rescuing banks.
Thereafter, the two camps’ interests and conclusions diverged sharply.
A prolonged and sustained central-bank policy of keeping short-term Treasury nominal interest rates low is essential to keeping the many interest rate-sensitive components of aggregate demand from falling even further below potential aggregate supply.
But, for investment banks, shadow banks, and especially commercial banks (with their expensive networks of branches and ATMs), such a policy makes it very difficult to report regular and healthy operating profits on their quarterly income statements and regular and healthy gains in their clients’ portfolios.
A prolonged and sustained central bank policy of purchasing ever-increasing quantities of long-term assets is essential to encourage a wary financial sector to use some of its risk-bearing capacity for its proper purpose: reducing the risk burden on entrepreneurship and enterprise.
But such a policy diminishes, and may even eliminate, financiers’ ability to take the easy route by riding the duration yield curve for profits.
From the standpoint of balancing aggregate demand and potential aggregate supply, the central bank should start by simply issuing a straightforward statement that, five years after the crisis began, a 0-2% target for annual inflation clearly runs unwarranted downside employment risks, and a 2-4% target is called for.
But, while such an announcement is an obvious no-brainer for those in the Macroeconomic Camp, it would make all bankers who hold nominal assets or who think in nominal terms physically ill.
In terms of the US public interest – and that of the world – it is very important that whoever President Barack Obama nominates to succeed Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke when his term expires at the beginning of 2014 is from the Macroeconomic Camp.
The world does not need a bankers’ central banker any more today than it did five years ago.
The Real Danger of Global Warming
PRAGUE – I am surprised at how so many people nowadays in Europe, the United States, and elsewhere have come to support policies underpinned by hysteria over global warming, particularly cap-and-trade legislation to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and subsidies for “green” energy sources.
I am convinced that this is a misguided strategy – not only because of the uncertainty about the dangers that global warming might pose, but also because of the certainty of the damage that these proposed policies aimed at mitigation will impose.
I was invited to address this issue at a recent conference in Santa Barbara, California.
My audience included business leaders who hope to profit from cap-and-trade policies and from subsidies for renewable energy and “green” jobs.
My advice to them was to not get caught up in the hysteria.
Europe is several years ahead of the US in implementing policies intended to mitigate global warming.
All of the European Union’s member countries have ratified the Kyoto Protocol and adopted a wide range of policies to lower their emissions and meet their Kyoto targets.
These policies include a cap-and-trade initiative known as the Emissions Trading Scheme, steep fuel taxes, and ambitious programs to build windmills and other renewable energy projects.
These policies were undertaken at a time when the EU economy was doing well and – one hopes – with full knowledge that they would have significant costs.
With the global financial crisis and the sudden economic downturn, two things are becoming clear.