There is something unsettling about the global power elite jetting into an exclusive Swiss ski resort and telling the rest of the world to stop using fossil fuels.
The apocalyptic bombast is even more disturbing.
According to Angel Gurría, Secretary-General of the OECD, “our planet is warming dangerously,” and we need to act now “to avoid catastrophe”; the United Nations climate chief, Christiana Figueres, maintains that global warming means that “the world economy is at risk.”
Former UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan takes the prize for the most extreme rhetoric, claiming that not curbing global warming is “a terrible gamble with the future of the planet and with life itself.”
Yet, the rhetoric is unconvincing.
Yes, global warming is real and man-made.
But creating panic and proposing unrealistic policies will not help in tackling the problem.
Both Annan and Gurría cited Typhoon Haiyan in the Philippines last November as evidence of increased climate-change-related damage.
Never mind that the latest report by the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) found that “current datasets indicate no significant observed trends in global tropical cyclone frequency over the past century” and reported “low confidence” that any changes in hurricanes in recent (or future) decades had anything to do with global warming.
Annan and Gurría also neglected to note that global Accumulated Cyclone Energy, an index for total hurricane activity, is hovering at the lowest values seen since the 1970’s.
Indeed, the trend for strong hurricanes around the Philippines has declined since 1951.
Similarly, Gurría tells us that Hurricane Sandy, which slammed into New York City in 2012, is an example of inaction on climate change, costing the United States “the equivalent of 0.5% of its GDP” each year.
In fact, the US currently is experiencing the longest absence of intense landfall hurricanes since records began in 1900, while the adjusted damage cost for the US during this period, including Hurricane Sandy, has fallen slightly.
Figueres claims “that current annual losses worldwide due to extreme weather and disasters could be a staggering 12% of annual global GDP.”
But the study she cites shows only a possible loss of 1-12% of GDP in the future, and this is estimated not globally but within just eight carefully selected, climate-vulnerable regions or cities.
By contrast, according to the IPCC, “long-term trends in economic disaster losses adjusted for wealth and population increases have not been attributed to climate change.”
On the contrary, the bulk of peer-reviewed economic evidence indicates that, up to around 2050-2070, the net global economic impact of rising temperatures is likely to be positive.
Although global warming will create costs stemming from more heat-related deaths and water stress, they will be outweighed by the benefits from many fewer cold-related deaths and higher agricultural productivity from higher levels of CO2.
Global warming is a long-term problem.
Most models indicate that the cost toward the end of the century will be 1-5% of world GDP.
This is not a trivial loss; but nor does it put “the world economy at risk.”
For comparison, the IPCC expects that by the end of the century, the average person in the developing world will be 1,400-1,800% richer than today.
Such incorrect statements by leading officials reinforce wasteful policies based on wishful thinking.
Figueres sees “momentum growing toward” climate policies as countries like China “reduce coal use.”
In the real world, China accounts for almost 60% of the global increase in coal consumption from 2012 to 2014, according to the International Energy Agency.
While Figueres lauds China for dramatically increasing its solar-power capacity in 2013, the increase in China’s reliance on coal power was 27 times greater.
Figueres’s weak grasp on the facts has led her not only to conclude that China is “doing it right” on climate change, but also to speculate that China has succeeded because its “political system avoids some of the legislative hurdles seen in countries including the US.”
In other words, the UN’s top climate official seems to be suggesting that an authoritarian political system is better for the planet.
The fact remains that global wind and solar power usage in 2012 cut, at most, 275 million tons of CO2, while soaking up $60 billion in subsidies.
With the electricity worth possibly $10 billion, the average cost of cutting a ton of CO2 is about $180.
The biggest peer-reviewed estimate of the damage cost of CO2 is about $5 per ton.
This means that solar and wind power avoid about $0.03 of climate damage for every dollar spent.
Compare this to smarter technological solutions.
In the short run, the US shale-energy revolution has replaced high-polluting coal with cheaper, cleaner natural gas.
This has cut about 300 million tons of US emissions – more than all the world’s solar and wind power combined – and at the same time has profited Americans by saving them $100 billion in energy costs.
In the long run, current investment in green research and development will help drive the price of future renewable energy below that of fossil fuels, enabling a choice that is both environmentally and economically sound.
In the meantime, even dramatic cuts in CO2 emissions will have very little impact on hurricanes 50-100 years from now.
Lifting billions of people out of poverty, however, would not only be intrinsically good; it would also make societies much more resilient in the face of extreme weather, whether caused by global warming or not.
Unfortunately, as we saw at Davos, the global climate debate is polluted with myths and wishful thinking.
If we want to do more good at lower cost, we should start by cleaning it up.
The Environment of Poverty
COPENHAGEN – Despite gains in life expectancy, expanded access to education, and lower rates of poverty and hunger, the world has a long way to go to improve the quality of people’s lives.
Almost a billion people still go to bed hungry, 1.2 billion live in extreme poverty, 2.6 billion lack access to clean drinking water and sanitation, and almost three billion burn harmful materials inside their homes to keep warm.
Each year, ten million people die from infectious diseases like malaria, HIV, and tuberculosis, along with pneumonia and diarrhea.
Lack of water and sanitation is estimated to cause at least 300,000 deaths each year.
Malnourishment claims at least 1.4 million children’s lives.
Poverty is one of the main killers.
It is why children do not receive proper nutrition and live in neighborhoods with unclean water and inadequate sanitation.
And it is why an entirely preventable disease like malaria kills 600,000 people each year; many are too poor to buy drugs and bed nets, while governments are often too poor to eradicate the mosquitos that carry the disease or contain and treat outbreaks when they occurs.
But some of the most lethal problems are environmental.
According to the World Health Organization, about seven million deaths each year are caused by air pollution, with the majority a result of burning twigs and dung inside.
Previous generations’ use of lead in paints and gasoline is estimated to cause almost 700,000 deaths annually. Ground-level ozone pollution kills more than 150,000 people per year, while global warming causes another 141,000 deaths.
Naturally occurring radioactive radon that builds up inside homes kills about 100,000 people every year.
Here, too, poverty plays a disproportionate role.
No one lights a fire every night inside their house for fun; they do so because they lack the electricity needed to stay warm and to cook.
While outdoor air pollution is partly caused by incipient industrialization, this represents a temporary tradeoff for the poor – escaping hunger, infectious disease, and indoor air pollution to be better able to afford food, health care, and education.
When countries become sufficiently rich, they can afford cleaner technology and begin to enact environmental legislation to reduce outdoor air pollution, as we now see in Mexico City and Santiago, Chile.
One of the best anti-poverty tools is trade.
China has lifted 680 million people out of poverty over the past three decades through a strategy of rapid integration into the global economy.
Extending free trade, especially for agriculture, throughout the developing world is likely the single most important anti-poverty measure that policymakers could implement this decade.
But it is also encouraging that the world is spending more money to help the world’s poor, with development aid almost doubling in real terms over the past 15 years.
This has boosted resources to help people suffering from malaria, HIV, malnutrition, and diarrhea.
And, though the data are somewhat inconsistent, it is clear that the world is spending more on the environment.
Aid for environmental projects has increased from about 5% of measured bilateral aid in 1980 to almost 30% today, bringing the annual total to about $25 billion.
That sounds great.
The world can increasingly focus aid on the main environmental problems – indoor and outdoor air pollution, along with lead and ozone pollution – that cause almost all environment-related deaths.
Unfortunately, that is not happening.
Almost all environmental aid – about $21.5 billion, according to the OECD – is spent on climate change.
There is no doubt that global warming is a problem that we should tackle smartly (though our track record so far has not been encouraging).
But doing so requires cheap green energy, especially in the developed world, not spending aid money to reduce developing countries’ emissions of greenhouse gases like CO₂.
Indeed, there is something fundamentally immoral about the way we set our priorities.
The OECD estimates that the world spends at least $11 billion of total development money just to cut greenhouse-gas emissions.
A large part of this is through renewable power like wind, hydro, and solar.
For example, Japan recently granted $300 million of its development aid to subsidize solar and wind power in India.
If all $11 billion were spent on solar and wind in the same proportion as current global spending, global CO₂ emissions would fall by about 50 million tons each year.
Run on a standard climate model, this would reduce temperatures so trivially – about 0.00002oC in the year 2100 – that it is the equivalent of postponing global warming by the end of the century by a bit more than seven hours.
Of course, climate campaigners might point out that the solar panels and wind turbines will give electricity – albeit intermittently – to about 22 million people.
But if that same money were used for gas electrification, we could lift almost 100 million people out of darkness and poverty.
Moreover, that $11 billion could be used to address even more pressing issues.
Calculations from the Copenhagen Consensus show that it could save almost three million lives each year if directed toward preventing malaria and tuberculosis, and increasing childhood immunization.
It could also be used to increase agricultural productivity, saving 200 million from starvation in the long run, while ameliorating natural disasters through early-warning systems.
And there would be money left over to help develop an HIV vaccine, deliver drugs to treat heart attacks, provide a Hepatitis B vaccine to the developing world, and prevent 31 million children from starving each year.
Is it really better to postpone global warming by seven hours?
Even if we continue spending $11 billion to avoid an increase in greenhouse gases for a hundred years, we would postpone global warming by less than one month by the end of the century – an achievement with no practical impact for anyone on the planet.
Why does the world consciously choose to help so ineffectively?
Could it be that environmental aid is not primarily about helping the world, but about making us feel better about ourselves?
Winds of Vanity
COPENHAGEN – Copenhagen, Denmark’s capital, wants to be the world’s first CO2-neutral city by 2025.
But, as many other well-meaning cities and countries have discovered, cutting CO2 significantly is more difficult than it seems, and may require quite a bit of creative accounting.
More surprisingly, Copenhagen’s politicians have confidently declared that cutting CO2 now will ultimately make the city and its citizens wealthier, with today’s expensive green-energy investments more than paying off when fossil-fuel prices rise.
But how can deliberately limiting one’s options improve one’s prospects?
These sound more like the arguments of green campaigners – and they are most likely wrong.
The first challenge that Copenhagen faces in reaching its zero-emissions goal is the lack of cost-effective alternatives for some sources of CO2, particularly automobiles.
Denmark already provides the world’s largest subsidy to electric cars by exempting them from its marginal 180% car-registration tax.
For the most popular electric car, the Nissan Leaf, this exemption is worth $85,000 (€63,000).
Yet, just 1,536 of Denmark’s 2.7 million cars are electric.
There is also the challenge inherent in wind-generated electricity: ensuring that the city can continue to run when the wind is not blowing.
To address this problem, Copenhagen has had to devise an electricity-generation strategy that enables it sometimes to run on coal-fired power when necessary, without creating net emissions.
The city’s plan is to build more than 100 wind turbines within the greater Copenhagen area and in the shallow waters around it.
With a combined output of 360 megawatts, which will feed electricity into the grid, these turbines will more than cover Copenhagen’s electricity needs – and the surplus can be used to offset the city’s remaining CO2 emissions, including from the city’s millions of non-electric cars.
Copenhagen’s success thus depends on the surrounding areas not aiming for CO2 neutrality.
After all, the whole accounting exercise works only if others are still using fossil fuels that Copenhagen’s unpredictable wind power can replace.
In this sense, Copenhagen is hogging the chance to feel righteous.
The city’s political leaders promise that this strategy for attaining carbon neutrality “provides an overall positive economic picture and will lead to economic benefits for Copenhageners” based on the expectation that prices for conventional energy sources like coal, oil, and gas will rise in the coming years.
But the often-heard justification for this assumption – that humanity is rapidly depleting these scarce resources – is inconsistent with real-world events, as innovation has effectively expanded oil, gas, and coal reserves to unprecedented levels in recent years.
Consider Copenhagen’s wind-turbine plan, the single largest expected source of savings.
It is likely that these projections are unrealistic.
Look at the long-term price trends of coal and gas, which power the vast majority of global electricity production.
Despite a recent increase, real coal prices have been trending downward since the 1950s.
In the United States, the shale-gas revolution, facilitated by the development of hydraulic fracturing (“fracking”), has brought prices to their lowest levels since natural gas gained prominence after the oil crises of the 1970s.
With many more countries set to tap shale-gas reserves over the next decade, this downward trend will most likely continue, helping to lower the price of electricity generation further.
That is why Aurora Energy Research recently projected a significant decline in electricity prices for the next three decades.
Fracking technology has also enabled the US to tap its large shale-oil reserves, making it the world’s largest petroleum producer, ahead of Saudi Arabia.
Citigroup estimates that, by 2020, oil will cost just $75 per barrel, and the former head of international forecasting at the OECD suggests that the number could be closer to $50.
This is inconvenient for climate mandarins in the UK and Copenhagen alike, because it reduces clean energy’s allure.
Even if fossil-fuel-powered electricity prices remain constant, Copenhagen’s wind turbines become a net drain.
If Aurora’s forecast proves correct, Copenhagen’s wind project would become a massive failure, costing 50% more than the saved electricity is worth.
Instead of allowing politicians to spend public money on feel-good climate projects based on distant – and unreliable – predictions, citizens should encourage their leaders to invest those funds in clean-energy research and development, with the goal of making renewables inexpensive enough to overcome fossil fuels in the market.
Initiatives like Copenhagen’s, however wonderful they sound, are ultimately little more than costly vanity projects.
The Climate-Policy Trap
ROME – Today’s policies to combat climate change cost much more than the benefits they produce.
Unfortunately, bad political choices often make these policies even less cost-effective.
Consider the European Union’s 20-20 policy, which targets a 20% reduction in CO2 emissions below 1990 levels by 2020.
It is important to examine this approach, not only because the EU is pursuing the world’s largest and most ambitious climate policy, but also because other climate policies suffer from similar shortcomings.
The most cost-efficient way to achieve the 20% target would be to operate a single, EU-wide carbon-market, which would cost the EU about $96 billion annually by 2020.
But the benefits to the entire world would be much lower.
Indeed, the only peer-reviewed overview of EU climate policy estimates that it can avoid climate-related damage of about $10 billion per year.
So, for every dollar spent, the EU stands to avoid about ten cents of damage.
This does not mean that climate change is not important; it means only that the EU’s climate policy is not smart.
Over the course of this century, the ideal EU policy would cost more than $7 trillion, yet it would reduce the temperature rise by just 0.05oC and lower sea levels by a trivial nine millimeters.
After spending all that money, we would not even be able to tell the difference.
Advocates of the EU’s policy often argue that we should pursue such policies nonetheless, because there is a risk that global warming will be much more severe than currently expected.
But, though this argument is valid in principle, economic models show that this risk has only a moderate effect on the best policy.
Moreover, the absence of any temperature rise over the past 10-17 years has made such worse-than-expected outcomes extremely unlikely.
The real risk concerns the potential for bad political choices to make climate policies worse than necessary.
The EU did not just implement a single carbon market in order to meet its target for CO2 emissions.
Instead, the EU made a bad deal a lot costlier through a host of partly contradictory policies.
For example, the EU demanded that renewables like wind and solar account for 20% of energy supplies by 2020, though this is by no means the cheapest way to cut emissions.
In fact, putting up a wind turbine cuts no extra CO2, because total emissions are already capped under the EU-wide carbon-trading scheme.
It simply means that when Great Britain installs a wind turbine, it becomes cheaper to burn coal in Portugal or Poland.
Taking into account such poor policies and averaging all macroeconomic models, the EU is more likely to pay around $280 billion per year to avert $10 billion in damage.
In other words, the poor design of EU climate policies triples the cost and prevents only three cents of climate damage per dollar spent.
But it gets worse, because these models still assume that the EU picks the cheapest renewables to fulfill its requirements.
Instead, most EU countries give higher subsidies to the most costly renewables.
For example, cutting a ton of CO2 with on-shore wind turbines in Germany probably costs about $35, avoiding about 14 cents of climate damage per dollar.
But offshore wind turbines cost about $150 per ton of CO2, avoiding just three cents of climate damage per dollar.
Biofuels are even less efficient, costing more than $300 per ton of CO2 avoided, while doing just over one cent of good per dollar.
And solar takes the absolute prize, costing more than $800 per ton of CO2 to do less than a cent of good per dollar spent.
These prices are not unique to Europe.
China pays $38 per ton of CO2 avoided with wind power, for example, while the US pays around $600 for cutting a ton of CO2 with biofuels.
Moreover, when the EU decides to cut its domestic emissions, part of the reduction simply migrates elsewhere.
If making a product in the EU costs more because of higher energy costs, the product will likely be made somewhere else, where energy is cheaper, and then imported into the EU.
In fact, new studies show that 38% of the EU carbon cuts leak elsewhere, meaning that European climate policy avoids not three cents of climate damage per dollar spent, but less than two.
From 1990 to 2008, the EU cut its emissions by about 270 million metric tons of CO2.
But it turns out that the increase in imports from China alone implied an almost equal volume of extra emissions outside the EU.
Essentially, the EU had simply shipped part of its emissions offshore.
Finally, the negative effects of poor climate policies are not just financial.
Biofuels, for which the EU alone is now paying more than $10 billion annually to do less than one cent of good for every dollar spent, also take up fields that otherwise would have produced food.
That means that food production moves elsewhere, often to farmland created by cutting down forests, which releases more CO2 and damages biodiversity.
It also drives up food prices, which so far has pushed at least 30 million poor people into starvation, with another 40-130 million expected to be starving by 2020.
We need a smarter approach to tackling climate change.
Rather than relying on cutting a few tons of incredibly overpriced CO2 now, we need to invest in research and development aimed at innovating down the cost of green energy in the long run, so that everyone will switch.
For now, our current climate policies are poor – and our politicians consistently find ways to make them even poorer.
They may please farmers and other interest groups, but overall they simply drive up costs and reduce already-minimal benefits.
A Better World Is Here
COPENHAGEN – For centuries, optimists and pessimists have argued over the state of the world.
Pessimists see a world where more people means less food, where rising demand for resources means depletion and war, and, in recent decades, where boosting production capacity means more pollution and global warming.
One of the current generation of pessimists’ sacred texts, The Limits to Growth, influences the environmental movement to this day.
The optimists, by contrast, cheerfully claim that everything – human health, living standards, environmental quality, and so on – is getting better.
Their opponents think of them as &nbsp;“cornucopian” economists, placing their faith in the market to fix any and all problems.
But, rather than picking facts and stories to fit some grand narrative of decline or progress, we should try to compare across all areas of human existence to see if the world really is doing better or worse.
Together with 21 of the world’s top economists, I have tried to do just that, developing a scorecard spanning 150 years.
Across ten areas – including health, education, war, gender, air pollution, climate change, and biodiversity – the economists all answered the same question: What was the relative cost of this problem in every year since 1900, all the way to 2013, with predictions to 2050.
Using classic economic valuations of everything from lost lives, bad health, and illiteracy to wetlands destruction and increased hurricane damage from global warming, the economists show how much each problem costs.
To estimate the magnitude of the problem, it is compared to the total resources available to fix it.
This gives us the problem’s size as a share of GDP.
And the trends since 1900 are sometimes surprising.
Consider gender inequality.
Essentially, we were excluding almost half the world’s population from production.
In 1900, only 15% of the global workforce was female.
What is the loss from lower female workforce participation?
Even taking into account that someone has to do unpaid housework and the increased costs of female education, the loss was at least 17% of global GDP in 1900.
Today, with higher female participation and lower wage differentials, the loss is 7% – and projected to fall to 4% by 2050.
It will probably come as a big surprise that climate change is expected to be mostly an increasing net benefit – rising to about 1.5% of GDP per year – in the period from 1900 to 2025.
This is because global warming has mixed effects; for moderate warming, the benefits prevail.
On one hand, because CO2 works as a fertilizer, higher levels have been a boon for agriculture, which comprises the biggest positive impact, at 0.8% of GDP.
Likewise, moderate warming prevents more cold deaths than the number of extra heat deaths that it causes.
Yet, to put matters in perspective, the scorecard also shows us that the world’s biggest environmental problem by far is indoor air pollution.
Today, indoor pollution from cooking and heating with bad fuels kills more than three million people annually, or the equivalent of a loss of 3% of global GDP.
But in 1900, the cost was 19% of GDP, and it is expected to drop to 1% of GDP by 2050.
Health indicators worldwide have shown some of the largest improvements.
Human life expectancy barely changed before the late eighteenth century.
Yet it is difficult to overstate the magnitude of the gain since 1900: in that year, life expectancy worldwide was 32 years, compared to 69 now (and a projection of 76 years in 2050).
The biggest factor was the fall in infant mortality.
For example, even as late as 1970, only around 5% of infants were vaccinated against measles, tetanus, whooping cough, diphtheria, and polio.
By 2000, it was 85%, saving about three million lives annually – more, each year, than world peace would have saved in the twentieth century.
This success has many parents.
The Gates Foundation and the GAVI Alliance have spent more than $2.5 billion and promised another $10 billion for vaccines.
Efforts by the Rotary Club, the World Health Organization, and many others have reduced polio by 99% worldwide since 1979.
In economic terms, the cost of poor health at the outset of the twentieth century was an astounding 32% of global GDP.
Today, it is down to about 11%, and by 2050 it will be half that.
While the optimists are not entirely right (loss of biodiversity in the twentieth century probably cost about 1% of GDP per year, with some places losing much more), the overall picture is clear.
Most of the topics in the scorecard show improvements of 5-20% of GDP.
And the overall trend is even clearer.
Global problems have declined dramatically relative to the resources available to tackle them.
Of course, this does not mean that there are no more problems.
Although much smaller, problems in health, education, malnutrition, air pollution, gender inequality, and trade remain large.
But realists should now embrace the view that the world is doing much better.
Moreover, the scorecard shows us where the substantial challenges remain for a better 2050.
We should guide our future attention not on the basis of the scariest stories or loudest pressure groups, but on objective assessments of where we can do the most good.
The Trouble with Universal Education
COPENHAGEN – With the deadline for the United Nations Millennium Development Goals fast approaching, the world is gearing up to establish a new set of goals for the next 15 years.
Given limited resources, policymakers and international organizations must ask themselves: Where can we do the most good?
Should a larger share of the $2.5 trillion that will be directed toward development aid over that period, and of developing-country budgets, be directed toward health, the environment, food, water, or education?
With these questions in mind, the Copenhagen Consensus (which I direct) asked some of the world’s top economists to assess the economic, social, and environmental costs and benefits of many different targets.
Education for all was among the goals that were assessed.
The importance of education is indisputable.
The problem is that the international community’s credibility in promising universal education has been compromised; it has pledged to achieve this goal in at least 12 UN-sponsored declarations since 1950.
For example, UNESCO promised in 1961 that, by 1980, primary education in Africa would be “universal, compulsory, and free.”
Yet, when the time came, about half of primary-school-aged children in Africa were still not attending school.
When target dates pass, the goals are simply reformulated on a new timeline, and more money is thrown at the problem, with little consideration of how, exactly, it should be spent.
And, in fact, the goal of ensuring primary and secondary education for all could well end up costing more than the entire global aid budget for education.
With 60 million children still out of school, the international community should not simply postpone the same universal-education target until 2030.
Instead, it is time to abandon this unrealistic goal in favor of an achievable, targeted, and cost-effective approach.
As the economist George Psacharopoulos recommended in a recent paper, the highest priority should be what works best: early education, especially preschool.
The most obvious reasons why earlier education makes for a better starting point is that people are most receptive to knowledge when they are young.
Moreover, at younger ages, there are fewer cultural barriers to education for girls, and there is less pressure for children to contribute labor.
Finally, preschool education is less expensive to deliver than higher-level schooling.
The longer-term effects of early learning are less apparent but more profound.
Though students who attended preschool do not perform better than their peers in primary school, they do tend to earn more as adults.
This suggests that preschool provides a qualitative boost to children’s social skills or emotional development that enables them to take better advantage of economic opportunity later in life.
Of course, the precise return on investment in expanded preschool education is difficult to discern.
But, in order to prioritize development targets – within and outside of the realm of education – estimates must be made.
First, there is the straightforward work of adding up the costs of education, such as teacher training and compensation, school construction and maintenance, and even the opportunity cost of child labor.
Then there is the more ambiguous process of assessing the benefits, which, though difficult to quantify, are convincing enough that many economists champion early education.
Based on the most extensive data available, Psacharopoulos determined that the most effective target would be to halve the proportion of children who are not attending preschool in Sub-Saharan Africa, which would yield social and economic benefits of $33 per dollar spent.
This goal, which focuses on a single challenge-plagued region, may seem modest; but it is also realistic and achievable – and the potential returns are massive.
As targets become more ambitious, they lose their impact.
For example, the pursuit of universal primary education in Sub-Saharan Africa would yield a lower, but still significant, $7 of social and economic benefit for every dollar spent.
And efforts to achieve universal primary education worldwide would cost far more, with each dollar spent bringing just $4 worth of benefits.
The same type of comparison must be made for other important goals, such as improving the quality of education – a surprisingly difficult objective to achieve, as many developed countries have learned from their poor performance in the OECD’s international assessment.
While money allocated to, say, reducing class sizes has very little impact, investment in institutional changes – such as the introduction of monitoring and evaluation systems, centrally administered examinations, and incentives for teachers – could result in $3-5 of good per dollar spent.
As for vocational training, the jury is still out.
But it has been identified as less profitable than general secondary education, making it an inferior investment option.
Efforts to make university affordable for all are even more problematic.
Given that children from wealthier households are more likely to pursue higher education, directing limited public resources, including tax revenues, toward reducing its cost amounts to a subsidy for the wealthy, at the expense of the poor.
A better approach would be to introduce tuition fees for the wealthy and scholarships for the poor.
Maximizing the impact of scarce resources on the lives of the world’s poorest people demands tough choices.
In an ideal world, universal, high-quality education at all levels would be worth pursuing.
But, amid competing demands for basic necessities like health care and potable water, narrower, more cost-effective education targets are essential.
Instead of aiming to improve billions of people’s circumstances slightly – at high cost – with the same promises that have been made since 1950, the international community should aim first to transform the lives of millions of children in Sub-Saharan Africa.
This approach, if applied to all of the goals included in the international community’s next development agenda, would ensure that the world of 2030 is a much better place.
The Poverty of Renewables
MIAMI – According to UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, “Climate change harms the poor first and worst.”
This is true, because the poor are the most vulnerable and have the least resources with which to adapt.
But we often forget that current policies to address global warming make energy much more costly, and that this harms the world’s poor much more.
Solar and wind power was subsidized by $60 billion in 2012. This means that the world spent $60 billion more on energy than was needed.
And, because the total climate benefit was a paltry $1.4 billion, the subsidies essentially wasted $58.6 billion.
Biofuels were subsidized by another $19 billion, with essentially no climate benefit.
All of that money could have been used to improve health care, hire more teachers, build better roads, or lower taxes.
Forcing everyone to buy more expensive, less reliable energy pushes up costs throughout the economy, leaving less for other public goods.
The average of macroeconomic models indicates that the total cost of the EU’s climate policy will be €209 billion ($280 billion) per year from 2020 until the end of the century.
The burden of these policies falls overwhelmingly on the world’s poor, because the rich can easily pay more for their energy.
I am often taken aback by well-meaning and economically comfortable environmentalists who cavalierly suggest that gasoline prices should be doubled or electricity exclusively sourced from high-cost green sources.
That may go over well in affluent Hunterdon County, New Jersey, where residents reportedly spend just 2% of their income on gasoline.
But the poorest 30% of the US population spend almost 17% of their after-tax income on gasoline.
Similarly, environmentalists boast that households in the United Kingdom have reduced their electricity consumption by almost 10% since 2005.
But they neglect to mention that this reflects a 50% increase in electricity prices, mostly to pay for an increase in the share of renewables from 1.8% to 4.6%.
The poor, no surprise, have reduced their consumption by much more than 10%, whereas the rich have not reduced theirs at all.
Over the past five years, heating a UK home has become 63% more expensive, while real wages have declined.
Some 17% of households are now energy poor – that is, they have to spend more than 10% of their income on energy; and, because elderly people are typically poorer, about a quarter of their households are energy poor.
Deprived pensioners burn old books to keep warm, because they are cheaper than coal, they ride on heated buses all day, and a third leave part of their homes cold.
In Germany, where green subsidies will cost €23.6 billion this year, household electricity prices have increased by 80% since 2000, causing 6.9 million households to live in energy poverty.
Wealthy homeowners in Bavaria can feel good about their inefficient solar panels, receiving lavish subsidies essentially paid by poor tenants in the Ruhr, who cannot afford their own solar panels but still have to pay higher electricity costs.
The list goes on.
In Greece, where tax hikes on oil have driven up heating costs by 48%, more and more Athenians are cutting down park trees, causing air pollution from wood burning to triple.
But climate policies carry an even larger cost in the developing world, where three billion people lack access to cheap and plentiful energy, perpetuating their poverty.
They cook and keep warm by burning twigs and dung, producing indoor air pollution that causes 3.5 million deaths per year – by far the world’s biggest environmental problem.
Access to electricity could solve that problem, while allowing families to read at night, own a refrigerator to keep food from spoiling, or use a computer to connect with the world.
It would also allow businesses to produce more competitively, creating jobs and economic growth.
Consider Pakistan and South Africa, where a dearth of generating capacity means recurrent blackouts that wreak havoc on businesses and cost jobs.
Yet the funding of new coal-fired power plants in both countries has been widely opposed by well-meaning Westerners and governments.
Instead, they suggest renewables as the solution.
But this is hypocritical.
The rich world gets just 1.2% of its energy from hugely expensive solar and wind technologies, and we would never accept having power only when the wind was blowing.
Over the next two years, Germany will build ten new coal-fired power plants to keep the lights on.
In 1971, 40% of China’s energy came from renewables.
Since then, it has powered its explosive economic growth almost exclusively with highly polluting coal, lifting 680 million people out of poverty.
Today, China gets a trifling 0.23% of its energy from wind and solar.
By contrast, Africa gets 50% of its energy today from renewables – and remains poor.
A new analysis from the Center for Global Development quantifies our disregard of the world’s poor.
Investing in renewables, we can pull one person out of poverty for about $500.
But, using gas electrification, we could pull more than four people out of poverty for the same amount.
By focusing on our climate concerns, we deliberately choose to leave more than three out of four people in darkness and poverty.
Addressing global warming effectively requires long-term innovation that makes green energy affordable to all.
Until then, wasting enormous sums of money at the expense of the world’s poor is no solution at all.
Global Warming’s Upside-Down Narrative
NEW YORK – When politicians around the world tell the story of global warming, they cast it as humanity’s greatest challenge.
But they also promise that it is a challenge that they can meet at low cost, while improving the world in countless other ways.
We now know that is nonsense.
Political heavyweights from US Secretary of State John Kerry to UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon call climate change “the greatest challenge of our generation.”
If we fail to address it, Kerry says, the costs will be “catastrophic.”
Indeed, this has been the standard assertion of politicians since the so-called Stern Review commissioned by the British government in 2006.
That report famously valued the damage caused by global warming at 5-20% of GDP – a major disruption “on a scale similar to those associated with the great wars and the economic depression of the first half of the twentieth century.”
Tackling climate change, we are told, would carry a much lower cost.
The president of the European Commission promised that while the European Union’s climate policies are “not cost-free,” they would amount to just 0.5% of GDP.
Indeed, politicians of all stripes have reiterated the Stern Review’s finding that global warming can be curtailed by policies costing just 1% of world GDP.
Climate policies, moreover, are said to help in many other ways.
US President Barack Obama promised that policies to combat global warming would create five million new green jobs.
The EU claimed that green energy would help “improve the EU’s security of energy supply.”
With the completion of the latest report by the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), we can now see that this narrative is mostly wrong.
The first installment of the IPCC report showed that there is indeed a climate problem – emissions of greenhouse gases, especially CO₂, lead to higher temperatures, which will eventually become a net problem for the world.
This result was highly publicized.
But the report also showed that global warming has dramatically slowed or entirely stopped in the last decade and a half.
Almost all climate models are running far too hot, meaning that the real challenge of global warming has been exaggerated.
Germany and other governments called for the reference to the slowdown to be deleted.
The second IPCC installment showed that the temperature rise that we are expected to see sometime around 2055-2080 will create a net cost of 0.2-2% of GDP – the equivalent of less than one year of recession.
So, while the IPCC clearly establishes that global warming is a problem, the cost is obviously much less than that of the twentieth century’s two world wars and the Great Depression.
Again, not surprisingly, politicians tried to have this finding deleted.
British officials found the peer-reviewed estimate “completely meaningless,” and, along with Belgium, Norway, Japan, and the US, wanted it rewritten or stricken.
One academic speculated that governments possibly felt “a little embarrassed” that their previous exaggerated claims would be undercut by the UN.
The third installment of the IPCC report showed that strong climate policies would be more expensive than claimed as well – costing upwards of 4% of GDP in 2030, 6% in 2050, and 11% by 2100.
And the real cost will likely be much higher, because these numbers assume smart policies, instantly enacted, with key technologies magically available.
Again, politicians tried to delete or change references to these high costs.
British officials explained that they wanted such cost estimates cut because they “would give a boost to those who doubt action is needed.”
Green jobs have been created only with heavy subsidies, costing a similar number of jobs elsewhere.
Indeed, each extra job created cost more than $11 million in the US.
And facile claims that renewable sources can boost energy security look a lot less convincing after the crisis in Ukraine; Europe now understands that only large and stable energy supplies matter.
Climate change has been portrayed as a huge catastrophe costing as much as 20% of world GDP, though brave politicians could counter it at a cost of just 1% of GDP.
The reality is just the opposite: We now know that the damage cost will be perhaps 2% of world GDP, whereas climate policies can end up costing more than 11% of GDP.
What makes this story all the more amazing is that experts have known almost all of these facts for a long time.
The Stern Review was produced by bureaucrats and never subjected to peer review.
Economists knew that the damage costs had been extensively massaged, and that the estimates were outliers compared to the academic literature.
The unfathomably low projections for policy costs were artifacts of ignoring most liabilities, again contradicting the academic literature.
The media, eager for breathless headlines, share the blame with politicians for this state of affairs.
Following the release of the Stern Review, one British newspaper reportedly wrote: “Act now or the world we know will be lost forever.”
Being accurate is less sexy, but much more informative.
We live in a world where one in six deaths are caused by easily curable infectious diseases; one in eight deaths stem from air pollution, mostly from cooking indoors with dung and twigs; and billions of people live in abject poverty, with no electricity and little food.
We ought never to have entertained the notion that the world’s greatest challenge could be to reduce temperature rises in our generation by a fraction of a degree.
The solution is to stop applauding politicians who warn of catastrophe and promote poor policies.
Instead of subsidizing inefficient solar and wind power with little benefit, we need to invest in long-term green innovation.
And we need to give more attention to all of the other problems.
This is perhaps less entertaining, but it will do much more good.
The Economics of Violence
COPENHAGEN – What is the biggest source of violence in our world?
With the brutal conflicts in Syria, Ukraine, and elsewhere constantly in the news, many people would probably say war.
But that turns out to be spectacularly wrong.
Getting it right matters if we are to find cost-effective solutions to this and other global problems.
Obviously, everyone would like to stop wars and violence, just as we would like to end poverty, hunger, and global warming, while providing education to all.
But, given limited resources, the international community can only do so much.
We have to prioritize, which is what an economic analysis of costs and benefits can do.
The international community is working on new development goals for the next 15 years, and the Copenhagen Consensus has asked some of the world’s leading economists to give their assessment of the smartest targets they can choose.
Is reducing violence a goal worthy of resources that would otherwise be spent on, say, reducing hunger?
And, if so, which forms of violence should be targeted?
A study by James Fearon of Stanford University and Anke Hoeffler of Oxford University’s Center for the Study of African Economies argues that societal violence – homicides and especially violence against women and children – is a much bigger problem than civil wars.
Nine people are killed in interpersonal violence for every battlefield death in a civil war, and one child is killed for every two combatants who die.
In 2008, there were 418,000 homicides around the world, with far too many countries recording a murder rate of more than 10 per 100,000, which the World Health Organization regards as an epidemic.
A single homicide in America costs the individual and society $9.1 million.
If we scale this by national income across the world, this single category of violent crime costs 1.7% of global GDP.
Of course, this is not a direct financial loss to the global economy, but a way of expressing the impact.
If murders could be eliminated, societies around the world would be better off in ways that can be valued at 1.7% of GDP.
Compare this to the much lower cost of civil wars, which are equivalent to about 0.2% of global GDP.
But this is still much less than the biggest source of violence of all: violence against women in the home.
Based on studies published in Science, 28% of all women in Sub-Saharan Africa reported experiencing violence in the past year at the hands of their partners or family.
This includes being slapped on the face, head, or ears, and a quarter of these children are beaten with some kind of implement repeatedly and as hard as possible.
Unfortunately, there is still little hard evidence about where resources should best be focused.
All we can say is that the money spent to reduce violence might be better targeted.
Considerable amounts of aid are directed toward “fragile states” to help stop or prevent civil war, but only 0.27% of international aid goes to projects with a “crime prevention” component.
Other programs may help in indirect ways, but there obviously is much room for improvement.
Some solutions, it is clear, do work very well.
Stronger social services can reduce violence against children.
Studies in Washington State show that home visits from trained staff can reduce child abuse, improve children’s quality of life and physical and mental health, and reduce child-welfare and litigation costs.
A dollar spent on this program produces benefits of $14, making it a highly cost-effective policy.
In many cases, changes in social attitudes are needed.
To reduce violence against women and girls, one program in Uganda, called SASA!
(Kiswahili for “Now!”) promotes the view that partner violence is unacceptable, and has helped to halve the rate of it.
This is a fantastic outcome, of course, though there has been no analysis of how cost-effective it is.
There are other examples of countries taking effective action.
In 1993, Bogota suffered 80 murders per 100,000 people.
By taking an integrated approach – limiting the hours during which alcohol can be sold, reclaiming public space, and improving the police and justice systems – the homicide rate was reduced to 21 per 100,000 in 2004.
That is still high, but it is far below the rate of 55 per 100,000 in Detroit.
Alcohol is a factor in many assaults, and controlling its availability could have a significant part to play, as the findings in Bogota suggest.
In the United Kingdom, a pilot study on stronger enforcement of existing rules showed that assaults could be reduced in a very cost-effective way, with the benefits outweighing the costs by 17 to one.
While we still don’t know enough, two points are certain.
First, domestic violence against women and children imposes a social cost of $8 trillion each year, making it a huge – and vastly underreported – global issue.
Second, there are solutions that can help to tackle some of these problems very cost-effectively.
That is why reducing domestic violence belongs on the short-list for the world’s next set of development goals.
The bear was tagged before it was released, to show that it had been causing trouble.
“Unfortunately,” said the ranger, “that bear may be back here even before our truck returns.
Once they develop a taste for bacon and beer, you can't keep them away.”
If a tagged bear is caught two or more times causing disruption, the rangers have orders to shoot it.
It is easy to feel sorry for an animal that discovers tasty food and can’t resist getting more the easy way.
The bear has no idea that its days are numbered unless it remains in the forest and hunts in the traditional way for its meals.
But that bear was following the wisdom natural selection had programmed in its genes: food that is high in proteins and sugars is good for you, and the less energy you expend getting it, the better.
That much the bear knows well.
It had no chance to learn – and probably never will – that picnic tables and garbage cans are defended by forest rangers with orders to kill.
How much luckier we humans are, knowing what is good and bad for us.
We cannot be trapped so easily by things that taste good but will cause our downfall.
But, in reality, most of us are no different from that bear.
Most people are aware that high-fat diets, too much alcohol, smoking, promiscuous sex, and recreational drugs, while pleasant, can ruin one's health.
Yet we can’t resist the lure of the garbage can and its delights.
But at least we have had clear warnings about the dangers of such habits, so people who want to use such knowledge can avoid being trapped.
There are other potentially harmful pleasures in the environment that are less known, but not less destructive than those that are.
One of the most seductive of these pleasures – and thus one of the most dangerous – is television.
Television is attractive to the architecture of the human nervous system: our brains are built to absorb information and follow rapid changes in the sensory field.
TV provides these in easily digestible, sumptuously prepared morsels.
Constant change and the appearance of excitement absorb viewers’ attention.
The Sistine Chapel cannot compare with it – most children will become bored after ten minutes by the frescoes of Michelangelo, but will watch a detergent commercial with riveted interest.
It also encourages aggressive behavior in children and produces negative moods such as sadness and loneliness.
Nor is there any evidence of benefits to counterbalance these negative effects.
When television was in its infancy, many thinkers ­ and not surprisingly, television producers – painted the future of the medium in glowing terms: TV would keep us informed, cultured, and entertained; it would strengthen family life and civic virtues.
None of this happened.
Even the informational value of television turned out to be a dream: individuals and communities that watch TV often know much less about what is happening in the world than comparable audiences that do not.
The only clearly positive effect of TV watching is that people feel relaxed while doing it, and many people are willing to exchange that relaxation for the more enjoyable and useful things they might be doing instead.
Like the bear that learned to fill his stomach comfortably, they feel satisfied to be entertained without having to exert themselves.
Of course, television can be nice when consumed in small doses and with discernment.
Like drinking a glass or two of wine, it helps digestion and lightens the mind.
But those who spend hours watching it each evening, with less and less control over their attention, and deriving progressively less enjoyment from what they watch, risk becoming as besotted as an alcoholic who only feels alive when he blots out reality.
No bear, if it knew what we do, would fall into that trap.
Black Swan World
BERLIN – In today’s global financial crisis, the image of a black swan has become a symbol for the seemingly impossible that somehow occurs, turning the world upside down.
This year will afford us ample opportunity to examine the black swans that are already among us, and to prepare for the arrival of even more.
November, for example, marks the 20th anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall.
The night of November 9, 1989, marked the beginning of the end of the Soviet Union and its empire, and thus also of the bipolar world that had, for five decades, divided Germany and Europe.
A year before, few people considered this world-shaking event even a remote possibility.
Yet it happened, and the world changed almost overnight.
After the disappearance of the Soviet Union and the bipolar world order, victorious Western capitalism, under the leadership of the only world power, the United States, reigned supreme in global politics, and even more so in the global economy.
Nothing and no one, it seemed, could stem the global triumph of the market, with its transcendence of all previous limits on wealth – that is, until September 15, 2008, the fateful date when Lehman Brothers went bust and the meltdown of the global financial system began.
While a distraught world is still trying to fathom the consequences of this global crash and to mitigate its impact, the call of the next black swan can already be heard: the global climate disaster.
It seems to be part of human nature willfully to deny the possibility of great crises, or at least to downplay them.
“Impossible” or “It won’t be all that bad” are the two magic formulae on which we tend to rely.
And we refuse to learn the lesson of the black swan even when the next one is already visible for all to see!
Although the generations alive today have witnessed two completely unexpected crises of epic proportions within the last 20 years, we indulge in a shocking collective repression of a climate disaster with far more serious – and foreseeable – consequences.
But, in fact, by linking the answers to the global climate and economic crises, we can find a way out of both.
The solutions to the climate crisis are already well known, the money is available, and so are the technologies, or where they aren’t, they could be developed.
What is lacking is the strategic vision and determined action of the major political players.
As for the economic crisis, bailouts and stimulus packages on the order of billions of dollars, euros, yen, or yuan have been planned or implemented to stem the further slide of the global economy.
But, while references to the Great Depression are justified, the lesson of that crisis, and of the New Deal, is that effective programs can at best cushion the fall and bring about stabilization.
The real economic recovery – and this is the bad news – came only with WWII and the long Cold War that followed.
Rather than relying on war as an economic mega-project to end today’s recession, the international community should bet on the fight against the climate crisis, because globalization will continue, rapidly increasing the threats to the world’s climate.
In 1929, there were slightly more than two billion people living on the planet; today, there are 6.7 billion, and in 2050 there will be nine billion.
All of them, thanks to globalization and new communication technologies, will strive for the same standard of living, give or take, which will necessarily lead to an overstretched global ecosystem.
The question of whether to use coal or nuclear power is simply no longer apposite: without a breakthrough in renewable energies, global energy demand cannot be met, not to mention the dangers of a new Chernobyl.
Where this will lead the world can be seen even today: China already has the world’s most ambitious scheme for expanding nuclear energy, and every year it builds coal-fired power plants whose electricity output is roughly equivalent to the capacity of the entire British power grid!
So the black swan of the climate crisis is already preparing to land.
To fight the climate crisis effectively demands nothing less than a green revolution of the global economy, the mega-project of the twenty-first century.
Only the rich industrial nations of Europe, America, and Japan can afford to pay for the necessary investments in emerging countries.
But this green revolution must be about more than spending money; it must also be about laws and standards, i.e. about political regulation and new technologies, as well as new products and markets, which mean new economic opportunities.
This year, a new global climate agreement will be negotiated in Copenhagen to replace the Kyoto Protocol.
This is effectively the last chance to prevent the next black swan from landing.
But we must understand that Copenhagen is also a big chance to revive the global economy.
All of the relevant powers of the twenty-first century are represented in the G-20, and they should see the success of Copenhagen as part of their direct responsibility.
This time, unlike at the London G-20 meeting, they should do the job properly – both to protect our climate and to reboot the global economy.
Blair’s EU disaster
When voters in France and the Netherlands turned down the proposal for a Constitution for the European Union, the world knew that the European project was in deep trouble.
Last week’s bruising battle over the medium-term future of the Union’s budget has confirmed that verdict with a vengeance.
It also brought to a sorry close the UK’s six-month presidency of the European Council, confirming Britain’s long-standing reputation as the odd-man-out in the European Union.
The two events are intimately connected.
French and Dutch voters did not say why they voted against the planned Constitution. But many commentators believe that they were protesting against what they perceived as the precipitate admission of ten new member states, mainly much poorer countries from Central and Eastern Europe.
In particular, voters were afraid that their jobs would be lost to hordes of Eastern immigrants, exemplified in the image widely quoted at the time, of the low-cost Polish plumber.
The irony, of course, was that most of the 15 old member states had refused to give the new members full and immediate access to the Western job markets.
But in any event, it was too late to protest: the ten Eastern states had already been granted membership of the Union.
But now the 25 member states must deal with the financial consequences of that enlargement, not just in the overall size of the European Union budget for the next seven years, but in who pays and who benefits.
In particular, the central issue is how far the old member states are willing to pay to boost the less developed economies of the new members.
In the event, it turned into a three-way battle between Britain, France and the new member states.
Traditionally, a large majority of the budget has gone either on agriculture or on the development of backward regions.
In practice, this has meant large flows of money either to big agricultural producers, like France, or to poorer member states, like Greece and Portugal.
On both counts, the new member states expected to benefit substantially from the EU system.
In the past, the big loser from the EU system, in budgetary terms, was the UK; for while agriculture accounted for two thirds of all EU spending, the UK had a small farm sector, and therefore received small farm payments.
The British long complained of the unfairness of these rules, especially in view of the fact that the UK was one of the relatively poorer member states; and in 1984, Margaret Thatcher’s Conservative government demanded, and got, a massive rebate on its net contribution to the EU budget.
Today, the situation has changed in three important respects.
EU farm policy has started to be reformed, and its share of the EU budget has fallen from over 60% to 40%; Britain has for several years enjoyed significantly faster economic growth than most other member states, so that it is now one of the richer EU countries, even compared with France and Germany; and the new member states are so much poorer than even the poorest of the old members, that they have an unanswerable moral case for a generous share of whatever budget could be negotiated.
When negotiations started six months ago, it was Britain’s turn to take over the Presidency of the European Council.
Tony Blair, British Prime Minister, electrified the world of European politics by telling the European Parliament that he was a “passionate pro-European”.
This was a message for which Britain’s European friends had long been hoping, and for which they had waited in vain since Blair’s election in 1997.
Certainly, he had never expressed any such sentiment inside the British Isles during the previous eight years.
Since Britain had been one of the most insistent advocates of enlargement of the EU to the candidates from Central and Eastern Europe, one might have expected that the Blair government would have wished to be correspondingly generous to the new-comers in the conduct of the budgetary negotiations.
At first, this seemed to be the British government’s chosen tactic.
Against all expectations, it struck a morally advantageous posture by offering to surrender some part of its budget rebate, but only if the rest of the European Union (i.e. France, in particular) would agree to fundamental reforms of EU farm policy.
It took some time before the British came to understand that since President Jacques Chirac is a beleaguered lame-duck President, who will remain in office but not in power until 2007, he is in no position to agree to any such bargain.
So when the British came to terms with this harsh reality, they played out the lamentable end-game of their management of the negotiations with small-minded cheese-paring and logic-chopping offers, all designed primarily to safeguard narrow British interests, mainly at the expense of the new member states.
It is a sad conclusion to a presidency, launched six-months ago, with Blair’s claim that he was a “passionate pro-European”. Yet the full text of his speech tells it all.
Blair is in favour of Europe; but not this Europe.
He wants to be a part of a political Europe; but only if the other member states follow Britain’s model of economic and social reform.
The problem is that economic and social reform are purely national responsibilities, and do not lie within the competence of the Union; if there is to be economic and social reform in France and Germany, that is a matter exclusively for French and German voters and politicians.
It could only be a European matter, if the EU were a real federation.
Is Blair a federalist, then?
Heavens, no!
He is merely an unthinking nationalist, living in terror of the nationalist yellow tabloid press.
So why does he say he is a passionate pro-European?
Because he has not thought about the question for one moment.
Blair’s European Dilemma
Tony Blair has achieved a remarkable third successive electoral victory.
But his sharply reduced majority in the House of Commons, and his damaged personal reputation, mean that his political position is seriously weakened.
As a result, he will be poorly placed to handle the challenges ahead, the most intractable of which will be the European Union’s new Constitution.
The Constitution, adopted by the 25 member states last year, is not, in itself, a big deal.
It introduces some significant improvements for majority voting in the Council of Ministers. It gives some more powers to the European Parliament.
It includes a Charter of Fundamental Rights. It might help harmonize the foreign policies of the member states.
But it is no revolutionary document.
According to normal British constitutional practice, the government would be expected to ratify this Constitution by a vote in the House of Commons; and, until the recent general election, the government’s huge majority should have been more than sufficient.