Unless we act with foresight and base our actions on scientific evidence, water stress, food insecurity, and social crises will not be far behind.
In other words, today's mounting threats cannot be covered up.
The Age of Sustainable Development must be built on openness, participation, and science.
Politicizing EU Competition Policy
The new European Commission has been named. What should be its primary goals?
The Commission was originally created as a technocratic body relatively independent of either national or supranational control - correctly so, given its mandate.
The Commission works best when it sticks to this role.
Think of the excellent work it has done in the area of competition policy: breaking up cartels and stopping state aid, even when it comes in disguised forms, such as government guarantees on company debt.
The lesson is that Commissioners should focus on their specific tasks, bearing in mind the interests of the EU rather than those of their country of origin.
Mario Monti, the successful Commissioner for Competition, happened to be Italian, but nobody ever accused him of pursuing an "Italian agenda."
In fact, his fight against state aid clashed with normal Italian practice.
An innovation by current President Romano Prodi's Commission helped.
Prodi's Commission decided to send Commissioners "into the field": their offices were no longer next to the President's office, but located in the department for which each was responsible.
This forced Commissioners to concentrate on their jobs and keep an eye on the all-powerful director-generals and their bureaucracies; there was little time left for "big picture" politics.
But the new commission that Durao Barroso, Portugal's former Prime Minister, has appointed risks becoming imprisoned by the bureaucracy again.
For one thing, Barroso has decided to bring his Commissioners back into the President's office.
This means less control and direct oversight of the bureaucracy, and an increased incentive to spend the day thinking up big plans rather than concentrating on targeted improvements.
The problem is aggravated by the composition of the new Commission.
There will be 25 Commissioners, one for each EU member country, whereas previously big countries had two and small countries one.
Moreover, the new Commissioners will include three former prime ministers, five former foreign ministers, and three former finance ministers - all heavyweight people with big political agendas at home.
Consider Italy, where Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi replaced Mario Monti, the Commission's most successful and effective member, with a politician enmeshed in the arcane games of Italian party politics.
Berlusconi's interest is clear: he wants someone he can call and ask to look after Italy's interests - be it a forbidden government loan to Alitalia or some other favor.
There is also a Machiavellian explanation for the replacement of Monti.
It is no secret that he irritated France and Germany.
His latest decision was to force France Telecom to pay back with interest a loan granted years ago by the French government, in violation of EU rules on state aid.
Germany never really accepted Monti's decision to bar government guarantees on the balance sheets of its Landesbanken, the powerful regional banks.
The German government is also worried by the Commission's resolution to question the "Volkswagen law."
That law prevents any shareholder who controls more than 20% of voting shares in Volkswagenwerk GmbH (VW) from casting more than 20% of the votes in a shareholders' meeting.
It also decrees that a majority of more than 80% of shareholder votes is required for important decisions in the company.
The Volkswagen law also deters private investors from acquiring shares in the company, despite the principle of free capital mobility within the EU.
We do not know whether Chancellor Gerhard Schröder and/or President Jacques Chirac called Berlusconi to suggest that he find a new Italian Commissioner.
Maybe they did, and maybe they didn't: one cannot know, especially at a time when Italy may need the full support of Chirac and Shröder as it tries to bail out Alitalia.
The bottom line is that with the new Commission members focused on their domestic political agendas, Durao Barroso's team will do less effectively what the Commission used to do well.
At the same time, to the extent that the Commission becomes less a body of technocrats and more a political body, the so-called "democratic deficit" will increasingly become a problem.
The root cause of the problem is the new European constitution.
By failing to limit the size of the Commission and accepting the one-country/one-commissioner rule, the Constitution has turned the Commission into a body of national representatives.
This, together with the rule that all decisions, even in the area of state aid, must be approved by a majority of Commissioners, suggests that the Commission is set to become much more lenient on state aid and competition policy.
The Politics of Economic Stupidity
NEW YORK – In 2014, the world economy remained stuck in the same rut that it has been in since emerging from the 2008 global financial crisis.
Despite seemingly strong government action in Europe and the United States, both economies suffered deep and prolonged downturns.
The gap between where they are and where they most likely would have been had the crisis not erupted is huge.
In Europe, it increased over the course of the year.
Developing countries fared better, but even there the news was grim.
The most successful of these economies, having based their growth on exports, continued to expand in the wake of the financial crisis, even as their export markets struggled.
But their performance, too, began to diminish significantly in 2014.
In 1992, Bill Clinton based his successful campaign for the US presidency on a simple slogan: “It’s the economy, stupid.”
From today’s perspective, things then do not seem so bad; the typical American household’s income is now lower.
But we can take inspiration from Clinton’s effort.
The malaise afflicting today’s global economy might be best reflected in two simple slogans: “It’s the politics, stupid” and “Demand, demand, demand.”
The near-global stagnation witnessed in 2014 is man-made.
It is the result of politics and policies in several major economies – politics and policies that choked off demand.
In the absence of demand, investment and jobs will fail to materialize.
It is that simple.
Nowhere is this clearer than in the eurozone, which has officially adopted a policy of austerity – cuts in government spending that augment weaknesses in private spending.
The eurozone’s structure is partly to blame for impeding adjustment to the shock generated by the crisis; in the absence of a banking union, it was no surprise that money fled the hardest-hit countries, weakening their financial systems and constraining lending and investment.
In Japan, one of the three “arrows” of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s program for economic revival was launched in the wrong direction.
The fall in GDP that followed the increase in the consumption tax in April provided further evidence in support of Keynesian economics – as if there was not enough already.
The US introduced the smallest dose of austerity, and it has enjoyed the best economic performance.
But even in the US, there are roughly 650,000 fewer public-sector employees than there were before the crisis; normally, we would have expected some two million more.
As a result, the US, too, is suffering, with growth so anemic that wages remain basically stagnant.
Much of the growth deceleration in emerging and developing countries reflects China’s slowdown.
China is now the world’s largest economy (in terms of purchasing power parity), and it has long been the main contributor to global growth.
But China’s remarkable success has bred its own problems, which should be addressed sooner rather than later.
The Chinese economy’s shift from quantity to quality is welcome – almost necessary.
And, though President Xi Jinping’s fight against corruption may cause economic growth to slow further, as paralysis grips public contracting, there is no reason for Xi to let up.
On the contrary, other forces undermining trust in his government – widespread environmental problems, high and rising levels of inequality, and private-sector fraud – need to be addressed with equal vigor.
In short, the world should not expect China to shore up global aggregate demand in 2015.
If anything, there will be an even bigger hole to fill.
Meanwhile, in Russia, we can expect Western sanctions to slow growth, with adverse effects on an already weakened Europe.
(This is not an argument against sanctions: The world had to respond to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, and Western CEOs who argue otherwise, seeking to protect their investments, have demonstrated a disturbing lack of principle.)
For the past six years, the West has believed that monetary policy can save the day.
The crisis led to huge budget deficits and rising debt, and the need for deleveraging, the thinking goes, means that fiscal policy must be shunted aside.
The problem is that low interest rates will not motivate firms to invest if there is no demand for their products.
Nor will low rates inspire individuals to borrow to consume if they are anxious about their future (which they should be).
What monetary policy can do is create asset-price bubbles.
It might even prop up the price of government bonds in Europe, thereby forestalling a sovereign-debt crisis.
But it is important to be clear: the likelihood that loose monetary policies will restore global prosperity is nil.
This brings us back to politics and policies.
Demand is what the world needs most.
The private sector – even with the generous support of monetary authorities – will not supply it.
But fiscal policy can.
We have an ample choice of public investments that would yield high returns – far higher than the real cost of capital – and that would strengthen the balance sheets of the countries undertaking them.
The big problem facing the world in 2015 is not economic.
We know how to escape our current malaise.
The problem is our stupid politics.
The Politics of Financial Volatility
LONDON – Twenty-four years ago, in the midst of an ugly US presidential campaign, Bill Clinton’s campaign manager neatly summed up his candidate’s message: “It’s the economy, stupid.”
Today, as investors struggle to understand what is driving extreme volatility in the financial markets, there is an equally pithy explanation: It’s the stupid politics.
Central bank policies have moved from supporting the markets to potentially destabilizing them.
Now markets are turning to structural reform and fiscal policy for assistance.
In this light, current price movements should be viewed through the spectrum of geopolitics.
And it is not a nice view.
Nowhere is this more evident than in the oil markets, where prices have collapsed, with both Brent and Crude now hovering around the $30-per-barrel level.
The extent of oil’s fall, and consequent deflationary fears, is cited as a major factor behind overall market turmoil.
In January, the correlation between crude oil prices and the S&P 500 reached the highest level since 1990.
It has become increasingly clear that supply dynamics, rather than falling demand, explain the drop from $110/barrel since the summer of 2014.
The shift to competitive pricing implied by the breakdown of Saudi Arabia’s monopoly power, together with OPEC’s desire to counter the threat from US shale energy, drove the first downward move.
Likewise, the recent lifting of sanctions on Iran, and the resulting increase in global oil supply, prompted a further 9% price drop over a matter of days.
These supply dynamics are shaped by politics.
Daily headlines about potential coordinated measures by the key oil-producing countries fuel oil-price volatility and define risk appetite across financial markets.
Yet the politics is so confused that coordination appears unlikely, at best; the Iranian oil minister recently described a potential OPEC production freeze as a “joke.”
Iran’s parliamentary elections augment the uncertainty.
Aside from oil, the other popular explanation for today’s market tumult is the economic slowdown in China, which many investors have cited as the reason for slumping equity prices this year.
But the slowdown, reflecting China’s transition from investment-led to consumption-driven growth, was widely expected, and the 2015 growth figure of 6.8% was within forecasts.
The real problem has been self-inflicted policy errors by China’s political leaders.
An ill-advised intervention in the equity markets in July 2015, followed by a poorly communicated exchange-rate adjustment in August, led investors to question the competence of policymakers.
These concerns have grown since the beginning of the year.
Currency policy remains confused, while newly introduced (and soon withdrawn) stock-market circuit breakers have accelerated market falls, as investors try to sell shares before liquidity disappears.
Moreover, purchases by state-owned financial institutions, together with bans on sales by large institutional shareholders, cannot remain permanent features if the market is to be truly free.
Expected leadership changes – six of the seven members of the Politburo Standing Committee will be replaced over the next 18 months – will only exacerbate uncertainty.
Labile politics are increasingly driving outcomes in other emerging markets as well.
In Brazil, the government struggles to balance its populist agenda with lower commodity prices, dwindling growth, and persistent inflation.
Moreover, a corruption scandal has paralyzed reform.
Small wonder that Brazil’s stock market has fallen 28% since last May.
In Russia, too, politics has aggravated the negative oil-price shock.
Western sanctions have contributed to an already slowing growth trajectory, and are threatening Russia’s ability to raise debt capital in global markets.
The ruble has plummeted 130% since 2014 began, and GDP in 2015 contracted by 3.7%.
Yet Russia is a star performer compared to Venezuela, where President Nicolás Maduro’s government has overseen the economy’s total disintegration.
Indeed, analysts are declaring the country is past the “point of no return.”
Even the relatively dynamic India is struggling, as its exciting reform agenda is challenged by social protests.
In Europe, the efficacy of the European Central Bank’s monetary policies is waning as the political scene becomes increasingly fragile.
In the United Kingdom, polls show the June 23 referendum on continued European Union membership will be extremely tight – an obvious threat to market stability, reflected in the immediate sell-off of pounds.
Meanwhile, the migration crisis threatens Germany’s government; splits are now deepening within Chancellor Angela Merkel’s party, which is losing popular support.
The unilateral decision by Austria and nine Balkan states to block the flow of migrants across their borders has fueled political turbulence.
The migrant crisis will have far-reaching ramifications, including the potential destruction of the Schengen zone.
In Southern Europe, Spain’s recent elections were inconclusive, and the absence of a stable government could derail an economic recovery that gained traction in 2015.
Meanwhile, the Italian government’s bank bail-ins have fueled volatility, with leading banks experiencing extraordinary one-day stock declines.
The damage to Prime Minister Matteo Renzi’s reputation for reliability has prompted fears of renewed political turmoil.
Turning to Japan, the strength in equities since Prime Minister Shinzo Abe took office has been founded on his “Abenomics” strategy’s “three arrows”: monetary stimulus, fiscal stimulus, and structural reforms.
The Bank of Japan has launched one arrow, expanding the monetary base to ¥80 trillion ($710 billion) and more recently adopting negative interest rates.
But momentum has faded considerably, as investors wait for the structural reforms needed for sustained improvement in economic, and market, fundamentals.
In the US, deep voter frustration has fueled Bernie Sanders’s leftist bid for the Democratic Party’s presidential nomination and the astonishingly vitriolic campaign waged by Donald Trump.
With Trump’s lead for the Republican Party’s nomination widening following the “Super Tuesday” primaries in ten states, financial markets, which seek stability and predictability, are struggling to find it in the politics of the world’s largest economy.
History may not repeat itself, but let’s hope it finds its rhyme.
Back in the 1990s, the US economy stabilized and then surged forward, driven by accelerating productivity and abetted by sound monetary and fiscal policy.
But economies may prove to be easier to mend than today’s dysfunctional politics, which may be part and parcel of the “new normal.”
The Pope’s Dangerous Sex Appeal
NEW YORK – Human sexual behavior can be perilous, as the ghastly rape of a 23-year-old woman by six men on a Delhi bus in December once again showed.
After going to the cinema, she and her boyfriend were beaten, before she was brutally assaulted and attacked with an iron rod for more than an hour.
Thirteen days later, she died from her wounds.
It is often claimed that rape is not really about sex, but about power.
True enough.
But it is not unrelated to sex.
The sexual act is used as a form of torture, or even, in some cases, as a deadly weapon.
But that was not what Pope Benedict XVI had in mind when he spoke recently about the dangers of sexual behavior.
In his pre-Christmas speech to the Roman Curia, the pope did not mention rape, let alone the sexual murder in Delhi.
Instead, in his defense of the family – or, as he would put it, the sacred union between man and woman – he pointed out how sexual arrangements outside that union were a threat to human civilization.
What he had in mind, without quite saying so, were same-sex unions.
It was a deeply confused speech.
His disquisition on the dangers posed by same-sex marriage followed a passage deploring the modern tendency to avoid lifelong commitments in human relationships, as if that were not precisely what gay marriage is about.
Of course, in the pope’s view, commitment in gay relationships is part of the problem: more and more people, especially in the Western world, now claim the freedom to choose their own sexual identities instead of sticking to the “natural” roles “ordained by God.”
The pope’s words suggest that homosexuality is a kind of lifestyle choice, a form of modern decadence – a secular, even blasphemous act against God and nature – rather than a fact of birth.
This is a common belief among religious believers, be they conservative Catholics, Protestants, Jews, or Muslims.
Tellingly, Benedict quoted Gilles Bernheim, the Chief Rabbi of France, who has expressed similar views on the threats to conventional family life.
Fear of sexual behavior is one of the main reasons why most religions establish strict rules concerning sexual relationships.
Marriage is a way to contain our dangerous desires.
Restricting sexual conduct to procreation is supposed to make the world safer and more peaceful.
Because women excite the desires of men, they are thought to pose a threat outside the confines of the family home.
That is why, in some societies, they are not allowed to emerge from those confines, or may do so only if fully covered and accompanied by a male relative.
Benedict is not so extreme.
Nor does he advocate violence against homosexuals.
On the contrary, he sees himself as a deeply civilized man of peace.
But I would argue that his speech actually encourages the kind of sexual aggression that can result in the savagery that took place in Delhi.
The six rapists who killed the young woman were not modern decadents who chose to defy God and nature by claiming new secular freedoms, let alone heterodox sexual identities.
From what we can surmise from this case – and many others like it – they are the semi-urbanized products of a highly conventional rural society where the roles of men, and especially women, are tightly regulated.
Their victim, a well-educated physiotherapy intern, seems to have been a great deal more modern than her attackers.
The men were not uneducated, but they were unable to cope with the freedoms of contemporary women.
For that reason, the six rapists saw her as a “loose” woman, a city slut, fair game.
After all, she was out late with her boyfriend.
That is precisely how the men taunted the young couple: What was an unmarried young woman doing out in the Delhi streets with a young man?
She deserved what was coming to her.
The reaction in some quarters followed similar lines.
When demonstrations against sexual violence erupted in Delhi, the Indian president’s son denounced the protesters as “dented and painted.”
Some politicians have described rape victims as “adventurous.”
Violent hatred of homosexuals comes from a similar source.
Just as women outside the family home – women who stake a claim to public space, working and living among men – are seen as dangerous temptresses, men who love men are often regarded as predators, ready to pounce on society’s children.
What many people fear is not just uncontrolled sexual behavior, but sex itself.
But the more sex is repressed and people are made to fear it the greater the chance of sexual violence, because anyone who might possibly stir our sexual desires, man or woman, becomes a potential target of our rage.
This might help to explain what happened in Delhi, but it does not in any way excuse it.
After all, most men in that city would not beat a young couple with metal pipes and rape the woman to death.
Hundreds of thousands of Indians are demonstrating in the streets to show their loathing of such atrocities.
One wishes that the pope had said something about that, and had offered some words of encouragement to the men and women in India who have had enough of sexual violence coming not from modern libertines, but from deeply repressed men.
But that is too much to expect from a man who appears to understand little about sexual life.
That is why, instead of talking about rapists, he targeted peaceful homosexual men and women who wish to show their commitment to their lovers by marrying them.
Popes, Saints, and Religious Competition
CAMBRIDGE – The election of the first non-European pope is long overdue.
After all, Pope Francis’s native region, Latin America, is currently home to nearly half (44%) of the world’s Catholics.
But the Catholic Church is increasingly losing out to Protestant competition there and elsewhere.
The Catholic Church understands this competition, but it confronts a chronic shortage of priests.
As a result, the creation of saints is becoming an important way of retaining the faithful.
Indeed, the choice of a Latin American pope echoes a prior shift in the geographical distribution of new saints.
Since the early part of the twentieth century – and, most clearly, since John Paul II’s papacy (1978-2005) – the traditional dominance of Italy and other European countries in the locations of blessed persons has waned.
This is reflected in the two stages of saint-making: beatification (the first stage of the process and currently the status of John Paul II) and canonization.
The rationale for this shift is to use national saints to inspire Catholics – and thereby counter the competition from Protestants, especially Evangelicals.
This phenomenon is most clear in Latin America, but it applies to North America, Asia, and Africa as well.
And we think that the naming of a Latin American pope has the same underlying motivation – to compete with the growing threat of Protestantism in this region.
The idea of using saints to compete with evangelicals in Latin America goes back a long way – the friars accompanying conquering Spanish troops introduced patron saints in every nucleated community.
Coupled with persistent shortages of priests, the worship of saints in Latin America became more embedded in the region’s culture than in that of Europe.
In 1992, John Paul II referred to evangelical groups in Latin America as “rapacious wolves” who were “luring Latin American Catholics away from the Church of Rome,” and he decried the “[h]uge sums of money…spent on evangelical proselytizing campaigns aimed specifically at Catholics.”
His concerns with Protestant competition in Latin America were – and remain – understandable, particularly in Brazil, Chile, and Guatemala, which have seen sharp increases in Evangelical adherence.
John Paul II changed the process of saint-making dramatically.
He personally beatified 319 people (non-martyrs), compared to a total of only 259 by the 37 previous popes since 1585.
He also made 80 saints, compared to a prior total of 165.
Pope Benedict XVI’s (2005-2013) large number of saints (44) reflects mainly the large stock of beatified people left behind by John Paul II.
As part of this process, Benedict XVI dramatically shortened the number of years that blessed persons had to wait to graduate from beatification to sainthood.
For example, John Paul II became a blessed person a mere six years after his death.
There have been suggestions that he will visit other Latin American countries this year, including his homeland, Argentina.
According to the Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life, Brazil has the largest Catholic population in the world.
Combined, Brazil, Mexico, and Argentina account for 26% of the world’s Catholics.
Yet Latin America’s Catholic population appears to be leveling off, due to falling birth rates and conversions out of Catholicism.&#160;
The combination of the highest share of Catholics in the world with a decline in the share of religious adherents leaves Francis facing a strategic dilemma.
Either he can focus on regaining Latin America for the Catholic Church, or he can place longer-term bets on Sub-Saharan Africa, where both the population and Catholicism are now growing faster than anywhere else in the world.
Where will the next saints come from?
Population and the Pope
MELBOURNE – As Pope Francis was returning to Rome from the Philippines last month, he told journalists about a woman who had had seven children by caesarean section and was now pregnant again.
This was, he said, “tempting God."
He asked her if she wanted to leave seven orphans.
Catholics have approved ways of regulating births, he continued, and should practice “responsible parenthood" rather than breeding “like rabbits."
Francis's “rabbit" comment was widely covered in the media, but fewer reported that he had also said that no outside institution should impose its views about regulating family size on the developing world.
“Every people," he insisted, should be able to maintain its identity without being “ideologically colonized."
The irony of this remark is that in the Philippines, a country of more than 100 million people, of whom four out of five are Roman Catholic, it is precisely the Church that has been the ideological colonizer.
It is the Church, after all, that has vigorously sought to impose its opposition to contraception on the population, opposing even the provision of contraceptives by the government to the rural poor.
Meanwhile, surveys have repeatedly shown that most Filipinos favor making contraceptives available, which is not surprising, given that the Church-approved birth-control methods mentioned by Francis are demonstrably less reliable than modern alternatives.
It is hard to believe that if the Philippines had been colonized by, say, Protestant Britain rather than Catholic Spain, the use of contraception would be an issue there today.
The larger issue that Francis raised, however, is whether it is legitimate for outside agencies to promote family planning in developing countries.
There are several reasons why it is.
First, leaving aside the “ideological" question of whether family planning is a right, there is overwhelming evidence to show that a lack of access to contraception is bad for women's health.
Frequent pregnancies, especially in countries without universal modern health care, are associated with high maternal mortality.
Aid by outside agencies to help developing countries reduce premature deaths in women is surely not “ideological colonization."
Second, when births are more widely spaced, children do better, both physically and in terms of educational attainment.
We should all agree that it is desirable for aid organizations to promote the health and education of children in developing countries.
The broader and more controversial reason for promoting family planning, however, is that making it available to all who want it is in the interest of the world's seven billion people and the generations that, barring disaster, should be able to inhabit the planet for untold millennia to come.
And here, the relationship between climate change and birth control needs to be brought into focus.
The key facts about climate change are well-known: Our planet's atmosphere has already absorbed such a large quantity of human-produced greenhouse gases that global warming is underway, with more extreme heat waves, droughts, and floods than ever before.
Arctic sea ice is melting, and rising sea levels are threatening to inundate low-lying densely populated coastal regions in several countries.
If rainfall patterns change, hundreds of millions of people could become climate refugees.
Moreover, an overwhelming majority of scientists in the relevant fields believe that we are on track to exceed the level of global warming at which feedback mechanisms will kick in and climate change will become uncontrollable, with unpredictable and possibly catastrophic consequences.
It is often pointed out that it is the affluent countries that have caused the problem, owing to their higher greenhouse-gas emissions over the past two centuries.
They continue to have the highest levels of per capita emissions, and they can reduce emissions with the least hardship.
There is no doubt that, ethically, the world's developed countries should be taking the lead in reducing emissions.
What is not so often mentioned, however, is the extent to which continuing global population growth would undermine the impact of whatever emission reductions affluent countries can be persuaded to make.
Four factors influence the level of emissions: economic output per capita; the units of energy used to generate each unit of economic output; greenhouse gases emitted per unit of energy; and total population.
A reduction in any three of these factors will be offset by an increase in the fourth.
In the “Summary for Policymakers" of its 2014 Fifth Assessment Report, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change stated that, globally, economic and population growth continue to be “the most important drivers" of increases in CO2 emissions from fossil-fuel combustion.
According to the World Health Organization, an estimated 222 million women in developing countries do not want to have children now, but lack the means to ensure that they do not conceive.
Providing them with access to contraception would help them plan their lives as they wish, weaken demand for abortion, reduce maternal deaths, give children a better start in life, and contribute to slowing population growth and greenhouse-gas emissions, thus benefiting us all.
Who could oppose such an obvious win-win proposition?
The only naysayers, we may suspect, are those in the grip of a religious ideology that they seek to impose on others, no matter what the consequences for women, children, and the rest of the world, now and for centuries to come.
Reconsidering Man’s Dominion
PRINCETON – In May, Pope Francis released his historic encyclical, Laudatio Si, or “Praise Be.”
He chose his papal name, he explains in the text, because he considers St. Francis of Assisi to be “the example par excellence of care for the vulnerable and of an integral ecology lived out joyfully and authentically.”
His namesake showed that concern for nature is inseparable from justice for the poor, social commitment, and peace within oneself.
The encyclical’s title refers to the Canticle of the Sun, St. Francis’s song of praise to God for all creation – the foremost expression of environmental holism within the Roman Catholic tradition.
Yet the Canticle’s praise for “Brother Sun” and “Sister Moon”has seemed so close to nature-worship that some have doubted whether it could ever be included in mainstream Catholic thinking.
Those doubts have now been laid to rest.
Francis’ predecessor, Pope Benedict XVI, began to turn the Church’s attention toward the need for environmental sustainability.
Francis has taken this process much further.
Laudatio Si has received considerable media attention, most of it focused on its uncompromising call for action on climate change.
That is appropriate, for it is of the utmost importance that the leader of the world’s 1.2 billion Roman Catholics has unequivocally stated that scientific studies attribute “most global warming” in recent decades to greenhouse gases, “released mainly as a result of human activity.”
There is, however, another aspect of the encyclical that has received much less attention.
St. Francis is among the most popular Catholic saints because of his reputation as a friend of animals.
In keeping with that tradition, Laudatio Si amounts to the strongest statement against harming animals ever made by a pope in a document as authoritative as an encyclical.
Mainstream Christian thinking about animals is rooted in the Book of Genesis,where God is said to have granted man dominion over all the animals.
St. Thomas Aquinas interpreted that verse as implying that it simply does not matter how man behaves toward animals; the only reason why we should not inflict whatever cruelties we like on animals is that doing so may lead to cruelty to humans.
A few Christian thinkers have sought to reinterpret “dominion” as “stewardship,” suggesting that God entrusted humanity to care for his creation.
But it remained a minority view, favored by environmentalists and animal protectionists, and Aquinas’s interpretation remained the prevailing Catholic doctrine until the late twentieth century.
Francis has now come down decisively against the mainstream view, saying that Christians “have at times incorrectly interpreted the Scriptures,” and insisting that “we must forcefully reject the notion that our being created in God’s image and given dominion over the earth justifies absolute domination over other creatures.”
Our “dominion” over the universe, he declares, should be understood “in the sense of responsible stewardship.”
Against the background of nearly 2,000 years of Catholic thinking about “man’s dominion,” this is a revolutionary change.
But the encyclical includes another statement that could have even more far-reaching implications.
That statement, which originally appeared in the Catechism of the Catholic Church issued by Pope John Paul II in 1992, calls it “contrary to human dignity to cause animals to suffer or die needlessly.”
To ensure that the sentiment would be noticed, Francis tweeted it.
(Yes, Francis tweets, using the Twitter handle @Pontifex.)
When is suffering and death “needless”?
If you can nourish yourself adequately without eating meat, isn’t buying meat needlessly causing, or at least being complicit in causing, the death of an animal?
Isn’t buying eggs from hens who have led a miserable life, jammed into small wire cages, needlessly causing, or being complicit in causing, the suffering of animals?
Before Cardinal Ratzinger became Pope Benedict XVI, he gave an interview in which he deplored the “industrial use of creatures” such as hens living “so packed together that they become just caricatures of birds.”
Unfortunately, right now, tens of billions of chickens are being forced to live this way; indeed, mankind’s realm is full of unnecessarily suffering animals.
Although animal advocates implored Ratzinger to reiterate his views on animal welfare after he became Pope, he never did so.
Francis, by contrast, appears to have been referring to factory-farmed animals when he spoke, in The Joy of the Gospel, of “weak and defenseless beings who are frequently at the mercy of economic interests or indiscriminate exploitation.”
Now, in Laudatio Si, Francis quotes the passage in the Gospel of Luke, in which Jesus says of the birds that “not one of them is forgotten before God.”
Francis then asks: “How then can we possibly mistreat them or cause them harm?”
It is a good question, because we do mistreat them, and on a massive scale.
Most Roman Catholics participate in this mistreatment, a few by raising chickens, ducks, and turkeys in ways that maximize profit by reducing animal welfare, and the majority by buying the products of factory farms.
If Pope Francis can change that, he will, in my view, have done more good than any other pope in recent history.
A Mexican Impasse for the Pope
LIMA – On February 17, Pope Francis is scheduled to celebrate Mass in Ciudad Juárez, Mexico, just south of the border with the United States.
He will surely take that opportunity to urge support for the poor in Mexico and for those who have migrated north.
After all, that is what he did in September during his moving homily in New York’s Madison Square Garden.
Referring to the 11 million undocumented immigrants in the US, he asked his listeners to reach out to “all those people who don’t appear to belong, or are second-class citizens…because they have no right to be there.”
But the absence of rights is a problem that is neither unique to the US nor confined to immigrants who lack legal authorization to remain in the country in which they reside.
Far larger and far more damaging is the difficulty that afflicts the five billion people who lack documented property rights.
In Mexico alone, there are ten million urban homes, 137 million hectares of land, and six million businesses whose owners’ rights are poorly protected.
If Francis focuses only on undocumented immigration in his Juárez address, his message is likely to become bogged down in a debate about US security concerns and countries’ sovereign right to protect their borders.
If, instead, he expands the discussion to include the importance of clearly documented property rights within countries, he will be on much firmer ground.
Property rights are a universal right enshrined in the US Constitution and the United Nations Charter.
Indeed, it is in search of just such rights that many of the world’s poor are motivated to cross borders into countries like the US.
For those living in the richest parts of the world, it is easy to take clear property rights for granted.
But the reality is that only 2.3 billion people have the documents to protect and leverage their rights – including approximately one billion people living in Japan, Singapore, and the democratic West, and another billion in certain developing countries and former Soviet states.
Documentation is not just a bureaucratic stamp on a piece of paper.
It is crucial to economic progress and inclusion.
The reason the undocumented have an interest in being properly documented – whether they know it or not – is that clear property rights provide their owners and the things they own with a lot of additional value.
In the US or Europe, for example, a house not only serves as a shelter; it is also an address that can identify people for commercial, judicial, or civic purposes, and a reliable terminal for services, such as energy, water, sewage, or telephone lines.
Documentation also allows assets to be used as financial instruments, providing their owners with access to credit and capital.
If you want to take out a loan – whether you are a mining company in Colorado or a Greek shoemaker in New York – you must first pledge documented property in one form or another as a guarantee.
As I have shown elsewhere, the poor of the world are in possession of some $18 trillion of undocumented assets in real estate alone.
But those assets will never attain their full value if they are not documented.
As it stands, they cannot be used to raise capital.
Nor can they be joined with other assets to create more complex and valuable holdings.
The lack of property rights also plays an important role in two areas of concern for both the pope and many US leaders: the turmoil in the Middle East and North Africa and the protection of the environment.
The Arab Spring, it should be recalled, began after a Tunisian street vendor set himself on fire as a protest against the arbitrary expropriation of his undocumented assets.
And much of the anger that drove people to the streets, led countries to the point of collapse, and drove millions from their homes was motivated by a desire for clear rights, including those protecting property.
Similarly, property rights are critical to environmental protection.
Without clear documentation, it is impossible for authorities to determine who is accountable for damaging natural resources or responsible for restoring local ecosystems.
Updated records are also needed to adjust conservation strategies to the opportunities and threats that arise as industry expands into virgin territories.
In the headwaters of the Amazon River, for example, most of the 1,496 local communities cannot fix precise boundaries – using universal coordinates and enforceable property law – to the land in their possession.
As a result, individual residents struggle to protect their assets, adapt to environmental threats, or respond to the challenges and opportunities of expanding globalization.
The fact that Francis is addressing the issue of documentation is important.
It means the Vatican is not only asking why so few have so much, but also why so many have so little.
By extending his compassion to those who lack documentation, the pope has an opportunity to do very much for very many.
Fransiskus yang Peduli Hutan
WASHINGTON, DC – Ketika Paus Fransiskus mengunjungi Amerika Latin pada bulan Juli, beliau menyatakan permohonan yang berapi-api demi perlindungan hutan hujan Amazon dan penduduk yang tinggal disana.
“Rumah kita dijarah, dikotori dan dirugikan dengan impunitas,” beliau berseru di hadapan aktivitas yang berkumpul di Bolivia untuk menghadiri World Meeting of Popular Movements (Rapat Dunia untuk Gerakan Populer).
“Ketidakberanian dalam membela hal ini adalah dosa besar.”
Mengikuti seruan Paus Fransiskus untuk mengambil tindakan bukan hanya isu moral; tapi merupakan isu praktis.
Saat para pemimpin dunia bertemu di United Nations Climate Change Conference (Konferensi Perubahan Iklim PBB) di Paris pada akhir tahun nanti untuk merancang tanggapan terhadap tantangan-tantangan pemanasan global, mereka harus membuat kebijakan untuk melindungi hutan tropis dan penduduk yang tinggal di hutan tersebut.
Paus Fransiskus bukan misionaris pertama yang mengunjungi Amazon.
Pastor dan Imam dari ordo Fransiskan, Yesuit, dan Dominikan telah mengabarkan injil ke daerah tersebut selama berabad-abad.
Yang menarik dari pernyataan Paus Fransiskus adalah hal tersebut tidak ditujukan untuk penduduk lokal, melainkan kepada penduduk kawasan Amerika Utara dan Eropa, yang karena permintaan mereka akan kayu, biofuel, dan produk pertanian menyebabkan kerusakan hutan hujan dan membahayakan hidup masyarakat adat yang tinggal disana.
Masyarakat Amazon telah banyak menderita karena insentif ekonomi untuk menebang hutan hujan.
Di seluruh dunia, masyarakat adat diancam, dibunuh, dan diusir dari kampung halaman mereka, Dari 116 aktivis lingkungan yang dibunuh di 2014, 40% diantaranya adalah pemimpin masyarakat adat.
Pada bulan September 2014, misalnya, Edwin Chota dan tiga pemimpin komunitas Asháninka di Peru dibunuh secara brutal, kemungkinan besar oleh pembalak liar.
Dua bulan kemudian, José Isidro Tendetza Antún, pemimpin masyarakat Shuar di Ekuador, disiksa dan dibunuh ketika dalam perjalanan untuk melakukan protes melawan proyek tambang yang mengancam keberadaan kampung halamannya.
Selain merupakan penghinaan terhadap hak asasi manusia, deforestasi bersamaan dengan serangan terhadap budaya masyarakat adat adalah ancaman serius pada perlawanan terhadap perjuangan melawan perubahan iklim.
Hubungan antara berkurangnya jumlah tutupan hutan dan pemanasan global telah didokumentasikan dengan baik.
Emisi karbon dioksida dari penebangan dan pembakaran hutan setara dengan 10% emisi global.
Sementara itu, masyarakat yang tinggal di hutan telah menunjukkan bahwa mereka seringkali adalah penjaga hutan terbaik karena penghidupan mereka tergantung pada hal tersebut.
Hutan dimana masyarakat adat tinggal seringkali menyimpan karbon dalam jumlah lebih besar dibandingkan dengan hutan yang dikelola oleh pemilik lain, baik pemerintah atau swasta.
Memang benar bahwa cadangan bagi masyarakat adat di Amazon Brasil mempunyai peranan penting dalam menurunkan laju deforestasi – tapi dengan biaya besar.
Dalam 12 tahun terakhir, jumlah aktivis dan pemimpin masyarakat adat yang dibunuh di Brasil lebih tinggi dibandingkan negara-negara lain.
Pada pertemuan di Paris akhir tahun ini, negara-negara diharapkan untuk menyampaikan rencana nasional – yang dikenal sebagai Intended Nationally Determined Contributiosn/INDCs (Rencana Kontribusi Nasional) – yang menguraikan langkah-langkah spesifik yang akan diambil untuk menurunkan emisi karbon dioksida.
Jika memperhitungkan permohonan Paus Fransiskus, maka langkah-langkah tersebut harus menyertakan komitmen membantu masyarakat adat untuk mengamankan hak-hak atas kampung halaman mereka dan memberdayakan mereka untuk melindungi hutan dari kerusakan.
Sejauh ini, hanya sekitar seperempat negara-negara di dunia yang telah menyerahkan draf awal INDC untuk dikaji.
Namun sayangnya, baru sedikit negara-negara yang memiliki hutan tropis yang telah menyerahkan rencana mereka dan belum satu pun negara-negara di Amazon yang telah melakukannya.
Meksiko, sebaliknya, telah memberikan contoh yang baik.
Pemerintah Meksiko telah menggunakan INDC mereka untuk menetapkan beberapa tujuan yang ambisius, termasuk komitmen terhadap deforestasi  nihil pada tahun 2030 dan untuk mengembalikan ekosistem hutan di daerah aliran sungai negara tersebut.
Namun demikian, meskipun Meksiko mempunyai hak kepemilikan lahan dan properti yang kokoh bagi masyarakat adat dan komunitas lokal, hak-hak tersebut belum terintegrasi dengan peraturan-peraturan lainnya – sehingga menghambat segala bentuk pertumbuhan ekonomi.
Negara-negara industri, seperti Amerika Serikat dan anggota Uni Eropa, mempunyai tanggung jawab khusus untuk memberikan solusi terhadap masalah deforestasi.
Komunitas hutan harus diberikan bantuan dalam mengelola sumber daya dan mempertahankan sumber penghidupan mereka.
The Green Climate Fund, yang didirikan oleh PBB untuk membantu negara-negara berkembang mengurangi emisi karbon dioksida dan beradaptasi dengan perubahan iklim, harus mencantumkan ketentuan khusus bagi masyarakat adat, yang sesuai dengan Dedicated Grant Mechanism (Mekanisme Hibah Khusus) di bawah Climate Investment Fund.
Kunjungan Paus Fransiskus yang akan datang akan meliputi perjalanan ke Washington, DC dan Paris, dimana beliau diharapkan akan meneruskan advokasi gerakan atas nama lingkungan hidup.
Keputusan untuk menjawab permohonan Paus Fransiskus dan mengubah doa menjadi kebijakan berada di tangan para pemimpin kita.
Pope Francis in America
LONDON – It’s a dollar to a cent that Pope Francis’s visit to the United States in September will be one of the biggest news stories of 2015.
Take the sheer number of American Catholics, add the diplomatic skill of the Vatican’s purple-and-scarlet-clad officials, then throw in Francis’s powerful statements on a variety of subjects – often antagonizing America’s right wing in the process – and you have all the ingredients of an epic event.
Start with the diplomats.
Vatican officials catch their share of criticism, not least from Francis himself.
But their ranks include intelligent top-rank officials – led by the Pope’s chief adviser, Cardinal Pietro Parolin – who are experienced at working quietly for peace and social justice in some of the most perilous parts of the world.
When such smart diplomacy is put at the service of an appealing and influential Pope, not to mention the 1.2 billion Catholics worldwide, the result is an engine for doing good that is more formidable than anything the world has seen for some time.
Anecdotes about Francis – from his propensity for making personal phone calls to those in distress to his decision to wash the feet of criminals, Muslims, and women (to the horror of some churchmen) – ring true.
Such acts of graceful nobility have contributed to his reputation as a kind, approachable, charismatic, and decisive leader – one who has proved to be highly appealing worldwide.
My personal experience with Francis suggests that his reputation is well deserved.
Though, at age 71, I may be a little old to indulge in hero worship, I cannot remember a public figure to whom I have warmed more.
He embodies the message, delivered in the Gospel of St. Matthew’s account of the Sermon on the Mount: “Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness” (Matthew 5:6).
The moral authority that Francis exudes makes his interventions in controversial contemporary issues – such as his condemnation of the Armenian genocide, Islamic jihadi violence, Mafia criminality and corruption in Italy, and the deaths of African and Middle Eastern migrants in the Mediterranean – extremely powerful.
Before and during his visit to the US, his views on three issues – none of which is without controversy in the US – will have a particularly strong impact.
First, Francis is helping to end the decades-long standoff between the US and Cuba.
Not only did Cardinal Parolin, formerly the Vatican’s man in Venezuela, play a key role in the restoration of diplomatic relations between the US and Cuba; Francis plans to visit the island on his way to the US.
But the thaw in US-Cuba relations has not been welcomed by all US politicians.
Indeed, despite President Barack Obama’s apparent desire to end the pointless diplomatic freeze, some right-wing US politicians would, it seems, prefer a pariah to a potential partner off Florida’s coast.
The second key issue that Francis will address relates to the Israel-Palestine conflict – a fraught subject for the US, Israel’s most important ally.
The Vatican has announced its intention to sign a treaty that includes recognition of a Palestinian state.
Given Francis’s long record of friendship with Jews, and his understanding of their religion and culture, no Israeli politician can possibly condemn him as an anti-Semite.
Nonetheless, in parts of the American political establishment, Israel – specifically, Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu and his Likud Party – can do no wrong.
A US senator once told me, “We are all members of Likud here.”
The third issue – the most challenging for some American politicians, especially the most conservative among them – is Francis’s recent encyclical on environmental stewardship, climate change, and sustainable and fair economic development.
He clearly intends to put the full moral weight of his papacy behind the efforts to conclude a deal on climate change at the United Nations conference in Paris in December.
Obama’s recent statement on carbon-dioxide emissions is clearly very much in line with the encyclical.
Francis will undoubtedly discuss the subject in his address to Congress, 30% of whose members – including House Speaker John Boehner, a Republican – are Catholic.
Given that several of the leading candidates for the Republican presidential nomination – including Jeb Bush, Marco Rubio, and Bobby Jindal – also are Catholic, Francis’s strong stance on climate change may create a serious political dilemma for some.
Already, some of the most conservative elements in American politics – backed by those, like the billionaire brothers David and Charles Koch, who benefit from inaction on climate change – are attempting to denounce Francis’s views.
Whereas the Catholic Church once tried to suppress science and reason, most notably in its condemnation of Galileo, it is now defending them, while conservative US politicians deny the facts.
The pope is on the side of reason, as well as that of the angels.
In 1891, Pope Leo XIII produced Rerum Novarum, an encyclical on workers’ rights that fundamentally challenged the contemporary political discourse and approach to policymaking.
Francis hopes to have a similar impact today, helping to catalyze action on climate change.
In this manner, he hopes, the world can achieve sustainable growth that improves the lot of the poor, while safeguarding the planet on which we depend.
The 78-year-old Francis often talks of the limited time he has ahead of him.
Most Catholics pray that this is not the case.
Given the positive impact that such a charismatic and forward-thinking pope can have on the world, we should all share that hope.
The Real Mission for Pope Francis
GLENDALE, CALIFORNIA – Catholicism, among the most tradition-bound religions, contains at its core a paradox that has become increasingly sharp.
As Pope Francis begins his first overseas trip – to Brazil, the world’s most populous Catholic country – it is difficult, despite the inertia of the past, to tell where the church is headed.
The accession of Jorge Mario Bergoglio to the papacy adds to the puzzle.
The chief Jesuit confessor at the papal court used to be called “the black pope,” owing to his simple black cassock (if not his sinister intent).
Now, for the first time, a Jesuit has become pope – and has compounded the novelty by assuming the very un-Jesuit name of Francis.
As curious as such gestures are in an institution that thrives on imagery, they are symbolic frills.
We already have plenty of pictures of Francis kissing babies; what he faces now – in Brazil and around the world – are strategic matters of genuine substance.
One such challenge, the Vatican Bank, is equivalent to cleaning up the Augean stables.
It is enough to mention the words “Vatican” and “bank” in the same sentence to start a cascade of jokes about comic-opera ineptness and skullduggery.
In order to find a remedy, Francis has appointed a special papal financial commission.
But the bank known as the Institute for Works of Religion, founded in 1942, does not have deep roots in Catholicism.
Though notoriously secretive, the operation is far removed from the Church’s more sensitive, doctrinal core.
Besides, the commission’s members have impeccable loyalist credentials, which is also true of the cardinals appointed by Francis to look into broader issues of reform.
At the same time, Francis has launched a series of initiatives aimed at pleasing just about everyone.
He has expedited the canonization process for John XXIII, who inaugurated Vatican II almost a half-century ago, and John Paul II, the autocratic Pole who reined in many of Vatican II’s liberating impulses.
He has also announced plenary indulgences – time off from “the pains of purgatory” – for those who follow his visit to the Catholic youth festival in Rio de Janeiro on the Internet.
Such measures are difficult to get worked up about – both for Catholics who do not take them seriously and for “the simple faithful.”
They have feel-good value, but little else.
The heart of the matter is that Francis’s actions have been in line with the “revolution from above” style of reform associated with Vatican II.
In particular, none of the changes promoted by Francis envision a reduction in papal power.
The “primacy of the papacy” – a term Catholic theologians use when talking with their Protestant counterparts – remains sacrosanct.
The larger lesson is that this monarchical model of Catholicism, together with the hierarchy that attends it, has remained pretty much the same since the Counter-Reformation.
For example, when priests leave “holy orders,” they are “reduced to the lay state” – a bit of condescending terminology that says a lot about the Church’s archaic mindset.
This is not a new situation.
What is new are the circumstances under which it is unfolding.
Catholicism in its heyday combined a fairly decentralized administration, under the sway of stand-alone bishops, with a uniform set of beliefs.
One reason why it used to take roughly 13 years for a Jesuit to reach ordination was the long indoctrination in orthodoxy required for priests who, unlike “regular clergy” (whose training lasted half that time), would be mobile and beyond the direct control of bishops.
This situation is now close to being reversed.
Church administration has become increasingly subject to uniform civil codes.
At the same time, since Vatican II – and in tandem with the decline of close-knit ethnic enclaves – churchgoers no longer feel obliged to hew to the letter of canon law.
“Relativism,” “cafeteria Catholicism,” and the like are ubiquitous.
Papal authority stands on shaky ground, especially in the comparatively secular West.
Francis can attract attention by opining about social justice outside the church, but it is difficult for any pope to influence the habits and theological views of Catholics themselves, who think and act as they please.
He can scold – a tack that Francis has so far tried to avoid – but he cannot convince.
If the Church’s first dilemma concerns the basis and effectiveness of papal authority, the second concerns sexuality.
The two are linked.
Francis shies away from the retrograde rhetoric that his predecessors used in raising alarms about the role of women, and he has not gone out of his way to follow up on the Vatican’s “visitation” (read “Inquisition”) of uppity American nuns.
But he has kept that last episode on the books, and he continues to wax traditional about homosexuality.
Catholicism – or, more accurately, the celibate male mythos at the heart of the institutional church – rests on centuries of sexism.
An antifeminist culture pervades the organization.
Thoughtful theologians can distinguish among psycho-sexual issues; in practice, however, fear of a slippery slope to calamity prevails.
Pull one thread – the celibacy requirement for priests, for example – and the whole edifice comes crashing down.
Consider what has happened to liberalizing Protestant denominations, which, for all their good intentions, have lost adherents.
One could argue that concessions on this front would simply acknowledge attitudinal and behavioral reality and allow the church to move on.
One could also argue that the consequences of reform would not be as organizationally disastrous as feared – in the same way that cleaning up backwaters like the Vatican Bank would restore credibility to the Church’s spiritual message.
But this is a conversation that Francis has yet to initiate, and that the people around him show little sign of understanding.
Poppy Power
This month, the European Parliament adopted a resolution on Afghanistan that could pave the way for a new and more open-minded approach to counter-narcotics strategies worldwide.
In fact, the resolution calls on the participants at a conference of donors, to take place in London at the end of January, “to take into consideration the proposal of licensed production of opium for medical purposes, as already granted to a number of countries.”
This proposal was originally made by the Senlis Council, an independent organization based in Paris, during a workshop in Kabul last September.
The text introduced by the European Liberal Democrats, with the support of virtually all political groups in the European Parliament, is revolutionary, not only because it goes against conventional thinking, but also because it raises the issue above the stagnant reality of the “war on drugs.”
In Afghanistan, that so-called war has essentially been based on eradication campaigns and alternative livelihood projects, which have achieved only scant results.
The European Parliament’s new stance may, I hope, mark the beginning of a radical policy shift by all actors involved in rebuilding Afghanistan.
According to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, despite concerted efforts at eradication and crop substitution, Afghanistan produced 87% of the world’s opium in 2005 – roughly 4.1 tons – generating $2.7 billion of illegal revenue, which amounts to roughly 52% of the country’s GDP.
The 2005 Afghanistan Opium Survey, released last November, estimates that the total value of this opium, once turned into heroin and distributed around the world, could reach more than $40 billion.
Moreover, in recent years, factories and laboratories for processing opium into heroin have been sprouting in Afghanistan, producing 420 tons of heroin last year alone.
The increase in domestic heroin production has provided a massive boost to the local retail market, giving rise to concerns about HIV/AIDS spreading in a country with poor infrastructure and nonexistent health services.
In addition, the itineraries used by the export convoys are no longer limited to the infamous “golden route” through Pakistan and Iran, but have multiplied, employing exit points in former Soviet Republics such as Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, and Turkmenistan.
This is helping to promote further instability in already volatile political contexts.
International counter-narcotics policy is currently driven by pressure for rapid and visible results.
But eradication and alternative livelihood projects mainly affect the lowest end of the value-added chain, the farmers, with no real impact on those higher up, such as large landowners and local traffickers, not to mention the extremely powerful drug lords and the international cartels and mafias.
Most landless farmers find it difficult to switch to different crops, being caught up as they are in the illegal opium-denominated market, which forces them to live at the mercy of the drug traffickers, who provide them with access to credit and market outlets.
The result of this was laid out in a report by the European Union’s Election Observation Mission that I presented in Kabul last December: Afghanistan risks becoming a “rentier” state with easy access to resources that lubricate corruption throughout its entire political system, finance illegal armed groups, and fuel regional destabilization.
Illicit Afghan networks, replicating well-known methods that organized crime has applied successfully for decades in other parts of the world, are mobile and resourceful, and can plug into a range of legal economic activities to sustain themselves.
Indeed, the UN estimates that just six countries prescribe 78% of the total legal production of opiates, implying shortages of opium-based painkillers in many of the UN’s 185 other member states.
Hence the potential legal demand is huge.
Moreover, the UN also estimates that there are 45 million people living with HIV/AIDS in countries where health systems are either absent or very poor, and that over the next 20 years there will be some 10 million new cases of cancer in the developing world.
These estimates, together with poor countries’ additional needs when natural catastrophes strike, imply that the potential legal demand for medicinal opiates is even higher.
An increase in production of “medical” opium would address its lack of availability worldwide.
It would also provide Afghan peasants, who have been growing poppy despite forced eradication of the plant and incentives to change crops, with an option that is regulated by law and that, in time, could have an impact on the heroin trade.
Governments, international organizations and individuals that participate in the London conference must not dismiss the call made by the European Parliament, for it offers a far more workable strategy to promote Afghanistan’s future than the current counter-narcotics policies permit.
A British Test of Reason
PARIS – If voters in the United Kingdom decide in the country’s referendum on June 23 to leave the European Union, it will not be for economic reasons.
They may choose Brexit because they want full sovereignty, because they hate Brussels, or because they want migrants to return home, but not because they expect great economic benefits.
The pro-Brexit camp initially appeared to be holding two strong economic cards.
The first was UK citizens’ overwhelming rejection of their country’s net fiscal transfer to the rest of the EU, which currently amounts to 0.4% of GDP.
Since Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher first demanded to have “her money back” in 1979, the budgetary costs of EU membership have completely overshadowed its economic benefits in the public’s view.
The second card was the sorry state of continental Europe’s economy.
In terms of GDP growth, employment, or innovation, other EU countries, on average, lag behind the UK (and, to an even greater extent, the United States).
Whereas EU membership was once regarded as a gateway to prosperity, it is increasingly viewed as a drag on progress.
But lately, as John Van Reenen of the London School of Economics recently put it, the economic case for Brexit has been largely missing in action.
Its advocates are at pains to explain what kind of trade and partnership agreements, if any, Britain could enter into with the EU, much less how those agreements would be superior to the current arrangement.
As a result, it is tough to argue that the UK would receive a net economic boost – or even that it will not suffer considerably – by leaving the EU.
Of the eight economic evaluations recently surveyed by the Institute for Fiscal Studies, a respected independent research institution, only one claims that leaving the EU would lead to significant economic gains.
And that study – produced, unsurprisingly, by Economists for Brexit – has been sharply criticized by the rest of the economic profession for lacking an appropriate analytical basis.
Most studies find that Britain would suffer significantly from leaving the EU.
UK exporters would end up participating less in the large EU market, and they would be shut out of EU-negotiated agreements ensuring access to major international markets.
While the UK could negotiate new agreements with these partners, that would take time, and, acting alone, its negotiating power would presumably be weaker.
This means that the UK would trade less with EU and non-EU partners alike.
It would pay higher prices for inputs and consumer goods, and British firms’ reduced integration into global value chains would undermine productivity.
The cost in terms of foregone GDP would be 5-20 times higher than the saving implied by not contributing to the EU budget.
That is not an appealing deal, to say the least.
All modern analysis of economic internationalization shows that foreign trade is a powerful selection mechanism.
It provides major growth opportunities for the most productive and innovative firms, while enabling them to learn from their overseas competitors.
It is no accident that the world’s best firms – which have the highest productivity, profits, and wages, and invest in strengthening human capital – are trade champions.
Brexit’s adverse impact on UK firms’ scope for development would further increase the economic cost.
These arguments have been forcefully advanced ahead of the referendum.
Yet they have not simplified the debate on the costs and benefits of Brexit.
This may be partly because that debate has not played out along party lines.
Prime Minister David Cameron’s Conservatives are deeply divided on the topic, while Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour Party is lukewarm about the EU.
Because the choice is not between left and right, independent views have gained greater weigtht.
The June 23 referendum is important in its own right, owing to its far-reaching implications for the UK’s relationship with Europe.
But it will also deliver broader lessons.
If British voters decide to leave the EU, it will indicate that rational economic arguments carry less weight than emotional appeals.
Such an outcome will bolster populist forces elsewhere – from Italy to France to the US – in their advocacy of isolationist policies that most experts regard as economic nonsense.
To oppose such forces and policies, mainstream political parties will have to address their failure, even with the facts on their side, to offer a narrative compelling enough to convince voters to choose economic openness.
A vote by a majority of British citizens to remain in the EU would have the opposite impact, highlighting that, whatever negative feelings people may have about a policy or entity, reason and logic cannot be tossed aside.
Equally important, such an outcome could encourage greater scrutiny of the economic consequences of populist programs in the US and the rest of Europe.
What is at stake in the June 23 referendum is therefore not only the relationship between Britain and the EU – or even the future of the “European project.”
How voters decide will be an important test of whether democratic choices in advanced countries are governed by economic rationality or popular passions.