(Interestingly, both of these possibilities are highlighted as “risk factors” in the offering documents for PDVSA’s bonds.)
Both PDVSA and the government can also use “exit consents”: changing some of the bonds’ terms – the pari passu clause used by Argentina holdouts, as well as other significant provisions – through agreement with a simple majority of PDVSA bondholders and two-thirds of holders of most government bonds.
Venezuela could further distinguish itself from Argentina by committing to a strong reform program and seeking IMF support.
Under the IMF’s exceptional access facility, Venezuela would potentially be eligible for more than $70 billion of new finance to support its reform program.
And this backing should help to win strong support from its creditors.
In this context, the IMF and major governments should support Venezuela’s decision to treat would-be holdouts no better than creditors with which it reaches agreement.
Defaults stemming from an unwillingness to pay do not deserve international support.
But when a debtor is unable to pay, nothing is gained by forcing payment.
When a significant number of holdouts insist on being paid in full, it becomes impossible to design an effective restructuring, unless other creditors reduce or defer their claims.
This is the definition of free riding.
No strategy to undermine holdouts can also mean no restructuring at all, which could mean chaos or even a failed state.
Neither outcome would serve the interests of the international financial community or the Venezuelan people.
What To Do About Debt
GENEVA – Over the last few months, a great deal of attention has been devoted to financial-market volatility.
But as frightening as the ups and downs of stock prices can be, they are mere froth on the waves compared to the real threat to the global economy: the enormous tsunami of debt bearing down on households, businesses, banks, and governments.
If the US Federal Reserve follows through on raising interest rates at the end of this year, as has been suggested, the global economy – and especially emerging markets – could be in serious trouble.
Global debt has grown some $57 trillion since the collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008, reaching a back-breaking $199 trillion in 2014, more than 2.5 times global GDP, according to the McKinsey Global Institute.
Servicing these debts will most likely become increasingly difficult over the coming years, especially if growth continues to stagnate, interest rates begin to rise, export opportunities remain subdued, and the collapse in commodity prices persists.
Much of the concern about debt has been focused on the potential for defaults in the eurozone.
But heavily indebted companies in emerging markets may be an even greater danger.
Corporate debt in the developing world is estimated to have reached more than $18 trillion dollars, with as much as $2 trillion of it in foreign currencies.
The risk is that – as in Latin America in the 1980s and Asia in the 1990s – private-sector defaults will infect public-sector balance sheets.
That possibility is, if anything, greater today than it has been in the past.
Increasingly open financial markets allow foreign banks and asset managers to dump debts rapidly, often for reasons that have little to do with economic fundamentals.
When accompanied by currency depreciation, the results can be brutal – as Ukraine is learning the hard way.
In such cases, private losses inevitably become a costly public concern, with market jitters rapidly spreading across borders as governments bail out creditors in order to prevent economic collapse.
It is important to note that indebted governments are both more and less vulnerable than private debtors.
Sovereign borrowers cannot seek the protection of bankruptcy laws to delay and restructure payments; at the same time, their creditors cannot seize non-commercial public assets in compensation for unpaid debts.
When a government is unable to pay, the only solution is direct negotiations.
But the existing system of debt restructuring is inefficient, fragmented, and unfair.
Sovereign borrowers’ inability to service their debt tends to be addressed too late and ineffectively.
Governments are reluctant to acknowledge solvency problems for fear of triggering capital outflows, financial panics, and economic crises.
Meanwhile, private creditors, anxious to avoid a haircut, will often postpone resolution in the hope that the situation will turn around.
When the problem is finally acknowledged, it is usually already an emergency, and rescue efforts all too often focus on propping up irresponsible lenders rather than on facilitating economic recovery.
To make matters worse, when a compromise is reached, the burden falls disproportionately on the debtor, in the form of enforced austerity and structural reforms that make the residual debt even less sustainable.
Furthermore, the recent strengthening of creditor rights and the growth of bond financing has made sovereign-debt restructuring enormously complex and open to abuse by highly speculative holdout investors, including so-called vulture funds.
As consensus grows regarding the need for better ways to restructure debt, three options have emerged.
The first would strengthen bond markets’ legal underpinnings, by introducing strong collective-action clauses in contracts and clarifying the pari passu (equal treatment) provision, as well as promoting the use of GDP-indexed or contingent-convertible bonds. This approach would be voluntary and consensual, but it would miss large parts of the debt market and do little to support economic recovery or a return to sustainable growth.
A second approach would focus on building a consensus around soft-law principles to guide restructuring efforts.
The core principles – those under discussion include sovereignty, legitimacy, impartiality, transparency, good faith, and sustainability principles – currently would apply to all debt instruments and could provide greater coordination than market-based approaches.
But, although this effort has the advantage of familiarity, it would be non-binding, with no guarantee that a critical mass of parties would adhere to it.
The third option would attempt to resolve this coordination problem through a set of rules and norms agreed in advance as part of an international debt-workout mechanism that would be similar to bankruptcy laws at the national level.
Its purpose would be to prevent financial meltdowns in countries facing difficulties servicing their external debt and to guide their economies back toward sustainable growth.
The mechanism would include provisions allowing for a temporary standstill on all payments due, whether private or public; an automatic stay on creditor litigation; temporary exchange-rate and capital controls; the provision of debtor-in-possession and interim financing for vital current-account transactions; and, eventually, debt restructuring and relief.
Evidence from Ghana, Greece, Puerto Rico, Ukraine, and many other countries shows the economic and social damage that unsustainable debts can cause when they are improperly managed.
In September, the United Nations General Assembly adopted a set of principles to guide sovereign-debt restructuring.
This is an important step forward, but much remains to be done to prevent much from coming undone as the global economy confronts the looming wall of debt.
How Much Development Data Is Enough?
NAIROBI – Rapid advances in technology have dramatically lowered the cost of gathering data.
Sensors in space, the sky, the lab, and the field, along with newfound opportunities for crowdsourcing and widespread adoption of the Internet and mobile telephones, are making large amounts of information available to those for whom it was previously out of reach.
A small-scale farmer in rural Africa, for example, can now access weather forecasts and market prices at the tap of a screen.
This data revolution offers enormous potential for improving decision-making at every level – from the local farmer to world-spanning development organizations.
But gathering data is not enough.
The information must also be managed and evaluated – and doing this properly can be far more complicated and expensive than the effort to collect it.
If the decisions to be improved are not first properly identified and analyzed, there is a high risk that much of the collection effort could be wasted or misdirected.
This conclusion is itself based on empirical analysis.
The evidence is weak, for example, that monitoring initiatives in agriculture or environmental management have had a positive impact.
Quantitative analysis of decisions across many domains, including environmental policy, business investments, and cyber security, has shown that people tend to overestimate the amount of data needed to make a good decision or misunderstand what type of data are needed.
Furthermore, grave errors can occur when large data sets are mined using machine algorithms without having first having properly examined the decision that needs to be made.
There are many examples of cases in which data mining has led to the wrong conclusion – including in medical diagnoses or legal cases – because experts in the field were not consulted and critical information was left out of the analysis.
Decision science, which combines understanding of behavior with universal principles of coherent decision-making, limits these risks by pairing empirical data with expert knowledge.
If the data revolution is to be harnessed in the service of sustainable development, the best practices of this field must be incorporated into the effort.
The first step is to identify and frame frequently recurring decisions.
In the field of development, these include large-scale decisions such as spending priorities – and thus budget allocations – by governments and international organizations.
But it also includes choices made on a much smaller scale: farmers pondering which crops to plant, how much fertilizer to apply, and when and where to sell their produce.
The second step is to build a quantitative model of the uncertainties in such decisions, including the various triggers, consequences, controls, and mitigants, as well as the different costs, benefits, and risks involved.
Incorporating – rather than ignoring – difficult-to-measure, highly uncertain factors leads to the best decisions.
When put in the service of sustainable development, such a model will often involve projecting the impact of interventions on livelihoods and the environment over several decades.
This process is most successful when stakeholders as well as experts are recruited to identify the relevant variables and their relationships.
These participants must be trained to provide quantitative estimates of their uncertainty for the different variables.
For example, experts might estimate with 90% confidence, based on available data and their own experience, that farmers’ average maize yields in a given region are 0.5-2 tons per hectare.
The third step is to compute the value of obtaining additional information – something that is possible only if the uncertainties in all of the variables have been quantified.
The value of information is the amount a rational decision-maker would be willing to pay for it.
So we need to know where additional data will have value for improving a decision and how much we should spend to get it.
In some cases, no further information may be needed to make a sound decision; in others, acquiring further data could be worth millions of dollars.
This process is repeated until there is no further value in acquiring data and a sound decision – a logical conclusion, based on the information, values, and preferences of the decision-makers or decision-making body – is reached.
It provides decision-makers and stakeholders insights into how to improve policies to maximize positive outcomes and reduce risks, such as the possibility of low rates of adoption or limited institutional capacity for effective implementation.
It is not enough simply to assume that the data revolution will benefit sustainable development.
Ensuring that it does will require recognizing the importance of rigorous analysis in every data-collection effort and the formation of a new generation of decision scientists to work alongside policymakers.
Decision Time for the Eurozone
ATHENS – Germany’s arguments against introducing Eurobonds, expanding the eurozone’s bailout fund, and instituting a comprehensive system of economic governance are transparent and easy to understand.
But are they right?
The Germans fear that such innovations would lead to a rise in domestic borrowing costs, and to direct and indirect fiscal transfers to poorer countries.
Moreover, they warn of the moral hazard generated by relieving over-indebted countries from the pressure to put their public finances in order.
Third, they cite treaty-related and constitutional difficulties in establishing rules and procedures that would simulate a “fiscal union.”
Finally, the need to move ahead with European unification in order to legitimize the inevitable infringement of over-indebted countries’ sovereignty might eventually infringe upon German sovereignty as well.
On the other hand, refusing to accept the growing consensus that fiscal union is the key to resolving the debt crisis exposes the eurozone, and Germany, to serious risks.
Sticking to half-measures exacerbates markets’ impatience and provokes increasingly determined speculative attacks, not only on the weaker peripheral countries, but also on core AAA-rated countries – like France and, eventually, Germany itself – whose banking sectors hold large volumes of peripheral countries’ debt.
Indeed, weakening banking conditions are emerging as a major threat to the eurozone’s recovery and stability.
In the event of sovereign defaults, moreover, the cost of bailing out the banks may far exceed the cost of issuing Eurobonds or instituting a reasonable transfer regime.
Investors need to be reassured that debt-service costs are under control, and that debt volumes and deficit limits are firmly monitored in order to minimize default risks and strengthen banks’ ability to lay the groundwork for sustainable growth.
In fact, the emerging systemic risk concerning the sustainability of the eurozone produces a vicious circle.
Systemic risk raises doubts about the solvency of over-indebted countries, which means that these countries’ efforts to consolidate their fiscal position and promote reform do not lead to improvement in financial conditions, which is essential for overcoming the crisis and promoting recovery.
As a result, fiscal consolidation becomes increasingly difficult to achieve, inviting renewed speculative attacks.
Moreover, viewed from a wider perspective, economic and social turbulence on Europe’s southern periphery will constitute a geopolitical risk.
That risk would be exacerbated by the eruption of a major default-related crisis within the eurozone, which might not be contained and, through a Lehman-like domino sequence, could jeopardize the entire edifice.
The eurozone’s dilemmas, and the pros and cons of proposed solutions, can be debated endlessly.
It could be argued, for example, that Eurobonds would allow eurozone members to pool their financial strength and, by enhancing the attractiveness of the euro as a reserve currency, hold down borrowing costs to such an extent that AAA-rated countries are not overburdened.
Legal problems could also be overcome in the short term by designing Eurobonds to include credit guarantees, repayment priorities, and the use of specific tax streams as collateral.
Proposals to limit moral hazard, meanwhile, would do so by limiting Eurobonds to 60% of GDP – the eurozone’s current ceiling for member states’ public debt.
A more substantial constraint would be to establish a tougher disciplinary regime on fiscally profligate countries as part of a reinforced institutional framework.
Political problems, however they are addressed, should be weighed against the vulnerability of European banks.
Germany’s banks today are the most highly leveraged of any of the major advanced economies, while at the start of the crisis they held close to one-third of all loans made to the public and private sectors of Greece, Portugal, Ireland, Spain, and Italy.
So long as the eurozone’s systemic risk is not addressed, sovereign defaults are not unlikely, leading to extended bank bailouts that could carry unacceptable costs.
In that case, a full-blown banking crisis could bring about a depression in the eurozone and, perhaps, globally.
Europe-wide bank recapitalization is essential in the short term to contain the cost arising from possible sovereign defaults.
However, addressing the eurozone’s deeper defects cannot be postponed endlessly.
Of course, in the midst of so much uncertainty, it is remarkable that the over-indebted countries’ consolidation efforts remain broadly on track; but the European Central Bank’s continued bond-buying and liquidity support is only a temporary palliative.
An impasse is inevitable, so playing for time is not a solution.
By contrast, a combination of Eurobonds, a fully-fledged debt facility, enhanced powers for the ECB so that it can act as a lender of last resort, and solid economic governance would work.
In the longer term, radical reforms in capital, product, and labor markets will also be needed, complemented by a stronger and more cohesive investment strategy at the European level, aimed at boosting competitiveness and restoring growth prospects.
European competitiveness does not have only a global dimension.
Large discrepancies exist within the eurozone, reflected in structural trade imbalances between the core and the periphery that lie at the heart of the debt crisis.
The eurozone’s cohesion and future growth depend critically on creating a framework – through grants and loans – for investment capital to flow to the poorer countries in order to close the competitiveness gap.
To borrow a phrase from the financial world, the euro is too big to fail.
Decisions should be taken sooner rather than later, so that the eurozone itself shapes events, rather than being commanded by them.
Decision Time for the Global Economy
MILAN – In the dog days of summer, Milan is quieter than many European cities.
The locals are away, and, unlike Paris or Rome, tourists do not take their place.
Here and elsewhere, people, businesses, governments, and markets take a break, decompress, and reflect.
Europe’s economic problems will still be here, waiting for us, in September.
And when summer ends, uncertainty about key issues will be the order of the day –&#160;and not only in Europe.
Largely unanticipated protest movements in Turkey and Brazil have raised questions about the economic and social sustainability of emerging-market growth.
The fires in Bangladeshi garment factories have raised new questions about the governance of global supply chains.
In the United States, the Federal Reserve hinted at “tapering” its quantitative-easing policy later in the year, and a kind of global carry trade based on monetary conditions in advanced countries started to unwind as a result, causing credit tightening and market turbulence in emerging economies.
This is probably only a preview of the complexity of the exit from the post-crisis assisted-growth model that has prevailed in the US, Europe, and now Japan.
A possible political impasse in the US in September over the budget and debt ceiling complicates the outlook further.
And yet much of the current uncertainty is set to dissipate.
In the coming months, highly consequential policy decisions (or their absence) in systemically critical parts of the global economy will be revealed, with significant effects on growth rates, asset prices, and overall confidence.
For starters, China’s new leadership has moved away from outsize fiscal and monetary stimulus and accepted an economic slowdown, betting on structural change, systemic reform, and sustainable longer-term growth.
The key signals will come from the Chinese Communist Party’s plenary meeting in the early fall.
China’s reforms will either support the economic shift, boosting sentiment and lifting growth forecasts, or they will fall short and disappoint, with attention most likely to be focused on the size and nature of state intervention in markets.
Either way, with the future of the global economy’s principal growth engine at stake, the effects will be felt worldwide.
In the US, economic deleveraging has proceeded significantly further than it has in Europe.
The US is adjusting structurally and generating real (inflation-adjusted) GDP growth (though well below its potential annual rate of 3-3.5%).
The tradable sector is expanding and is not dependent on leverage to generate aggregate demand.
One can think of the US economy as an 8-cylinder engine running on five, owing to residual deleveraging, fiscal consolidation and drag, public-sector investment shortfalls, and questions about the financial health and security of middle-income households (the backbone of domestic aggregate demand).
Part-time employment is spreading and may become the labor market’s new normal.
Then there is the question of the Fed’s assisted-growth model.
Is the US economy ready to grow without abnormal policy support?
It seems clear that tapering the Fed’s monthly purchases of long-term securities later this year would cause a realignment of asset values in financial markets.
How this spills over into the real economy is yet another source of uncertainty.
But, despite some transitional market turbulence, the overall effect will likely be positive.
The beneficial effect on the risk-return options available to investors/savers (including pension funds) will outweigh the higher cost of debt; indeed, an important subset of growth engines in the tradable sector is not dependent on low-cost debt.
The same cannot be said of Europe, where Germany’s general election in September is viewed as a key barometer of continuing commitment to the euro.
The European Central Bank’s “outright monetary transactions” program – though conditional, limited to short-term government debt, and so far unused – appears to have stabilized eurozone sovereign-debt markets, albeit in a low- or zero-growth environment.
But the OMT program is dependent on German support.
The question is how long this can last, given southern Europe’s growth and employment challenges (and an apparent lack of understanding among policymakers and the public that there are no short-term solutions).
In Italy, the debate centers on taxes in general, and the rather miniscule property tax in particular.
The income tax (and thus the tax on employment) is high.
But the country is relatively wealthy, especially in terms of property assets on household balance sheets.
So higher taxes on property and lower taxes on income would contribute to the creation of a more dynamic, competitive economy.
But that is far from the current focus of public debate.
The key liberalizing reforms that would enhance the economy’s flexibility and pace of adjustment are simply not on the agenda (owing to an underlying lack of trust among voters).
This is important because the private sector in Italy (and in Spain) cannot match the structural flexibility found in the US (and in Germany since its reforms in 2003-2006).
Think now of an 8-cylinder engine running not on five cylinders, but on two or three at best.
(Admittedly, the Spanish labor market reforms enacted earlier this year may start to lift employment and improve competitiveness and growth on the economy’s tradable side, which is constrained largely by low productivity, not weak demand.)
But the default option in the context of political gridlock – a halting, slow-growth strategy, focused excessively on fiscal austerity and featuring high unemployment (especially for the young) – is unlikely to remain workable for long.
At some point, the political agenda will either shift toward real reform, or sentiment will shift substantially against the euro.
Fortunately, this uncomfortable uncertainty will not last much longer – in Europe or elsewhere.
China’s leaders will make their choices, as will German voters.
The Fed will clarify the direction of US monetary policy.
Markets will adjust and settle down.
Distortions will begin to unwind.
Without dismissing the downside risks, I remain cautiously optimistic about the global economy’s prospects.
With greater clarity in terms of Chinese and US policy, both economies should gain momentum.
That will give developing countries (many of which face difficult domestic policy choices) a tailwind, while making the substantial challenges in Europe and Japan easier to address.
From Memory to Denial in Russia
LONDON – My most painful experience in Russia was a visit to Perm-36, the only one of Stalin’s forced-labor camps to have been preserved, in 1998.
I was in Perm, a city in the Urals, to take part in a seminar of the Moscow School of Political Studies.
Founded by the remarkable Lena Nemirovskaya, the school’s purpose was to introduce young post-communist Russians to democracy, self-government, and capitalism.
One bitterly cold March day, I joined a few friends on a trip to the former camp.
Built in the early 1940s as a “regular” labor camp, Perm-36 was converted into a concentration camp for political prisoners in 1972.
The last prisoners were released in 1987, three years into Mikhail Gorbachev’s rule.
Now it was being restored as a Gulag Museum by Memorial, a human-rights group founded by the dissident physicist Andrei Sakharov, to remind Russians of their totalitarian past.
We were shown around the maximum-security wing.
Surrounded by a barbed-wire perimeter, it had housed the political prisoners, mostly from the non-Russian Soviet republics, who were considered to be “particularly dangerous recidivists.”
After a Ukrainian television crew filmed the site in 1989, part of it was deliberately destroyed.
It was obvious that the prisoners had been subject to psychological torture and extreme physical hardship.
The tiny radiator in each cell could hardly have dented the October-to-April frost.
The prisoners slept on wooden planks or iron bunks.
Their clothes and bedcovers were made of cotton, not wool, and an open hole served as the cell’s lavatory.
Our guide, Maya, explained that the authorities liked to put together prisoners who got on each other’s nerves.
During the day, they were moved across the corridor to identical cells in which they uselessly worked making iron implements.
For one hour each day, they were allowed into an “exercise block,” a nine-foot (2.7 meters), tin-lined cube, with a barbed-wire roof and a guard post on top.
The only other “recreation” was a weekly show of propaganda films.
Of the 56 “dangerous recidivists” held in Perm-36 in the 1980s, seven died.
One was the Ukrainian poet and nationalist Vasyl Stus.
The authorities called it a suicide, but survivors say that, for fun, the guards unscrewed one of the wooden planks from the wall and dropped it on Stus’s head as he lay sleeping.
As Maya recounted the grisly story, I watched the faces of the two young male guards who accompanied us.
Their expressions were as frozen as the ground outside.
Were they thinking about football or about making love to their girlfriends?
Given enough vodka, would they, too, have been capable of murder for fun?
The answer, I fear, is probably yes.
Evil systems never seem to struggle to find the zombie henchmen they need.
Organizations like Memorial and the Moscow School of Political Studies have no place in Vladimir Putin’s Russia.
Officially, they are deemed “foreign agents” and have been subject to so much legal harassment that it is almost impossible for them to function.
Today, the Gulag Museum is under different management.
“The new presentation,” write Mikhail Danilovich and Robert Coalson, “is devoted not to the repressive forced-labor practices of the Stalin era but to the timber production at the plant and to its contribution to the Soviet victory in World War II.”
And, after 20 years, the Moscow School of Political Studies has been forced to suspend its Russian operations.
The fate of the museum and the school is part of the wider clampdown on freedom of expression and behavior in Putin’s third presidential term.
Dissidents are routinely dubbed deviants, fifth columnists, and traitors, as the regime leads a drive for national unity based on religion, tradition, and paranoid rhetoric.
This represents a major shift from Russia’s early post-Soviet days.
The liberal Russia’s Choice party, led by the country’s first democratic prime minister, Yegor Gaidar, received 15.5% of the vote in the 1993 general election, and with its allies formed the largest bloc in the Duma.
At the time, this was regarded as a catastrophic failure.
Today, liberal candidates cannot even get into the Duma.
How has this come to pass?
Why have the hopes of Gorbachev’s glasnost been so cruelly snuffed out?
A widespread view is that Russia is simply reverting to type: freedom was never more than a fleeting vowel in its historical alphabet.
But this is a facile explanation.
True, Russian liberalism has contributed to its own demise, by its incompetence and factionalism.
But the West did not help.
In the 1990s, it failed to put money behind the economic reforms that it sponsored.
Expanding NATO into the Baltic States in 2002 – the Alliance’s first enlargement into former Soviet territory – was a catastrophic mistake, which made it almost impossible for a Russian to be both patriotic and pro-Western.
By both omission and commission, the West cut the ground from under Russian political liberalism, enabling the ascendancy of Putinism.
So far, Putin has displayed an accurate sense of limits.
He allows Russians to dream of greatness without getting them into serious trouble.
Under his leadership, Russia has shrugged off sanctions, forged a new alliance with China, and annoyed – but not openly challenged – the West in Syria.
But those who know Putin say that he brooks no argument; he is the only one setting the limits.
And no one can maintain supreme power for as long as he has without being corrupted.
For the moment, Putinism is the only game in town.
But, although the forces represented by Memorial and the Moscow School of Political Studies have been marginalized, they have not been eradicated.
A New Macroeconomic Strategy
NEW YORK – I am a macroeconomist, but I dissent from the profession’s two leading camps in the United States: the neo-Keynesians, who focus on boosting aggregate demand, and the supply-siders, who focus on cutting taxes.
Both schools have tried and failed to overcome the high-income economies’ persistently weak performance in recent years.
It is time for a new strategy, one based on sustainable, investment-led growth.
The core challenge of macroeconomics is to allocate society’s resources to their best use.
Workers who choose to work should find jobs; factories should deploy their capital efficiently; and the part of income that is saved rather than consumed should be invested to improve future wellbeing.
It is on this third challenge that both neo-Keynesians and supply-siders have dropped the ball.
Most high-income countries – the US, most of Europe, and Japan – are failing to invest adequately or wisely toward future best uses.
There are two ways to invest – domestically or internationally – and the world is falling short on both.&nbsp;
Domestic investment comes in various forms, including business investment in machinery and buildings; household investment in homes; and government investment in people (education, skills), knowledge (research and development), and infrastructure (transport, power, water, and climate resilience).
The neo-Keynesian approach is to try to boost domestic investment of any sort.
Indeed, according to this view, spending is spending.
Thus, neo-Keynesians have tried to spur more housing investment through rock-bottom interest rates, more auto purchases through securitized consumer loans, and more “shovel-ready” infrastructure projects through short-term stimulus programs.
When investment spending does not budge, they recommend that we turn “excess” saving into another consumption binge.
Supply-siders, by contrast, want to promote private (certainly not public!) investment through more tax cuts and further deregulation.
They have tried that on several occasions in the US, most recently during the George W. Bush administration.
Unfortunately, the result of this deregulation was a short-lived housing bubble, not a sustained boom in productive private investment.
Neither neo-Keynesians nor supply-siders focus on the true remedies for this persistent drop in investment spending.
Our societies urgently need more investment, particularly to convert heavily polluting, energy-intensive, and high-carbon production into sustainable economies based on the efficient use of natural resources and a shift to low-carbon energy sources.
Such investments require complementary steps by the public and private sectors.
The necessary investments include large-scale deployment of solar and wind power; broader adoption of electric transport, both public (buses and trains) and private (cars); energy-efficient buildings; and power grids to carry renewable energy across large distances (say, from the North Sea and North Africa to continental Europe, and from California’s Mojave Desert to US population centers).
But just when our societies should be making such investments, the public sectors in the US and Europe are on a veritable “investment strike.”
Governments are cutting back public investment in the name of budget balance, and private investors cannot invest robustly and securely in alternative energy when publicly regulated power grids, liability rules, pricing formulas, and national energy policies are uncertain and heavily disputed.
In the US, public investment spending has been slashed.
Neither the federal government nor the states have political mandates, funding strategies, or long-term plans to catalyze investment in the next generation of smart, clean technologies.
Both neo-Keynesians and supply-siders have misunderstood the investment paralysis.
Neo-Keynesians see investments, public and private, as merely another kind of aggregate demand.
They neglect the public-policy decisions regarding energy systems and infrastructure (as well as the targeted R&amp;D to promote new technologies) that are needed to unleash smart, environmentally sustainable public and private investment spending.
Thus, they promote gimmicks (zero interest rates and stimulus packages), rather than pressing for the detailed national policies that a robust investment recovery will require.
The supply-siders, for their part, seem utterly oblivious to the dependence of private investment on complementary public investment and a clear policy and regulatory framework.
They advocate slashing government spending, naively believing that the private sector will somehow magically fill the void.
But, by cutting public investment, they are hindering private investment.
Private electricity producers, for example, will not invest in large-scale renewable energy generation if the government does not have long-term climate and energy policies or plans for spurring construction of long-distance transmission lines to carry new low-carbon energy sources to population centers.
Such messy policy details have never much bothered free-market economists.
There is also the option of using domestic saving to boost foreign investments.
The US could, for example, lend money to low-income African economies to buy new power plants from US companies.
Such a policy would put US private saving to important use in fighting global poverty, while strengthening the US industrial base.
Yet here, too, neither the neo-Keynesians nor the supply-siders have exerted much effort to improve the institutions of development finance.
Instead of advising Japan and China to raise their consumption rates, macroeconomists would be wiser to encourage these economies to use their high savings to fund not only domestic but also overseas investments.
These considerations are reasonably clear to anyone concerned with the urgent need to harmonize economic growth and environmental sustainability.
Our generation’s most pressing challenge is to convert the world’s dirty and carbon-based energy systems and infrastructure into clean, smart, and efficient systems for the twenty-first century.
Investing in a sustainable economy would dramatically boost our wellbeing and use our “excess” savings for just the right purposes.
Yet this will not happen automatically.
We need long-term public-investment strategies, environmental planning, technology roadmaps, public-private partnerships for new, sustainable technologies, and greater global cooperation.
These tools will create the new macroeconomics on which our health and prosperity now depend.
America’s Overrated Decline
CAMBRIDGE – With the approach of the US Congressional elections, questions about the health of America’s political institutions and the future of its global leadership have become rampant, with some citing partisan gridlock as evidence of America’s decline.
But is the situation really that bad?
According to the political scientist Sarah Binder, the ideological divide between America’s two main political parties has not been as large as it is now since the end of the nineteenth century.
Despite the current gridlock, however, the 111th Congress managed to pass a major fiscal stimulus, health-care reform, financial regulation, an arms-control treaty, and revision of the military policy on homosexuality.
Clearly, the US political system cannot be written off (especially if partisan gridlock is cyclical).
Nonetheless, today’s Congress is plagued by low legislative capacity.
Though ideological consistency has more than doubled over the last two decades, from 10% to 21% of the public, most Americans do not have uniformly conservative or liberal views, and want their representatives to meet one another halfway.
Political parties, however, have become more consistently ideological since the 1970s.
This is not a new problem for the US, whose constitution is based on the eighteenth-century liberal view that power is best controlled by fragmentation and countervailing checks and balances, with the president and Congress forced to compete for control in areas like foreign policy.
In other words, the US government was designed to be inefficient, in order to ensure that it could not easily threaten the liberty of its citizens.
This inefficiency has likely contributed to the decline in confidence in American institutions.
Today, less than one-fifth of the public trusts the federal government to do the right thing most of the time, compared to three-quarters in 1964.
Of course, these figures surged occasionally during that period, such as after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks; but the overall decline is considerable.
The federal government is not alone.
Over the last several decades, public confidence in many influential institutions has plummeted.
From 1964-1997, the share of Americans who trusted universities fell from 61% to 30%, while trust in major companies fell from 55% to 21%.
Trust in medical institutions dropped from 73% to 29%, and in journalism from 29% to 14%.
Over the last decade, confidence in educational institutions and the military has recovered, but trust in Wall Street and large corporations has continued to fall.
But these ostensibly alarming figures can be misleading.
In fact, 82% of Americans still consider the US to be the world’s best place to live, and 90% like their democratic system of government.
Americans may not be entirely satisfied with their leaders, but the country is certainly not on the brink of an Arab Spring-style revolution.
Moreover, though party politics have become more polarized in recent decades, this follows the 1950s and early 1960s, when the escape from the Great Depression and victory in World War II fueled unusually high confidence in US institutions.
In fact, the sharpest decline in public trust in the government occurred in the late 1960s and early 1970s.
Moreover, declining trust in the government has not been accompanied by significant changes in citizens’ behavior.
For example, the Internal Revenue Service is among the government institutions that inspire the least public confidence; yet there has been no major surge in tax evasion.
In terms of controlling corruption, the US still scores in the 90th percentile.
And though voting rates in presidential elections declined from 62% to 50% in the latter half of the twentieth century, they stabilized in 2000, and rose to 58% in 2012.
The loss of confidence that Americans have expressed may be rooted in a deeper shift in people’s attitudes toward individualism, which has brought about decreased deference to authority.
Indeed, similar patterns are characteristic of most post-modern societies.
This social shift probably will not influence US institutions’ effectiveness as much as one might think, given America’s decentralized federal system.
In fact, gridlock in the national capital is often accompanied by political cooperation and innovation at the state and municipal levels, leading citizens to view state and local governments, as well as many government agencies, much more favorably than the federal government.
This approach to governance has had a profound impact on the mentality of the American people.
A 2002 study indicated that three-quarters of Americans feel connected to their communities, and consider their quality of life to be excellent or good, with nearly half of adults participating in a civic group or activity.
That is good news for the US.
But it does not mean that America’s leaders can continue to ignore the political system’s shortcomings, such as the gerrymandered “safe seats” in the House of Representatives and obstructive processes in the Senate.
Whether such sources of gridlock can be overcome remains to be seen.
And there is legitimate reason to doubt America’s ability to maintain its “hyperpower” status, not least owing to the rise of major emerging economies.
But, as the conservative author David Frum notes, over the last two decades, the US has experienced a swift decline in crime, auto fatalities, alcohol and tobacco consumption, and emissions of sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide, which cause acid rain – all while leading an Internet revolution.
Given this, dire comparisons to, say, the decline of Rome are simply unwarranted.
Pencemaran Nama Baik dan Pembangunan di Dunia Arab
AMMAN – Akibat radikalisme yang dipenuhi unsur kekerasan dan perang saudara di Timur Tengah dan Afrika Utara yang kini menarik perhatian dunia, sistem hukum di kedua kawasan yang tidak memberikan keadilan tengah menjadi sorotan.
Tetapi undang-undang yang bermasalah seperti kriminalisasi pencemaran nama baik, yang memudahkan terjadinya penindasan politik dan ekonomi, sesungguhnya melemahkan pembangunan dan justru merusak kehidupan.
Pemerintah Mesir bisa disebut salah satu pelaku yang sering melanggar undang-undang pencemaran nama baik dan penistaan untuk menekan perbedaan pendapat.
Secara khusus, otoritas Mesir menggunakan Pasal 98 (f) Kitab Undang-undang Hukum Pidana Mesir – yang melarang warga negara menghina “agama-agama surgawi”, menghasut perselisihan sektarian, atau mendiskreditkan Islam – untuk menahan, menuntut, dan memenjarakan penganut agama non-mayoritas, terutama Kristen.
Yang diperlukan hanya klaim tidak jelas bahwa kegiatan mereka membahayakan “kerukunan dalam masyarakat.”
Selain itu, penulis Ahmed Naji baru-baru ini dikenakan hukuman dua tahun penjara karena melanggar “kesusilaan umum” dengan menerbitkan tulisan bermuatan seksual dalam novelnya.
Hal ini terjadi sebulan setelah penulis Fatma Naoot mengajukan banding atas hukum penjara tiga tahun yang dijatuhkan padanya ketika tulisannya di media sosial Facebook yang mengkritik penyembelihan hewan pada perayaan hari raya mengakibatkan vonis bersalah atas dakwaan “penghinaan terhadap Islam”.
Ini tidak berhenti di situ saja.
Lebih parahnya, menurut laporan di tahun 2015 yang diterbitkan oleh US Commission on International Religious Freedom, perkara-perkara mengenai fitnah atau penistaan bertambah sejak tahun 2011.
Pada bulan Januari 2015, Presiden Abdel Fatah al-Sisi mengeluarkan keputusan yang mengizinkan pemerintah melarang publikasi asing apapun yang dipandang menyinggung agama, sehingga kewenangan sensor yang sudah kuat menjadi semakin besar dan menimbulkan tekanan ekstra pada wartawan.
Sayangnya situasinya tidak lebih baik di Tunisia, sebab menurut laporanFreedom House tahun 2015 “pemidanaan terhadap pencemaran nama baik masih menjadi salah satu hambatan terbesar dalam pelaporan independen.”
Selain itu, timbul kekhawatiran akan badan investingasi tindak pidana cyber yang baru dibentuk yang ditugaskan untuk “melakukan pengintaian secara bebas (tidak dikendalikan) terhadap warga negara Tunisia,” seperti yang terjadi selama pemerintahan mantan Presiden Zine El Abidine Ben Ali, yang digulingkan dalam revolusi Arab Spring.
Yordania juga telah meningkatkan upaya membatasi kebebasan berekspresi, melalui revisi UU pidana cyber pada bulan Juni 2015 yang memberi kewenangan pada jaksa agung untuk melakukan penahanan tanpa penetapan pengadilan terhadap setiap orang yang diduga menggunakan internet untuk melakukan pencemaran.
Meskipun UU Media dan Penerbitan di Yordania melarang penahanan terhadap wartawan atas opini di media cetak, wartawan sekarang menjadi target jika opini mereka diterbitkan secara online.
Benar saja sekarang sudah ada beberapa dakwaan terhadap para wartawan ini. 
Salah satu perkara terkait pencemaran nama baik yang paling disoroti di Timur Tengah saat ini adalah perkara yang melibatkan Najat Abu Bakr, anggota parlemen Palestina yang dipanggil untuk menghadiri pemeriksaan di kejaksaan agung setelah mengangkat tuduhan korupsi atas Hussein al-Araj, salah satu menteri di kabinet yang memiliki hubungan dekat dengan Presiden Mahmoud Abbas.
Tindakan ini nampaknya juga dipicu oleh dukungan Bakr dalam aksi mogok guru di Tepi Barat – kejadian yang memalukan bagi pemerintah Abbas.
Meskipun kejaksaan agung Palestina diizinkan, berdasarkan undang-undang pencemaran nama baik yang berlaku, untuk menahan seseorang selama 48 jam untuk pemeriksaan, kelompok pendukung hak asasi manusia mengutuk tindakan ini.
Bakr menolak perintah tersebut dan melancarkan aksi menduduki gedung parlemen.
Petugas keamanan Palestina mengepung gedung tersebut tapi tidak berusaha menangkapnya.
Bertambahnya dan meluasnya penerapan peraturan perundang-undangan tentang pencemaran nama baik di Timur Tengah dan Afrika Utara menggambarkan tren yang berbahaya, yakni tren yang memicu reaksi keras dari kelompok masyarakat sipil.
Kasus Naji misalnya menggerakkan penulis, seniman, dan pembuat film asal Mesir untuk meluncurkan kampanye publik menuntut kebebasan berekspresi dan kreativitas yang lebih luas.
Selain itu, mantan eksekutif Google, Wael Ghonim, yang aktif dalam pemberontakan pada tahun 2011 secara terbuka mengkritik vonis yang dijatuhkan pada Naji.
Beberapa publikasi artistik milik negara kemudian diterbitkan dengan halaman depan yang memuat foto Naji atau beberapa kata yang menunjukkan dukungan untuk kebebasan berpendapat, dengan sisa halamannya dibiarkan kosong.
Di Yordania, koalisi yang dipimpin oleh Center for Defending Freedom of Journalists memulai kampanye baru, “Talk is Not a Crime” (Berpendapat bukan Kejahatan) untuk meningkatkan kesadaran akan rendahnya kebebasan media.
Di Palestina, unjuk rasa melawan penggunaan peraturan tentang pencemaran nama baik untuk memenjarakan lawan politik telah membuahkan hasil, dimana dukungan publik terhadap Bakr berperan besar dalam mendorong terbentuknya kesepakatan yang membolehkan Bakr kembali ke rumahnya di Nablus tanpa ditangkap atau diperiksa.
Aksi perlawanan saja dalam kasus-kasus individual tidak bisa membuat perubahan.
Kampanye harus fokus pada revisi undang-undang pencemaran nama baik untuk memastikan agar pemerintah tidak bisa menggunakannya untuk membungkam perbedaaan pendapat.
Kuncinya adalah menghapus unsur-unsur pemidanaan pada perkara pencemaran nama baik dan kemungkinan dijatuhkannya hukuman penjara.
Sebaliknya perkara sejenis ini dapat digugat secara perdata dan pihak yang diputus bersalah melakukan pencemaran nama baik diharuskan membayar denda yang wajar.
Memaksa anggota-anggota parlemen untuk mendekriminalisasi pencemaran nama baik tidak akan mudah.
Namun melalui upaya bersama dari semua pihak terkait – terutama media, masyarakat sipil, dan aktivis HAM – serta dukungan aktor regional dan internasional, tujuan ini bisa tercapai.
Mengingat pentingnya kebebasan berpendapat untuk pertumbuhan ekonomi dan sosial, kita tidak bisa membuang waktu.
Defeating North Korea’s Nuclear Blackmail
North Korea’s announcement that it possesses nuclear weapons has fuelled a diplomatic frenzy.
To persuade North Korea to return to the six-party talks – with China, Japan, the US, Russia, and South Korea – on defusing the nuclear threat on the Korean peninsula, Japan, the US, and South Korea have now offered to expand the scope of the talks to allow North Korea to raise any issue that concerns it.
This could be a grave mistake.
The talks ground to a halt in June 2004, when the North Koreans pulled out, citing the allegedly hostile policies of the US and Japanese governments.
Now they claim to have manufactured nuclear weapons for self-defense.
Although there had been several unofficial statements by Kim Jong-Il’s regime admitting that North Korea possessions nuclear arsenal, the announcement was the first official confirmation.
What lay behind the declaration was the regime’s recognition that a second-term Bush administration would not soften its demand for a complete repudiation of its nuclear program, but would instead continue to pursue policies aimed at isolating and stifling North Korea.
The same goes for Japan, whose stance on the abduction of its citizens by North Korean agents in the 1970’s and 1980’s was also cited by the Kim regime last June as a reason for walking out of the six-party talks.
With this in mind, the North Koreans’ motives in playing the nuclear trump card are clear, and the timing couldn’t have seemed more advantageous for them: force the Americans into making concessions while the situation in Iraq leaves the US with no room for maneuver, and undercut the rising call in Japan for economic sanctions against North Korea over the abduction issue.
Thus, whereas North Korea’s announcement of its nuclear capability strongly condemned Japan and the US, it did not mention China, Russia, and South Korea, which had been more conciliatory during the six-party talks.
Indeed, in withdrawing from the six-party talks, North Korea did not completely abandon the possibility of resolving the nuclear standoff through dialogue.
Rather, North Korea’s aim was to postpone the six-party talks as long as possible in order to force direct bilateral negotiations with the US, in which it would presumably extract energy assistance and other aid while demanding a security guarantee for “Dear Leader” Kim Jong-il.
America didn’t budge on bilateral negotiations, and its response to North Korea’s recent announcement that it possesses nuclear weapons likewise emphasized the need to revive the six-party talks.
Japan adopted a similar stance.
Like Japan, the Bush administration’s relatively moderate stance toward North Korea has changed since the talks broke down last year.
The US seems to be tightening its diplomatic encirclement of North Korea with a view to shifting the nuclear discussion to the UN Security Council.
Moreover, the Japan-US Security Consultative Committee brought together the countries’ foreign and defense ministers in Washington in February to discuss common strategic objectives related to the reformation of US forward forces.
This includes US forces in Japan, which will focus on responding to North Korean nuclear and ballistic-missile threats, as well as new threats posed by international terrorism and China’s military build-up.
Remaining in step with each other on security issues is essential if Japan and the US are to maintain a firm alliance to ensure the stability of the Asia-Pacific region.
The Japanese government has also been searching for effective measures to respond to North Korea’s consistently insincere attitude on regional and bilateral issues, including the abduction cases.
Militarily, Japan revised its law on the Self-Defense Forces to establish procedures for ballistic missile defense, with a strong focus on North Korea.
The decision, coming at the cabinet’s regular meeting on February 15th, was not intended to coincide with Kim Jong-il’s 63rd birthday the following day.
But it did show that Japan’s government, having long suspected that North Korea already possessed nuclear weapons, would not be intimidated into a fundamental policy change by confirmation of the threat.
The revision establishes the future direction of Japan’s military posture by delegating greater authority to the commanders of the Self-Defense Forces to initiate defensive actions against immediate threats.
According to South Korean news reports, in addition to its existing mid-range Nodong missiles, North Korea has improved its Scud missiles, extending their range to reach Japan’s main islands.
If North Korea is, indeed, continuing to develop not only its nuclear arsenal, but also various types of ballistic missiles, in defiance of international commitments, it is truly a rogue state.
As for the nuclear issue, Japan’s policy toward North Korea should continue to emphasize solidifying ties with the US and strengthening cooperation with China, South Korea, and Russia, making every effort to promote early resumption of the six-party talks.
But dialogue with the Kim regime cannot be an end in itself.
Negotiation is necessary, and it must be sufficient, but progress will be impossible if North Korea is allowed to turn its mere participation in the six-party talks into a bargaining chip.
China Confronts the Market
CAMBRIDGE – China’s current economic woes have largely been viewed through a single lens: the government’s failure to let the market operate.
But that perspective has led foreign observers to misinterpret some of this year’s most important developments in the foreign-exchange and stock markets.
To be sure, Chinese authorities do intervene strongly in various ways.
From 2004 to 2013, the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) bought trillions of dollars in foreign-exchange reserves, thereby preventing the renminbi from appreciating as much as it would have had it floated freely.
More recently, the authorities have been deploying every piece of policy artillery they can muster in a vain attempt to moderate this summer’s plunge in equity prices.
But some important developments that foreigners decry as the result of government intervention are in fact the opposite.
Exhibit A is the August 11 devaluation of the renminbi against the dollar – a move that invoked for US politicians the old adage, “Be careful what you wish for.”
The devaluation – by a mere 3%, it should be noted – reflected a change in PBOC policy intended to give the market more influence over the exchange rate.
Previously, the PBOC allowed the renminbi’s value to fluctuate each day within a 2% band, but did not routinely allow the movements to cumulate from one day to the next.
Now, each day’s closing exchange rate will influence the following day’s rate, implying adjustment toward market levels.
The authorities probably would not have moved when they did had it not been for growing market pressure for a depreciation that could help counteract weakening economic growth.
In fact, bolstering growth might have been the primary motivation for the country’s political leaders, even as the PBOC remained focused on advancing the longer-term objective of strengthening the market’s role in determining the exchange rate.
But the two motivations are consistent: market forces would not be placing downward pressure on the renminbi if China’s economic fundamentals did not warrant it.
The American politicians who demanded that China float its currency may have anticipated a different outcome – somewhat unreasonably, given that market forces reversed direction in mid-2014 – but one can hardly blame the Chinese for taking them at their word.
To be sure, China remains far from embracing a free-floating currency, let alone a fully convertible one, which would require further liberalization of controls on cross-border financial flows.
Unification of onshore and offshore markets is more important than a floating exchange rate in determining whether the International Monetary Fund will include the renminbi in the basket of currencies used to determine the value of its reserve asset, the Special Drawing Right.
Much commentary on the subject has underestimated the importance of the criterion that the currency be “freely usable.”
Nonetheless, many are fretting that China’s exchange-rate adjustment has triggered a “currency war,” with other emerging economies devaluing as well.
But, more than a year after the economic fundamentals swung against emerging markets (and especially away from commodities) and toward the United States, this adjustment was due.
Though the Chinese move likely influenced the timing, other devaluations would have inevitably taken place.
Warnings about competitive devaluations are misleading.
Exhibit B in the case against attributing financial developments in China to government intervention is the stock-market bubble that culminated in June.
According to the conventional wisdom, the authorities consistently intervened not only to try to boost the market after the collapse, but also during its year-long run-up, when the Shanghai Stock Exchange composite index more than doubled.
The finger-wagging implication is that Chinese policymakers, particularly the stock-market regulator, have only themselves to blame for the bubble.
There is undoubtedly some truth to this story.
It seems clear that the extraordinary run-up in equity prices was fueled by a surge in margin financing of stock purchases, which was legalized in 2010-2011 and encouraged by the PBOC’s monetary easing since last November.
Likewise, there was plenty of support for the bull market in government-sponsored news media, for example.
But what many commentators fail to note is that China’s regulatory authorities took action to try to dampen prices over the last six months of the run-up.
They tightened margin requirements in January, and again in April, when they also facilitated short-selling by expanding the number of eligible stocks.
The event that ultimately seems to have pricked the bubble was the China Securities Regulatory Commission’s June 12 announcement of plans to limit the amount that brokerages could lend for stock trading.
This is precisely the kind of counter-cyclical macroprudential policy that economists often recommend.
But, whereas advanced economies rarely implement this advice, China and many other developing countries do tend to adjust regulation, including reserve requirements for banks and ceilings on homebuyers’ borrowing, counter-cyclically.
One could criticize the Chinese regulator on the grounds that the effect of its moves to increase margin requirements did not last long; or one could criticize it on the grounds that its moves caused the recent crash.
But, either way, these measures were intended to stem the rise in market prices, rather than to contribute to it.
This is not a trivial point.
Nor is the fact that the PBOC’s interventions in the foreign-exchange market over the last year have aimed to dampen the renminbi’s depreciation, not add to it.
Given this, it is facile to blame China’s problems on government intervention.
Defending Japanese Defense
Japan’s government and National Security Council plan to revise the country’s National Defense Program Outline (NDPO) by the end of this year.
A draft of proposed changes submitted to Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi assigns three key tasks to the Self-Defense Forces (SDF): effective response to new threats, participation in international peacekeeping activities, and defense against invasion.
Today’s complex security environment, with terrorist attacks by non-state actors occurring alongside traditional state-to-state wars, demands a nimble, integrated strategy.
The draft revision of the NDPO seems to recognize this, emphasizing the need for Japan’s own defense efforts, cooperation through the Japanese-US alliance, and contributions to multilateral missions.
Moreover, the National Security Council has indicated the need to introduce a new plan for multi-functional flexible defense forces.
Unfortunately, key components of Japan’s emerging security strategy remain vague and contradictory.
For example, while the likelihood of an invasion threat is judged to be low, the Defense White Paper of 2004 argues that the SDF’s “most fundamental function” is to prepare for the worst, because sufficient defensive power cannot be developed overnight.
In other words, Japan will clearly assert its will to defend the nation, and to prevent invasion in combination with the Japan-US security system.
On the other hand, the National Security Council proposes “scaling down the size of defense forces,” implying mitigation of the will to defend.
Indeed, the failure to suggest any possibility of an “emergency expansion” of the SDF compounds this anxiety.
To be sure, the government is ultimately responsible for determining the appropriate scale of defense power in line with fiscal considerations.
But it is also the responsibility of the government to prepare a detailed and realistic policy aimed at securing the necessary level of defense capability in the event of unforeseen threats.
Japan’s government should thus give a clear indication of a true will to defend the country’s security.
Of course, defense capability cannot be judged solely according to force levels.
The draft NDPO’s vision of a new, more adaptable, mobile, flexible, and multi-purpose SDF, with advanced technological resources and information gathering capacity, calls for a fundamental reassessment of the existing organization and equipment.
In conformity with the international community’s efforts to secure peace and stability, the draft also creates a core unit within each of the military branches, and establishes an integrated operational system.
The military reorganization that the NDPO envisages is far-reaching.
Japan’s ground forces are to reorient their current structure, which is geared to combat capability in response to large-scale invasion, toward increased adaptability for military action in less severe circumstances.
The navy is to shift its focus away from the anti-submarine warfare (ASW) capability of the Cold War era, creating a structure aimed at defending islands, monitoring and responding to ballistic missiles, and combating illegal spy ship activities.
The air force is to continue its monitoring activities in neighboring airspace and maintain response readiness against air attack, while modifying invasion response tactics somewhat as the likelihood of an attack from the air diminishes.
One problem is the dilution of ASW capability.
Japan needs to develop well-balanced defense forces with the capacity needed to respond to new threats, such as the rapid build-up of China’s navy, especially its submarine forces.
The importance of ASW capability in the Western Pacific has not waned.
On the contrary, recent illegal violation of Japanese territorial waters by Chinese nuclear submarines suggests that, rather than being reduced, ASW capability should be built up further.
If Japan does decide to scale down its defense forces in this respect, a bold and qualitative change is inevitable.
In particular, this could mean the introduction of what has so far been viewed as somewhat taboo equipment, such as light aircraft carriers or nuclear submarines.
In this age of uncertainty, when even the nature of the threats that nations face is uncertain, Japan’s strategic and military planners must continue to seek ways to adapt the SDF to today’s myriad current threats.
But they must do so in a way that provides genuine direction, and that Japan’s people, military, and neighbors find convincing.
Liberals to the Barricades
SANTIAGO – From Austria, France and the United States, to Poland, the Philippines, and Peru, illiberal populists are on the rise.
Some blame runaway globalization; others blame income inequality; still others blame out-of-touch elites who simply don’t get it.
Such explanations – however plausible they may be – miss the larger point.
The problem is political, not just economic.
Liberal democracy is humankind’s greatest political achievement.
Yet liberal democrats around the world are reluctant to make the case for it.
No wonder they are losing the battle for citizens’ hearts and minds.
The problem is far from new.
In fact, it is at the very root of liberalism.
Wary of censorship or oppression, liberal thinkers have more often than not espoused moral neutrality: they do not advocate a single set of values, or a particular definition of what constitutes a good life.
A liberal society – almost by definition – enables its citizens to lead any life they wish, as long as third parties suffer no harm.
The problem is that politics everywhere is Aristotelian: concerned with virtue.
Americans refer to their presidency as a bully pulpit with good reason.
When politicians advocate a particular set of values – or virtues – voters listen.
This can be done clumsily, as when John Kerry accepted the Democratic Party’s presidential nomination in 2004 with a speech that repeated the word “value” or “values” 32 times.
But it can also be done magisterially, as when Robert F. Kennedy Jr. chided Americans for surrendering “personal excellence and community values in the mere accumulation of material things.”
GDP, he memorably added, “measures everything (...) except that which makes life worthwhile.”
Philosophers from John Stuart Mill to John Rawls to Martha Nussbaum have sought a way out of liberalism’s quandary.
It would be discriminatory and illiberal to promote, much less impose, a particular group’s values, religious or otherwise.
But governments and political leaders can and should advocate the shared values – what Rawls called the “overlapping consensus” – that define a liberal society.
By commemorating Martin Luther King Jr.’s birthday, for example, the US both underscores and rededicates itself to the shared ideal of racial equality.
It was King himself who arguably provided the best example of the passion with which such ideals can (and should) be defended.
There are too few like him.
Populists like Donald Trump and French National Front leader Marine Le Pen use passion in the service of a politics of fear and hatred.
By contrast, liberal democrats, products of the Enlightenment all, advocate for their political ideals – which value human reason above base emotions – in a tone best suited to small, polite gatherings.
This is a serious problem.
“Ceding the terrain of emotion-shaping to anti-liberal forces,” writes Nussbaum, “gives them a huge advantage in the people’s hearts and risks making people think of liberal values as tepid and boring.”
Reason and emotion, neuroscientists like Steven Pinker tell us, are two sides of the same mental coin.
Likewise, cognitive linguist George Lakoff, drawing on work by psychologist Drew Westen, concludes that “emotion is both central and legitimate in political persuasion.
Its use is not an illicit appeal to irrationality, as Enlightenment thought would have it.
The proper emotions are rational.”
King understood this very well when he proclaimed his “dream” of a society in which his children would “not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character.”
Today, US President Barack Obama is the only liberal democratic leader who speaks the language of values and virtue.
Obama is often criticized for being cool and aloof, and yet there is nothing of the sort in his promotion of the capacity to live together in peace and mutual respect as the most admirable liberal virtue of all.
“Each of us has deeply held beliefs,” he said in his victory speech in 2012. “And when we go through tough times, when we make big decisions as a country, it necessarily stirs passions, stirs up controversy,” which he called “a mark of our liberty.”
And yet, “despite all our differences, most of us share certain hopes for America’s future...We believe in a generous America, in a compassionate America, in a tolerant America open to the dreams of an immigrant's daughter who studies in our schools and pledges to our flag.”
That last line reveals that Obama is also aware of the other challenge liberal democracies must overcome: to shape a credible us.
The populists’ example is again telling.
Right-wing populists such as Trump engage in identity politics.
Left-wing populists such as Bernie Sanders engage in income politics.
Whether it is Chinese exporters, Mexican immigrants, presumed Islamic terrorists, or greedy Wall Street bankers, “there is,” as Harvard’s Dani Rodrik recently stressed, “a clear ‘other’ toward which anger can be directed.”
Liberal democrats need to make it clear that we get nowhere by blaming others, and that assuming shared responsibility is the only way to build a better shared future.
Of course economic and political reforms that reduce inequality of income and power are indispensable, both for their own sake and to make appeals to shared sacrifice credible.
Yet just as indispensable is the moral conviction, passionately expressed, that the “immigrant's daughter who studies in our schools” is a genuine member, with full rights, of that common us.
No social or political organization in human history has come closer than liberal democracy to realizing the ideal of equal opportunity for all.
We are not there yet.
But we have come a long way, and by sticking with liberal-democratic values we will go a longer way yet.
No jihadist or bigot, no Trump or Le Pen, no Chávez, Maduro, or Putin, should be allowed to destroy this possible dream.
Don’t Fear the IMF
CAMBRIDGE – The International Monetary Fund is, in many places, the organization that everybody loves to hate.
According to some, the IMF is bad for the poor, women, economic stability, and the environment.
Joseph Stiglitz, whose influence is amplified by his Nobel Prize, blames the IMF for causing and then worsening the economic crises it was called on to resolve.
The IMF purportedly does so to save capitalists and bankers, not ordinary people.
Though untrue, this belief does enormous harm and limits the potential good that the IMF can do.
For starters, consider how the world deals with refugee crises, such as Syria’s, and the way it deals with financial crises.
As its name indicates, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees is a person, not an institution.
He or she heads an “office,” not a full-fledged organization.
This weakness is what forced German Chancellor Angela Merkel to bully her European Union partners into a more coherent response to the ongoing influx of asylum-seekers.
By contrast, the system to prevent and resolve financial crises is anchored by a full-fledged institution: the IMF.
It may not be perfect, but, compared to areas such as refugees, human rights, or the environment, it is light-years ahead.
It is easy to misunderstand what the IMF does.