Proponents of austerity currently use nominal debt figures to scare voters, even in countries with record-low interest rates and large private-sector profits that are not being channeled toward investment.
To counter their arguments, opinion-makers should emphasize the expected long-term returns on incremental public investment, not with ideological arguments, but with concrete examples from various sectors in the recent past that have had reasonably good rate of returns.
Of course, as the economist Charles Wyplosz has explained, debt sustainability analysis is inherently uncertain.
But some needs can reasonably be anticipated.
Amid massive unmet demand for new climate-compatible infrastructure and for workers with modern skillsets, any semi-competent government should be able to demonstrate the likelihood of significant real returns on incremental investment.
In many countries, one could realistically expect a 4% average return on at least one percentage point of GDP worth of incremental investment.
If the marginal real interest rate is 1%, an increase in public investment would actually reduce future indebtedness.
Of course, it is possible for too large of an increase to put pressure on real interest rates, thereby crowding out potential private investment.
If there is significant exchange-rate risk, such as in non-reserve currency countries, that, too, should be taken into account.
Current fiscal-policy debates should not focus on simplistic headline numbers.
To strengthen public accounts, both conservatives and progressives should start promoting a long-term balance-sheet-oriented approach to policymaking, ensuring that the debates are based on relevant data.
Otherwise, the wrong policies – and, with them, anemic GDP growth and sluggish job creation – will continue to prevail.
Fishy Conservation Efforts
NAIROBI – If you happen to be a salamander known as the Iranian Kaiser spotted newt, chances are that things may be looking up.
Governments at the recent meeting in Doha of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) voted for a trade ban on Iranian Kaisers, alongside tougher protection for a host of land-living creatures.
But if you are a blue-fin tuna of the western Atlantic stock, your mood will be decidedly more pessimistic.
It is a similar story for several species of shark, including the oceanic white-tip, scalloped hammerhead, and the great and spiny dogfish.
Despite strong scientific evidence showing sharp declines in the populations of all three, every proposal for tougher trade controls on these marine species – along with more than 30 species of coral –&#160;failed to secure the necessary two-thirds majority.
In the case of the western Atlantic stock of blue-fin tuna, several countries argued that the existing management body – the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT) – is best placed to manage the stock.
Others who proposed tougher trade rules were not convinced – and with good reason.
Stocks of this highly prized fish have declined by up to 80% since the dawn of industrialized fishing, and this has been on ICCAT’s watch.
In the case of sharks and rays, a recent survey indicates that close to one-third of the 64 ocean-living species are on the verge of extinction.
Their decline is linked to over-exploitation of other once-common species.
For example, spiny dogfish is partly substituting for cod in many European fish-and-chip shops.
Sharks, too, are suffering from rapidly rising demand for shark-fin soup, which is considered a delicacy in many parts of Asia.
But saving endangered and near-endangered species is not just about conservation; it is also about defending millions of people’s livelihoods, which depend on healthy oceans.
Today’s marine environment is truly under siege.
When the explorer John Cabot sailed off the coast of Newfoundland more than 500 years ago, vast shoals of cod slowed down his ships; crews could lower buckets over the side and fill them with fish.
By 1992, however, over-fishing had forced the total closure of this once highly productive fishery, and, despite all efforts, Newfoundland’s Grand Banks has never recovered.
Similarly, over-fishing of sharks in the Caribbean has triggered a rise in octopus and a drastic drop in spiny lobsters and scallops –&#160;two major sources of revenue for neighboring coastal communities.
The outcome at CITES has brought into sharp relief increasing tensions between industrial and environmental interests, as if these were diametrically opposed.
Surely a twenty-first-century fisherman does not want to see the basis of his or her living degraded and destroyed, nor does a modern conservationist want to ring-fence the environment and stop people from making a living.
So if governments want existing agreements to rule the waves, they must start acting on the sobering science and real-world numbers.
For example, with respect to sharks, existing sanctions against “finning” under Regional Fisheries Management Organizations should be enforced, backed up by an independent system of on-board observers to ensure that trawlers comply.
Moreover, an international action plan for sharks, including a ceiling on catches, should be created.
And proper fishing methods that catch only target species should be used, with others caught accidentally as so-called by-catch returned to the sea alive.
Where fisheries agreements are not succeeding, conservation agreements must be tried and applied.
After all, these are not competing regulatory regimes, but complimentary ones.
In the case of the western Atlantic blue-fin tuna, the ball is now firmly back in ICCAT’s court.
Governments that support the ICCAT option must now prove that it is up to the job.
They have three years to do so, before CITES next meets in Thailand.
If there is no dramatic action and improvement, governments should instead give CITES, as a well established conservation and trade agreement, a chance to reverse the species’ current plight.
Blue-fin tuna is heading for commercial, if not outright, extinction, as are a host of other economically and ecologically important marine species.
They are swimming in the last-chance lagoon.
But so, too, could be the organizations that have presided over a breathtaking collapse of so many fisheries and left a once-bountiful marine environment – and the lives and livelihoods of many fishermen – damaged and degraded in their wake.
China’s Rebalancing Act
BEIJING – China’s 12th Five-Year Plan calls for a shift in the country’s economic model from export-led growth toward greater reliance on domestic demand, particularly household consumption.
Since the Plan’s introduction, China’s current-account surplus as a share of GDP has indeed fallen.
But does that mean that China’s adjustment is on track?
According to the IMF, the fall in China’s current-account surplus/GDP ratio has largely been the result of very high levels of investment, a weak global environment, and an increase in prices for commodity imports that has outpaced the rise in prices for Chinese manufactured goods.
So the fall in China’s external surplus/GDP ratio does not represent economic “rebalancing”; on the contrary, the Fund predicts that the ratio will rebound in 2013 and approach its pre-crisis level thereafter.
The IMF’s explanation of the recent fall in China’s current-account surplus/GDP ratio is broadly correct.
Experience suggests that China’s external position is highly sensitive to global conditions, with the surplus/GDP ratio rising during boom times for the world economy and falling during slumps.
Europe’s malaise has hit China’s exports badly, and undoubtedly is the most important factor underlying the current decline in the ratio.
By definition, without a change in the saving gap, there will be no change in the trade surplus, and vice versa.
Furthermore, the saving gap and the trade balance interact with each other constantly, making them always equal.
In response to the global financial crisis in 2008, China introduced a RMB4 trillion ($634 billion) stimulus package.
While the increase in investment reduced the saving/GDP ratio, the resulting increase in imports lowered the trade surplus/GDP ratio. As a result, China’s external surplus/GDP ratio fell significantly in 2009.
In 2010, China’s government adjusted its economic policy.
In order to control inflation and real-estate bubbles, the central bank tightened monetary policy and the government refrained from another round of fiscal stimulus.
China’s real-estate investment accounted for 10% of GDP, and slower investment growth in the sector necessarily reduces import demand, directly and indirectly.
But, because the fall in import growth had yet to turn into a rout, while China’s exports to Europe plummeted, China’s current-account surplus fell further in GDP terms in 2011.
This situation is likely to change in 2012.
The negative impact of the fall in real-estate investment since 2010 has been deeper and longer than expected; indeed, almost all categories of imports that fell by 10% or more in August were related to real-estate investment.
As a result, it is possible that the fall in investment growth will reverse the declining external surplus/GDP ratio in 2012, unless the global economy deteriorates further and/or the Chinese government launches a new stimulus package.
Perhaps most important, China must now export more manufactured goods to finance imports of energy and mineral products.
The worsening terms of trade have been a major factor contributing to the decline in the current-account surplus in recent years.
Nevertheless, despite the merits of its analysis, the IMF underestimates China’s progress in rebalancing.
In my view, China’s rebalancing is more genuine – and more fundamental – than the Fund recognizes, and the prediction of an eventual rebound in China’s external surplus/GDP ratio will most likely turn out to be wrong.
First, the roughly 30% real exchange-rate appreciation since 2005 must have had a serious impact on exporters, reflected in the bankruptcy – as well as the upgrading – of many enterprises in coastal areas.
Though the market shares of Chinese exports seem to have held up quite well, this is attributable to price-cutting in foreign markets, which is not sustainable.
Over time, real exchange-rate appreciation will cause a shift in expenditure, making China’s rebalancing more apparent.
Second, China’s wage levels are rising rapidly.
According to the 12th Five-Year Plan, the minimum wage should grow by 13% per year.
Together with real appreciation, the increase in labor costs is bound to weaken the competitiveness of China’s labor-intensive export sector, which will be reflected in the trade balance more clearly in the coming years.
Third, China has made significant progress in building its social-security system.
The number of people covered by basic old-age insurance, unemployment insurance, workers’ compensation, and maternity insurance has risen substantially.
Moreover, universal medical insurance is emerging, and a comprehensive system for providing aid to students from poor families has been established.
As a result, the motivation for precautionary saving has been weakened somewhat, while some researchers have found statistical evidence that the consumption rate is rising, which is supported by China’s emergence as the world’s fourth-largest importer of luxury goods.
Finally, the worsening of China’s terms of trade will play an even more fundamental role in reducing its trade surplus in the future.
Given weak demand, which may be prolonged, Chinese exporters must accept increasingly thin profit margins to maintain market share.
However, China’s large size and low per capita income and capital stock imply continued rapid growth in its demand for commodities.
Thanks to supply constraints, China’s import bill for commodities and metals is likely to offset its processing-trade surplus in the near future.
In short, as long as China’s government is not so unnerved by the slowdown in output growth that it changes its current policy stance, the current-account surplus is more likely to continue to fall relative to GDP than it is to rebound in 2013 and thereafter.
In fact, such an outcome is not only likely, but also desirable.
After all, faced with “infinite quantitative easing,” being a large net creditor means being in the worst position in today’s global economy.
Memulihkan Investasi
JENEWA – Pada KTT G-20 bulan lalu di Hangzhou, Cina, para pemimpin dunia menguraikan sebuah rencana ambisius menuju “era baru pertumbuhan global”. Namun mereka melupakan satu unsur pokok: memperbaiki iklim investasi.
Kebijaksanaan konvensional menyakini bahwa melalui pasar keuangan yang efisien, tabungan rumah tangga akan mengalir ke perusahaan-perusahaan yang paling andal mengolah dana untuk kegunaan paling produktif.
Namun di banyak negara berkembang, kemudahan akses pada pembiayaan – berkat aliran modal lintas batas yang bebas serta deregulasi pasar keuangan – masih belum menghasilkan tambahan pembiayaan untuk investasi jangka panjang, terutama di sektor manufaktur.
Keputusan investasi tergantung pada berbagai faktor dan kejadian di masa depan, maka gabungan pendanaan publik dan privat sangat penting agar proyek-proyek baru membuahkan hasil.
Di Asia Timur, kawasan yang mengalami pertumbuhan dan pembangunan pesat dalam beberapa tahun terakhir, para pembuat kebijakan tidak hanya mengizinkan, tapi justru mendorong profit korporasi lebih tinggi, asalkan disalurkan pada investasi produktif.
Hasilnya, empat per lima pengeluaran investasi yang dikucurkan perusahaan-perusahaan besar di Asia Timur didanai dari laba ditahan (retained earnings), sementara lembaga-lembaga keuangan milik negara membantu menjaga laju pertumbuhan yang dimotori investasi (investment-led growth).
Ketidakseimbangan antara profit dan investasi merupakan alasan utama pertumbuhan di negara-negara maju dan berkembang seperti kehilangan gairah; apabila tidak diatasi, ini akan berakibat pada krisis legitimasi lebih buruk pada tata kelola perusahaan (corporate governance) dan manajemen ekonomi.
Di negara-negara maju, profitabilitas perusahaan terus meningkat, sebagian dikarenakan strategi “shareholder-primacy” yang berfokus pada pengambilan keputusan jangka pendek, pemotongan biaya, dan bentuk-bentuk rekayasa keuangan lainnya yang didorong oleh investor institusional.
Dengan demikian, strategi konvensional seperti “retain-and-invest” digantikan dengan strategi “downsize-and-distribute”, yaitu profit digunakan untuk menaikkan dividen, melakukan stock buyback, serta merger dan akuisisi.
Di negara-negara berkembang, arus keuangan global jelas berkontribusi pada guncangan makroekonomi yang menyulut ketidakpastian perekonomian, sehingga membatasi perencanaan jangka waktu investasi (investment horizon) yang dibuat perusahaan.
Baru-baru ini, kita juga menyaksikan perusahaan di negara-negara berkembang mengejar strategi corporate governance yang sama dengan perusahaan di negara-negara maju.
Berdasarkan analisis terhadap neraca perusahaan non-keuangan, rasio investment-to-profitberkurang dari tahun 1995 hingga 2014, dimana Brasil, Malaysia, Korea Selatan, dan Turki mengalami penurunan terbesar.
Perusahaan-perusahaan publik besar lebih jarang ditemui di negara berkembang dibandingkan di negara maju; tetapi bagi perusahaan-perusahaan yang secara rutin membagikan dividen di negara berkembang, dividen payout kepada pemegang saham meningkat, bahkan ketika profitabilitas sama.
Perusahaan-perusahaan tersebut juga mengumpulkan aset-aset finansial – kadang lebih cepat dari pengumpulan obligasi (corporate debt) – berarti mereka kekurangan peluang investasi jangka panjang yang mungkin mendatangkan keuntungan dan opsi-opsi investasi portofolio dalam pasar-pasar keuangan yang sudah liberalisasi.
Terlalu dini untuk menyimpulkan bahwa hubungan antara profit dan investasi di negara-negara berkembang telah dipatahkan.
Akan tetapi, meski profitabilitas perusahaan meningkat di banyak tempat, tren investasi dimana saja (kecuali Cina dan India) senantiasa lemah, bahkan sebelum krisis keuangan global terjadi di tahun 2008.
Sementara itu, financialization terus menganggu kestabilan makroekonomi di seluruh dunia. contohnya, program pelonggaran kuantitatif (quantitative easing) yang diberlakukan oleh negara-negara maju menyebabkan kelebihan likuiditas – sehingga memunculkan lonjakan obligasi di negara-negara berkembang.
Di beberapa tempat, obligasi berdenominasi dolar oleh perusahaan non-keuangan rata-rata naik 40% dari tahun 2010 hingga 2014; dari tahun 2007 hingga 2015, rasio debt-to-service juga naik 40%.
Angka-angka tersebut menunjukkan krisis perbankan sistemis akan segera menimpa.
Selain itu, investasi dimotori obligasi terpusat di sektor-sektor berbasis sumber daya alam yang sangat cyclical yang tidak berkontribusi pada pertumbuhan inklusif dan berkelanjutan.
Bahkan, hanya tujuh sektor – migas, listrik, konstruksi, komoditas industrial, properti, telekomunikasi, dan pertambangan – menyumbangkan lebih dari dua pertiga total kenaikan pada utang dan investasi.
Hal ini menunjukkan bahwa kemudahan akses pada pinjaman bunga rendah dan pembiayaan dengan utang tidaklah memihak sektor-sektor high-tech yang paling berkontribusi pada pertumbuhan produktivitas.
Guna membalikkan tren ini, pertama kita harus mengalihkan tren di negara-negara berkembang menuju strategi korporasi yang sangat ‘financialized’.
Hal ini memerlukan perubahan-perubahan corporate governance secara umum, serta struktur insentif di perusahaan non-keuangan, termasuk preferential tax treatment terhadap laba ditahan dan equity financing, dan cadangan penyusutan khusus untuk laba yang diinvestasikan kembali.
Selain corporate governance, kita harus memulihkan keseimbangan hubungan antara profit dan investasi, melalui inisiatif-inisiatif kelembagaan dan kebijakan publik, serta kebijakan industrial yang proaktif.
Hal ini membutuhkan reformasi dan penguatan sistem perbankan demi memastikan kapasitas pinjaman yang cukup untuk investasi jangka panjang, termasuk bagi usaha kecil dan menengah.
Adapun tentang kondisi makroekonomi, pemerintah dapat memperbaikinya melalui investasi publik, terutama di bidang infrastruktur, sehingga menaikkan produktivitas dan menambah profitabilitas sektor swasta.
Terakhir, komunitas internasional harus mengedepankan upaya memberantas penghindaran pajak dan capital flight, kedua praktik jahat yang mengikis basis pendapatan negara.
Investasi jangka panjang pada aktiva produktif sangat penting dalam menjamin pertumbuhan berkelanjutan yang diperlukan negara-negara berkembang.
Tetapi mereka tidak akan meraihnya tanpa mempertahankan lingkungan yang mendorong strategi-strategi jangka pendek.
Fixing the Food Chain
COPENHAGEN
 – 
 The global food system is in disarray.
Four years ago, a 30-year trend of decreasing food prices rapidly reversed course.
Grain prices have more than doubled since 2004, and prices for most other foods have increased significantly.
Add unsustainable management of natural resources, emerging negative effects of climate change, and sharply rising prices for fertilizers and energy, and we are faced with the most severe global food crisis since the early 1970’s.
Dramatic price hikes reflect several factors: adverse weather in key food production areas, rapid increase in demand for meats and dairy products, higher oil prices, draw-downs of food stocks, greater use of food commodities for bio-fuel, and failure to invest in rural infrastructure, research and technology, and other public goods needed to facilitate agricultural growth in developing countries.
The skyrocketing cost of food has resulted in more starvation among the poor, reduced purchasing power among the non-poor, and food riots in more than 30 countries.&#160; 
The key lesson to learn is that insufficient investment in science and inappropriate government policies lead to food crises.
To avoid these shortcomings in the future, the world’s farmers and food processors must be helped to produce more food to meet increasing demand fueled by growth in world population and incomes.
Moreover, they must produce more with less land and water, at reasonable prices, and without damaging natural resources or worsening climate change.
But are governments getting the message?
I believe so.
Hunger is not a new phenomenon, but as long as the rural poor endure it in silence, as they have for a long time, governments can comfortably ignore it.
Food riots by urban populations, on the other hand, threaten what governments care about the most: their legitimacy.
Developing countries invest only slightly more that 0.5% of the value of their agricultural production in agricultural research.
That is grossly inadequate.
An increase to 2% is warranted.
This would still be less than what high-income countries invest in agricultural research.&#160; 
Modern science should focus on sustainable increases in land and water productivity, management of production risks caused by droughts, floods, pests, and on mitigation and adaption to climate change.
Drought-tolerant and pest-resistant crop varieties, disease-resistant livestock, and high-yield agricultural production systems that use less water and capture nitrogen from the air are but a few examples of the kind of technologies needed.
More research is also needed to improve the nutritional quality of staple foods by fortifying them with iron, vitamin A, and zinc to help solve widespread micronutrient deficiencies.
We must also strengthen food safety from production to consumption, including improvements in our understanding of the interaction between the food system and human health, particularly zoonotic diseases and the effects of pesticides.
Research to identify alternative energy sources to stop the conversion of maize, soybeans, oil palm, and other foods to bio-fuel should become another high priority.
Most of the people at risk of hunger and malnutrition live in rural areas.
They need access to roads, markets, appropriate institutions and technology, primary health care, and education if they are to escape poverty and hunger and produce more food for an increasing world population.
Government subsidies that increase the use of food commodities such as maize, soybeans, and palm oil for bio-fuel should be discontinued.&#160; 
International institutions are needed to regulate globalization and ensure trade competition.
Trade-distorting agricultural policies, including those in the United States, the European Union, and Japan, should be eliminated.
While poverty reduction is the best way to reduce fertility rates, access to reproductive health care is critically important for helping families limit the number of children they have to the number they desire.&#160;&#160; 
The world’s natural resources are sufficient to produce the food needed in the foreseeable future without damaging the environment, but only if governments follow enlightened policies and science is put to work for the food system.&#160; 
Fixing the Innovation Supply Chain
CAMBRIDGE – As a graduate student at MIT, I had the opportunity to work with Professors Robert Langer and Ram Sasisekharan in an environment rife with innovative thinking.
We asked what could be possible, and were driven to pursue revolutionary technologies that were widely considered impossible.
This experience instilled in me a simple but powerful credo: think big.
Innovation is difficult.
If one is willing to traverse the boundary of the unknown, one should pursue the course that promises the greatest potential impact.
In exploring a wide range of subjects – energy, agriculture, medicine, and more – one approach has, in my experience, emerged as the most effective: begin with the end in mind.
By identifying the problems and envisioning the preferred solution, one can define the set of constraints into which technological innovation fits, and establish a clear, albeit often difficult, path to its realization.
A fundamental requirement of this approach is an open mind, unconstrained by the subject’s idiosyncratic dogma.
Those who are immersed in a field have an established view of what is possible, based on some combination of previous successes, citation bias, current limits of knowledge, and truth – and it is often difficult to distinguish these sources.
But the newcomer asking the most basic questions begins to notice logical inconsistencies, from which the real constraints on solutions and technological limits arise.
Breakthroughs lie at the intersection of technological possibility and market pull.
An understanding of these forces enables innovators to optimize the direction of invention.
With well-defined constraints, a clear path for developing innovative technologies – one that accounts for both the known and the unknown – can be planned.
This unconventional approach has consistently produced groundbreaking technologies that, if successfully implemented, revolutionize a field.
What might be more interesting, however, is the response that such progress often elicits: “This seems so obvious.
Why hasn’t someone done it before?”
Early in my career, this reaction troubled me; it made me wonder whether I had, in fact, overlooked something obvious.
But, as my experience with entrepreneurial innovation has grown, I have realized that the response is rooted in the fact that most people are trapped in a specific doctrine, which obscures the innovative solutions that lie beyond its borders.
Companies exhibit similar behavior when it comes to acquiring innovative technologies, adhering to ineffective, restrictive processes, despite an ostensibly obvious alternative: the efficient systems that manufacturers use to secure inputs for production.
In order to establish a clear, low-risk path to producing their goods at a predictable (and profitable) cost, companies employ teams dedicated to securing the relevant supply chains, controlling inventory, managing the production process, and so on – from the point of origin to the point of consumption.
In many cases, this involves maintaining relationships with a dedicated network of suppliers, with which producers share detailed product specifications.
Doing so ensures that producers get exactly what they need, and that suppliers are able to deliver the correct inputs. The result is a well-defined, highly productive, and mutually beneficial working relationship.
By contrast, the innovation supply chain (the process by which companies obtain and/or develop future products and improve on their current products) tends to be characterized by inefficiency, ambiguity, and competition.
And, in many cases, no supply chain is in place.
Most pharmaceutical companies, for example, lack effective innovation supply chains.
But only about 15% of the drugs that the US Food and Drug Administration has approved recently were developed by the same company that markets and sells them, meaning that many major pharmaceutical companies depend on the innovation ecosystem to advance their products.
Drug companies often lament that the firms from which they are sourcing innovations do not perform clinical trials to their specifications, forcing them to repeat the work.
Nevertheless, they are reticent about providing such specifications in advance – even when innovators request them – perhaps to protect their market position or internal efforts.
Moreover, the same companies compete directly in the supply of innovative technologies.
The result is a broken supply chain.
Just as individual innovators must challenge conventional wisdom, companies must replace the established approach to the innovation supply chain with one that more closely resembles how they create and maintain a manufacturing supply chain.
If market incumbents are willing to share “innovation specifications” (which should not be confused with innovation methods), they can develop an effective network of innovation suppliers, thereby increasing the reliability of the product-development engine.
And, as with effective manufacturing supply chains, the supplier and the purchaser must build a reciprocal relationship, in which they do not compete with each other, practically or economically, in the specific activities that they are performing.
An efficient supply chain can transform innovation on both the individual and industry levels.
Indeed, a common approach – defining key market needs, coupling them with solution constraints, and pushing the boundaries of current thinking – applies to all kinds of innovation.
With an innovation ecosystem organized along these lines, “obvious” advances could occur significantly faster.
How obvious is that?
Helping Refugees Together
LONDON – This year is likely to be the most momentous for refugee protection and migration since the signing of the Geneva Convention in 1951.
Depending on the choices we make, we will either help create more open societies, based on greater international cooperation, or we will abet authoritarian governments and their nationalist agendas.
So we must treat this issue with exceptional urgency and seriousness of purpose.
The refugee and migration crises in the Mediterranean, Asia, Africa, and Central America have led to widespread and appalling human suffering.
The significance of this can hardly be overstated, for the world’s failure to help its most vulnerable people reflects an extraordinary breakdown of morality in the international community.
We are at risk of losing our collective understanding of why the multilateral system and international cooperation matter.
When we refuse to protect those facing persecution, we not only endanger them; we subvert our principles of civil liberty and put our own freedom at risk.
Last year, we were offered literally a million reminders that the system of refugee protection was failing.
Each asylum-seeker bravely crossing the Mediterranean was telling us that something was wrong in countries of first asylum.
How could we have allowed Jordan, Lebanon, and Turkey to bear the burden of hosting almost five million refugees with negligible backing from the rest of the world?
It costs at least $3,000 a year to provide a refugee with a decent level of support; the international community provided just a small fraction of this.
When the cracks in the protection system became gaping holes, refugees voted with their feet.
Then, in a panicked effort to deter arrivals, the European Union – the birthplace of the international protection system – jeopardized its tradition of human rights and the basic standards of asylum law.
The signal this sends to frontline countries – that they need not fully respect the rules of protection – could be devastating.
In the misguided belief that safeguarding sovereignty means acting unilaterally, governments have resisted an international approach to migration.
But as events in the Mediterranean have starkly demonstrated, this approach is self-defeating.
It leads to paper-tiger sovereignty, undermines the credibility of democratic governments and the multilateral system, and empowers smugglers and authoritarian populists.
We must bring this downward spiral to a halt.
A systemic global crisis demands a systemic global response.
By the time world leaders meet in September at the United Nations Summit on Addressing Large Movements of Refugees and Migrants, the global community must acknowledge what went wrong – and agree on how to fix it.
Rather than shifting the burden, we need to start sharing responsibility.
The smartest way to safeguard national sovereignty is to minimize the risks migrants face when trying to reach safety, and to maximize the means at their disposal to build productive lives.
Accomplishing this require three things.
First, we must use the political momentum around the refugee issue to generate commitments to specific improvements in the international protection system and to reduce the vulnerability of all migrants.
It is simply unacceptable that just ten countries are forced to bear the lion’s share of the burden, that 86% of refugees reside in the developing world, and that fewer than 100,000 per year are resettled.
Supporting refugees is not optional, and we cannot allow responsibility to be defined merely by proximity to a crisis.
We must no longer go from year to year, crisis to crisis, begging for pledges (which all too often go unfulfilled).
We should calculate what it costs to support forced migrants and the countries that host them – as if we were preparing a family budget – and then collectively contribute the necessary funding within the context of a long-term plan.
We also must expand our capacity to host refugees through resettlement and other legal pathways – such as student, work, and family reunification visas.
Second, strengthening the international protection system requires us to rethink the very idea of our responsibility toward refugees.
We can no longer afford to treat them as deadweight in permanent camps.
Instead, we must help them become active, contributing members of our communities.
Our model must be based on refugees’ full inclusion, as soon as possible, in labor markets and schools.
And we must vow never to hold children in detention.
Finally, the UN system must develop greater capacity to address migration and provide migrants with a stronger voice at the global level.
Only then will we be able to agree on a set of commitments to reduce the risks that all migrants face, ensuring rescue at sea, offering safe pathways to relocation, and providing legal identities.
The degree of public and political attention that refugees and migration are receiving this year is not likely to be repeated in my lifetime or in that of the next generation.
The condition of many humans – not to mention the human condition itself – will improve or worsen depending on how we use this opportunity.
A Better EU Budget
BRUSSELS – Stopping Europe’s economic decline and overcoming its competitiveness crisis will require radical solutions.
But European Union leaders remain fixated on old priorities – a lack of vision evident in negotiations over the EU’s 2014-2020 Multiannual Financial Framework (MFF).
Once again, short-term national interests are taking precedence over the need for a forward-looking, flexible, and efficient EU budget.
The European Parliament, which for the first time must approve the MFF, should use its new-found influence to uphold the EU-wide public interest and offset the blinkered, vested interests of individual member states.
In a climate of budgetary restraint, it is unsurprising that the European Council agreed earlier this year to reduce the EU budget by 3.4% relative to the 2007-2013 MFF.
But, with austerity under fire and EU countries looking to encourage spending, the Council should also consider the budget’s shape, ensuring that the MFF does not impede future growth and investment.
For example, the proposed budget slashes funding for cross-border infrastructure projects, including the expansion of high-speed broadband networks into rural areas and the development of transport and energy infrastructure.
But the EU can add considerable value by coordinating transnational infrastructure projects, thereby achieving economies of scale and avoiding a duplication of national spending.
Europeans would benefit directly through improved Internet access, lower energy costs, and more efficient transport links.
Likewise, in order to lay the foundations for future economic growth, the EU should nurture new, sustainable industries and innovative small and medium-size enterprises – not cut funding for important research programs like Horizon 2020.
Innovations in renewable energy, for example, are essential to improving energy security and preserving Europe’s standing as a global leader in combating climate change.
Given that renewable energy is one of the world’s fastest-growing sectors, such investment could have a significant impact on future GDP growth and job creation.
Meanwhile, agricultural subsidies and cohesion funds, which were cut by 11% and 8%, respectively, relative to the previous MFF, still account for almost two-thirds of total spending.
While these areas are important, their allocations should be reduced further to create space for growth-enhancing investments.
Another major problem is the MFF’s lack of flexibility.
A priority review during the budgetary term would enable the EU to adapt its annual budgets to changing circumstances and reallocate unspent money where it is needed most.
Moreover, the current structure of the EU’s annual budget carries financial risks.
For example, many projects are completed toward the end of the budgetary cycle, generating a backlog of unpaid bills in the MFF’s later years.
If they are not addressed through an MFF-amending budget, they risk fueling a run-up in debt.
While the Council eventually agreed to cover the difference in the 2012 budget, an even greater shortfall is forecast for this year – and many member states are unable to oblige the Commission’s request for an additional €11.2 billion to cover these outstanding liabilities.
Now, the European Parliament is insisting that all unpaid bills should be settled before the next budgetary cycle begins.
To be sure, the EU budget contains flexible instruments, such as the EU Solidarity Fund, which provides emergency assistance after natural disasters.
But these tools have not always been used as effectively as possible.
Disbursal of relief funds to help Italy rebuild after severe floods in 2011 took almost a year, owing to politicization in the Council.
Even without the delays caused by political interference, such instruments are inadequate.
Scope to adapt the MFF as a whole is needed, not least to ensure its legitimacy.
It should include a comprehensive and binding revision clause ensuring that the state of public finances and collective investment needs are reassessed at the halfway point.
This would give the next European Parliament – and the voters who elect its members – the influence over the EU’s long-term budget that a democratic system requires.
Agreement on budgetary priorities should be achieved in the Council through qualified majority voting, so that a single country cannot hijack the process.
A “sunset clause” would prevent the Council from blocking subsequent revisions by, say, stipulating that the budget would revert to 2013 levels if no review were conducted by the specified date.
In the long term, the MFF’s timing should be adjusted to coincide with the European Parliament’s mandate, and the EU’s excessive reliance on national contributions should be reduced.
As trade liberalization has diminished the EU’s income, mainly derived from customs duties, individual countries have increasingly sought to minimize their net contributions.
Bargaining between member states leads to lowest-common-denominator budgets that appease vested interests but fail to support EU member states’ shared ambitions.
Europe thus ends up losing, and the true benefits of EU membership are not fully realized.
Add to that the way deals are reached – behind closed doors and without adequate democratic oversight – and it is not surprising that Europeans’ views of the EU are becoming increasingly negative.
A system based on the EU’s own resources would reduce tension between contributors and beneficiaries and ease pressure on member states’ budgets.
Existing proposals include a “Robin Hood” tax on financial transactions, a share of the profits from the EU’s carbon emissions-trading scheme, or a larger take from value-added tax receipts.
But the Council has left this potentially contentious subject out of recent discussions.
That is precisely the problem.
Political leadership calls for vision and courage.
Postponing important decisions leads to an inefficient budget shaped by competing national interests.
Without a responsive budgetary policy that focuses on the EU as a whole, the MFF negotiations will provide plenty of high drama and fine rhetoric, but few real benefits that might boost Europe’s recovery.
Missing Growth Multipliers
PRINCETON – In April 2010, when the global economy was beginning to recover from the shock of the 2008-2009 financial crisis, the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook predicted that global GDP growth would exceed 4% in 2010, with a steady annual growth rate of 4.5% maintained through 2015.
But the forecast proved to be far too optimistic.
In fact, global growth has decelerated.
Lessons from the October 2008 WEO, which analyzed recoveries after systemic financial stress, were incorporated into subsequent forecasts.
As a result, predictions for the United States – where household deleveraging continues to constrain economic growth – have fallen short only modestly.
The April 2010 report forecast a US growth rate of roughly 2.5% annually in 2012-2013; current projections put the rate a little higher than 2%.
By contrast, the fiscal multiplier was seriously underestimated – as the WEO has now recognized.
Consequently, forecasts for the United Kingdom – where financial-sector stresses largely resembled those in the US – have been significantly less accurate.
The April 2010 WEO forecast a UK annual growth rate of nearly 3% in 2012-2013; instead, GDP is likely to contract this year and increase by roughly 1% next year.
Much of this costly divergence from the earlier projections can be attributed to the benign view of fiscal consolidation that UK authorities and the IMF shared.
Likewise, the eurozone’s heavily indebted economies (Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain) have performed considerably worse than projected, owing to significant spending cuts and tax hikes.
For example, Portugal’s GDP was expected to grow by 1% this year; in fact, it will contract by a stunning 3%.
The European Commission’s claim that this slowdown reflects high sovereign-default risk, rather than fiscal consolidation, is belied by the UK, where the sovereign risk is deemed by markets to be virtually nonexistent.
The world-trade multiplier, though less widely recognized, helps to explain why the growth deceleration has been so widespread and persistent.
When a country’s economic growth slows, it imports less from other countries, thereby reducing those countries’ growth rates, and causing them, too, to reduce imports.
The eurozone has been at the epicenter of this contractionary force on global growth.
Since eurozone countries trade extensively with each other and the rest of the world, their slowdowns have contributed significantly to a decrease in global trade, in turn undermining global growth.
In particular, as European imports from East Asia have fallen, East Asian economies’ growth is down sharply from last year and the 2010 forecast – and, predictably, growth in their imports from the rest of the world has lost momentum.
Global trade has steadily weakened, with almost no increase in the last six months.
The once-popular notion, built into growth forecasts, that exports would provide an escape route from the crisis was never credible.
That notion has now been turned on its head: as economic growth has stalled, falling import demand from trade partners has caused economic woes to spread and deepen.
The impact of slowing global trade is most apparent for Germany, which was not burdened with excessive household or corporate debt, and enjoyed a favorable fiscal position.
To escape the crisis, Germany used rapid export growth – especially to meet voracious Chinese demand. Although growth was expected to slow subsequently, it was forecast at roughly 2% in 2012-2013.
But, as Chinese growth has decelerated – owing partly to decreased exports to Europe – the German GDP forecast has been halved.
And, given that this year’s growth has largely already occurred, Germany’s economy has now plateaued – and could even be contracting.
In good times, the trade generated by a country’s growth bolsters global growth.
But, in times of crisis, the trade spillovers have the opposite effect.
As the global economy has become increasingly interconnected, these trade multipliers have increased.
Indeed, while less ominous and dramatic than financial contagion, trade spillovers profoundly influence global growth prospects.
Failure to recognize their impact implies that export – and, in turn, growth – projections will continue to miss the mark.
The projected increase in global growth next year will likely not happen.
On the contrary, policy errors and delays in individual countries will seriously damage economies worldwide.
When Democracy Fails the People
NEW YORK – Nobel laureate Amartya Sen famously suggested that famines do not occur in democracies, because accountable governments will do everything they can to avoid mass starvation.
The same reasoning should apply to clean drinking water; like food, it is a resource that is indispensable for our survival and wellbeing.
And yet recent events in the United States offer depressing insights about the limits of Sen’s dictum, and about how democracies can fail the people they are ostensibly supposed to serve.
In 2014, the municipal government of Flint, Michigan, stopped purchasing water from Detroit and began sourcing it from a nearby river.
The decision was motivated by cost concerns.
Worries about the quality of the water were disregarded.
The river water, it turned out, corroded the city’s aging pipes; by the time it left the taps, it could contain high levels of toxic lead.
And yet nobody seemed to care.
The city and state governments looked the other way, even after companies and hospitals declared the water unfit for use and switched to other sources.
Flint’s residents complained of the water’s color and taste.
But no matter how loud they raised their voices – either alone or collectively – they were disparaged as ignorant or dismissed as serial complainers.
Even after doctors presented evidence that lead levels in the blood of the city’s children had doubled in the space of a year, the objections of the people of Flint fell on deaf ears.
The US may be one of the world’s most successful democracies, with regular elections and a representative government that is supposed to be – in Abraham Lincoln’s famous phrase – “of the people, by the people, for the people.”
And yet not one level of government took the necessary measures to ensure that the residents of Flint had access to safe drinking water.
And Flint is not a solitary case; it is emblematic of a global problem.
Millions of people worldwide lack access to clean drinking water.
All too often, the world’s poor are forced to drink contaminated water, drill holes in pipelines, or buy bottled water that is far more expensive than what flows from the taps of their richer neighbors.
And the issue is only growing in importance as competition for drinking water heats up.
When a government proves unresponsive or incompetent, a common prescription is to limit its influence, so that the power of the market can be unleashed.
But when it comes to essential resources – such as water – this approach becomes morally repugnant.
Allocating clean water, for example, to those able to pay the most for it results in situations where industrial applications win out over individual needs, leaving many with none.
The real problem is not water scarcity; it is that existing supplies are unequally distributed and thus unaffordable to the poor.
This might be tolerable when it comes to ordinary goods – not everyone can have a yacht; but when it comes to an essential resource, we must ensure access on an equitable basis.
That means we have to find a better way to govern resources like water.
For a message to be effective, it must reach and influence those in control – whether they are elected officials, regulators, or private actors.
Elections provide people with the opportunity to vote, but that is not the same thing as giving them a voice, much less ensuring that raised voices are listened to.
Flint is not only a wake-up call for democracy in the US; it is a stark lesson in the need for better governance worldwide.
When cost-cutting efforts produce drinking water that fails to meet basic health standards, “government for the people” has been seriously eroded.
As the late Nobel laureate Elinor Ostrom demonstrated, ordinary people are capable of sharing resources and avoiding the “tragedy of the commons.”
And yet the imperative for action lies with those in control of essential resources, not with those in need of them.
If the problem of equitable access is to be solved, authorities must fulfill their responsibility to the governed, which means listening, learning, and ultimately leading the effort to address it.
Rediscovering Fiscal Policy at the G7
ALGIERS – As G7 leaders convene in Ise-Shima, Japan, the global economy’s fragility is a top concern.
But instead of focusing on currency wars, the leaders of the major developed economies should be discussing fiscal policy, which under current conditions would be a more powerful tool than monetary policy for boosting economic activity.
After all, today, unlike in normal times, the effects of fiscal policy would not be limited by too-high interest rates, inadequate private demand, strict capacity constraints, or excessive inflation.
Economists dismiss fiscal policy largely because it is “politically constrained.”
But that is not a good reason to give up on it.
On the contrary, if the political process is producing problematic fiscal policies, as it is today, that is all the more reason for economists to voice their concerns.
The heyday of activist fiscal policy was a half-century ago.
Most advanced countries pursued a countercyclical approach, reining in spending or raising taxes during periods of economic expansion and enacting stimulus policies during recessions.
The saying “we are all Keynesians now,” attributed to Milton Friedman in 1965 and Richard Nixon in 1971, captured the economic zeitgeist.
But, after 2000, some began to pursue pro-cyclical budgetary policies.
When the economy was booming, they implemented fiscal stimulus, thereby reinforcing the upswing.
When the economy experienced a downturn, they pursued fiscal austerity, exacerbating the recession.
Among those who acted pro-cyclically were some US politicians.
At the beginning of this century, President George W. Bush threw away the large fiscal surpluses that he had inherited from Bill Clinton, enacting large tax cuts and rapid spending increases even from 2003 to 2007, as the economy neared its peak.
He was aided and abetted by Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan, who bizarrely considered the surpluses a threat.
It was during this period that Vice President Dick Cheney reportedly declared that former President Ronald Reagan had proved that “deficits don’t matter.”
Saddled with debt, US leaders felt less able to enact badly needed fiscal stimulus when the Great Recession hit in 2007.
Democrats understood that it was necessary, but Republicans decided, at precisely the wrong time, that deficits were bad, after all.
In January 2009, when the economy was tanking, the Republicans voted against President Barack Obama’s fiscal stimulus plan.
Fortunately, the policy was enacted nonetheless, making a major contribution to reversing the free-fall.
But once the Republicans took over the House of Representatives in 2010, they were able to block Obama’s further attempts to stimulate the still-weak economy.
Then there is the poster child for the post-millennial turn to pro-cyclical fiscal policy: Greece.
Like Bush, the country ran excessive budget deficits while the economy was expanding, from 2003 to 2008.
Then, in 2010, confronting a massive debt crisis, Greece acquiesced to its European creditors and adopted strict austerity, which exacerbated economic contraction.
As a result, far from restoring a sustainable debt burden as intended, the policy caused the debt-to-GDP ratio to rise rapidly.
European countries in general base their budget plans on unnecessarily biased official forecasts, which can push them toward pro-cyclical policy.
Before 2008, all eurozone members, not only Greece, “unexpectedly” exceeded the 3%-of-GDP ceiling for budget deficits at times.
And, after 2008, the pattern of pro-cyclical fiscal contraction, leading to falling income and rising debt-to-GDP ratios, played out not just in Greece, but in Ireland, Italy, Portugal, and Spain as well.
Austerity’s leading champion is, no surprise, Germany.
The Germans had reluctantly agreed, at the April 2009 G20 summit in London, that the US, China, and other major countries would expand demand to help pull the world out of recession.
But when the Greek crisis erupted at the end of that year, the Germans reverted to their deeply held beliefs in fiscal rectitude.
At first, the International Monetary Fund went along with the claim by Greece’s creditors that austerity could work.
But in January 2013, the IMF’s then-chief economist, Olivier Blanchard, published a paper concluding that fiscal multipliers were much higher than the IMF had thought, and thus that the austerity programs in the struggling countries of the eurozone’s periphery might have been excessive.
Today, IMF Managing Director Christine Lagarde well recognizes that, for Greece to achieve a sustainable debt-to-GDP ratio, it needs more debt relief, not demands for surpluses of 3.5% of GDP.
Japan, host of this week’s G7 meeting, has also made fiscal mistakes.
In April 2014, even with the Bank of Japan having pursued aggressive quantitative easing to kick-start economic growth, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe followed through on a planned consumption-tax hike, from 5% to 8%.
As many had predicted, Japan fell back into recession.
Very soon, Abe must decide whether to raise the consumption tax again, to 10%.
While Japanese officials are not being unreasonable in worrying about the country’s huge national debt, near-zero interest rates show that creditworthiness is not the problem today.
What Japan needs is a stronger economy.
This clearly indicates that Japan should not proceed with another large increase in the consumption tax.
What it could do instead is pursue a pre-set path of small annual increases in the consumption tax over the next 20 years.
To be sure, there are also examples of countries that have used countercyclical fiscal policy to their advantage since 2000.
Some developing countries – including Chile, Botswana, Indonesia, Malaysia, and South Korea – took advantage of the boom years to run budget surpluses, pay down debt, and build up reserves.
As a result, they had enough fiscal space to relax such policies when the 2008-2009 crisis hit.
Unfortunately, some that escaped pro-cyclicality in the last decade have since been backsliding.
Thailand is one example.
Another is Brazil, whose failure to take advantage of the renewed commodity boom of 2010-2011 to eliminate its budget deficit contributed substantially to the mess it is in today.
Politicians virtually everywhere would do well to re-read the fiscal policy chapter in their introductory macroeconomics textbooks.
Mempercepat Aksi Perubahan Iklim
BONN – Bulan Desember lalu di Paris, para pemimpin dunia bertemu untuk menyepakati seperangkat tujuan dan arahan dekarbonisasi perekonomian global dan peningkatan kapasitas beradaptasi terhadap perubahan iklim.
Konferensi tersebut merupakan prestasi yang menonjol, tapi itu baru permulaannya saja.
Setiap negara – dengan dukungan pemerintah daerah, sektor swasta, dan warga negaranya – kini harus bergerak cepat untuk memenuhi janji-janjinya dan mengendalikan perubahan iklim.
Kebutuhan akan aksi bersama dan urgen tidak bisa dikesampingkan lagi.
Penundaan apapun akan menyebabkan dampak-dampak negatifnya terus menumpuk.
Hal ini tidak hanya mengakibatkan penderitaan yang dahsyat, terutama pada kelompok penduduk paling rentan di dunia, tapi juga akan bergaung selama beberapa dekade berikutnya dan menjadikan sasaran utama untuk membatasi kenaikan suhu global di bawah 2 º Celsius (dibandingkan suhu masa pra-industri) akan membutuhkan biaya sangat besar.
Kemajuan pesat yang diperlukan bisa terwujud dengan penurunan emisi karbon emisi secara besar yang dicapai melalui peningkatan investasi pada pengembangan dan perluasan energi yang lebih bersih dan efisien.
Di saat yang sama, upaya melestarikan dan menambah “penyerap” karbon (carbon sinks) – seperti hutan, lahan basah, padang rumput, hutan bakau, dan lamun yang menyerap banyak karbon dioksida yang dilepaskan – sangat krusial.
Tetapi, menurut asumsi yang paling optimis pun, perlu waktu untuk merekayasa peralihan secara global dari penggunaan bahan bakar fosil menuju energi terbarukan dan memulihkan infrastruktur ekologi dunia yang sudah terkuras habis.
Itu sebabnya penting untuk mengupayakan tindakan mengurangi polutan iklim jangka pendek (short-lived climate pollutant) (SLCP), yang juga menyebabkan perubahan iklim.
SLCP termasuk karbon hitam atau jelaga (senyawa utama karbon yang juga menimbulkan masalah kesehatan); hydrofluorocarbons (HFC), yang umumnya dipakai dalam pendingin; dan metana dan ozon troposferik (senyawa di lapisan atmosfer bawah).
Berkilo-kilo, “polutan-polutan super ini” menyebabkan pemanasan yang lebih hebat dibandingkan karbon dioksida.
Bahkan efek pemanasan jelaga adalah 900 kali lebih besar daripada karbon, dan efek metana 28 kali lebih besar; sebagian besar HFC memiliki efek pemanasan yang 2.000 kali lebih besar dibandingkan karbon dioksida.
Masalah-masalah yang diakibatkan polutan jangka pendek (SLCP) melampaui perubahan iklim.
Karbon hitam dan ozon troposferik adalah dua jenis polutan air yang membunuh tujuh juta jiwa per tahun dan merusak ratusan juta ton tanaman pangan.
Koalisi Air dan Udara Bersih (Climate and Clean Air Coalition to Reduce Short-Lived Climate Pollutants) di bawah Program Lingkungan PBB (United Nations Environment Programme) memperkirakan bahwa aksi cepat mengurangi SLCP, terutama metana dan karbon hitam, berpotensi memperlambat pemanasan yang diperkirakan terjadi di tahun 2050 sebanyak 0.5º Celsius.
Selain itu, aksi ini dapat menyelamatkan dua juta jiwa per tahunnya dan mencegah kehilangan hasil tanaman panen sebanyak lebih dari 30 juta ton per tahun.
Kita patut berharap bisa menuai manfaat-manfaat ini.
Berdasarkan Perjanjian Paris, setiap negara harus mencapai penurunan emisi sesuai dengan rencana kontribusi nasional masing-masing.
Lebih dari selusin negara telah memasukkan SLCP ke dalam rencan aksi perubahan iklim nasional mereka.
Selain itu, Koalisi Air dan Udara Bersih bekerja sama dengan 50 negara anggota, serta Bank Dunia dan Organisasi Kesehatan Dunia, untuk menghilangkan polutan-polutan super ini.
Namun, supaya berhasil, upaya-upaya ini harus lebih dari Perjanjian Paris.
Untungnya, kemajuan juga sudah terlihat.
Langkah-langkah untuk menurunkan produksi dan konsumsi HFC tengah dilakukan berdasarkan Protokol Montreal tentang perlindungan lapisan ozon.
Negara-negara di dunia memulai perundingan formal bulan November lalu dan berharap akan menyelesaikannya di akhir tahun ini.
Perundingan ini menguatkan penghapusan bahan-bahan kimia lama, seperti chlorofluorocarbons (CFC) dan lain-lain, yang sudah meniadakan sekitar 135 miliar ton CO2 berada di atmosfer, sembari mempercepat pemulihan lapisan ozon.
Tentu saja, penurunan SLCP tidak perlu mengorbankan upaya mengurangi emisi karbon dioksida.
Sebaliknya, negara-negara di dunia bisa dan harus menurunkan kedua secara bersamaan.
Memang benar, upaya-upaya mengurangi emisi karbon dioksida juga dilakukan di luar kerangka Perjanjian Paris.
Organisasi Penerbangan Sipil Dunia (ICAO) yang tengah berusaha menurunkan emisi perjalanan udara, telah mencapai kesepakatan awal tentang penurunan emisi di bidang transportasi udara beberapa minggu lalu.
Organisasi Maritim Internasional (IMO) juga mengupayakan target yang serupa untuk pengangkutan laut.
Pemanasan yang berasal dari polutan iklim apapun berbahaya dan memicu serangkaian konsekuensi yang tidak dapat dipulihkan (irreversible), termasuk kenaikan permukaan air laut, kerusakan hutan, menipisnya es di laut Artik dan gletser di Greenland dan Daratan Tinggi Tibet, dan mencairnya permafrost.
Lebih parah lagi, efek-efek ini bisa saling memperburuk sehingga dunia bisa terperangkap dalam lingkaran setan dan semakin sulit untuk keluar.
Tetapi jika kita bertindak cepat, memanfaatkan momentum segar tentang penghapusan HFC melalui perjanjian serupa seperti Protokol Montreal dan tingginya dukungan dari beberapa koalisi, kita bisa menghindar dari bencana dan menjamin pertumbuhan ekonomi jangka panjang, termasuk menyokong kemajuan menuju perwujudan Tujuan Pembangunan Berkelanjutan (SDG).
Sederhananya, besarnya tindakan yang diambil terhadap semua emisi yang terkait dengan iklim akan menentukan keberhasilan kita dalam mengentaskan kemiskinan dan dunia seperti apa yang akan menjadi tempat hidup anak-cucu kita.
Melalui penandatanganan Perjanjian Paris tanggal 22 April nanti, kita memiliki peluang emas untuk terus maju demi masa depan yang lebih cerah, bersih, dan makmur.
The Secret Sex Lives of Crop Plants
ABERYSTWYTH – Scientists estimate that there are more than 400,000 species of plants on earth, at least half of which are edible for humans.
Indeed, it is entirely possible that we are capable of eating 300,000 plant species.
And yet we consume just a tiny fraction of that.
Homo sapiens, the most cosmopolitan of species, one that thrives by virtue of being a generalist, eats only about 200 plant species.
Remarkably, a mere three crops – maize, rice, and wheat – account for more than half of the calories and proteins that we derive from plants.
Strangely, there have been few attempts to explain why we consume so few of the species that are possible to eat.
Taste is not the answer.
Nor is nutritional value.
The plants we eat have been enhanced by generations of selection, in which farmers have favored those with the most palatability, the greatest nutritional value, and the highest yield.
As much as one might hate broccoli, it is likely to be far tastier than most of the 300,000 alternatives.
Wild plants taste like wild plants because they still are wild plants.
But why is that?
In Guns, Germs, and Steel, the geographer and science writer Jared Diamond argues that the explanation for our limited menu lies within the plants themselves.
Diamond argues that when agriculture was still in its infancy, our ancestors were remarkably efficient at identifying the very few species that were suitable for domestication – by which Diamond means not being poisonous.
The logic seems impeccable, and it is true that the vast majority of the planet’s 400,000 plant species do contain chemical defenses (poisons) to defend themselves from grazing herbivores.
But, unfortunately for Diamond’s theory, many of our most important crops are also stuffed full of toxins, to the extent that if they were introduced today, they would most likely be banned for human consumption.
Examples include the tomato, its relative the potato, and many other root crops, such as cassava, which contains cyanide; taro, which is full of oxalates; and yams, which produce defense chemicals that mimic female hormones.
Indeed, many of the plants we love to grow and eat, including chilies, mustard, horseradish, and wasabi, are attractive precisely because they are packed with potentially harmful chemicals.
What distinguishes food crops from other plants has nothing to do with taste, nutrition, or whether they contain poisons.
The plants we eat are atypical because of their particularly dull sex lives.
Many biologists believe that the reason there are so many species of flowering plants is that each has become dependent on a unique species of insects that coevolved to pollinate it.
In other words, these are plants with elaborate sex lives.
The more unusual the mechanism of insect pollination, the greater the genetic separation among plant populations becomes, almost as if they had evolved on different islands.
This explains why there are roughly 25,000 orchid species.
Orchids are the kinky exhibitionists of the botanical world.
Many of them have extremely elaborate flowers that have evolved to trick male bees or wasps into trying to copulate with them, thereby ensuring that they are regularly pollinated.
This explains why we don’t farm orchids for food.
Seducing bees and wasps might work well for a few individual flowers, but it would never work on an agricultural scale.
There would never be enough male wasps to pollinate an entire crop; and if there were, they would soon tire or wise up.
Furthermore, because wasps are not found everywhere, an orchid crop could never be pollinated outside its original range.
Most food crops, by contrast, can be pollinated by different types of insects.
They can be successfully cultivated around the world, using whatever insects are available to pollinate them.
The most common crops of all – wheat, maize, and rice – are grasses that rely on the wind for pollination.
Others, such as potatoes and yams, are spread vegetatively and are rarely propagated from seed at all, while some crops that would naturally be insect pollinated, such as oilseed rape, become wind pollinated when they are grown on an industrial scale.
A more adventurous plant diet is possible.
But it would have to accommodate the quirky sex lives of what we include in it.
Food for Revolution
PRINCETON – Summits are defined by their location.
It is quaint that the 1933 World Economic Conference took place in the Geological Museum in London’s Kensington, at a time when international cooperation seemed as alien as a fossilized dinosaur.
On these criteria, Deauville, in French Normandy, with the (slightly faded) elegance of a past era of elite luxury, ostentatious consumption, and sumptuous banquets, is also perhaps not an altogether fortunate choice for the G-8 meeting.
This year, the G-8ers are talking about interesting but peripheral issues, such as the economic impact of the Internet.
Worse, they are talking about important issues, like food security, in a peripheral way.
The food issue emerged for the first time as a major theme at the July 2009 summit in L’Aquila, Italy, as a response to a commodity boom that was beginning to falter, but that has since reemerged with the force of a hurricane.
Now the G-8 will discuss funding for palliative measures.
The issue of food is, however, intimately tied to a host of much broader economic issues, which the international community is not properly addressing.
Even though the global economy today looks relatively robust in general, international economic cooperation is more fragile now than at any moment in the post-1945 world.
Weak food security highlights all of the major problems of the modern world non-order.
Economic and financial nationalisms threaten.
There is talk of currency wars, national management and regulation of banking, and growing demand for greater levels of trade protection.
And all of these issues are inter-connected.
The discussion of monetary policy is especially divisive.
Because of low interest rates in the United States, major financial institutions can borrow cheaply in dollars and then chase much higher returns in the major emerging-market countries.
The result creates an impossible dilemma for many of the world’s most dynamic economies.
If they try to clamp down by raising domestic interest rates, they will only attract greater capital inflows.
If they let the exchange rate rise, they might deter some capital inflows, but they would also penalize their exporters and push up domestic unemployment.
Emerging-market policymakers in big countries such as Brazil, China, and Turkey routinely attack the US and its monetary policy as a source of inflation, social tension, and political instability.
The most obvious and dangerous consequence of low interest rates in the major industrial countries is their impact on commodity prices, which is especially pronounced for food and fuel.
As many economists, notably Jeffrey Frankel, have shown, prices on these markets are established by an auction-like process; as a result, commodity markets transmit the effects of monetary expansion particularly quickly.
By contrast, branded products, into which producers have sunk major investments in securing the market, have prices that are much stickier and do not reflect the effects of monetary policy as rapidly.
Higher food prices have had a major impact in expanding the area devoted to cultivation in many countries, and have led to higher output levels worldwide.
Brazil, Russia, and China, but also Algeria, Egypt, and South Africa – indeed, all African countries that have maintained functioning governments – have seen dramatic increases in food production over the past decade.
This should be a happy picture: the world is now better able to feed itself.
But the same economic stimuli that underpin higher food output also lead to supply problems, a decline in living standards, and massive social strains, especially in urban centers.
This is important to bear in mind, because rising food prices have historically been the trigger for political revolutions.
The three revolutions that made the modern world, in France, Russia, and China, all had their immediate origins in food shortages, fear of hunger, and disputes about food pricing.
The panic about bread that swept France in 1789, and the inability of the government to guarantee supplies, destroyed the ancien regime.
Louis XVI was contemptuously called “le boulanger,” the baker.
Wartime inflation destroyed stability in the Russian empire in 1917, as farmers, worried about the declining value of their money, hoarded their output and let the cities starve.
The Bolsheviks came to power on a promise of bread (and peace).
China, too, was paralyzed by inflation after the Second World War, leaving it vulnerable to food panics.
Food prices are usually not limited in their effects to one country alone.
Simultaneous revolutions swept Europe in 1848, in the aftermath of crop failures whose most notorious manifestation was the Irish famine.
Price rises have been a major trigger of the discontent this year in the Middle East and North Africa.
Though the Egyptian and Tunisian economies were expanding quite satisfactorily, people had to pay much more for food.
Moreover, it would be wrong to view this as a purely regional phenomenon limited to the so-called Arab Spring.
The same kind of unrest, in which the countryside is pitted against the town, with both sides demanding more rights, could undermine the political order in China and other big emerging-market economies.
Recent decades have been replete with contagious financial crises that spread disorder from one country to another.
The effects of globalized money are now producing a new whirlwind.