The two 50-basis-point RRR increases just locked up the same amount of liquidity.
A country with current-account and capital-account surpluses and increasing foreign-exchange reserves normally sees an excessive money supply and high inflation.
But, while excessive money supply is a reality for China – the PBC now holds more than $2.6 trillion in foreign reserves – inflation has been quite moderate so far, thanks to the sterilization policy.
The RRR is only one example of a textbook sterilization instrument.
Another is to sell off government bonds held by the central bank in order to take money out of circulation – again, just the opposite of what the Fed is now doing.
Because China’s government does not owe much debt to the public, the PBC sold out its holdings of government bonds in 2005. So it had to create something else to sell.
It created so-called “Central Bank Bills,” which commercial banks are supposed to buy voluntarily.
When they do, the money they pay is also locked up in the PBC’s accounts.
To date, up to 5-6% of total liquidity has been returned to the central bank in this way.
Furthermore, the PBC uses unconventional instruments from time to time, such as “credit ceilings” or “credit quotas” imposed on commercial banks.
This may result in “extra reserves,” which commercial banks cannot use to extend their credit lines.
Credit quotas imposed early this year have left Chinese commercial banks with 2-3% of extra reserves.
Adding up the impact of the PBC’s sterilization efforts, roughly one-quarter of China’s total monetary base is illiquid.
Thus, although China’s total money supply seems excessive, with the M2-to-GDP ratio now at about 190%, the real monetary base is actually much smaller than it appears.
As a result, China’s inflation, as well as asset prices, remain under control.
For how long will this sterilization continue, and how far will it go?
At what point will higher RRR levels cause Chinese commercial banks to begin running losses?
There may be room for further sterilization.
First, unlike in some other countries, Chinese commercial banks are paid reasonable interest rates on required reserves, except for the “extra reserves” that they hold. So they do not lose much, if anything, from the PBC’s sterilization policies.
Second, China’s central bank still controls interest rates by enforcing a roughly three-percentage-point spread between deposit rates and lending rates.
As a result, Chinese commercial banks can operate longer with a higher RRR than their counterparts elsewhere.
One key issue facing China is how to reduce the current- and capital-account surpluses in order to reduce foreign-exchange holdings.
Yes, further revaluation of the exchange rate is needed, but this can play only a secondary role.
The most important task for China is to reduce the saving rate, which equaled 52% of GDP in 2009.
A number of fiscal, social-security, and tax reforms should be a priority for this purpose.
But it seems that both revaluation and reform will take time.
Meanwhile, the causes of global imbalance on the US side also seem unlikely to disappear any time soon. And now, with the Fed’s QE2 on the table, conditions may worsen before they improve.
The PBC may have to continue its sterilization for some time in the foreseeable future.
China’s New Economic Model
China’s success since it began its transition to a market economy has been based on adaptable strategies and policies: as each set of problems are solved, new problems arise, for which new policies and strategies must be devised.
This process includes social innovation .
China recognized that it could not simply transfer economic institutions that had worked in other countries; at the least, what succeeded elsewhere had to be adapted to the unique problems confronting China.
Today, China is discussing a “new economic model.”
Of course, the old economic model has been a resounding success, producing almost 10% annual growth for 30 years and lifting hundreds of millions of Chinese out of poverty.
The changes are apparent not only in the statistics, but even more so in the faces of the people that one sees around the country.
As an increasing share of China’s population moves to cities, those cities will have to be made livable, which will require careful planning, including public transportation systems and parks.
Equally interesting, China is attempting to move away from the export-led growth strategy that it and other East Asian countries have pursued.
That strategy supported technology transfer, helping to close the knowledge gap and rapidly improving the quality of manufactured goods.
Export-led growth meant that China could produce without worrying about developing the domestic market.
But a global backlash has already developed.
Even countries seemingly committed to competitive markets don’t like being beaten at their own game, and often trump up charges of “unfair competition.”
More importantly, even if markets are not fully saturated in many areas, it will be hard to maintain double-digit growth rates for exports.
So something has to change.
China has been engaged in what might be called “vendor finance,” providing the money that helps finance the huge US fiscal and trade deficits, allowing Americans to buy more goods than they sell.
But this is a peculiar arrangement: a relatively poor country is helping to finance America’s War on Iraq, as well as a massive tax cut for the richest people in the world’s richest country, while huge needs at home imply ample room for expansion of both consumption and investment.
In fact, to meet the challenge of restructuring China’s economy away from exports and resource-intensive goods, China must stimulate consumption.
While the rest of the world struggles to raise savings, China, with a savings rate in excess of 40%, struggles to get its people to consume more.
Providing better social services (public health care, education, and nation-wide retirement programs) would reduce the need for “precautionary” savings.
More access to finance for small and medium sized businesses would help, too.
And “green taxes” – such as on carbon emissions – would shift consumption patterns while discouraging energy-intensive exports.
As China moves away from export-led growth, it will have to look for new sources of dynamism in its growing entrepreneurial ranks, which requires a commitment to creating an independent innovation system.
China has long invested heavily in higher education and technology; now it is striving to create world-class institutions.
But if China wants a dynamic innovation system, it should resist pressure by Western governments to adopt the kind of unbalanced intellectual property laws that are being demanded.
Instead, it should pursue a “balanced” intellectual property regime: because knowledge itself is the most important input in the production of knowledge, a badly designed intellectual property regime can stifle innovation – as has been the case in America in some areas.
Western technological innovation has focused too little on reducing the adverse environmental impact of growth, and too much on saving labor – something that China has in abundance.
So it makes sense for China to focus its scientific prowess on new technologies that use fewer resources.
But it is important to have an innovation system (including an intellectual property regime) that ensures that advances in knowledge are widely used.
That may require innovative approaches, quite different from intellectual property regimes based on privatization and monopolization of knowledge, with the high prices and restricted benefits that follow.
Too many people think of economics as a zero-sum game, and that China’s success is coming at the expense of the rest of the world.
Yes, China’s rapid growth poses challenges to the West.
Competition will force some to work harder, to become more efficient, or to accept lower profits.
But economics is really a positive-sum game.
An increasingly prosperous China has not only expanded imports from other countries, but is also providing goods that have kept prices lower in the West, despite sharply higher oil prices in recent years.
This downward pressure on prices has allowed Western central banks to follow expansionary monetary policies, underpinning higher employment and growth.
We should all hope that China’s new economic model succeeds.
If it does, all of us will have much to gain.
China’s New Latin Beat
China’s President Hu Jintao has just returned home from his first trip to Latin America, where he sought new long-term sources of supplies for his country’s booming economy.
These new ties offer Latin America and the Caribbean both a new market and an example of how a dynamic economy can reduce poverty.
But Latin America should also be on its guard. While China may be a ravenous importer of Latin American commodities, it is also a formidable competitor.
Both the public and private sector throughout the region should take immediate measures to face up to this new competition and to work toward cooperative projects with the Chinese.
Ordinary people in Latin America are only now recognizing China’s importance as a global economic player.
Indeed, until recently, most people took little notice of China.
But China’s soaring growth, seen in contrast with stagnation in Latin America’s economies, has awakened governments and businessmen across the region.
Comparisons between China’s economy and that of Latin America are stunning.
The World Bank estimates that dire poverty in China, calculated as individual income of $1 per day, has been reduced from about 500 million people at the start of the 1980’s to less than 90 million in 2000.
Meanwhile, poverty rates in South America have remained relatively constant.
Economic growth rates reveal the same gap.
From 1978 to 2003, annual real GDP growth in China averaged 8.1% while growth in Mexico – the fastest in Latin America, barely reached 1% a year.
Although growing, China’s trade with Latin America and the Caribbean remains small, representing less than 2% of both exports and imports in 2002. The nature of that trading relationship differs substantially from country to country.
Brazil and Argentina have, for example, significantly increased agricultural exports to China, while Central America and Mexico have seen their imports from China increase dramatically.
These changes have also had a severe impact on Mexico’s trade with the US.
Although Latin American and Chinese exports to the US have both grown significantly since 1990, China replaced Mexico in 2003 as the second-leading exporter to the US in value terms after Canada.
Mexico’s competition in the US market from China has increased particularly in light manufacturing – mostly clothing and electronics.
In Central America and Mexico clothing production is vitally important – generating 400,000 and 600,000 jobs, respectively – and represents the heart of Central America’s maquiladoras (free trade zones), which account for more than 70% of regional exports to the US.
Losing this sector of the economy to the hyper-competitive Chinese will be a hard hit, as textile exports are often the first step on the development ladder.
With respect to other goods, including computers, Chinese-made products are set to replace Mexican output in overwhelming numbers.
Mexico’s so-called “Silicon Valley South” companies in Guadalajara have, by their own estimates, already lost more than $500 million worth of projects and approximately 20,000 jobs to Asia, especially to China, and this trend will continue in the short term.
If Latin America fails to deal with its new competitor, the peoples of the region will lose jobs and opportunities to develop as they should.
But there are lessons to be learned and advantages to be gained from China if Latin American governments and businesses are willing to think creatively.
China’s Next Transformation
HONG KONG – During three decades of favorable global economic conditions, China created an integrated global production system unprecedented in scale and complexity.
But now its policymakers must deal with the triple challenges of the unfolding European debt crisis, slow recovery in the United States, and a secular growth slowdown in China’s economy.
All three challenges are interconnected, and mistakes by any of the parties could plunge the global economy into another recession.
To assess the risks and options for China and the world, one must understand China’s “Made in the World” production system, which rests on four distinct but mutually dependent pillars.
The first of these pillars, the China-based “world factory,” was largely created by foreign multinational corporations and their associated suppliers and subcontractors, with labor-intensive processing and assembly carried out by small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs) that have direct access to global markets through a complex web of contracts.
Starting modestly in coastal areas and special economic zones, the “world factory” supply chain has spread throughout China, producing everything from stuffed animals to iPads.
The “world factory” could not have been built without the second pillar: the “China infrastructure network,” installed and operated mostly by vertically integrated state-owned enterprises in logistics, energy, roads, telecoms, shipping, and ports.
This pillar relies heavily on planning, large-scale fixed investment, and administrative controls, and its quality, scale, and relative efficiency were strategic to Chinese competitiveness and productivity.
The third pillar is the “Chinese financial supply chain,” which provided the financing needed to construct and maintain the infrastructure network.
This supply chain is characterized by the dominance of the state-owned banks, high domestic savings, relatively under-developed financial markets, and a closed capital account.
The final pillar is the “government services supply chain,” by which central and local officials affect every link of production, logistics, and financial networks through regulations, taxes, or permits.
Most foreign observers miss the scale and depth of institutional and process innovation in this supply chain, which has managed (mostly) to protect property rights, reduce transaction costs, and minimize risks by aligning government services with market interests.
For example, Chinese local governments became highly adept at attracting foreign direct investment (FDI) by providing attractive infrastructure and supporting services that facilitate the expansion of global production chains.
With the onset of the current global crisis, and given dramatic changes in social media, demographics, urbanization, and resource constraints, all four pillars are now under stress.
Production chains are facing labor shortages, wage increases, and threats of relocation to lower-cost countries.
Meanwhile, global investors are questioning local governments’ solvency.
Chinese experts are now debating a key governance question: which top-level architecture would enable the country to adopt the reforms needed to meet global and domestic pressures?
Investors are concerned about Chinese equities’ erratic performance, regulatory risks, and policy surprises, as well as the uncertainties stemming from greater volatility in asset prices, including property prices, interest rates, and the exchange rate.
What makes the Chinese economy more difficult to read is the increasingly complex interaction of all four of its production system’s components, with each other and the rest of the world.
First, favorable conditions for the growth of the “world factory” have begun to dissipate.
Production costs – in terms of labor, resources, regulation, and infrastructure – have been rising domestically, while consumption bubbles in the West have burst.
Second, the early success of “China infrastructure” was built on cheap land, capital, and labor.
But, despite modern infrastructure, logistical costs within China are 18% of production costs, compared with 10% in the US, owing to various internal inefficiencies.
Third, the success of China’s financial system was built on state-owned banks’ financing of large infrastructure projects and foreign financing of export production through FDI and trade.
The financial system has yet to address adequately the challenges of financial inclusivity, particularly funding of SMEs and rural areas, and exposure to excess capacity in selected industries.
Last but not least, the three pillars could not have remained standing without the anchor provided by the fourth.
Until now, its success was based on positive competition between local governments and different ministries, benchmarked according to performance indicators such as GDP and fiscal revenues.
Unfortunately, this has led to problems of social equity and environmental sustainability, which require complex coordination of bureaucratic silos in order to overcome the resistance of powerful vested interests.
There is general recognition and consensus that the path of reform requires profound re-engineering of all four pillars.
First, the production chain must shift from export dependence toward domestic consumption.
Realigning China’s infrastructure means emphasizing quality over quantity, and reducing state ownership and controlled prices in favor of market forces.
State orchestration should instead be focused on fighting corruption, reducing transaction costs, promoting competition, lowering entry barriers, and removing excess capacity.
For the financial supply chain, the key is to address systemic risks and realign incentives in order to induce investors to support the engines of real economic growth, rather than the creation of asset bubbles.
The Chinese miracle was engineered by institutional and process innovation at all levels of the government services supply chain.
China requires nothing less than another radical re-engineering to become a more balanced, socially equitable, and sustainable economy.
That process has already begun with another round of experimentation through three new Special Economic Zones in Hengqin, Qianhai, and Nansha to pilot the emergence of a creative, knowledge-based services economy.
Of course, such an economy relies crucially on the quality of governance.
The real challenge for Chinese officials is how to balance creativity and institutional innovation with order, thereby ensuring the integrity of all four of its economy’s pillars.
China’s “Peaceful” Rise?
In recent weeks, China announced a 12.6% increase in its defense spending; America’s CIA director, Porter Goss, testified about a worsening military balance in the Taiwan Strait; and President George W. Bush pleaded with Europeans not to lift their embargo on arms sales to China.
Yet Chinese leaders have spoken of China’s “peaceful rise” or, more recently, its “peaceful development.”
Analysts such as John Mearsheimer of the University of Chicago have flatly proclaimed that China cannot rise peacefully, and predict that “the United States and China are likely to engage in an intense security competition with considerable potential for war.”
Optimists point out that China has engaged in good neighbor policies since the 1990’s, settled border disputes, played a greater role in international institutions, and recognized the benefits of using soft power.
But skeptics reply that China is merely waiting for its economy to lay the basis for future hegemony.
Who is right?
We will not know for some time, but the debaters should recall Thucydides’ warning more than two millennia ago that belief in the inevitability of conflict can become one of its main causes.
Each side, believing it will end up at war with the other, makes reasonable military preparations that are read by the other side as confirmation of its worst fears.
In fact, the “rise of China” is a misnomer.
“Re-emergence” would be more accurate, since by size and history the Middle Kingdom has long been a major power in East Asia.
Technically and economically, China was the world’s leader (though without global reach) from 500 to 1500.
Only in the last half-millennium was it overtaken by Europe and America.
The Asian Development Bank has estimated that in 1820, at the beginning of the industrial age, Asia accounted for three-fifths of world output.
By 1940, this fell to one-fifth, even though Asia was home to three-fifths of the world’s population.
Rapid economic growth has brought output back to two-fifths of the world total today, and the Bank speculates that Asia could return to its historical levels by 2025.
Asia, of course, includes Japan, India, Korea, and others, but China will eventually play the largest role.
Its high annual growth rates of 8-9% led to a tripling of its GNP in the last two decades of the twentieth century.
Nonetheless, China still has a long way to go and faces many obstacles.
The US economy is about twice the size of China’s; if it grows by only 2% annually, and China’s economy grows by 6%, they could reach parity sometime after 2025.
Even so, they would not be equal in composition or sophistication.
China would still have a vast, underdeveloped countryside, and would not equal the US in per capita income until sometime after 2075 (depending on the measures of comparison.)
China is a long way from posing the kind of challenge to American preponderance that the Kaiser’s Germany posed when it surpassed Britain in the years leading up to World War I.
Moreover, simple projections of economic growth trends can mislead.
Countries tend to pick the low-hanging fruit as they benefit from imported technologies in the early stages of economic take-off, and growth rates generally slow as economies reach higher levels of development.
In addition, China’s economy suffers from inefficient state-owned enterprises, a shaky financial system, and inadequate infrastructure.
At the same time, politics has a way of confounding economic projections.
Creating a rule of law and institutions for political participation has lagged behind economic growth, and growing inequality, massive internal migration, an inadequate social safety net, and corruption could foster political instability.
Indeed, some observers fear instability caused by a weak , rather than a rising, China.
As long as China’s economy does grow, its military power will likely increase, thus making China appear more dangerous to its neighbors and complicating America’s commitments in Asia.
A RAND study projects that by 2015, China’s military expenditure will be more than six times higher than Japan’s, and its accumulated military capital stock will be roughly five times higher (measured at purchasing power parity).
Whatever the accuracy of such assessments of China’s military growth, the outcome will also depend on what the US and other countries do.
The key to military power in the information age depends on the ability to collect, process, disseminate, and integrate complex systems of space-based surveillance, high speed computers, and “smart” weapons.
China and others will develop some of these capabilities, but, according to many military analysts, China is not likely to close the gap with the US soon.
China’s inability to compete with the US on a global basis does not mean that it could not challenge the US in East Asia, or that war over Taiwan is impossible.
Weaker countries sometimes attack when they feel backed into a corner, such as Japan did at Pearl Harbor or China did when it entered the Korean War in 1950.
If, for example, Taiwan were to declare independence, China would likely intervene with armed force, regardless of the perceived economic or military costs.
But it would be unlikely to win such a war, and prudent policy on both sides can make such a war unlikely.
There is no need for the US and China to go to war.
Not every rising power leads to war – witness America’s overtaking of Britain at the end of the nineteenth century.
If China’s rise remains peaceful, it promises great benefits to its own people and to its neighbors – and to Americans.
But, remembering Thucydides’ advice, it will be important not to mistake analysts’ theories for reality, and to continue pointing this out to political leaders and publics.
China’s Political Storm
NEW DELHI – As senior leaders are purged and retired provincial officials publicly call for Politburo members to be removed, it has become clear that China is at a crossroads.
China’s future no longer looks to be determined by its hugely successful economy, which has turned the country into a world power in a single generation.
Instead, the country’s murky and increasingly fractured politics are now driving its fate.
One need look no further than the ongoing power struggle in the run-up to this autumn’s planned leadership changes, or official figures showing that rural protests have been increasing at the same rate as China’s GDP.
The sudden downfall of Bo Xilai – and the call from Yunnan Province for the removal of the two Politburo members closest to him – is just one example of the no-holds-barred infighting now taking place in Zhongnanhai, the closed leadership compound in Beijing.
Indeed, the internecine squabbles are said to be so vicious that there have been rumors, denied by the regime, that the Communist Party’s congress at which a new president and prime minister are to be anointed this autumn, might be postponed.
The Party’s abrupt vilification of Bo after lauding him for his leadership in Chongqing has fueled public cynicism over his orchestrated downfall and laid bare the leadership’s thin ideological core.
If China is to preserve its gains in global stature, it must avoid a political hard landing.
For the time being, at least five different scenarios are conceivable.
Re-equilibration: The Party protects its legitimacy, keeps the military subordinate, and manages to put a lid on popular dissent.
In other words, the status quo prevails for the foreseeable future.
This is the least likely scenario, owing to deepening internal Party disagreements and rising popular discontent.
Implosion: This likelihood of&nbsp;political disintegration, economic collapse, and social disorder may be no higher than that of re-equilibration.
The government’s fixation on weiwen, or stability maintenance, has resulted in China becoming the world’s only important country whose official internal-security budget is larger than its official national-defense budget.
This underscores the extent to which authorities have to carry out internal repression to perpetuate one-party rule and maintain control over the restive ethnic-minority homelands that make up more than 60% of China’s landmass.
But it may also explain why one self-immolation in Tunisia helped to kindle the Arab Spring, whereas some three dozen self-immolations by Tibetan monks and nuns have failed to ignite a similar popular movement against the Chinese state.
The Soviet Union imploded because the party was the state, and vice versa.
China, by contrast, has established strong institutional capacity, a multi-tiered federal structure, a tradition of civilian leadership turnover every ten years, and a well-oiled, sophisticated security apparatus that has kept pace with technological advances.
Thus, China’s government can pursue a policy of wai song nei jin – relaxed on the outside, vigilant internally.
Guided reform: A process of gradual political change begins, in keeping with outgoing Premier Wen Jiabao’s warning that without “urgent” reforms, China risks turmoil and disruption of economic growth.
Can China emulate the recent example of neighboring Myanmar (Burma), which has initiated significant, if still tenuous, political reforms?
As the political heirs of the country’s Communist revolutionaries, the third-generation leaders that are taking over the reins of power in China may possess a strong pedigree, but they are also scarred and limited by it.
These so-called princelings are trapped in the same political culture that led to the death of millions of Chinese and the continuing repression of opponents (real or imagined).
They do not look like political reformers in the slightest.
Great leap backward: A new “Cultural Revolution” erupts, as the clique in power ruthlessly seeks to suppress dissent within and outside the establishment.
As the Dalai Lama recently warned, there are still plenty of “worshippers of the gun” in power in China.
Indeed, such is China’s political system that only the strongest advance.
One fallen princeling, Bo, has been accused of cruelty and corruption – traits that are endemic in China’s cloistered but fragmented oligarchy, which values family lineage and relies on networks of allies.
Praetorian takeover: The People’s Liberation Army rules from behind a civilian mask, increasingly calling the shots with government officials, who are beholden to it.
While the civilian leadership has become diffuse (every Chinese leader since Mao Zedong has been weaker than his predecessor), the military has enjoyed greater autonomy and soaring budgets since 1990.
Indeed, the Party, having ceased to be a rigid monolith obedient to a single leader, has become dependent on the military for its political legitimacy and to ensure domestic order.
The PLA’s growing political clout has been manifest in the sharpening power struggle within the Party.
In recent weeks, an unusual number of senior military officers have published articles in official newspapers calling for Party discipline and unity, and alluding to the military’s role in containing the infighting.
Another development is the increasing tendency of military generals to speak out of turn on strategic issues and undercut diplomatic strategy.
The simple truth is that the foreign ministry is the Chinese government’s weakest branch, often overruled or simply ignored by the security establishment, which is ever ready to upstage even the Party.&nbsp;
China’s internal politics has a bearing on its external policy.
The weaker the civilian leadership has become, the more China has been inclined to discard Deng Xiaoping’s dictum tao guang yang hui (hide brightness, nourish obscurity).
China has lately taken more to the spotlight than to the shadows.
Under any plausible scenario, a restrained and stable Chinese foreign policy may become more difficult.
China\u0027s Political Time Warp
On June 1, Dr. Jiang Yanyong, a surgeon at Beijing 301 Military Hospital, and his wife, Dr. Hua Zhongwei, both seventy-two years old, left home to pick up a visa at the American Embassy.
They have not been heard from since.
Family and friends assumed that Public Security Bureau police detained them and that the couple would be released after the June 4 anniversary of the Tiananmen Square massacre of fifteen years ago passed.
But on June 8, unnamed officials asked the doctors' son to collect some personal effects for his parents, including dentures, and deliver them to the authorities.
This was not, of course, the first time someone had been detained without explanation in China, so it was not a good omen.
With China's economy booming, foreign investors flocking, and the country's role in global markets ever more central, the disappearance of this elderly couple hardly caused a break in China's hectic march.
But the disappearance underscores the ongoing imbalance between economic and political reform.
Jiang Yanyong is no ordinary doctor.
He is someone who had long since reached the point in life when he felt compelled by duty and patriotism to step beyond the role of a surgeon and become a public citizen.
His odyssey began on June 4, 1989, when he spent a horrific night trying to save hundreds of wounded and dying victims who flooded through his hospital's eighteen operating rooms as the People's Liberation Army opened fire on its way to Tiananmen Square.
Dr. Jiang, traumatized and anguished, nonetheless kept his silence.
However, as the SARS epidemic flared up in 2003, Dr. Jiang realized in April that Health Ministry reports of only 19 confirmed cases of the disease in Beijing were bogus - he knew of almost ten times that amount.
He decided to go public.
"I felt I had to reveal what was happening, not just to save China, but to save the world," he said.
His exposé of the SARS epidemic cover-up forced China's government to confront the disease more openly and aggressively, averting a public health catastrophe.
But if Dr. Jiang became a hero in the process, he was also marked as insubordinate, the kind of potentially uncontrollable person that the Chinese Communist Party fears.
Indeed, the Party's worst fears were realized this past March just before the 15th anniversary of the Tiananmen Massacre.
As the National People's Congress was meeting, Dr. Jiang broke his silence by writing a long, heartfelt appeal to the leaders of China.
In it, he charged that "a small number of leaders who supported corruption" had resorted to measures on June 4th that were "unprecedented in the world or China" when it used "tanks, machine guns, and other weapons to suppress totally unarmed students and citizens."
In grim detail, his letter described the bloody mayhem that the slaughter brought to his hospital and the hysteria of ordinary people as they arrived to find children and loved ones dead.
Without deference to or fear of the Party, Dr. Jiang castigated China's leaders for the way that they "mobilized all sorts of propaganda to fabricate lies and used high-handed measures to silence the people across the country."
How does one reconcile an isolated retrograde incident such as the disappearance of an elderly Chinese couple with the hopeful progress of the "Chinese economic miracle" that has so transformed this once seemingly desperate, backward land?
China today is a contradiction.
The tensions between its increasingly open economy and its still closed political system and institutions (established during the Stalin era in the 1950's) make China the most conflicted nation of consequence in the world today.
The old state planner Chen Yuan once cautioned that Chinese reformers had created "a birdcage economy" in which a capitalist bird was growing within a socialist cage.
His inference was that, unless Party leaders were careful, this capitalist bird would literally burst out of its socialist cage, spelling an end to China's Marxist-Leninist revolution.
Indeed, the old socialist economic birdcage has now been largely burst by China's capitalist reforms, releasing with a vengeance a mutant "people's republic" into the global marketplace of consumerism.
But the demolition process that has transformed or razed so many of China's old Stalinist economic institutions has not been matched by a demolition of stultifying political structures.
Although Chinese leaders speak of "One country, two systems" as their formula for governing Hong Kong - and possibly Taiwan some day - their slogan is far more relevant to China itself, given the co-existence of a capitalist economic system within a Leninist political system.
Dr. Jiang Yanyong may become a millionaire, wear any clothes he likes, redecorate his living room, even buy a car, but he cannot inform the public about an epidemic or write government officials an honest letter of admonition.
Does this matter?
That depends on whether one believes that Leninist capitalism is a viable and stable form of government for China over the long term.
China\u0027s Post-Olympic Challenge
NEW YORK – Almost everyone in the world who watched the 2008 Olympics in Beijing was impressed by China’s preparations, the acumen of the Chinese in running such a complex and challenging event, and the rich harvest of medals – especially gold medal – that Chinese athletes won.
It was abundantly evident in the run-up to the Games how important it was to Chinese everywhere to show themselves to advantage.
One got a sense of this when China’s reputation and the Games’ status came under attack during the Tibetan demonstrations and protests against the Olympic torch as it made its tortured progress around the world.
But, when all was said and done, through what turned out to be often Draconian controls, China pulled off quite a feat!
Indeed, it is hard to imagine that the British will care as much, or go to such extremes, for the London Olympics in 2012.
For many years, especially since the Tiananmen Square massacre of 1989, China has felt a deficit of global respect.
This feeling has deeply troubled its leaders and filled its people with a sense that, despite all their economic progress, their proper place in the world was not only eluding them, but being denied to them by the endless criticism of the so-called “developed world.”
For the last two decades, Chinese leaders have been diligently trying to build a new edifice in order to gain some of that missing respect.
This made a successful Olympic Games, when all the world would be watching, an urgent matter.
But, now that the Games have ended, Chinese leaders cannot quite say, “Mission accomplished.”
While China’s achievement is worthy of genuine esteem, its efforts to gain a full measure of international respect and real “great power” status will not succeed until it matches its new economic and military power with a certain essential moral force.
That, in turn, requires a society and a leadership that seeks to be exemplary in all ways that make human beings more human, including respect for truthfulness, openness, tolerance, and people’s right to disagree with their government.
I fear that China’s leaders and people will continue to feel a certain gnawing, inchoate sense of deficiency and incompleteness in their quest for global respect until they find the strength to begin addressing the crucial, but elusive, issue of making China an ethical, as well as an economic and military, power.
For a country steeped in millennia of Confucianism, the need for ethical leadership should be clear.
To fully address the question of the moral and ethical base of a new form of Chinese governance, China’s government and its people must be able to look back freely and come to terms with their recent history: the Great Leap Forward, the Cultural Revolution, the events of 1989, Tibet, and other sensitive issues.
They must also freely be able to discuss the future and what kind of society they wish to see rise from the ashes of Mao’s revolution.
I make these somewhat critical observations about China not with any sense of moral superiority or a wish to relieve myself of the responsibility to level the same critique at my own country’s recent failures.
As most of the world knows, America’s quest to maintain its claim to the title of “greatness,” has, of late, also been elusive.
Arriving from different staring points, both the United States and China now find themselves confronting a similar challenge: restoring global trust and respect.
Their success inevitably requires directly confronting their evident moral failures.
If many of those same viewers who have been impressed by China’s successes in Beijing now also find themselves recoiling at the idea of a stronger and more prideful China, that is understandable.
For strength unalloyed by checks and balances – and by a capacity for self-critical reflection about the rightness and wrongness of state action – can be unnerving.
Many Americans, too, have recently had to learn this.
One hopes that China will derive a new measure of respect and self-confidence from these astounding Games.
But one also hopes that China’s successes will enable its leaders to feel strong enough to begin looking honestly at China’s recent past in a more critical way.
Such forthrightness is not easy for any country.
But, having completed such an important step forward, China must now find new, more humanistic ways to continue to re-invent itself.
The Invisible-Border War
NEW DELHI – A half-century after the Sino-Indian War of 1962, the border between China and India remains undefined and a constant source of friction between the world’s two most populous countries.
Following three weeks of fighting in 1962, it was agreed to draw a Line of Actual Control (LAC).
But, five decades later, the map has yet to be delineated.
As a result, both sides routinely send patrols up to the point where they believe the LAC should be – the latest episode being a three-week incursion by Chinese troops into Indian-held territory that began in April.
Face-offs in the no-man’s land that lies between where China and India each envisage the LAC are so common that the militaries of the two countries have developed a modus vivendi, whereby one side tells the other to withdraw peacefully.
Both sides have routinely abided by the informal protocol that has evolved over the years.
But not this time.
In the area of Daulat Beg Oldie, near Depsang Plains, in the Ladakh region of Jammu and Kashmir, a patrol of about 15 People’s Liberation Army soldiers crossed into Indian-held territory and set up camp for an extended stay.
Stretching from the strategic Karakoram Pass, near Pakistan in the north, the LAC runs south, along the ridges of the eastern Himalayas to the ancient Buddhist monastery town of Tawang.
After that, it traces the old McMahon Line drawn in 1914 – and rejected by China as an imperial dictate – to demarcate British India from what was then Tibet.
The LAC then meanders until the point where India, China, and Burma meet.
China’s strategic interest in the line that separates India from a restive Tibet and the troublesome province of Xinjiang is straightforward.
For India, Daulat Beg Oldie is an important outpost near the entrance to the Karakoram Pass and the Siachen Glacier region.
So, was China’s incursion into Indian territory an error by a local PLA commander?
Or was a more complex calculation in play?
The towering Karakoram Pass was part of the old silk route that connected Ladakh and Kashmir with Xinjiang – now, like Tibet, an “autonomous region” of China.
As two observers recently described it, Daulat Beg Oldie was a kind of transfer point for goods to be loaded on to pack ponies “for the cruel journey over the Saser La into the more hospitable Shyok river valley” leading to “Leh, Turtok, or Srinagar [in Kashmir].”
India’s parliament, not surprisingly, denounced the Chinese incursion in the harshest possible terms.
The government, perplexed at first, tried unsuccessfully to make light of the presence of the PLA troops.
A tent competition followed; because China had pitched four, India pitched eight.
The Financial Times quoted Sun Hongnian, a Chinese border expert: “For India, every meter of road and every bunker in that area is a strategic win of territory” that brings them “closer to the main road on our side.”
The standoff came to an end on May 6, as suddenly as it had started.
India’s foreign minister, having earlier termed the incursion a “localized incident,” had to change his tune under parliamentary pressure, and cautioned China that India might have to reconsider his projected visit to Beijing.
Was all of this a Chinese effort to obtain, in Henry Kissinger’s words, “strategic deterrence”?
Or was it a deliberate push toward realizing Chinese President Xi Jinping’s proposal to Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh on the sidelines of the BRICS summit in South Africa in March?
Xi told Singh that he sought “a fair, reasonable, and mutually acceptable settlement based on mutual understanding and accommodation,” adding significantly, “Let’s settle the boundary framework agreement quickly.”
Was the Chinese incursion intended to serve as a sort of diplomatic accelerator?
India should take to heart former Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd’s prescient observation that “China, a nation of foreign and security policy realists, respects strategic strength and is contemptuous of vacillation and weakness.”
After all, one of the lessons of the 1962 war was that a vacillating response to Chinese aggression is self-defeating, particularly in situations like that posed by the incursion at Daulat Beg Oldie.
One thing seems clear from the recent incident: a new dispensation reigns in China, and will continue to guide policy for the next decade under Xi’s leadership.
The PLA troops in Daulat Beg Oldie are a reminder that China has no intention of allowing unresolved border issues to be swept under the rug.
Indeed, almost simultaneously with the PLA incursion, scholars at an official Chinese think tank questioned Japanese sovereignty over Okinawa.
Whether Xi’s appeal to India to “settle the boundary framework quickly” was an exhortation or a warning, other Asian countries can no longer afford to ignore their own border disputes with China.
As what happened in Daulat Beg Oldie demonstrates, China’s new leaders are not interested in preserving the status quo.
China’s Roadmap
China is about to adopt its 11th five-year plan, setting the stage for the continuation of probably the most remarkable economic transformation in history, while improving the well-being of almost a quarter of the world’s population.
Never before has the world seen such sustained growth; never before has there been so much poverty reduction.
Part of the key to China’s long-run success has been its almost unique combination of pragmatism and vision.
While much of the rest of the developing world, following the Washington Consensus, has been directed at a quixotic quest for higher GDP, China has once again made clear that it seeks sustainable and more equitable increases in real living standards.
China realizes that it has entered a phase of economic growth that is imposing enormous – and unsustainable – demands on the environment.
Unless there is a change in course, living standards will eventually be compromised.
That is why the new five-year plan places great emphasis on the environment.
Even many of the more backward parts of China have been growing at a pace that would be a marvel, were it not for the fact that other parts of the country are growing even more rapidly.
While this has reduced poverty, inequality has been increasing, with growing disparities between cities and rural areas, and between coastal regions and the interior.
This year’s World Bank World Development Report explains why inequality, not just poverty, should be a concern, and China’s 11th five-year plan attacks the problem head-on.
The government has for several years talked about a more harmonious society, and the plan describes ambitious programs for achieving this.
China recognizes, too, that what separates less developed from more developed countries is not only a gap in resources, but also a gap in knowledge.
So it has laid out bold plans not only to reduce that gap, but to create a basis for independent innovation.
China’s role in the world and the world’s economy has changed, and the plan reflects this, too.
Its future growth will have to be based more on domestic demand than on exports, which will require increases in consumption.
Indeed, China has a rare problem: excessive savings.
People save partly because of weaknesses in government social-insurance programs; strengthening social security (pensions) and public health and education will simultaneously reduce social inequalities, increase citizens’ sense of well-being, and promote current consumption.
If successful – and, so far, China has almost always surpassed even its own high expectations – these adjustments may impose enormous strains on a global economic system that is already unbalanced by America’s huge fiscal and trade imbalances.
If China saves less – and if, as officials have announced, it pursues a more diversified policy of investing its reserves – who will finance America’s more than $2 billion a day trade deficit?
This is a topic for another day, but that day may not be far off.
With such a clear vision of the future, the challenge will be implementation.
China is a large country, and it could not have succeeded as it has without widespread decentralization.
But decentralization raises problems of its own.
Greenhouse gases, for example, are global problems.
While America says that it cannot afford to do anything about it, China’s senior officials have acted more responsibly.
Within a month of the adoption of the plan, new environmental taxes on cars, gasoline, and wood products were imposed: China was using market based mechanisms to address its and the world’s environmental problems.
But the pressures on local government officials to deliver economic growth and jobs will be enormous.
They will be sorely tempted to argue that if America cannot afford to produce in a way that preserves our planet, how can we?
To translate its vision into action, the Chinese government will need strong policies, such as the environmental taxes already imposed.
As China has moved toward a market economy, it has developed some of the problems that have plagued the developed countries: special interests that clothe self-serving arguments behind a thin veil of market ideology.
Some will argue for trickle-down economics: don’t worry about the poor, eventually everybody will benefit from growth.
And some will oppose competition policy and strong corporate governance laws: let Darwinian survival work its wonders.
Growth arguments will be advanced to counter strong social and environmental policies: higher gasoline taxes, for example, will kill our nascent auto industry.
Such allegedly pro-growth policies would not only fail to deliver growth; they would threaten the entire vision of China’s future.
There is only one way to prevent this: open discussion of economic policies in order to expose fallacies and provide scope for creative solutions to the many challenges facing China today.
George W. Bush has shown the dangers of excessive secrecy and confining decision-making to a narrow circle of sycophants.
Most people outside China do not fully appreciate the extent to which its leaders, by contrast, have engaged in extensive deliberations and broad consultations (even with foreigners) as they strive to solve the enormous problems they face.
Market economies are not self-regulating.
They cannot simply be left on autopilot, especially if one wants to ensure that their benefits are shared widely. But managing a market economy is no easy task.
It is a balancing act that must constantly respond to economic changes.
China’s 11th five-year plan provides a roadmap for that response.
The world watches in awe, and hope, as the lives of 1.3 billion people continue to be transformed.
China’s See-No-Evil Diplomacy
Ever since its founding, the People’s Republic of China has adhered to a foreign policy of non-interference in other country’s internal affairs – or so it claims.
But with China’s rapid ascent and ever-closer integration with the outside world, this doctrine has become increasingly anachronistic.
Overseas, China’s role in places like Sudan and Burma not only draws international opprobrium, but also taints its reputation.
By maintaining cozy relations with repressive regimes and protecting them from international sanctions, China risks being seen as their accomplice.
Even when China’s voice could be decisive in resolving crises or preventing bloodshed, instead of acting, its diplomats repeat the old platitudes about non-interference.
The recent “saffron revolution” in Burma presented China with not only a challenge, but also an opportunity to exert its influence.
Yet it failed the test of statesmanship once again by sitting on its hands and merely calling for restraint.
Thanks to China’s collusion, the suffering of Burma’s people continues.
China’s mixture of inaction with a mercantilist approach to its Third World trading partners attests to the hypocrisy of its foreign policy.
For, where access to natural resources is concerned, China is more than willing to discard its non-interference doctrine.
This has not gone unnoticed, as a wave of anti-China movements has spread across Africa.
In Zambia, Chinese mining firms’ indifference to the death of their African employees provoked large protests against China’s presence.
Though China finally pacified the situation by threatening to withdraw investment, doing so meant reneging on the promise not to meddle in other countries’ domestic affairs.
Of course, interference in the internal affairs of another country isn’t inherently evil.
When it is harnessed to promote growth and human rights, interference should be appreciated, regardless of the regime that is doing it.
China’s vast influence over a few fellow dictatorships still holds out the best hope of softening their misrule.
Indeed, China’s pandering to dictators in its quest for resources contradicts its long-term interest in being acknowledged as a benign and legitimate power and commanding the international respect that it craves.
Had China put pressure on the Burmese junta to stop slaughtering its own people, it would have earned substantial moral credit around the world.
Moreover, the suspicions of China’s neighbors fueled by its rise could be partly allayed by such efforts to improve regional stability.
China now faces a dilemma.
Should its parochial interests give way to more cosmopolitan responsibilities?
How it answers this question will largely determine how the world views it for decades to come.
If China doesn’t want to be seen as complicit in the crimes of its client regimes, then it is time for it to alter its concept of diplomatic interference.
If China maintains its non-interference policy, it will become increasingly difficult to mask that doctrine’s malevolence behind the façade of the country’s “charm offensive.”
China still has a long way to go before it will be perceived as a responsible stakeholder in the world.
Reforming the non-interference doctrine is a necessary step in that direction.
China’s Shrinking Trade Surplus
BEIJING – Throughout 2010, China was criticized by the United States Congress (and many others) for “manipulating” its currency in order to maintain an advantage for exports, and thus preserve its trade surplus.
China’s behavior, it was alleged, was the source of today’s huge global imbalance.
China, however, refused to accept the blame and declined repeated US demands to undertake a large revaluation.
The exchange rate of the renminbi against the US dollar rose only about 3% between June 2010 and the year’s end.
According to an analysis used by some American economists and politicians, the low rate of currency appreciation, combined with Chinese export growth of 31% in 2010 over 2009, should have increased China’s trade surplus by a wide margin.
In fact, China’s trade surplus decreased by 6.4% in 2010 compared to 2009.
And that decline follows a 30% drop in China’s trade surplus in 2008, owing to the global financial crisis and subsequent recession.
The reason, of course, is the strong increase in Chinese domestic demand.
Total sales of consumer goods increased by 14.8% in 2010 and domestic fixed investment grew by 19.5%, both in real terms.
As a result, in US dollar terms, import demand grew by 38.7%, outpacing export growth of 31%.
Simply put, if a country can improve its domestic balance, it will become more balanced externally, regardless of how little the exchange rate changes.
The second question is this: can China reduce its trade surplus still further while continuing to maintain its policy of “gradual appreciation” of the renminbi?
Such an outcome is, in fact, quite likely in the next years, during the period of the new Five Year Plan.
To begin with, several significant fiscal/taxation reforms are now underway or in the pipeline, such as an increase in the collection of state-owned companies’ dividends and a hike in the resource tax on industries such as oil and coal mining, in order to reduce corporate savings.
There will also be cuts in personal-income tax in the next few years in order to increase households’ disposable income.
In the new Five-Year Plan for 2011-2015, some binding targets are set for the social safety-net reforms.
The social-security system will finally provide universal coverage, including the rural population and migrant workers in China’s cities.
More public funds will be available for rural education and rural health care.
More public services will be provided to newly urbanized rural migrants.
All of these changes will increase household consumption in both the short and long term.
When all of these reforms are realized, China’s national saving rate may be reduced to 45%, from 51% currently.
That will have a very significant effect in terms of reducing the current-account surplus, which reflects net national savings.
Moreover, the Chinese government, at both the central and local levels, will remain keen to continue infrastructure investments aimed at further urbanization and industrialization.
An ambitious plan for a national high-speed train system has been set forth.
And all major urban areas, including some second-tier cities, are building their public transportation systems to include more subways and light-rail networks.
Other urban facilities will also be in strong demand, because China’s urban population will continue to increase massively for the foreseeable future.
Given that the urbanization ratio is still quite low, at 48%, a relatively high investment in infrastructure may be sustained for a long time.
Those investments will drain most of the country’s domestic savings and sustain high demand for imports.
So it seems likely that China’s current-account surplus will dip below 4% of GDP before long – and probably go even lower, if not turn into an outright deficit.
In other words, China could easily reach the target set by the “indicative guidelines” for reducing global imbalances by 2015, as proposed by US officials recently at the G-20 ministerial meeting in Seoul last November.
The key question is: what is going on with the US, which, after all, represents the other side of the great imbalance?
The US current-account deficit has been narrowing in recent quarters, thanks to export growth.
That is good news.
Moreover, it happened without much downward exchange-rate adjustment so far, owing to the weakness of the euro and some other key currencies.
The monetary easing undertaken by the US Federal Reserve raised expectations for a devaluation of the US dollar that might help US exports.
But domestic savings remain low in the face of persistently high levels of public debt.
Again, the fundamental cause of today’s global imbalance can be found in domestic structural problems on both sides. Exchange rates will play only a secondary role in rebalancing.
China\u0027s Silent Rural Revolution
When China's National People's Congress (NPC) concluded its annual meeting recently, it voted to enshrine protection of human rights and private property in the constitution.
But other major changes in China's development strategies that appear to be taking place have attracted far less notice.
China's current leadership, one year after coming to power, has criticized "the single-minded pursuit of GDP growth" over the past decade and unveiled a new approach to modernization characterized as "balanced, human-centered, and environmentally friendly."
The change in priorities - and outsiders' tendency to overlook it - is not difficult to understand.
The world is fascinated by China's economic miracle, but it is much less interested in the costs associated with the country's 8-9% annual growth rate in the past 25 years.
For instance, the energy consumption of every unit of Chinese industrial output is close to three times the global average.
In may places, the environment has been devastated almost beyond recovery.
Similarly, a recent Chinese bestseller, A Survey of Chinese Peasants , reveals the tremendous human costs of China's modernization drive.
The book caught the attention of both the elites and the mass public with its heart-breaking stories of the suffering endured by 900 million farmers and its bold criticism of the government's rural policies.
Beyond the glamorous skyscrapers of Beijing, Shanghai, and other urban centers, the majority of Chinese who live in the countryside have gained little from the material progress of the past two decades.
On the contrary, the initial benefits that peasants gained from the rural reforms of the late 1970's and early 1980's have disappeared; real income among farmers has dropped in recent years as their production costs rise and agricultural prices decline.
In most parts of China, farming can no longer sustain a respectable standard of living.
Most worrying is the ever-growing tax burden placed on the rural population.
While average agricultural income grew by 90% in the 1994-97 period, the rural tax burden jumped by 800%.
More than 300 taxes and fees have been imposed on peasants by all levels of government.
For example, some townships demand 14 kinds of fees to register a marriage.
Today, a farmer's annual income is only one-sixth that of an urban dweller's, but he has to pay three times more in taxes.
This comes in addition to many other financial burdens exacted at the local level.
Indeed, 25 years of reforms have changed nothing of China's "one country with two systems" - a model that segregates China's urban centers from its agricultural areas, with development of the former realized at the expense of the latter.
If we use what is called the "Gini coefficient" to measure this income gap, with "0" indicating perfect equality of income distribution and "1" meaning perfect inequality, the number for China is 0.454 in 2002.
This is an internationally recognized level of "absolute disparity."
India, long known for gross disparities between rich and poor, has a Gini coefficient that has hovered around 0.30 to 0.32 over the past five decades.
So today's China is a much less equitable society than India.
A recent study by the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences concluded that China's urban-rural income gap is the worst on earth, maybe only slightly better than Zimbabwe.
The irony here is that China is widely hailed as a success story, while Zimbabwe is generally viewed as a failed state.
Such an unfair distribution of wealth based on economic exploitation, social injustice and political exclusion has caused silent but persistent resistance by Chinese peasants.
They protest, they petition, and they participate in local riots when all other means are exhausted.
Yet little changes.
As a result, the "peasant question" is now threatening social stability and is potentially explosive in a way reminiscent of when Mao organized his revolution around peasant disaffection with the rural policies of the Nationalist government of Chiang Kai-shek.
In response, Premier Wen Jiabao announced a series of measures during the NPC, ranging from phasing out agricultural taxes over the next five years to measures aimed at increasing farmers' income.
But while official attention to rural poverty is music to the ears of the poor, experience shows that such promises are usually inadequate.
Wen's predecessor, Zhu Ronji, also said that his "biggest headache" was how to reduce the rural tax burden and increase peasant income.
Yet the situation only worsened.
China's government must acknowledge that deep income inequality and rural poverty is no longer exclusively an economic problem, but threatens social peace and political stability.
Comprehensive reform is the only way out.
Unless China commits to greater political openness, allowing the poor and disadvantaged to voice their concerns, represent themselves, and monitor policy implementation, it will continue to be jeopardized by a false and perilous prosperity.
China’s Soft-Power Offensive in Taiwan
TOKYO – China’s behavior during the recent presidential election in Taiwan demonstrates that its leaders have learned some lessons, if only the hard way.
They have learned that China can have a greater impact on Taiwanese voters through trade and making people feel richer than by threats – even threats to fire missiles – which had been China’s electoral tactics in previous Taiwanese elections, particularly when a pro-independence candidate looked popular enough to win.
Indeed, fearing the popularity of Lee Teng-hui, who ran in the 1996 presidential election on a pro-independence platform, China’s People’s Liberation Army actually fired missiles close to the nearby coast of Keelung.
But this saber rattling backfired. Lee won.
The presidential election on January 14 was the first of the transfers of power in China and Taiwan that will take place this year.
Later this year, China’s President Hu Jintao and Prime Minister Wen Jiabao will be succeeded by men chosen by the Communist Party long ago.
Avoiding new tension with Taiwan appears to have been a calculated decision by China’s leaders as they begin their own – perhaps not yet fully settled – changing of the guard.
For almost two decades, Taiwan’s presidential elections have attracted global attention not only for the robustness of Taiwan’s democratic culture, but also for the perennial question of whether the winner would seek formal independence for Taiwan.
This time, Tsai Ing-wen, the woman nominated by the opposition Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), mounted a late charge on the Kuomintang incumbent, Ma Ying-jeou. But China did not bluster as Tsai surged in the polls.
Instead, China did all that it could do boost Ma, who has presided over a massive increase in economic ties with the mainland.
For example, China provided cheap airplane tickets to roughly 400,000 of the one million Taiwanese living on the mainland to enable them to return home to vote.
Given that Ma won by 800,000 votes, this tactic may not have been decisive, but it most likely played a considerable part in determining the outcome.
Paradoxically, the strong performance of James Soong Chu-yu of the People First Party, which split from the Kuomintang, helped Ma by giving voters a second alternative to him.
And America’s quiet instructions to all candidates to avoid nationalist provocation undoubtedly also played a role in dampening tension with China – another factor that probably benefited Ma.
As part of China’s new “soft” approach to Taiwan, Wen emphasizes “conceding interests” to Taiwan.
In Taiwan’s south, long a DPP stronghold, that approach appears to have paid off.
The Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement (ECFA) between China and Taiwan has enabled farmers and fishermen in southern Taiwan to prosper by selling agricultural and fisheries products to the enormous Chinese market, and the Kuomintang received higher support in the region than in past elections.
Of course, promoting economic interaction with Taiwan is not China’s ultimate goal; unification is.
China’s government appears to believe that Ma’s victory is a step in this direction.
But economic integration is one thing, and political integration quite another.
After experiencing the benefits of democracy and freedom of expression, Taiwanese are unlikely to want to settle for anything less than the open society that they have today.
Indeed, with increased contact between Taiwan and the mainland, ordinary Chinese could begin to envy the modern democracy that the Taiwanese people have built – and spread the idea of an open society to the Chinese mainland.
Ma’s role in his second term should be to serve as just such an evangelist for democracy in China.
Well aware of this “danger,” China is implementing five policies.
The first is to expand the ECFA, so that more Taiwanese companies feel its benefits.
Second, and similarly, China will try to shake up the DPP’s base by further targeting the commercial interests of Taiwanese farmers and fishermen in the south.
Third, China will emphasize common Chinese culture in order to reduce Taiwanese fear of unification.
A fourth goal is to win over young legislators elected during this presidential election.
Finally, China will seek to prevent the use of the name Taiwan and force the international use of the awkward name “Chinese Taipei.”
But the greatest issue affecting cross-strait relations is the Chinese economy itself.
Signs of decline in China’s economy, which has racked up double-digit growth for decades, would affect all of its Taiwan policies.
When Shanghai stocks fell by about 20% last year, Taiwanese stocks fell by a similar amount almost simultaneously – proof of how synchronized the Chinese and Taiwanese economies have become.
China will not be able to get its way if the profitability of this synchronization breaks down.
So, will Taiwan become more like the mainland, or vice versa?
To ask that question is to reprise a debate that was heard when Hong Kong and Macau reverted to China, but that is seldom encountered nowadays.
Whether serious moves toward unification change that fact will depend on the effectiveness of China’s soft-power approach, which cannot be limited only to the attractiveness of its economy if it is actually to succeed.
China’s Stability Gambit
BEIJING – The first principle that I learned when I started focusing on China in the late 1990’s is that nothing is more important to the Chinese than stability – whether economic, social, or political.
Given centuries of turmoil in China, today’s leaders will do everything in their power to preserve stability.
Whenever I have doubts about a potential Chinese policy shift, I examine the options through the stability lens. It has worked like a charm.
Stability was on everyone’s mind at the annual China Development Forum (CDF) held March 17-20 in Beijing.
Hosted by Premier Wen Jiabao, with many ministers of the State Council in attendance, the CDF is China’s most important international conference.
Yet, literally two days before this year’s CDF began, the controversial Bo Xilai was removed as Party Secretary of Chongqing.
As a strong candidate to join the Standing Committee of the Politburo, China’s inner circle of leadership, Bo’s sudden demise was stunning.
There was a palpable buzz in the air as we convened in the Diaoyutai State Guesthouse.
The formal sessions played out predictably, placing great emphasis on the coming structural transformation of China’s growth model – a colossal shift from the all-powerful export- and investment-led growth of the past 32 years to a more consumer-led dynamic.
There is now broad consensus among China’s senior leadership in favor of such a rebalancing.