But did the battle between pragmatists and radicals end there?
In the early 1970’s, moderates gained by engineering a rapprochement with the US, capped by Nixon’s famous visit to China in 1972.
Deng was rehabilitated the following year, and in the late 1970’s, after Mao’s death, Deng’s pragmatists seized control of the regime.
What do these historical examples suggest for Iran?
It is likely that the relatively calm period dating from Khomeini’s death in 1989 is over.
The election of Ahmadinejad marks the onset of new struggles within the ruling Islamic Republican Party.
These pit the “honest radicals”- led by Ahmadinejad and supported by younger, second-generation revolutionaries known as the Abadgaran, or Developers, who are strong in the Iranian parliament, the Majlis- against the more corrupt and pragmatic mullahs who head the Party, led by Expediency Council Chairman and former President Hashemi Rafsanjani.
Supreme Leader Ayatollah Khamenei is left in the middle, perhaps increasingly isolated and without strong popular support.
How should the US and European leaders respond?
Historically, phases of resurgent radicalism have lasted 5-10 years, marked by greater aggressiveness against internal and external enemies.
This bodes ill for improved relations with Iran in the short run, and makes it imperative that Western powers unite to make it unambiguously clear that any use of nuclear weapons or materials by Iran or terror groups aligned with Iran will result in an immediate and devastating response.
(China developed its nuclear weapons just before its Cultural Revolution, mainly to deter the Soviet Union, but never used them).
It also seems advisable to offer positive incentives – including US recognition and an end to sanctions – that could help empower pragmatists in their intra-Party struggle, much as Nixon’s overtures to China helped blunt China’s radicalism and strengthened the hand of pragmatists in the Communist Party.
Nixon did not demand that China’s leaders abandon communism or that Mexico become a competitive democracy, only that they act responsibly and learn to do business with the US.
Five decades after its revolution, China is still not a democracy, and Mexico is only just becoming one nine decades after its revolution.
Neither country always sees eye to eye with the West.
But both became countries with which it is possible to do a great deal of business, and both are increasingly integrated into the global economy.
That may be the only realistic goal in dealing with Iran.
The Return of the Siloviki
STOCKHOLM – Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin recently announced that Russia, Belarus, and Kazakhstan have abandoned their separate talks to join the World Trade Organization.
Instead, they would seek to enter the world trade body as a single customs union.
In effect, this means that Russia seems to be casting aside its accession to the WTO – a major reversal of Russian strategy.
Putin’s statement hit like a bolt from the blue.
Two days earlier, United States Trade Representative Ron Kirk and European Union Trade Commissioner Catherine Ashton had completed successful talks on Russia’s accession to the WTO with Putin’s first deputy, Igor Shuvalov, Finance Minister Alexei Kudrin, and Minister of Economy and Development Elvira Nabiullina.
As late as June 3, Putin had declared himself sure of Russia’s “swift joining of the WTO.”
The leaders of Belarus or Kazakhstan seemed equally surprised by Putin’s statement, especially as Russia had just prohibited almost all imports of dairy products from Belarus in a protectionist ploy.
After 16 years of negotiations, Russia appeared poised to join the WTO within a couple of months.
Indeed, only three difficult hurdles remained.
First, Ukraine demands a bilateral protocol on market access, which would force Russia to abolish roughly 100 trade sanctions, primarily in agriculture.
The second obstacle is border controls with Georgia, a mainly political issue: whether Abkhazia and South Ossetia are independent, as Russia maintains, or are part Georgia, as the rest of the world believes.
Finally, the EU insists that Russia abolish planned prohibitive export tariffs on lumber.
Only the Georgian issue is really serious.
A customs union with Belarus and Kazakhstan is no alternative to Russia’s WTO accession.
No countries have ever entered the WTO collectively, nor is this legally possible says WTO head Pascal Lamy.
Moreover, while the customs union was proclaimed in 1995, the earliest it can be formed is in July 2011, which is unlikely.
Predominantly a commodity exporter, Russia has less need for the WTO than a manufacturer like China. Even so, one-fifth of Russia’s exports comprise metals and chemicals that are sensitive to anti-dumping measures.
A series of World Bank and Russian studies have estimated that Russia can gain 0.5-1.0 percentage points in economic growth for half a decade if it joins the WTO.
Membership is also important for Russia’s international standing.
It is the only G-20 country outside of the WTO, which accounts for 96% of global trade.
The WTO also represents a choice of economic and political strategy.
Before Putin resigned as president in May 2008, he presented his “Russia 2020” program. Its heart was an “innovation strategy” based on more market reforms and investment in human capital, leading to annual growth of 6-7%.
In their rhetoric, President Dmitri Medvedev and his technocrats embrace this vision.
But Putin and his siloviki (political allies whose power base is in the security apparatus) seem to prefer an “inertia strategy,” the worst of the Russia 2020 scenarios. This strategy amounts to state capitalism, living on Russia’s energy wealth, and doing nothing to curtail Russia’s massive red tape and corruption.
By reversing course on the WTO, Putin has again shown himself to be Russia’s master.
He did the same thing last summer by lashing out against a successful mining and metallurgical company, Mechel, and provoking the war in Georgia.
During the winter, Putin’s poor policy choices on the financial crisis undermined his power.
Rather than shielding Russia’s private enterprises, he engineered a domestic liquidity freeze, which led to a sharp drop in GDP of 9.5% in the first quarter of 2009, despite Russia’s huge foreign reserves.
The pragmatic technocrats took over, but the subsequent doubling of oil prices signals that the danger for Russia’s economy is over for now, so the siloviki are resuming command.
The question is what their next step will be.
The prominent Russian military analyst Pavel Felgenhauer insists that their prime aim is to finish off Georgia and its president, Mikheil Saakashvili, who remains in power and defiant.
Georgia has received no military support and is virtually undefended. The Kremlin continues its propaganda offensive against Georgia, and has vetoed prolonging the mandate for United Nations observers in Georgia and Abkhazia.
A major Russian military maneuver, Caucasus 2009, is underway. The last such maneuver, Caucasus 2008, was followed by the invasion of Georgia.
During the latter part of this maneuver, July 6-8, US President Barack Obama is supposed to meet President Medvedev in Moscow.
Medvedev obviously hopes to reach out and improve Russia’s and his own standing in the world.
The siloviki , however, prefer Russia isolated and authoritarian, with power securely in their hands.
The Kremlin wants a new strategic arms control agreement, but the siloviki desire nothing more.
Obama’s administration had hoped for a final breakthrough in Russia’s WTO talks, but Putin’s actions have eliminated prospects for such an outcome.
The US also wants progress on the territorial integrity of former Soviet states, such as Georgia, but that, too, is unlikely.
Putin or his collaborators seem to be setting up Medvedev for a failure, suggesting that their jealousy of Medvedev’s limited power is greater than their interest in defending Russia’s national interests.
Yet there is still hope that Putin encounters a sufficiently negative reaction that he changes his stance on WTO accession.
After all, he suspended Russia’s WTO accession talks after the August 2008 war in Georgia, only to allow them to restart this spring.
The Return of the Stiff Upper Lip
LONDON – Normally, British politics is a ferocious sport.
Its parliamentary debates are often pugilistic and personal.
The British media have been described as “feral” (a word used by Tony Blair, among others).
The questions asked of politicians by journalists are often so aggressive or implicitly insulting that one wonders why their recipients don’t walk out of interviews in a huff, or wither on the spot from humiliation.
But nothing has been normal in Britain of late.
For one thing, there is the new coalition government – a rarity unseen since the end of World War II.
Then, there are the reactions to the new government, which have been marked by a temperateness of tone that is highly unusual – and all the more surprising, given that David Cameron, the new prime minister, has not exactly been the bearer of good news.
Cameron’s central proposition is that Britain is in a state of “crisis,” and that getting through it will require fortitude and patience.
In a major speech, he warned that there is “pain” ahead, and that it will be felt by everyone, as severe spending cuts will be required to bring down Britain’s massive fiscal deficit.
Ordinarily, such pronouncements would provoke outcries of dismay, and of real or pretended indignation.
And, of course, there have been demurrals and criticisms. But, aside from former Labour ministers, protesting bitterly at being blamed for the state of the economy, the response has been remarkably civil and thoughtful.
What has happened?
Perhaps an alliance between Conservatives and Liberals – the two parties ostensibly farthest apart in their views – confounded everyone out of their certainties.
This in itself may be no bad thing.
But the “absence of war,” as the British playwright David Hare once called it, suggests that Britain’s political tectonic plates have shifted.
For one thing, the coalition exposes an undercurrent in British political life that has  coexisted – almost furtively – with heated rhetoric: convergence among the main parties towards a kind of centrist synthesis on most of the big issues.
In a sense, the Conservative-Liberal coalition represents a culmination of this trend.
The policies and positions articulated by the new government suggest not so much the once vaunted Third Way (a slogan for the age of prosperity) as a carefully calibrated Middle Way.
It is clear, for example, that the sacred cows of public services and social benefits – among the most extensive in the world – will not remain untouched. Both will be subject to cuts.
In addition, Cameron is proposing other reforms, such as requiring people, after several years’ unemployment, to accept a job offer, even if it is not the applicant’s preference.
This may help break the demoralizing cycle of unemployment and alienation.
But, to be clear, no one is thinking of eliminating basic services, or dismantling the social safety net.
There will also be new restraints on immigration.
These come, however, after a vast influx of legal and illegal immigrants.
But no one is suggesting that Britain should become a mono-cultural country again.
At the other end of the economic spectrum, banking practices will – one hopes – be better regulated, following a prolonged period of stunning financial irresponsibility.
Clearly, however, nationalization, or a state-managed economy, is not in the cards.
For all the discomforts that may lie ahead, Britain is not about to enter an age of brutal austerity.
Instead, what the coalition seems to be proposing is a sort of correction, a retrenchment from various excesses and dysfunctions to something more restrained and disciplined.
The ubiquitous sense of entitlement, accompanied by automatic skepticism about all things political, seems to have been replaced by a recognition that some problems are not susceptible to simple left-right explanations or solutions; that the government is neither omnipotent nor always ill-intentioned; and that there are limits to the prosperity that politics can provide.    
The tone of stern warning has recently been adopted by other European leaders.
But the coalition has one thing going for it: the Brits still love a crisis – and being told that they are in the middle of one has played very well.
There is a challenge to meet, a reason to pull together.
It is difficult to know how long this sentiment of solidarity will last.
Politics abhors equilibrium as much as nature abhors a vacuum; and undoubtedly, tensions within the coalition, as well as outside it, will surface.
Still, possibly the British mood portends a wider change of climate for Western liberal democracies, and the onset of a new, less indulgent era.
For now, the British upper lip seems to have regained some of its stiffness.
One hopes that this will last long enough for British society to regain its stability and its much-needed vigor.
The Revolt of the Debtors
BRUSSELS – Greek Prime Minister George Papandreou’s call to hold a referendum on the rescue package agreed at the eurozone summit in late October has profound implications for European governance, despite the fact that the referendum will not now go ahead.
It may also determine the future of the euro.&#160;
Papandreou had to reverse course quickly in response to both internal and external pressure,&#160;but the option that he put on the table will not go away whatever the fate of the present Greek government.
As long as the Greek people have to be asked to accept one austerity package after another, they might wonder when they will have a direct say on this matter.
Less than one week before Papandreou dropped his bombshell, eurozone leaders had spoken unequivocally: “The introduction of the European Semester has fundamentally changed the way our fiscal and economic policies are coordinated at European level, with co-ordination at EU level now taking place before national decisions are taken.”
Simply put, pan-eurozone financial governance had supposedly won the day.
Technically, Papandreou’s proposed referendum was not directly about fiscal or economic policy, but it is a decision that would have had huge economic ramifications for the eurozone.
Despite that, it was taken without any coordination with other eurozone leaders.
Moreover, if Greece’s voters had rejected the deal that has just been proposed to them, the outcome might have foreclosed any further coordination on the country’s debt problems with the European Union.
Greece would have sunk or swum on its own.
So, only days after the eurozone’s heads of state and government congratulated themselves on their summit success, the concept of coordination was shown to be meaningless for the one country where coordination matters most.
Papandreou’s move also exposes the fatal flaw of grand plans for a political or fiscal union to support the euro: the “people,” not governments, remain the real sovereign.
Governments may sign treaties and make solemn commitments to subordinate their fiscal policy to the wishes of the EU as a whole (or to be more precise, to the wishes of Germany and the European Central Bank); but, in the end, the people may reject any adjustment program that “Brussels” (meaning Berlin and Frankfurt) might want to impose.
The EU remains a collection of sovereign states, and it therefore cannot send an army or a police force to enforce its pacts or collect debt.
Any country can leave the EU – and, of course, the eurozone – when the burden of its obligations becomes too onerous.
Until now, it had been assumed that the cost of exit would be so high that no country would consider it.
This no longer seems to be the case – or so the Greeks, at least, seemed to believe.
This also implies that Eurobonds will never constitute the silver bullet that some had hoped would solve Europe’s sovereign-debt crisis.
As long as member states remain fully sovereign, investors cannot be assured that if the eurozone breaks up, some states will not simply refuse to pay – or will not refuse to pay for the others.
With popular resistance to paying for profligate southern Europeans rising in Germany and Holland, governments there might be forced to ask their people whether they want to pay the huge costs implied by their commitments to bail out eurozone members that are unwilling or unable to pay.
That is why the bonds issued by the eurozone’s rescue fund, the European Financial Stability Facility, are trading at a substantial premium relative to German debt, while efforts by Klaus Regling, the EFSF’s head, to convince China, Japan, and other Asians to buy the bonds have gotten nowhere.
The broader message of the Greek move is that “coordination” has so far been a code word for almost total control by creditors (sometimes together with the ECB).
The attempt to impose a benevolent creditors’ dictatorship is now being met by a debtors’ revolt.
Financial markets have reacted so strongly because investors now comprehend that “sovereign debt” is the debt of a sovereign that can simply decide not to pay.
Holders of bonds of the eurozone’s member states have now been put on notice that, when the going gets tough, the real sovereign, “We, the people,” might be asked whether they actually want to pay.
And the answer might very well be an emphatic “no,” as opinion polls in Greece and the experience of Iceland (whose population twice voted down deals agreed by the Icelandic government) suggest is likely.
Nobody can know at this point whether Portugal or Italy might be the next stops on this road of resistance.
The result, however, is quite predictable: soaring risk premia throughout the periphery.
Papandreou’s decision to call a referendum in Greece could thus have marked the beginning of the endgame for the euro.
At this point, the common currency can be saved only if systemically important countries – namely, Italy and Spain – take concerted action to demonstrate that they are different from Greece.
The Revolt of the Meritocrats
PARIS – The bailout of the financial system was a bizarre moment in economic history, for it benefited those who benefited most from the markets’ irrational exuberance – the bosses of financial firms.
Before the crisis hit, however, redistribution of wealth (and the tax and social security payments that make it possible) was considered the biggest obstacle to economic efficiency.
Indeed, the values of solidarity had given way to those of individual “merit,” judged by the size of one’s paycheck.
The paradox is that a part of this evolution may be attributable to two positive factors: the slow work of democracy, which liberates individuals but at the same time leaves them more isolated; and the development of a welfare system that shares risks and makes individuals more autonomous.
With this isolation and autonomy, people increasingly tend to believe, for better or for worse, that they alone are responsible for their own fate.
Here lies the conundrum.
An individual is free and autonomous only because of the collective decisions taken after democratic debate, notably those decisions that guarantee each person access to public goods such as education, health care, etc.
Some sense of social solidarity may remain, but it is so abstract that those for whom the wheel of fortune has spun so favorably feel little debt.
They believe that they owe their status purely to merit, not to the collective efforts – state-funded schools, universities, etc. – that enabled them to realize their potential.
When merit is measured by money, there is no ethical limit to the size of an individual’s paycheck.
If I earn ten, a hundred, or a thousand times more than you, it is because I deserve ten, a hundred, or a thousand times more than you.
Merit and skills are how we give an intrinsic value to money.
Human nature – ego and/or arrogance – does the rest.
It is no surprise, then, that many people think of themselves as priceless.
The central place where this self-(over)evaluation meets the fewest obstacles is the financial market.
Money there is an abstraction – “the abstraction of abstractions,” as Hegel put it – which helps explain why salaries are no longer rooted in reality.
Of course, when the crisis hit, financial institutions were the first to argue that autonomy was unrealistic, and that we are all interdependent.
After all, why else should taxpayers agree to rescue them?
But now these same institutions are deciding that they want to go their own way again.
So yesterday’s (pre-crisis) world is being resurrected.
Dismissing the risks that taxpayers incurred, financial institutions used the bailout to restore profitability and are now reverting to their old habits, which had worked so well for them and so badly for others.
No one should be surprised about this.
The economic stakes encourage everyone to make the best of their circumstances.
The bailout of banks led to a wave of mergers.
If they were already too big to fail, what should we now say when banks are even bigger?
Their market power has increased, yet they know they incur no risk, owing to the aggravated systemic impact of their potential bankruptcy.
Moreover, they face an economy starved of credit, in which the crisis endangered many companies whose bankruptcy would have no systemic effect.
Working in so uncompetitive a market is a real stroke of luck.
I do not know many businessmen who would not take advantage of this; to be honest, I do not know any.
The free-market doctrine, which has become almost a religion, reinforced this belief: markets are efficient, and if they pay me so much (a potentially mind-boggling amount, as seen in recent cases), it is because my own efficiency warrants it.
I also participate indirectly and abstractly in forging the common good, by creating value through my work, and I am rewarded for it.
But suddenly the system collapses, the creation of value turns into destruction and parallel universes collide.
No mathematician can remember so unprecedented and spectacular a result: parallel lines intersecting, with autonomy becoming (for the brief moment of the bailout at least) interdependence.
For the connections between the economy and the world of finance are so strong and the interdependency between the so-called parallel universes so tight that there was no choice.
Eyes are opened; the illusion of arbitrage between efficiency and solidarity fades.
The crisis reminds us what each person owes to others, highlighting an ethical truth that we were quick to forget: the rich benefit more than the poor from their cooperation with other members of society.
Two conclusions can be drawn from all this. The first is that we all owe at least some of our success to others, given the public goods that society provides.
This calls for more modesty and restraint in determining the highest salaries, not for moral reasons but for the sustainability of the system.
The second conclusion is that the most privileged classes, which have benefited the most from the solidarity of others, notably the poor, can no longer deny the latter’s contributions.
But don’t hold your breath waiting for them to agree.
The Revolutionary Ethics of Embryo Research
What appeared to be the most momentous scientific advance of 2005 is currently under siege.
In June, the prestigious journal Science published an article by the South Korean scientist Woo-Suk Hwang and an international team of co-authors describing how they had developed what were, in effect, “made to order” lines of human stem cells cloned from an adult.
Although the scientific validity of their research is now the subject of several separate investigations, it is no less important to examine its ethical implications.
Hwang and his colleagues claimed to have replaced the nucleus of an unfertilized human egg with the nucleus of an ordinary cell taken from another person, developing stem-cell lines from the resulting embryo that matched the DNA of the person who supplied the ordinary cell.
That achievement appeared to take us significantly closer to a world in which patients could be given cell or tissue transplants that their bodies would not reject, because the biological materials, cloned from the patients themselves, would be a perfect match.
At the beginning of December, Hwang disclosed that some of the eggs came from two women working in his lab, and that other “donors” had been paid for their eggs – a breach of ethical guidelines that had nothing to do with the accuracy of the science.
But then Hwang’s collaborators began questioning the validity of the experiment itself, and Hwang notified Science that he wished to withdraw the paper.
At the time of this writing, he still defends the validity of his work, while admitting “human errors” in the preservation of the stem-cell lines, including contamination by a fungus.
He has reportedly even suggested that some cells may have been tampered with.
We will not know how close we are to the production of individually tailored stem-cell lines until the scientific investigations into Hwang’s research are completed.
Nevertheless, few researchers doubt that what Hwang and his colleagues claimed to do is, in principle, achievable.
If Hwang was not the first to do it, someone else eventually will.
Once it can be done reliably, it will pave the way for important medical breakthroughs.
But the ethical significance of such research goes far beyond the undoubted importance of saving critically ill patients.
Proving the possibility of cloning from the nucleus of an ordinary human cell would transform the debate about the value of potential human life, for we would find that “potential human life” was all around us, in every cell of our bodies.
For example, when President George W. Bush announced in 2001 that the United States would not fund research into new stem-cell lines that are created from human embryos, he offered the following reason: “Like a snowflake, each of these embryos is unique, with the unique genetic potential of an individual human being.”
But it is precisely this reasoning that is threatened by what Hwang and his team claimed to have achieved.
If it is the uniqueness of human embryos that makes it wrong to destroy them, then there is no compelling reason not to take one cell from an embryo and destroy the remainder of it to obtain stem cells, for the embryo’s “unique genetic potential” would be preserved.
This possibility highlights the weakness of the argument that abortion, too, is wrong because it destroys a genetically unique human being.
By this reasoning, a woman who finds herself pregnant at an inconvenient time could have an abortion, as long as she preserves a single cell from the fetus to ensure that its unique genetic potential is preserved.
But it seems absurd that this should make any difference to the morality of aborting the fetus.
If, at a later date, the woman wants to have a child, why should she use the DNA of her earlier, aborted fetus rather than conceiving another fetus in the usual way?
Each fetus – the one she aborts and the one she later conceives through sexual intercourse – has its own “unique” DNA.
In the absence of special reasons, like a change in sexual partners, there seems to be no reason to prefer the existence of one child to that of the other.
Perhaps the assumption is that, as opponents of abortion sometimes say, the aborted fetus had the genetic potential to become a Beethoven or an Einstein.
But, for all we know, it is the next fetus that the woman will conceive, not the one she aborted, that will turn out to be the Beethoven or Einstein.
So why prefer one genetic potential over the other?
Once we abandon arguments based on potential, the claim that it is wrong to kill embryos and fetuses must be based on the nature of those entities themselves – that they are actual human beings who already possess the characteristics that make killing wrong.
But, because fetuses, at least at the stage of development when most abortions are performed, have yet to develop any kind of consciousness, it seems reasonable to regard ending their lives as much less serious than killing a normal human being.
If so, then this is all the more true of embryos.
The Revolution Reborn
MEXICO CITY – In El Salvador, for the first time ever in Latin America, a former political-military organization that tried to gain power through the barrel of a gun has achieved its aims through the ballot box.
Although the Sandinista Front in Nicaragua did win a semi-legitimate election in 1984, it had reached power five years earlier by overthrowing the Somoza dictatorship.
By 2006, when Daniel Ortega was finally re-elected, the old Sandinista Front of 1979 was unrecognizable.
El Salvador’s Farabundo Martí Liberation Front (FMLN) was created in 1980, through the fusion of five guerrilla groups supported by Cuba and Nicaragua.
The FMLN nominated a presentable and attractive candidate, Mauricio Funes, for last Sunday’s presidential election, and, despite seeing a 10-point lead whittled down to barely two points by election night, squeaked out an uncontested victory.
The conservative ARENA party, which has governed El Salvador since the country’s 10-year civil war ended in 1992, did everything possible to prevent an FMLN victory, resorted, once again, to every red-baiting trick in the book.
According to ARENA’s relentlessly negative campaign, a triumph for the left would bring communism, Hugo Chávez, and the Castro brothers to San Salvador.
But scare tactics did not work this time.
There is obviously a lesson here to be learned by other left-wing political movements and guerrilla groups in Latin America.
The Socialist Party in Chile, the Workers Party in Brazil, the Broad Front in Uruguay, even Chávez in Venezuela and the PRD and FSLN in Mexico and Nicaragua, respectively, have shown that, after years of waiting, the left can win elections in Latin America.
The difference between these victorious leftists and El Salvador’s FMLN will be revealed when the FMLN’s old characteristics as an armed movement are challenged by the daily facts of governance.
For, while Funes is no old guerrilla hack, his vice president, Salvador Sanchez Ceren, and almost the entire FMLN leadership are unreformed Castroist guerrilla leaders and cadres.
It is they, not Funes, who control the FMLN organization.
The FMLN’s most reform-minded, democratic, modern, and brilliant leaders – Facundo Guardado, Joaquin Villalobos, Salvador Samayoa, Ana Guadalupe Martinez, and Ferman Cienfuegos – have all left the party.
A second worrying factor is the FMLN’s links to Cuba and Venezuela.
As recently as a year ago, anyone who visited FMLN headquarters in San Salvador to interview, for example, Ceren, its Secretary General, would be struck by the overwhelming presence of Chávez: red shirts, red berets, pictures of the Venezuelan caudillo, quotations from his teachings and musings.
Chávez helped the FMLN by giving free or cheap oil to its mayors in many parts of the country, and probably (though it has not been proven) by channeling funds, if only in small quantities, to the party’s electoral coffers.
The Cuban presence also remains strong, although the recent political purges initiated by Raúl Castro make it difficult to know who exactly is working for whom.
Ramiro Abreu, who “ran” El Salvador for Cuba’s Department of the Americas in the 1980’s and 1990’s, remains active, but now more as a businessman and a senior statesman than as a Cuban operative.
But Cuba’s influence on the old FMLN leadership remains intact.
Cuban and Venezuelan involvement in political parties in Mexico or Brazil, for example, is undisputable, but not necessarily very relevant.
These are large countries with huge economies, where conspiring and doling out small perks and favors is not very effective.
But El Salvador, like Nicaragua, Bolivia, and Ecuador, is another story.
A third factor that weighs in the balance in analyzing what sort of government the FMLN may deliver is the economic crisis that is battering Latin America.
For the moment, it is impossible to ascertain whether the recession will provoke a radicalization of the left in the region, which Chávez seems to be promoting, or induce moderation through resignation – that is, a postponement of revolutionary goals owing to inauspicious economic conditions.
We will know soon.
But the most important consequence of the FMLN’s victory may lie in its effect on the rest of Central America and Mexico.
Honduran President Manuel Zelaya, more out of convenience and demagogy than conviction, has moved into the Chávez orbit; Nicaragua’s Ortega was always part of that orbit, as are people close to Alvaro Colóm in Guatemala.
If too we add El Salvador to this list, only Costa Rica and Panama to the south remain out of the loop, leaving Mexico to the north increasingly exposed.
Of course, the Central American nations do not wield huge influence in Mexico; if anything, it is the other way around.
But the Mexican left, while no longer as weak as it was after its defeat in 2006, has always needed foreign role models.
It sympathizes far more with Chávez, Bolivian President Evo Morales, Cuba, the Sandinistas, and now the FMLN than with the moderate left elected in Chile, Brazil, Uruguay, and Peru. They will read Funes’ victory as one more notch on the barrel of “the people’s” rifle and one more hair plucked from Uncle Sam’s beard.
To dismiss the FMLN’s historical achievement as simply an act of justice or a foreseeable event in a tiny backwater would be reckless.
The Right Populism for Poland
Poland’s parliamentary and presidential elections this month saw the death of a left-leaning postcommunist party that mostly dominated the country since 1995.
But the demise of the left does not mean that the right has a coherent economic program. For the victorious coalition of the Law and Justice (PiS) party and Civic Platform (PO) is torn between liberal (PO) and populist instincts (PiS).&nbsp;
If PiS’s populist slogans become policy, government spending is likely to expand, which will exacerbate Poland’s already weak fiscal position and consequently trigger inflationary expectations.
Worse, boosting social spending will contribute little to resolving the country’s staggering 17.5% rate of unemployment – most of it structural –while any hope of quick euro adoption will be dashed.
What Poland needs most is fiscal discipline and market-oriented reforms, including relaxation of the rigid labor laws that are inhibiting job creation.
After all, over the past two decades, the enduring goals of dismantling communism and central planning, as well as joining the European Union, have served as important driving forces of reform.
But can the political will for renewed reform be mustered in a government that is half liberal and half populist?
A specific commitment to adopt the euro at the earliest possible date could serve as the same sort of springboard as the push to join the EU in the 1990’s.
Such a strategic goal would provide justification for prudent fiscal and monetary policies, and, given Poles’ desire to consider themselves full Europeans, it would boost political support for such policies.
Only such support can bring the government budget deficit, expected to reach 4.4% of GDP in 2005, down to the EU’s benchmark of less than 3% of GDP within the next two years.
Moreover, a commitment to pursue euro membership will have positive spillover effects. It will reinforce convergence expectations among financial market participants, which will translate into lower risk premia for investors.
Lower risk also will bring inflation expectations down and reduce interest rates, which will in turn speed up the compression of Polish government bond yields to comparable EU levels, increasing financial stability.
While the current yield on 10-year Polish government bonds of 4.7% appears to be at the edge of meeting the Maastricht long-term interest-rate benchmark, sustainability will depend on the fiscal policy outlook and on the overall credit risk.
More stable financial markets and a less volatile exchange rate relative to the euro will bring many advantages.
Most importantly, lower exchange-rate risk will boost both domestic and foreign direct investment, thereby helping to alleviate unemployment.
So it is imperative that the new government prepares – in cooperation with the National Bank of Poland (NBP) – a comprehensive program to steer the course of fiscal and monetary policy toward the goal of euro membership.
Although there is no need immediately to announce a specific exchange rate for the zloty at euro entry, such a program must include among its focal points a formula for determining the rate.
By developing and disclose to the public a compelling rationale for what will determine the exchange rate when the time comes, the financial markets would then be able to forecast the future reference exchange rate more precisely.
This would reduce the potential for speculative currency arbitrage and mitigate exchange-rate risk in the run-up to euro adoption, which would contribute to lower market interest rates, as their level always incorporates the prevalent exchange-rate risk.
There is little doubt among economists that euro membership will bring enduring net benefits to Poland.
It will lower transaction costs and increase labor productivity.
But it will do so only if serious institutional deficiencies are eliminated. These include legal impediments to labor mobility, reform of a complex tax system beset by excessive rates and porous loopholes, and substandard road infrastructure.
Each should be regarded as an urgent matter by the new government, and each, if handled adroitly, could be “sold” to the public as the type of popular reform that people have been demanding.
Poland’s new government faces several serious challenges, not the least of which will be to reconcile its liberal and populist tendencies.
Only if populism is put at the service of liberal reform will the government achieve lasting benefits.
The Right Priorities for the G8
In the run-up to the G8 meeting in Scotland on July 6-8, British Prime Minister Tony Blair has called on the international community to set the right global priorities, which he has unequivocally stated should be Africa and global warming.
Blair is right in challenging us to set priorities.
But his choice is probably wrong.
While we should accept his challenge, we should also get our priorities right.
Political leaders rarely espouse clear priorities, preferring to seem capable of giving everything to everybody.
They must work with bureaucracies, which are naturally disinclined to have their efforts prioritized, lest they end up as anything less than number one.
Whenever we prioritize, we not only say where we should do more (which is good) but also where we should not increase our efforts (which is regarded as cynical). 
But not talking about priorities does not make the need to prioritize go away.
Instead, the choices only become less clear, less democratic, and less efficient.
Refusing to prioritize, dealing mainly with the most publicized problems, is wrong.
Imagine doctors at a perpetually overrun hospital refusing to perform triage on casualties, merely attending patients as they arrived and fast-tracking those whose families made the most fuss.
Refusing to prioritize is unjust, wastes resources, and costs lives.
So what should be our top global priorities?
This question was addressed in a groundbreaking project involving a long list of the world’s top economists at the Copenhagen Consensus last year.
A “dream team” of eight economists, including three Nobel Laureates, confronted the basic question: if the world had, say, an extra $50 billion to do good, where could that money best be spent?
The top priority turned out to be HIV/AIDS prevention.
A comprehensive program would cost $27 billion, but the potential social benefits would be immense: avoidance of more than 28 million new cases of HIV/AIDS by 2010.
This makes it the best investment the world could make, reaping social benefits that outweigh the costs by 40 to 1.
Similarly, providing micronutrients missing from more than half the world’s diet would reduce diseases caused by deficiencies of iron, zinc, iodine, and Vitamin A with an exceptionally high ratio of benefits to cost.
If we could only find the political will, establishing free trade could be achieved at a very low cost, with benefits of up to $2.4 trillion a year.
Fighting malaria pays off at least five times the costs.
Mosquito nets and effective medication could halve the incidence of malaria and would cost $13 billion.
The list goes on to focus on agricultural technologies to tackle food production and hunger, as well as technologies to boost the supply of clean drinking water and improve sanitation.
Given that these problems are most acute in Africa, Blair’s priorities have some merit.
But the Copenhagen Consensus showed us not only what we should be doing, but also what should not be done – at least not right now.
The experts rated responses to climate change extremely low on the “to do” list.
In fact, the panel called these ventures – including the Kyoto Protocol – “bad projects” because they cost more than the good they do.
This does not mean that we should ignore climate change.
Global warming is real.
But the Kyoto rules will make an almost imperceptible difference (postponing temperature increases from 2100 to 2106) at a substantial cost (about $150 billion per year).
Given scarce resources, we must ask ourselves: do we want to do a lot of good now, or a little good much later?
We need to ask if we can do more for the world by investing differently.
Far from suggesting a policy of laissez faire, this question addresses the pressing problem of prioritization head on.
Why did thousands die in Haiti during the recent hurricanes and not in Florida?
Because Haitians are poor. They cannot take preventive measures.
Breaking the cycle of poverty by addressing the most pressing issues of disease, hunger, and polluted water will not only do obvious good, but also make people less vulnerable.
The G-8 meeting has put global prioritization on the agenda.
Now is the time to get our priorities right.
These are not space-age technologies, but staple goods that the world needs.
Doing the best things first would be a great investment in the planet’s future.
If we are serious about solving the world’s most serious challenges, we owe it to ourselves to set the right priorities.
Anchoring the Arab Awakening
LONDON – The economic situation in the countries of the so-called Arab Awakenings is deteriorating quickly.
Egypt is running low on cash – before recent rescue loans, currency reserves covered less than three months of imports – and Egyptians are hoarding fuel and foodstuffs in anticipation of future shortages.
More frequent and longer-lasting power outages foretell worse to come in an economy already struggling with mass unemployment, widespread exclusion, and deep pockets of poverty.
Short-term macroeconomic stability is the immediate priority in Egypt and the other Arab Awakening countries.
In the medium term, however, the viability of the current order is at stake – and not only in these countries, but across the rest of North Africa and the Middle East.
With so much at stake, Majid Jafar of UAE-based Crescent Petroleum was right to worry at the recent World Economic Forum on the Middle East and North Africa at the Dead Sea.
His proposal of an Arab Stabilization Plan, inspired by the post-1945 Marshall Plan in Western Europe, is laudable.
The imperative for large-scale coordinated action is overwhelming.
But is the Marshall Plan the right model?
The Marshall Plan was a macroeconomic strategy involving massive capital transfers to help reconstruct the war-ravaged industrial capacity and infrastructure of economies with well-developed institutions.
But what the Arab region needs are micro-oriented, project-based, and governance-heavy investments conditioned on deep reform of a business environment that is generally considered among the worst in the world.
In a joint report on the competitiveness of the Arab countries, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) and the World Economic Forum call for urgent institutional reform to support private-sector growth. Excessive red tape and ineffective enforcement of competition policy and governance rules are hampering entrepreneurship throughout the region.
Massive investments are also needed in education to eradicate deep pockets of illiteracy, raise overall skill levels, and better match skills to the demands of the market.
Perhaps surprisingly, there is widespread consensus in the Arab Awakening countries that the private sector is central to sustained job creation and growth.
We saw this recently when the EBRD, together with the British-based organization Forward Thinking, conducted a closed-door workshop for 27 leading representatives of parties from across the political spectrum in the region.
Two days of intensive discussions revealed important differences in perspective, but also many commonalities.
Private-sector development clearly means different things to different people.
The parties on the right largely embrace free-market thinking, while Egypt’s Muslim Brotherhood and its kindred parties in Libya and Tunisia are deeply sceptical of the state, which they view as bloated, inept, and ultimately corrupt.
Moreover, the existing banks have failed to serve these parties’ small-business and farming constituencies.
Achieving ambitious goals for inclusive growth and job creation quickly without an enabling state and without using the banking system will be extremely difficult.
Without question, the main responsibility for building these countries’ political systems and reforming their economies rests with their citizens.
Outside intervention has left too many scars in the public’s collective memory.
But the region can look to the successful transition in Central Europe and the powerful anchor for reforms provided by these countries’ accession to the European Union.
Countries like Hungary and Poland can hardly be accused of having a hidden agenda when they share their development experience.
Much can also be learned from countries like Turkey, which has managed to create a dynamic and innovative private sector.
The good news is that the economies of the Arab Awakening countries do not suffer from the deep distortions that characterized post-communist Europe.
Many of the early reforms have already been implemented, and reasonably sophisticated banking systems are in place.
In post-communist Europe, banks had to be built from scratch out of the rubble of socialism.
As a result, while political uncertainty will take its toll on economic growth, the Arab Awakening countries should not have to face a transitional recession, as post-communist Europe did in the 1990’s.
On the other hand, they are unlikely to benefit from the subsequent robust growth that most European transition countries experienced.
Jafar is right that the Arab Awakening countries need a plan.
But it should be a plan for private-sector-led inclusive growth, supported by efforts in the rest of the Arab world and in the EU.
Most critically, it must be a plan owned by the countries themselves and based on an approach that recognizes the critical roles of an enabling state and a catalytic financial sector.
The ongoing socio-political transition, underpinned by widespread public recognition of the need for change, provides a historic opportunity to embark on growth-enhancing reforms.
The Right to Die
On December 21, an Italian doctor, Mario Riccio, disconnected a respirator that was keeping Piergiorgio Welby alive.
Welby, who suffered from muscular dystrophy and was paralyzed, had battled unsuccessfully in the Italian courts for the right to die.
After Riccio gave him a sedative and switched off the respirator, Welby said “thank you” three times to his wife, his friends, and his doctor. Forty-five minutes later, he was dead.
Welby’s request to die was widely publicized in Italy, where it led to heated debate.
At the time of writing, it is unclear whether Riccio will be charged with any offense.
At least one Italian politician has called for his arrest on a charge of homicide.
Welby’s death raises two questions, which need to be distinguished.
One is whether a person has a right to refuse life-sustaining medical treatment.
The other is whether voluntary euthanasia is ethically defensible.
A patient’s informed consent should be a prerequisite for all medical treatment, as long as the patient is a competent adult in a position to make a decision.
Forcing medical treatment on a competent adult patient who does not want it is tantamount to assault.
We may think that the patient is making the wrong decision, but we should respect his or her right to make it.
That right is recognized in most countries, but not, apparently, in Italy.
Even the Roman Catholic Church has long held that there is no obligation to use “extraordinary” or “disproportionate” means to prolong life – a view reiterated in the “Declaration on Euthanasia” issued by the Sacred Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith and approved by Pope John Paul II in 1980.
That document states that to refuse a burdensome medical treatment “is not the equivalent of suicide.”
On the contrary, such a refusal “should be considered an acceptance of the human condition, or a wish to avoid the application of a medical procedure disproportionate to the results that can be expected, or a desire not to impose excessive expense on the family or the community.”
That description applies well to Welby’s decision.
On this view, Riccio was doing what anyone should have been prepared to do for Welby, who was paralyzed and unable to implement his refusal of a burdensome medical treatment.
If the Welby case falls on the right side of the line drawn by Roman Catholic doctrine, the deeper question is whether Church doctrine draws the line in a place that makes sense.
If an incurably ill patient can refuse burdensome treatment, knowing that this refusal will mean his or her death, why should an incurably ill patient who is not being kept alive by any medical treatment, but finds that the illness itself makes life burdensome, be unable to seek assistance in escaping that burden?
Defenders of Catholic teaching would answer that in the latter case, the patient intends to end his life, and that is wrong, whereas in the former case, the patient merely intends to avoid the additional burden that treatment brings.
Death is, of course, a foreseeable consequence of avoiding that burden, but it is a byproduct that is not directly intended.
If the patient could avoid the burden and yet continue to live, that would be his choice.
Welby should not have been helped to die, they might argue, because he expressly said that he wanted to die, not that he wanted to avoid a burdensome treatment.
This distinction is dubious.
In both cases, the patient knowingly chooses a course of action that will lead to her or his death, rather than an alternative course of action that would have led to a longer but burdensome life.
By focusing on the narrower intention to refuse burdensome treatment, rather than the broader implications of the choice, the Roman Catholic Church is able to avoid the inhumane implication that patients must always accept life-prolonging treatment, no matter how painful or costly such treatment may be.
But it does so at the cost of rendering incoherent its own vigorous opposition to assisted suicide and voluntary euthanasia.
Many countries recognize a legal right to refuse medical treatment.
But only in the Netherlands, Belgium, Switzerland, and the American state of Oregon are physicians permitted to assist a patient in ending his or her life by means other than withdrawing life-sustaining medical treatment.
The Netherlands, in particular, has been subjected to a relentless campaign of vilification.
Critics allege that the legalization of voluntary euthanasia has led to a breakdown of trust in the medical profession and all sorts of other dire consequences.
But if these allegations are true, no one has told the Dutch.
Despite a change of government in the Netherlands since voluntary euthanasia was legalized, no effort has been made to repeal the measure.
There is simply no public support for such a move.
The Dutch know how voluntary euthanasia is practiced in their country, they know that legal euthanasia has improved, rather than harmed, their medical care, and they want the possibility of assistance in dying, if they should want and need it.
Isn’t that a choice that everyone should have?
The Right to Equality, Then and Now
LONDON – Following weeks of financial and economic turmoil, public debate has finally turned to the horrific potential human ramifications of the collapse of the global financial system.
Comparisons and contrasts with the Great Depression of the 1930’s have inevitably become a central part of that discourse – and rightly so.
There is much that the world can and must learn now from the lowest point of the twentieth century.
Above all, we have got to heed the proven need for applying social – as well as economic – interventions in a time of economic crisis.
Recession and depression can lead to exclusion and, at worst, persecution of societies’ most vulnerable groups.
That is why the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights was adopted in 1948, and why we need, more urgently than ever, to establish universal equality for all human beings.
Nations must act now to ensure that everyone – regardless of wealth, ethnicity, sex, or religion – has the same rights, and that these rights are enshrined in laws at the time they are enacted.
This October, 128 leading experts in the fields of human rights and equality from 44 countries launched a landmark attempt to build on the epochal 1948 UN declaration to establish universal human equality.
We did so by launching a “Declaration on Principles of Equality” – a declaration that builds on its historical precursor to establish, for the first time ever, general legal principles that define equality as a basic human right.
Based on a total of 27 principles, the Declaration reflects a moral and professional consensus among human rights and equality experts and is the product of more than a year’s work led by the United Kingdom-based Equal Rights Trust.
Needless to say, reaching a consensus among such a diverse group of people from around the world was not easy.
Equality means different things to different people – and at different times.
Interpretations largely depend on the practical realities of the social, cultural, and political environment in which the principles of equality operate. 
All signatories to our new Declaration agreed that incitement to violence that is motivated by race or gender or sexual orientation constitutes a serious violation of the right to equality.
Some American civil rights lawyers, out of natural deference to the United States Constitution’s First Amendment were, however, reluctant to sign up to this principle unless it was qualified by a reference to the threat of “imminent” violence.
Some participants from the developing countries wanted poverty to be declared a proscribed basis of discrimination, while others argued that poverty is far too vague a concept to be the subject of legal rights and duties.
Some contended that absolute poverty differs from relative poverty, or asked what responsibility individuals have to raise themselves out of poverty through education and work?
These participants argued that specific legal duties, such as the right to a minimum wage and the right to vocational training, are more effective than the vague extension of anti-discrimination law to cover poverty as such.
The result was a compromise between these two groups.
For all these differences of opinion, we are unanimous in the belief that, if the Principles of Equality are to be effective in our age, they have to go well beyond the negative anti-discrimination model that was adopted in the US and Europe in the second half of the twentieth century.
They must, instead, encourage nations positively to promote the principle of equal rights in keeping with current interpretations of international obligation.
The declaration that we have developed regards equality as a “freestanding right.” In other words, it exists as a separate right, and is not dependent on the violation of some other legal right, such as the right to education.
It follows, then, that the right to equality could be violated even where another legal right – to, say, housing or employment – does not exist.
The right to equality would exist in all areas of activity regulated by domestic, international or regional law.
It would apply to everyone, regardless of nationality or statelessness, including refugees and asylum seekers, and it would place a positive obligation on states to “promote and fulfill” the right to equality. 
A new declaration was badly needed when we began work on it one year ago.
Today, it is crucial if we are to prevent an even greater chasm from dividing the world’s haves and have-nots.
The Right Way to Beat Chinese Inflation
WASHINGTON, DC – High inflation is threatening social stability in China, soaring from 3.3% in March 2007 to 8.3% in March 2008.
As a result, the People’s Bank of China has raised interest rates substantially and increased banks’ reserve requirements.
The trick for the Chinese government will be to quell inflation in a way that does not compromise its long-term goal of continued strong economic growth.
The risks are high.
China’s accelerating inflation reflects a similar climb in its GDP growth rate, from the already high 11% in 2006 to 11.5 % in 2007.
To be sure, the prolonged rapid increase in Chinese aggregate demand has been fueled by an investment boom, as well as a growing trade surplus.
Thus, lowering inflation would require reducing the growth rate (if not the level) of these two demand components.
But Chinese policymakers should focus more on reducing the trade surplus and less on reducing investment spending – that is, they should emphasize renminbi (RMB) appreciation over higher interest rates to cool the economy. 
A sizeable reduction in aggregate demand through RMB appreciation is achievable without being imprudent, because the current-account surplus in 2007 was 9.5 % of GDP.
Investment (especially in infrastructure in backward areas and social investments) should not bear the brunt of the expenditure squeeze, because today’s investment is also tomorrow’s growth in production capacity; and the production of more goods tomorrow would reduce inflation. 
Using RMB appreciation as the primary tool to fight inflation implies accepting a temporarily higher unemployment rate now in exchange for a permanently lower unemployment rate in the future.
This is because manufactured exports are typically more labor-intensive than investment projects.
As a result, a RMB1 billion reduction in exports would create more unemployment than a RMB1 billion reduction in investment spending.
But tomorrow’s capacity expansion from today’s investment would mean a permanent increase in the number of jobs created from tomorrow onward.
Nevertheless, China must be careful when implementing RMB appreciation.
Policy makers should closely monitor potential changes in the economic conditions in the G-7.
A deep recession in the United States resulting from the sub-prime crisis would significantly lower Chinese exports and cut the prices of oil and other primary commodities.
In that case, a large RMB appreciation undertaken now would be overkill.
Moreover, the authorities should recognize that RMB appreciation is unlikely to reduce US-China trade tensions.
In short, substantial RMB appreciation would reduce the bilateral US-China trade deficit and China’s overall trade surplus significantly, but it would do little to reduce the overall US trade deficit.
In the absence of a generalized appreciation of all Asian currencies and unchanged American policies, possibly only a deep recession could reduce the overall US current-account deficit.
A stronger RMB can help only the overheated Chinese economy.
And it has the virtue of doing so without hurting China’s future production capacity.
The Right Way to Electric Cars
NEW YORK – Excitement about electric cars abounds nowadays, but consider the number of existing gasoline-powered cars: about 850 million.
It would take years of new-car sales to make a dent in that number.
That fact at first depressed Jiri Räsänen, a civil servant in Helsinki – but then it gave him and his friends a good idea. Why not keep the cars but replace their engines?
That idea would solve a lot of problems, starting not just with today’s installed base of cars, but with the installed base of car makers .
Even though many of them are in trouble, it’s probably not the best time to start a new car company, either.
Yet while the market for new cars has slowed dramatically, it could be a good time to start a business replacing gasoline engines with electric ones.
The group’s initiative, led by Räsänen, is called eCars - Now!
A small operation in Finland, it is less a company than a role model for companies that the team hopes will spring up worldwide.
Borrowing from the open-software movement, Räsänen and his colleagues want to make the idea and the basic designs free, and encourage lots of companies all over the world to implement it locally.
Some companies will make batteries or electric engines or retrofit kits; others will retrofit gasoline cars with the new engines – a great job opportunity for unemployed auto workers.
eCars- Now! hopes to foster an ecosystem of car service workers and parts makers similar to the ecosystem of open-software programmers and generic computer hardware.
Of course, the parallels end at some point, because batteries and engines aren’t quite the equivalent of PCs, but the ethos is much the same.
Räsänen and his team started by measuring the potential demand for electric cars in Finland.
“No one had done that before in Finland,” he recalls.
“We decided that if we could get 500 people to show interest in a converted car, we could demonstrate that the mass conversion scheme would make sense.”
It took eCars – Now! only 11 days to sign up 500 interested customers.
To be sure, they merely indicated interest; they did not send money.
But the company’s Web site continues to attract new prospects, with 1,000 people now registered as likely or certain to buy such a vehicle.
The site also solicited advice on which car to convert.
The Toyota Corolla was the first choice – hardly surprising since it is the leading car model in Finland (with 7% of the market).
Just 15 months later, in May of this year, a retrofitted Corolla demo model with an engine from Detroit-based Azure Dynamics was on display at the Electric Vehicle Symposium, a trade show in Stavanger, Norway.
What will it take to make this idea work?
To some extent, it’s already working – by spreading.  Local efforts may succeed or fail based on the talents of local implementers.
In Italy, inventor Roberto Vezzi had a Smart-EV project along the same lines.
He has now joined the eCars – Now! movement, and his eSmart car will be upgraded with the open-source graphical user interface being developed for the eCorolla in Finland.
Other initiatives are springing up in Denmark, Latvia, Spain, and Turkey, says Räsänen.
The group is now looking for an initial manufacturer/assembler for the retrofit kits (as opposed to the engines inside them). In the meantime, eCorolla and the eSmart will go through testing.
Overall, the economics make sense.
Produced on an appropriate scale, a kit should cost about $20,000, including distribution costs and a profit margin.
It should take about eight hours for two workers in a professional garage to install such a kit, or less than a week for the car-owner himself/herself (or, as they say, two weeks if the owner’s spouse “helps”).
That’s considerably less than the cost of a new car – especially an electric one.
The real economic benefit, however, is in the cost savings thereafter.
To be sure, a lot will depend on the availability of convenient charging stations, but they are starting to appear.
The project is deconstructing the car industry – probably in a more effective way than American government officials are doing in Detroit.
In Finland, at least, all you need from the government is a certificate of inspection, which costs about €100 ($135).
If all goes well, a host of electric car-engine and retrofit kit makers will appear, serving different markets of existing car owners.
Dealers and mechanics will install the batteries, comprising a new corps of workers devoted (indirectly) to cleaning up the environment and adding value to the installed base of cars.
Any far-sighted government could help not by subsidizing these efforts, but by buying up the old gasoline engines.
That provides an incentive to retrofitting companies, while competition for customers, rather than for subsidies, will encourage the various providers to be efficient.
(Many European governments currently have “cash-for-clunker” schemes that buy and destroy old cars; a cash-for-gas-engines scheme would make more sense by lowering costs and conserving the many car bodies that still work fine.)
This project might have seemed quixotic a few years ago, but now it fits the times perfectly.
It’s modest at a time when the world is in recession.
It’s energy- and environmentally- friendly at a time when concerns about global warming are growing.
NEW YORK – At the recent donors’ meeting on Georgia, aid pledges rolled in, totaling $4.5 billion – about $1,000 per citizen of Georgia.
That’s the good news.
The bad news is that the meeting was restricted to donors and Georgia’s government, with Transparency International criticizing its opaque decision-making process.
Lack of transparency and accountability in how money is spent in wars, and in the rebuilding that takes place after them, no longer play well with taxpayers.
In light of increasing global demand for aid and falling supply (down 12% over the last two years), its effective and transparent use is becoming more imperative.
And governments that are not accountable to their citizens will most likely fail in this regard.
Before these “pledges” become “commitments,” donors should carefully examine Georgia’s economic development strategy and assess its plans for humanitarian and reconstruction aid.
They should ask whether aid for Georgia contributes to peace and stability or, on the contrary, whether it will impede a political solution to the conflict and keep investors away.
Russia’s recent recognition of Abkhazia and South Ossetia as separate republics, despite their de facto autonomous status within Georgia since the early 1990’s, will make it more difficult to find solutions to the problems of internally displaced persons (IDPs), returnees, and the resident population in the conflict zones.
But reintegration of conflict-ridden groups into productive activities is a sine qua non for political, economic, and social stability.
The UN reckons that countries that fail in this endeavor have an even chance of reverting to conflict.
So, has Georgia’s development model been conducive to dynamic and inclusive growth, that is, growth that leads to productive investment, innovative practices, and widespread job creation?
To be sure, the International Monetary Fund and United States officials have recognized Georgia’s unquestionable success in adopting sound macroeconomic policies and reforms to improve the business climate.
Foreign investors have responded by pouring resources into the country.
With capital inflows amounting to 20% of GDP in the years before the war, annual economic growth jumped to over 12% in 2007, with the country experiencing almost 40% growth since 2003.
But rapid growth is not enough.
Georgia has failed to create the jobs, dynamism, and inclusion that are necessary for a peaceful society.
Despite some recent diversification, investment flows have been heavily tilted to construction of oil and gas pipelines and other large international projects.
Moreover, military expenditure has increased from 1% to 7% of GDP since 2003, drawing resources away from human development into unproductive investment.
Unemployment is high, income disparities have worsened, and corruption remains widespread, notwithstanding important improvements in recent years.
Despite official statistics that place less than a third of the population below the poverty line, experts reckon that roughly half the population is trapped in poverty, amid a large urban-rural gap.
The challenge for Georgia is to find a solution to the IDPs by rehabilitating infrastructure, housing, and other services, and by facilitating job creation so that the conflict-affected population’s living conditions can improve.
The UN High Commission for Refugees forecasts that 73,000 of the roughly 127,000 IDPs created by the South Ossetian crisis will probably return to their place of origin by early winter.
Given 220,000 IPDs from previous conflicts in the 1990’s now face fading prospects for a return to Abkhazia and South Ossetia, Georgia’s authorities must find a viable and permanent solution for roughly 6% of the population.
Moreover, capital flows, upon which Georgia is highly dependent, have been interrupted since the conflict started.
Without a solution to the IPD problem, efforts to strengthen political stability and security will fail.