And whether one uses “Yangon” or “Rangoon” to identify Myanmar/Burma’s capital, the place still remains what the British travel writer Norman Lewis described as “imperial and rectilinear…built by a people who refused compromise with the East.”
The British-built Rangoon was, of course, the Victorian colonizer’s response to what Lewis called the “unsubstantial glories of Mandalay.”
As he put it, “These massive columns now rise with shabby dignity from the tangle of scavenging dogs and sprawling, ragged bodies at their base.”
With Myanmar/Burma now the “in” destination for the world’s hot-money investors, the imperial decrepitude that Lewis described will doubtless soon be transformed, the archaic charm of a fading past demolished for the sake of modern commerce.
This tranquil land of timeless faith, over which Buddha’s benign statues preside – a land of rivers, deep forests, and blood-red rubies – is now in play for international investors.
For the Nobel laureate Aung San Suu Kyi, who suffered two decades of incarceration and house arrest, the country must aspire to something beyond getting rich if it is truly to overcome the decades of military misrule: a transforming, revolutionary idea.
That idea, of course, is democracy, which is something very new to Myanmar/Burma, for the British practiced little of it when they ruled, as George Orwell’s Burmese Days makes clear.
Since regaining her freedom, Suu Kyi has liberated her fellow citizens from fear through the power of this idea and her own example.
“It is not power that corrupts” she memorably noted, “but fear.
Fear of losing power corrupts those who wield it, and fear of the scourge of power corrupts those who are subject to it.”
On the strength of that ennobling idea, Myanmar/Burma has embraced democratic reform and rid itself of diplomatic and economic isolation.
President Thein Sein’s government has, by its release of Suu Kyi and embrace of a democratic transition, transformed the country’s image.
Rapprochement with the iconic Suu Kyi, like that of South Africa’s apartheid-era rulers with Nelson Mandela, was the core decision.
But what has surprised many observers is the pace of change.
For example, the recent ceasefire between the government and Karen rebels exemplifies progress that was simply unthinkable only one year ago.
If anything, the latest developments vindicate India’s long-held policy of engaging with Myanmar, a country of major strategic and economic importance to it in terms of trade, transport, energy, and security.
Engagement is the way to establish vital links between Myanmar and South and East Asia.
Indeed, the resumption of diplomatic relations with the United States, and the suspension of a US investment ban, indicate that transformation has already taken place.
It is now Japan, however, that is doing the heavy lifting of modernizing Myanmar’s economy.
Japan is deploying vast government aid and private-sector engagement reminiscent of its investments in China at the height of Japanese global economic power in the 1980’s.
Japan appears to be acting not only for commercial reasons, but also according to its strategic interests.
The Japanese, like Sein, want to see Myanmar shift its diplomatic orientation away from China.
Many Japanese, whose forebears ravaged the country in World War II, now profess a romantic sentimentality toward Myanmar.
Yohei Sasakawa of the Nippon Foundation remembers eating rice shipped from the country in the lean years after the war in Japan.
“We are really late,” he says, “in repaying our obligation” for “the kindness of Myanmar.”
Here India has been slow to join the struggle for influence.
Its prime minister has visited the country, but without a clear plan of engagement, even though developing western Myanmar would boost the economy of India’s border region.
These opportunities exist because Thein’s government has been deliberately distancing itself from China, long the military regime’s patron and protector.
The sense among ordinary Burmese that the Chinese were looting the country’s resources has led to an anti-China backlash, including problems with a copper mine in Monywa and the cancellation last year of the Myitsone hydroelectric dam.
John Pang, the Chief Executive of CARI, a research organization based in Malaysia, says that today’s transitional Myanmar/Burma is “a game the Chinese gave away.”
Their loss is Myanmar/Burma’s – and South Asia’s – gain, regardless of what Thein or his democratically chosen successors choose to call their country.
My Body, My Capital?
LONDON &#45;&#45; In the 1960’s, feminists coined the slogan, “Our bodies, our selves.”
But that liberating sentiment has recently undergone an ironic twist.
As an anonymous American woman, justifying her decision to undergo cosmetic surgery, put it, “All we have in life is ourselves, and what we can put out there every day for the world to see… Me is all I got.”
The French commentator Hervé Juvin extolled this new attitude towards the body in his 2005 surprise bestseller, L’avènement du corps (The Coming of the Body) .
Plastic surgery, the implantation of biochips, piercings – all emblazon the belief that our bodies are our unique property.
At the same time, Juvin asserts, because everyone has a body, property has suddenly become democratized.
We appear to live in a time that has witnessed the absolute failure of the grand Enlightenment dreams of linear progress, universal peace, and equality between rich and poor.
Together with widespread hostility to organized religion, manifested in such hugely popular books as Richard Dawkins’s The God Delusion , disappointment with social ideals means that we turn inward.
In the absence of a belief in eternal life, everything becomes invested in this life, this body.
Long life is our desire, eternal youth our supposed right, and the myth of the body without origin or limits our new religion.
That might be why governments are so widely seen to have a positive duty to promote stem cell research and other forms of medical progress.
Biotechnology industries flourish, with state sanction and support, because they add extra value to the body, the object of supreme worth to us.
Indeed, the infinite renewal of the body isn’t confined to superficial repairs through cosmetic surgery.
External substitutes for organic structures can be surgically implanted, breaking down the barrier between the body and the outside world.
At the same time, tissue removed from the body enters into commerce and trade as a commodity like any other, in the form of stem cell lines, human eggs, and other “products.”
The American law professor James Boyle believes that we can grasp the way in which the body has become an object of trade by likening it to the historical process of enclosure.
In eighteenth-century Britain, land, which was previously a public resource, was “enclosed” by private owners.
Freed of feudal-style legal restrictions on transfer of ownership and of traditional rights held by commoners who used communal land to pasture their animals, landholdings could now be sold to raise capital, which helped to finance the industrial revolution.
In modern biotechnology, Boyle thinks, things previously outside the market-once thought to be impossible to commodify-are becoming routinely privatized.
One in five human genes is now patented, even though the human genome might be thought to be our common heritage.
And although Boyle doesn’t mention this latest development, umbilical cord blood, taken in the final stage of labor, is now banked by profit-making firms as a potential – though unlikely – source of stem cells for the baby.
In biomedicine, a series of legal cases have generated powerful momentum toward the transfer of rights over the body and its component parts from the individual “owner” to corporations and research institutions.
So the body has entered the market, becoming capital, just as land did, though not everyone benefits, any more than the dispossessed commoners grew wealthy during the agricultural enclosures.
Most people are shocked when they learn that one-fifth of the human genome has been patented, mostly by private firms.
But why be so surprised?
After all, female bodies have been subject to various forms of property-holding over many centuries and in many societies.
Women’s bodies are used to sell everything from cars to pop music, of course.
But female tissue has been objectified and commodified in much more profound ways, in legal systems from Athens onwards.
While men were also made into objects of ownership and trade, as slaves, in general women were much more likely to be treated as commodities in non-slave-owning systems.
Once a woman had given her initial consent to the marriage “contract,” she had no right to retract her consent to sexual relations – ever.
There are clear parallels between that situation and the way in which the common law has offered little redress to patients who have tried to claim property rights in tissue taken from them, or to activists seeking to limit the powers of Big Biotech over human genetic patents.
All bodies are assumed to be “open access” now, just as women’s have always been.
But the assault on freedom is perceived as such only when it begins to apply to men.
It took a long time for people to notice that women’s eggs were required in large quantities for stem cell technologies: a phenomenon I call “the lady vanishes.”
The stem cell debates often seem to be premised on the assumption that only the status of the embryo matters.
Many people are still unaware that women’s eggs are a crucial part of “therapeutic cloning.”
By contrast, genetic patenting, which affects both sexes, has (rightly) generated a huge scholarly literature and a very vigorous popular debate.
Just a coincidence?
The new enclosures of the genetic commons or of body tissue threaten to extend the objectification and commodification of the body to both sexes.
Everyone has a female body now, or, more properly, a feminized body.
Rather than holding an investment in our bodies, we’re all at risk of becoming capital: my body, but somebody else’s capital.
My Outlook for 2009
DAVOS – The future of the global economy will depend greatly on whether President Barack Obama launches a comprehensive and coherent set of measures, and on how successfully he carries them out.
How the Chinese, Europeans, and other major players respond will be almost as important.
If there is good international cooperation, the world economy may start climbing out of a deep hole by the end of 2009.
If not, we will face a much longer period of economic and political disorder and decline.
There is no way to reestablish economic equilibrium in one fell swoop.
Instead,&nbsp; the economy must first be pumped full of money to make up for the collapse of credit; then, when credit begins to flow again, the liquidity must be drained from the system almost as fast as it was injected.
This second operation will be both politically and technically more difficult than the first: it is much easier to give money away than to take it back.
It is all the more important that stimulus packages be channeled into relatively productive investments.
The bailout of the motor industry ought to be the exception, not the rule.
The Dollar
The effort to pump the American economy full of money will run into difficulties on two fronts: the exchange rate and interest rates.
The dollar came under pressure early in the current financial crisis, but staged a strong recovery as the crisis worsened.
The dollar’s strength in the latter part of 2008 was due not to an increased desire to hold dollars but to increased difficulties in borrowing them.
European and other international banks had acquired a lot of dollar-denominated assets which they habitually funded in the interbank market; as the market dried up, they were forced to buy dollars.
At the same time, periphery countries held a lot of dollar-denominated obligations which they had to repay when they could not roll them over.
Russia and East European countries on the periphery of the euro were tied much more to the euro; but when the Russian market collapsed, the effect on the dollar was the same, because the Russian central bank had overbought euros and had to sell them to defend the ruble.
The trend was temporarily reversed at the end of 2008 when the Federal Reserve lowered interest rates to practically zero and embarked on quantitative easing.
The euro staged an explosive rally, but the rally was short lived because the eurozone developed its own internal difficulties.
Widespread riots in Greece drew attention to the plight of the Southern Tier countries— Spain, Italy and Greece— and of Ireland.
CDS rates for these countries rose, their credit ratings were lowered and the yield spreads on their government bonds versus Germany widened to an alarming extent.
The euro headed lower right from the beginning of 2009 and it was even outpaced by sterling.
Going forward the fact that Germany and the European Central Bank hold a different view of the problem confronting the global economy from the rest of the world is liable to cause wide swings in exchange rates and hinder the recovery.
The ECB operates under asymmetric guidelines: it is constitutionally obliged to be concerned only with maintaining price stability, not full employment; Germany still lives with the memory of the Weimar Republic’s runaway inflation, which served as a prelude to the Nazi regime.
Both considerations militate against fiscal irresponsibility and unlimited money creation.
This should favor the euro as a store of value, but the internal tensions within Europe work in the opposite direction.
The fact that there is no Europe-wide mechanism for protecting the banking system and each country has to act on its own raises doubts about their ability to do so.
Is Ireland’s credit good enough?
And can the ECB accept the government debt of Greece as collateral beyond certain limits?
The foundations of the Maastricht Treaty are shaking—not to mention the difficulties that the United Kingdom and Switzerland are facing in protecting their overgrown banks.
As national regulators seek to protect their own banks, they may hurt the banking systems of other countries.
For instance, Austrian and Italian banks are heavily exposed in Eastern Europe; the Royal Bank of Scotland which is now majority owned by the British government does the bulk of its business abroad while a significant portion of UK housing is financed by foreign banks.
Eventually the various national authorities will have to protect each other, but it is only a common danger that will force them to do so.&nbsp;
The owners of wealth may increasingly turn to the yen and gold for safety but the may run into resistance from the authorities—sooner in the case of the yen than gold.
And there will be a tug of war between those who seek safety and those who need to use their reserves to save their businesses.
With all these contradictory forces at work we can expect wild currency fluctuations.
Interest Rates
The way out of a deflationary trap is to first induce inflation and then to reduce it.
That is an intricate operation and success is far from assured.
As soon as economic activity in the United States revives, interest rates on government bonds are liable to shoot up; indeed, the yield curve is likely to steepen in anticipation.
Either way, a rise in long-term interest rates is liable to choke off the recovery. The prospect of the greatly increased money supply turning into inflation is likely to lead to a period of stagflation.
That, however, would be a high-class, desirable outcome because it would avoid prolonged depression.
It is difficult, but not impossible, to imagine the U.S. economy growing at a rate of 3 percent or more in the decade ahead.
The United States has been running a chronic current account deficit, which exceeded 6 percent of GDP at its peak.
That will disappear, and it will leave behind a heavy burden of foreign debt that will be further swollen by the budget deficits of the next few years.
Consumption as a share of GDP has to fall.
The financial services sector, which has been the fastest growing segment of the economy, will shrink.
With baby boomers retiring in increasing numbers, demographic trends have turned unfavorable. All these are negative influences.
What is to be expected on the positive side?
More equitable income distribution, both domestically and internationally. Better social services, including education.
A constructive energy policy leading to large-scale investments in alternative energy and energy saving. Reduced military expenditures.
Faster growth in the developing world providing better export markets and investment opportunities. But even with the best policies, domestic growth is liable to lag behind the global economy.
China
What China does will have almost as much influence as President Obama on the future of the global economy, and Chinese-American relations will be the most important bilateral relationship in the world.
China has a tremendous interest in the prosperity of the global economy.
Obama can build on this in reconstructing the international financial system, but it will require great tact and foresight on both sides.
The emergence of a new world power is a dangerous process.
Twice it has led to world war in which the emergent power was defeated.
China has to go out of its way to make itself acceptable if it wants to be accepted as a world leader.
It has adapted the doctrine of harmonious development, which is the right approach, but it also has other doctrines, notably those relating to Taiwan and Tibet, that work in the opposite direction.
Due to the erroneous policies of the Bush administration and the bursting of the super-bubble, China has gained too much power too soon. &nbsp; For a constructive partnership, both sides will have to lean over backward.
President Obama has to treat China as an equal partner and China has to accept continuing American leadership.
That will not be easy for either side.
China has much to lose.
It is not a democracy, and there is no established routine for changing governments.
Failure to achieve a satisfactory growth rate—generally defined as 8 percent per annum—could lead to political turmoil, and political turmoil in China would be disastrous for the world.
Fortunately, China has developed a method of elaborate consultations that, while not democratic, do give the various interest groups involved a voice in determining policy.
The main drawback of the consensus-building process is that it is slow and cumbersome, and there is a danger is that the Chinese leadership will not move fast enough to counteract the sudden drop in the global economy.
Here again, a strong lead from the new Obama administration could have a beneficial effect.
The Indian Subcontinent
India is more self-contained than China, and it should have less difficulty in maintaining its upside momentum.
The Indian stock market has been harder hit than that of most countries, but its banking system, which is still largely in government hands, has been less affected.
Remittances from the Gulf States will suffer and its outsourcing business will languish, but hopefully infrastructure investments, of which India has a great backlog, will continue apace.
The macro-economic outlook is more favorable than for most of the world.
The greatest uncertainties are political, and they revolve around Pakistan, which is a failing state.
Some elements in the military and intelligence services have been closely involved with terrorists, and there is a real danger that they may gain the upper hand.
The November 26, 2008, terrorist attacks on Mumbai were brilliantly planned, timed, and executed.
Coming before the Indian elections, it was meant to set India and Pakistan against each other, allowing the Islamist influence in Pakistan at least to survive or at most to gain control of the State.
The Bush administration allowed all the various players to be set against each other: Pakistan against India and Afghanistan; the military against the civilian government within Pakistan; Nawaz Sharif against Asif Ali Zardari, within the civilian government—not to mention the various tribes that have been armed by the military in order to fight the Pakistani Taliban fighting each other.
The task of the Obama administration will be to bring the various factions together to fight the common enemy, the people behind the terrorist attacks on Mumbai.
The problem of Pakistan is closely interlinked with the problem of Afghanistan.
The American forces invading Afghanistan were originally welcomed as liberators, but NATO got involved without a proper plan of engagement, and after eight years the presence of foreign troops is no longer welcome.
The Oil-Producing Countries
The oil-producing countries have suffered a sudden reversal of fortune.
Their surpluses have turned into deficits, and their sovereign wealth funds and currency reserves have suffered major losses.
The Gulf States have been badly hit, because their private sectors, including some banks, were greatly overextended.
Dubai was the world’s most spectacular real estate bubble and will have to be rescued by the deep pockets of Abu Dhabi.
But the oil producers’ woes are not necessarily bad news.
Some of the major oil-surplus countries, notably Iran, Venezuela, and Russia, have been enemies of the current world order, and their wings are being trimmed.
The decline in Iran’s capacity to sponsor political and terrorist movements in neighboring countries is already having beneficial effects.
The political and security situation in Iraq seems to be stabilizing, and Syria seems to be more amenable to negotiation.
The chances are good that Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad will not be re-elected in June 2009.
By contrast, Russia may become more of a menace due to the decline in oil prices.
Under Vladimir Putin, nationalism has replaced communism as the country’s guiding ideology.
The Kremlin is now using its control over natural resources to reestablish Russia’s position as a political power, enrich the rulers and ensure their own control over Russia, and to bribe and suborn the rulers of the former Soviet. &nbsp;The various objectives mutually reinforce each other; together, they constitute the new order – a sham democracy built on petrol-patronage.
In the Putin regime, economic power has been concentrated in the hands of two groups: those who acquired property and those who take a slice of cash flows.
By and large, the first group is more sophisticated and more Western-oriented: it keeps its money and its children abroad.
The second group exploits the state’s arbitrary powers more directly.
The first group was decimated by the financial crisis; the second was left relatively unscathed.
The crisis reinforced the arbitrary powers of the state, as a large part of official currency reserves was spent to bail out and reacquire the first group’s assets.
This is important, because, as the economic outlook deteriorates and the Putin regime will no longer be able to satisfy people’s economic expectations, it is likely to rely more actively on arbitrary state powers.
After all, the Kremlin is occupied not by the cautious bureaucrats of the Soviet era, but by buccaneers who were willing to take risks to get where they are.
This may translate into military adventures abroad and repression at home.
Europe
Different European countries have reacted differently to the rise of a hostile Russia, influenced by their historical experience and their economic interests.
Europe must resist the geopolitical challenge that Russia is posing, and it must be unified to have any chance of success.
But a unified European policy must not be purely geopolitical, because Europe’s common interest would not be strong enough to override national interests.
Russia could divide and conquer, as it is doing already.&nbsp;
The key to Europe’s ability to neutralize Russia’s geopolitical advantage is to establish a unified energy policy, with a Europe-wide distribution network and a Europe-wide regulatory authority that has precedence over national regulators.
This would deprive Russia of its ability to play one country off against another, because a concession granted to one national distributor would immediately become available to customers in all the other countries.
It no less necessary to continue promoting the rule of law, international cooperation, and the principles of open society, mainly by reforming the international financial system and by paying special attention to Russia’s near-abroad.
Ukraine, in particular, is in a perilous state, but financing public works that would create jobs in Eastern Ukraine, where the steel industry is in distress, could make a major difference both politically and economically.
Georgia must be helped to recover from the damage inflicted by the Russian invasion, but help should be contingent on the Saakashvili government observing the principles of open society.
Russia cannot be helped directly because of its excessive reliance on arbitrary state power, but when Russia sees progress in international cooperation, particularly with China, it will not want to be left out in the cold.
The financial crisis and its aftermath will be a period of testing and, one hopes, development for the European Union’s institutions, particularly its financial institutions, which are relatively new.
The EU has a common currency and the ECB, but it does not have a common fiscal policy or treasury.
This shortcoming has become increasingly evident and it may lead to a breakup of the eurozone.
But belonging to the eurozone proved to be very valuable—Greece is hurting less than Denmark although its problems are much greater.
Therefore the odds favor that the euro will emerge from the current crisis with the ECB given greater powers over the banking system.
The Bush administration distinguished itself by driving a wedge between “old Europe” and “new Europe.”
It is to be hoped that the Obama administration will adopt the opposite course.
The world badly needs a more united Europe, both politically and financially.
The Developing World
A few countries like Brazil and Chile are reasonably well positioned to engage in countercyclical policies on their own with only a light assist from the IFIs.
But most of the rest of the developing world is heavily dependent on the initiatives outlined in the previous chapter.
In the absence of a radical international initiative, they face a very grim future.
Countries like Pakistan, Egypt, Morocco, and Haiti have already experienced food riots.
Others, such as South Africa and Turkey, suffer from serious power outages.
Mexico has a serious security problem because of drug trafficking.
As the economic situation deteriorates, the chances of civil unrest rise.
The collapse of credit in the global financial system is having an even more devastating effect on the countries of the periphery than those at the center.&nbsp; Credit lines are withdrawn, maturing loans cannot be rolled over and trade finance has dried up.
Hopefully, the leaders of the world recognize that it is in their own enlightened self-interest to come to the rescue of the developing world.
The attraction of the SDR donation scheme is that it does not impose any direct costs on donor countries.
All they have to do is vote for the creation of SDR and then pass on the benefits to less-developed countries.
I hope they will rise to the occasion.
My Plan to Drop the Bomb
NEW YORK – The destruction of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945 marked an end and a beginning.  The close of the Second World War ushered in a Cold War, with a precarious peace based on the threat of mutually assured destruction. 
Many efforts are underway worldwide to achieve this goal.  Earlier this year, the 65-member Conference on Disarmament—the forum that produces multilateral disarmament treaties—broke a deadlock and agreed to negotiations on a fissile material treaty.  Other issues it will discuss include nuclear disarmament and security assurances for non-nuclear-weapon states.  
In addition, Australia and Japan have launched a major international commission on nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament.  My own multimedia “WMD—WeMustDisarm!” campaign, which will culminate on the International Day of Peace (21 September), will reinforce growing calls for disarmament by former statesmen and grassroots campaigns, such as “Global Zero.”
These calls will get a further boost in September when civil society groups gather in Mexico City for a UN-sponsored conference on disarmament and development. 
Though the UN has been working on disarmament since 1946, two treaties negotiated under UN auspices are now commanding the world’s attention.
Also in September, countries that have signed the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) will meet at the UN to consider ways to promote its early entry into force.  North Korea’s nuclear tests, its missile launches and its threats of further provocation lend new urgency to this cause. 
Next May, the UN will also host a major five-year review conference involving the parties to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), which will examine the state of the treaty’s “grand bargain” of disarmament, non-proliferation and the peaceful use of nuclear energy.  If the CTBT can enter into force, and if the NPT review conference makes progress, the world would be off to a good start on its journey to a world free of nuclear weapons. 
NEW HAVEN – At this time of year, at graduation ceremonies in America and elsewhere, those about to leave university often hear some final words of advice before receiving their diplomas.
To those interested in pursuing careers in finance – or related careers in insurance, accounting, auditing, law, or corporate management – I submit the following address:
Best of luck to you as you leave the academy for your chosen professions in finance.
Over the course of your careers, Wall Street and its kindred institutions will need you.
Your training in financial theory, economics, mathematics, and statistics will serve you well.
But your lessons in history, philosophy, and literature will be just as important, because it is vital not only that you have the right tools, but also that you never lose sight of the purposes and overriding social goals of finance.
Unless you have been studying at the bottom of the ocean, you know that the financial sector has come under severe criticism – much of it justified – for thrusting the world economy into its worst crisis since the Great Depression.
And you need only check in with some of your classmates who have populated the Occupy movements around the world to sense the widespread resentment of financiers and the top 1% of income earners to whom they largely cater (and often belong).
While some of this criticism may be over-stated or misplaced, it nonetheless underscores the need to reform financial institutions and practices.
Finance has long been central to thriving market democracies, which is why its current problems need to be addressed.
With your improved sense of our interconnectedness and diverse needs, you can do that.
Indeed, it is the real professional challenge ahead of you, and you should embrace it as an opportunity.
Young finance professionals need to familiarize themselves with the history of banking, and recognize that it is at its best when it serves ever-broadening spheres of society.
Here, the savings-bank movement in the United Kingdom and Europe in the nineteenth century, and the microfinance movement pioneered by the Grameen Bank in Bangladesh in the twentieth century, comes to mind.
Today, the best way forward is to update financial and communications technology to offer a full array of enlightened banking services to the lower middle class and the poor.
Graduates going into mortgage banking are faced with a different, but equally vital, challenge: to design new, more flexible loans that will better help homeowners to weather the kind of economic turbulence that has buried millions of people today in debt.
Young investment bankers, for their part, have a great opportunity to devise more participatory forms of venture capital – embodied in the new crowd-funding Web sites – to spur the growth of innovative new small businesses.&nbsp;Meanwhile, opportunities will abound for rookie insurance professionals to devise new ways to hedge risks that real people worry about, and that really matter –&nbsp;those involving their jobs, livelihoods, and home values.
Beyond investment banks and brokerage houses, modern finance has a public and governmental dimension, which clearly needs reinventing in the wake of the recent financial crisis.
Setting the rules of the game for a robust, socially useful financial sector has never been more important.
Recent graduates are needed in legislative and administrative agencies to analyze the legal infrastructure of finance, and regulate it so that it produces the greatest results for society.
A new generation of political leaders needs to understand the importance of financial literacy and find ways to supply citizens with the legal and financial advice that they need.
Meanwhile, economic policymakers face the great challenge of designing new financial institutions, such as pension systems and public entitlements based on the solid grounding of intergenerational risk-sharing.
Those of you deciding to pursue careers as economists and finance scholars need to develop a better understanding of asset bubbles – and better ways to communicate this understanding to the finance profession and to the public.
As much as Wall Street had a hand in the current crisis, it began as a broadly held belief that housing prices could not fall – a belief that fueled a full-blown social contagion.
Learning how to spot such bubbles and deal with them before they infect entire economies will be a major challenge for the next generation of finance scholars.
Equipped with sophisticated financial ideas ranging from the capital asset pricing model to intricate options-pricing formulas, you are certainly and justifiably interested in building materially rewarding careers. There is no shame in this, and your financial success will reflect to a large degree your effectiveness in producing strong results for the firms that employ you.
But, however imperceptibly, the rewards for success on Wall Street, and in finance more generally, are changing, just as the definition of finance must change if is to reclaim its stature in society and the trust of citizens and leaders.
Finance, at its best, does not merely manage risk, but also acts as the steward of society’s assets and an advocate of its deepest goals.
Beyond compensation, the next generation of finance professionals will be paid its truest rewards in the satisfaction that comes with the gains made in democratizing finance – extending its benefits into corners of society where they are most needed.
This is a new challenge for a new generation, and will require all of the imagination and skill that you can bring to bear.
Good luck in reinventing finance.
The world needs you to succeed.
The Continuing Mystery of Life’s Building Blocks
GARRISON, NEW YORK – Imagine for a moment that you have come across a trove of marvelous devices left by an ancient civilization.
These mysterious instruments vary widely in size and complexity, but they all share a few wondrous capabilities.
If you want to understand how they work, it makes sense to start with the simplest and smallest device, then systematically carve off pieces until it stops working.
Eventually, everything that is inessential will be gone, and you will be left with only the components necessary for it to perform its basic functions.
And then, once you figure out what each of those pieces does, you will have your answer.
This is roughly the journey of discovery that the American biotechnologist J. Craig Venter and his colleagues have been taking for the past two decades – only their marvelous devices are not archeological remains, but living organisms.
And the pieces they are trying to understand are the genes that we share with all other forms of autonomous, reproductive life.
In a recent paper in the journal Science, Venter and his colleagues announced that they had created the smallest living and reproducing organism.
Their creation – called JCVI-syn3.0 – is a simple cell, with only the genes that are essential for life; it has a smaller genome than any autonomously replicating organism found in nature, larger only than those found in viruses and other entities that rely on hosts for essential functions.
Venter and his team created their organism through a process of trial and error.
They began by using their knowledge of biology to deduce the minimum set of genes that would be required for life.
That approach failed.
So, instead, they took an existing organism and began to whittle it down.
They started with the genome of Mycoplasma mycoides, a parasitic bacteria that infects cattle and goats, and also a close relative of Mycoplasma genitalium, which has the fewest genes – just 525 – known among free-living bacteria.
The team broke the M.mycoides genome into eight fragments and began deleting genes one by one.
If the reconstructed organism failed to thrive, the gene was left in. If it did not appear to matter, it stayed out.
In the end, 473 genes were required for the organism to thrive.
(Humans, by comparison, have roughly 20,000 genes.)
The most important result of the Venter team’s work was to reveal how little we know about the basic biology of life.
Most of the 473 genes take care of housekeeping: They make proteins, keep DNA in good repair, and are responsible for the cell’s membrane and cytoplasm.
But there are 149 genes whose function is unknown.
In other words, the purpose of nearly one-third of the genes needed to keep the organism alive, well, and reproducing remains a mystery.
Of the 149 genes with unknown functions, 70 have a structure that at least hints at their role in the cell.
But we know nothing about the other 79, except that in these organisms, in this environment, life is impossible without them.
Moreover, as Venter and his colleagues acknowledge, if the team began with a different microbe, or grew it in a different environment, the set of necessary genes would be different.
So their genome is a minimal genome, not the minimal genome.
All of this implies many exciting discoveries ahead.
And yet, when it comes to practical, commercial objectives, the news is considerably more sobering.
One of the primary goals of synthetic biology has been to create a platform, or chassis, to use as a foundation for building organisms designed for specific tasks.
Just as Volkswagen uses its A5 platform to build 19 different vehicles, from luxury Audi A3s to small SUVs and budget models, a biological chassis would be a minimal microbial platform onto which could be bolted genetic instructions to make drugs, biofuels, cosmetics, or whatever one desires.
With the publication of the Science paper, two challenges become evident.
The first is that biology is complicated.
As Venter’s work shows, we do not yet have a sufficient grasp of the essentials of basic biology to design and build a cell.
Genes do not function like fenders or brakes; they cannot be mounted on a chassis to perform a function independently of other components.
Genes interact – amplifying, dampening, or even silencing one another.
And those effects, in turn, influence still other genes.
Genomes, it turns out, function less like machines than like ecosystems with multitudinous relationships and complex feedback loops.
Adding genomic parts to a synthetic organism in order to achieve a predictable result may be far more difficult than proponents of the chassis model have assumed.
The second challenge regards the competition.
When Venter and his team began their effort, genetic engineers had tools that were powerful but, by modern standards, crude.
In recent years, scientists have found ways to edit genes with far greater precision.
The most prominent, known as CRISPR Cas9, cuts DNA with remarkable (though not perfect) accuracy.
As a result, gene editing has emerged as an alternative strategy to the chassis model for tailoring microbes to make useful products.
It is impossible to know whether synthetic organisms like Venter’s JCVI-syn 3.0 or gene-editing techniques will prove to be commercially dominant in biotechnology – or indeed whether some other method will supplant both.
We can be confident, however, that our knowledge of basic biology will deepen, and that our growing ability to manipulate living organisms will confront us with increasingly serious ethical considerations.
Carbon Majors and Climate Justice
BONN – A groundbreaking study published last November revealed that the activities of a mere 90 producers of coal, oil and gas, and cement – dubbed the “carbon majors” – have led to 63% of all CO2 emissions since the Industrial Revolution.
The report was released just weeks after Typhoon Haiyan (or Yolanda as it was known locally) tore through the Tacloban region in the Philippines.
With unprecedented wind speeds of 315 kilometers (196 miles) per hour, the storm killed 6,300 people, left four million homeless, and caused more than $2 billion of damage.
Haiyan and its devastation became a rallying cry for delegates at the subsequent United Nations climate-change conference in Warsaw.
In response, they agreed to establish an international mechanism to address climate-change-related “loss and damage,” to be applied in countries that are unable to adapt or protect themselves from the worst effects of global warming.
Those most vulnerable to climate change are often least responsible for its causes, and have the fewest resources to deal with its consequences.
Contrast this with the carbon majors, which have made huge fortunes from the fossil fuels that are largely responsible for climate change.
In 2013, the combined profits of just four majors – Chevron, ExxonMobil, BP, and Shell – topped $94 billion.
This colossal return was possible only because these companies externalize their products’ highest cost – the climate devastation borne by the poor and vulnerable.
It seems only fair and reasonable, therefore, that all fossil-fuel entities, but especially the carbon majors, pay a levy on each ton of coal, barrel of oil, or cubic meter of gas they produce to a new International Mechanism for Loss and Damage, which would help to fund efforts to address the worst effects of climate change.
Furthermore, given that the effects of climate change today are the result of past emissions, the carbon majors should pay a historical levy, too.
If set initially at a relatively low $2 per ton of carbon, these levies could raise $50 billion annually, though the rate should increase each year.
The revenues could support vulnerable countries’ efforts to develop long term plans to deal with climate change, as well as finance pilot projects aimed at minimizing loss and damage, sharing information, and replicating best practices.
They could fund the monitoring and forecasting of slow-onset and extreme-weather events, enabling authorities and the public to prepare more effectively for an impending disaster.
And the money could cover loss-and-damage risk premiums on individual, local, national, regional, or international insurance policies.
Governments would collect the levies from the carbon majors, perhaps when they collect royalties and other extraction-related fees, and deposit the money with the international mechanism.
If the new levy were added to existing fees, it would strengthen the price signal driving a shift away from fossil fuels and toward renewables.
This fossil-fuel levy would be entirely compatible with the norms established by the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and with the “polluter pays” and “do no harm” principles of international law, according to which organizations are required to pay for the damage that they cause.
Indeed, the arrangement would be similar to existing regimes, such as those covering oil-spill compensation or nuclear damage.
But paying the cost of one’s damage, though necessary, is far from sufficient.
After all, a compensation levy should not imply that the carbon majors have effectively bought a right to pollute.
We must also work to stop inflicting harm on the most vulnerable people (and on ourselves).
When the world’s governments meet at the UN climate-change conference in Paris in 2015, they must agree on ways to phase out net greenhouse-gas emissions and stop burning fossil fuels by mid-century.
According to Carbon Tracker, 80% of fossil-fuel reserves must remain in the ground if we are to avoid catastrophic climate change.
Even at today’s “low” level of climate change, the devastation is already all too real.
It is real for the Philippines citizens mourning relatives and trying to rebuild homes and lives; for the Pacific Islanders growing crops in containers, importing drinking water, and building sea walls to protect their islands from the encroaching ocean; and for hungry farmers in the Sahel.
And it is a growing reality for millions of other vulnerable people worldwide.
These people deserve the world’s support – not just moral support, but genuine help in the form of effective, properly funded mechanisms designed to prevent, or at least alleviate, the climate-related hardships inflicted upon them by past and present industrialization.
For the carbon majors, the time to pay up has arrived.
The Next Trade Breakthroughs
STANFORD – Economic news is grim all around the world.
This year’s output growth has been disappointing, and the International Monetary Fund expects only a slight improvement in 2015.
Europe may be sliding back into recession, with even the once-robust German economy teetering on the brink.
China is downshifting, and Brazil, Russia, and India are struggling to avoid a stall.
So it is a pity that three important opportunities for growth from trade liberalization – the World Trade Organization’s Doha Development Round, the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) in the Asia-Pacific region, and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) between the United States and Europe – are being neglected.
If designed properly, all three have the potential to spur global growth.
Through the reduction of tariffs and non-tariff barriers, the protection of intellectual property, and the harmonization of regulations, hundreds of billions of dollars of output – and millions of better-paying jobs – could be generated.
This is the lesson of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), which celebrates its 20th birthday this year.
In NAFTA at 20, a book that I edited, policymakers and scholars explain how the landmark trade treaty exemplifies the benefits of trade liberalization – and why political leaders should pursue it.
The elimination of tariffs among Canada, Mexico, and the US was innovative, risky, and controversial.
NAFTA became a lightning rod for complaints about globalization, capitalism, and the decline of organized labor.
Many claimed that the treaty would depress wages, destroy jobs, and ravage the agricultural industry in the US.
Instead, NAFTA boosted all three signatories’ economies and became the template for hundreds of subsequent free-trade agreements.
NAFTA helped open what former Mexican Trade Minister Jaime Serra Puche says had been “a highly protectionist economy for five or six decades.”
US agricultural exports threatened some Mexican farmers, but others were able to boost their exports – and profits – to the US.
Meanwhile, the country’s consumers, especially the urban poor, benefited from lower food prices.
According to Stephen Haber, my colleague at Stanford University’s Hoover Institution, “After, and to a considerable extent because of, NAFTA, the Mexican economy and political process became far more competitive.”
Canada also benefited.
The country’s firms and workers saw their productivity rise by 14%, leading to what the University of Toronto economist Daniel Trefler estimates is the equivalent of a decade’s improvement in living standards.
“Canada&hellip;is a much more modern economy today than it would have been,” says the country’s former finance minister, Michael Wilson.
Meanwhile, Canada and Mexico have become the United States’ top two export markets, accounting for a combined $625 billion in 2013, more than the next ten largest export markets combined.
Prior to NAFTA, exports to Mexico roughly equaled those to the United Kingdom and about half of what was going to Japan.
Moreover, this surge in trade has created myriad well-paying jobs.
NAFTA produced something far different from the outsourcing its opponents predicted.
Some 40% of what the US imports from Mexico actually originates in the US.
For Canada, the figure is 25%.
For China, by contrast, the share is just 4%.
“We’re not just selling things to each other,” explains Serra Puche.
“Now, we’re producing things jointly.”
According to Lorenzo Caliendo, an economist at the Yale School of Management, a surge in cross-border trade and increases in real (inflation-adjusted) wages in all three countries can be attributed to NAFTA – even once other factors, like the opening of China, the peso crisis, the dot-com bubble, and the Great Recession, are taken into account.
In short, as former US Secretary of State George Shultz has noted, “NAFTA has transformed the region.”
Today, NAFTA can continue to serve as a model for ongoing trade negotiations.
A NAFTA 2.0 could focus on areas that were originally excluded, such as labor mobility and energy.
The development of Canadian oil sands, the shale-energy revolution in the US, and the opening of Mexico’s oil sector to foreign investment imply the biggest geopolitical shift since the collapse of communism.
Moreover, the finalization of either the TPP or the TTIP could spur progress in the WTO’s Doha Round.
“There is no question that a high quality major agreement today, as the NAFTA was in 1994, could cause multilateralism to take a giant leap forward,” says former US Trade Representative Carla A. Hills.
Trade liberalization has been stalled for too long.
Since the end of World War II, American presidents, Democrat and Republican alike, have promoted free trade as a key pillar of growth.
John F. Kennedy launched what became the Kennedy Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, and Bill Clinton helped secure congressional passage of NAFTA and the Uruguay Round of trade talks, which had been initiated and negotiated under Presidents George H.W. Bush and Ronald Reagan.
President Barack Obama has promoted the TPP in Asia, but he only recently asked Congress for fast-track negotiating authority (the ability to request an up-or-down congressional vote without amendments).
Obama’s request was rebuffed by the US Senate’s Democratic majority leader, Harry Reid.
The new Republican-controlled Senate should act quickly to approve it.
“There is no way we would have completed the NAFTA negotiation without fast track,” according to Hills.
Nobody will negotiate seriously with the US if Congress can cherry-pick amendments.&nbsp;Former US Trade Representative Mickey Kantor recalls Clinton’s horse-trading with congressional Democrats to persuade them to join Republicans in passing NAFTA, overcoming both parties’ protectionist wings.
Obama and the new Republican majority must now decide if they will follow in their predecessors’ footsteps and spark a new era of economic growth.
Two Lessons for the Next US President
NAGASAKI – Looking out of my window across the harbor of the remarkable city of Nagasaki, Japan, two thoughts of considerable relevance to the next American president come to mind.
Nagasaki has endured the worst of humanity.
In August 1945, a plutonium bomb decimated the city, causing massive physical damage and untold human suffering.
Since then, however, the city has exemplified the best of human achievement, rising from the rubble thanks to the spirit and enterprise of Japanese men and women, who trade the things that they build – for example, at the Mitsubishi shipyards – with the rest of the world.
But Nagasaki – and Japan, more broadly – has not always been open to the world, reaching across the ocean to connect with other countries, from near neighbors like China to faraway allies like the United States.
For centuries, Japanese minds, and Japanese borders, were distinctly closed.
On a hillside in Nagasaki, there is a stark reminder of this radical closed-mindedness.
A monument commemorates the martyrdom of 26 Roman Catholics, who were crucified at the end of the sixteenth century as part of the effort to stamp out the growth of Christianity in Japan.
The American film director Martin Scorsese is now completing an adaptation of these events, based on Shusaku Endo’s novel Silence.
Japan’s embrace of modernity came centuries later, with the decades-long Meiji restoration that began in the late 1860s.
Rather than losing touch with its own culture and traditions, however, Japan merged the two, moving forward without losing sight of the past.
This balance is reflected in Japanese architecture, which is thoroughly modern, yet steeped in tradition.
So what does all this have to do with the US election?
For one thing, the US, like some parts of Europe, is now at risk of entering its own period of closed minds and closed borders.
While the more moderate Hillary Clinton is likely to defeat the recklessly isolationist Donald Trump, the backlash against openness that has fueled Trump’s rise will not dissipate on its own.
Of course, a President Clinton, along with other policymakers, would do well to underscore the leading role that diversity has played in driving America’s success.
Providing a haven for people from all over the world, where all people are subject to the same rules and laws, has been a key strength of the US for most of its history.
This idea is reflected in the words on the country’s seal: E Pluribus Unum (from many, one).
But Clinton will also have to address some of the real grievances that spurred the backlash against economic openness.
An infrastructure program, by creating huge numbers of productive jobs and distributed wealth, would be a good start – one that would be far easier to achieve if her Democratic Party also won the Senate.
With such an approach, the US could revive its reputation as the “land of opportunity,” which has been so critical to US soft power in the past.
As she works to overcome rifts at home, Clinton will also have plenty of work to do abroad.
Herein lies the second lesson of Nagasaki’s history: the overwhelming threat posed by nuclear weapons.
Today, it is North Korea that embodies that threat most acutely.
That country’s volatile regime, led by the world’s most powerful juvenile delinquent, Kim Jong-un, not only possesses nuclear weapons, but is also working to develop long-range delivery capacity.
Recent tests of nuclear weapons and long-range missiles – including the country’s most powerful nuclear test ever, carried out last month – show just how close the Hermit Kingdom is to achieving its goals.
Even if Clinton takes a restrained approach to the use of force in international disputes, as President Barack Obama has over the last eight years, she would not be able to stand by idly if North Korea had the capacity to launch a long-range nuclear strike.
America would have to protect its Asian allies (not to mention its own citizens, were the North able to strike the US mainland).
But unilateral action would certainly not be the best option.
It would be far better to persuade China to intervene to bring Kim’s regime to heel.
That would demand some deft diplomacy.
Chinese officials still insist that they cannot control North Korea.
That may be true, up to a point.
Yet it is clear that no one has as much clout in Pyongyang as China’s Communist Party bosses.
And it is very possible that, behind closed doors, Chinese officials are already testing their ability to manipulate some of the shadowy figures surrounding Kim, who appears increasingly paranoid about the possibility of a coup.
But China would be unlikely to agree to more direct intervention in North Korea without some quid pro quo.
Perhaps America, with its Asian allies, could make some modest shift in their approach to China’s illegal pursuit of territorial claims in the South and East China Seas.
This would, to be sure, be unpopular, particularly among China’s neighbors.
But it might also be necessary to quell the North Korean nuclear threat.
Defusing North Korea’s nuclear ambitions would be worth the sacrifice.
When viewing the world from the perspective of Nagasaki, the need to preserve plurality and openness, while advancing America’s strategic pivot to Asia, becomes starkly clear.
It is a perspective that the next US president should embrace.
Learning from Namibia
WINDHOEK – Sandwiched between Angola and South Africa, Namibia suffered mightily during the long struggle against apartheid.
Yet, since winning independence from South Africa in 1990, this country of 2.4 million people has achieved enormous gains, especially in the last couple of years.
A big reason for Namibia’s success has been the government’s focus on education.
While people in advanced countries take for granted free primary and secondary education, in many poor countries, secondary education, and even primary schools, require tuition.
Indeed, governments are often advised to impose tuition as a form of “cost recovery.”
In Namibia, however, public primary education is free; and, as of the current school year, so is public secondary education.
Namibia’s government is also proactive in other important ways.
Malaria eradication efforts have reduced annual cases by 97% in about a decade.
Bucking the global trend of increasing inequality, Namibia’s Gini coefficient (the standard measure of inequality in an income distribution) has fallen by some 15 points since 1993 (admittedly from one of the highest levels in the world).
And the poverty rate has been more than halved, from 69% in 1993 to under 30%, with extreme poverty (the number of people living on less than $1.90 a day) falling by a similar margin, from just under 53% to less than 23%.
Namibia also has Africa’s highest ranking for press freedom from Reporters Without Borders – well ahead of the United States and other wealthy economies.
The country also has favorable ratings – among the highest in Africa – on Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index.
Even as commodity prices have been falling, Namibia has managed to maintain strong GDP growth – an estimated 4.5% in 2015, following average growth of nearly 4.2% from 1991-2014.
At the same time, its debt-to-GDP ratio, at around 25%, is less than a third of the debt ratio in Europe or the US.
Of course, Namibia has its problems.
The unemployment rate, at least as conventionally measured, remains stubbornly high, at nearly 28%.
And, like other countries in the region, it faces a high level of HIV/AIDS – nearly 17% of the population are HIV-positive.
The World Bank classifies Namibia as upper middle income, but the authorities insist that theirs is in fact a developing country.
Namibia certainly has some of the difficulties we associate with less-developed economies.
It has to develop a very large and arid country with a small population.
This includes isolated desert communities of nomadic hunter-gatherers, who somehow must be integrated into a modern society without losing their identity.
Integrating people who a quarter-century ago were on the fringes of the global economy would be an enormous task for any country.
For Namibia, it is even harder: as much as any country in the world, it is confronting head-on the effects of climate change.
Nonetheless, Namibia has taken these problems in stride as it creates a diversified economy and cohesive society.
Remarkably, rival political factions of the country’s freedom struggle have come together to work for the common good.
Indeed, Namibia provides low-cost health care not only for its own citizens, but also for its neighbors.
Some 15-20% of health-care visits in the north of Namibia are Angolan citizens.
The manager of the hotel where we stayed, just across the border, regularly sends a little boat across the crocodile-infested river to bring over Angolans who want to buy provisions at the hotel canteen or see the visiting Namibian health-care workers.
No one in Namibia talks about building a wall between their country and its poor and corrupt neighbors.
Rather, the Namibians we met understand that you can’t pick your neighbors, so it’s best to work with them by sharing scarce water resources, cooperating on regional health efforts, encouraging investment, and exchanging students.
Moreover, Namibia’s government has wisely understood that abundant natural resources can easily become a curse, enriching a few at the expense of the many.
The authorities know that unless Namibia’s natural wealth is invested in infrastructure and its people’s productive capacities, resource exhaustion will leave the country poorer, not richer.
They also know that it would be irresponsible not to garner for Namibians the most possible from the country’s resources, and are rethinking investment laws and revisiting mining contracts to ensure that that is the case.
Transparency is crucial to this process, which is why the government’s strong support of press freedom is so important.
As President Hage Geingob told us, the press often says things that he doesn’t like.
But, having fought for freedom from apartheid South Africa, Geingob says, Namibia must defend the freedoms it won.
Besides, Geingob recognizes how transparency protects him from demands for favors from corporate and other interest groups.
Not all of Namibia’s key resources are finite.
Some – like fisheries – are renewable, and the government is working hard to preserve and enhance them.
Most important, unlike most other resource-dependent economies, it has succeeded in diversifying the economy – to the point that services account for more than 60% of its GDP, with tourism leading the way.
Every year, more than a million foreign tourists visit the country.
That is not surprising.
Namibia is one of the most beautiful places in the world, and its people cultivate its environment and protect its animals.
About 100 years ago, the colonialists – the “1%” of their time – enjoyed hunting for sport and decimated the rhino and elephant population.
Now local scientists are bringing animals back to the Skeleton Coast and other parts of the country.
Ironically, some funding for this comes from today’s 1%, who donate to the cause.
Namibia shows that even countries that start with serious disadvantages – extremes of racism, colonialism, inequality, and underdevelopment – can chart a path toward shared prosperity.
Its achievement deserves international recognition – and emulation.
NAM in Tehran
NEW DELHI – Nowadays, the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) is no longer much of a movement.
Since the Cold War’s end, it has fractured into a far more heterodox grouping whose members range from leftist regimes, as in Cuba, North Korea, and Venezuela, to the conservative monarchies (Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Qatar) of the Persian Gulf.
So it should be no surprise that ideological cacophony has severely diluted the group’s founding impulse of avoiding entanglement in the disputes of the world’s superpowers.
Thus, today’s NAM finds itself as a group in search of purpose and principle.
Its sole comfort, it seems, is that it has not yet withered away.
But, despite its diminished status, the recent NAM summit in Tehran was able to claim the world’s attention.
Why hold the summit in Tehran, some members asked?
This, however, only raised heckles from those who still see the group as a means to stare down the superpowers.
Their retort – “Why not in Tehran?” – angered more than it soothed.
The dispute over the wisdom of holding the summit in Iran’s capital revived the core debate about what “non-aligned” means in the post-Cold War world.
Why keep such an anachronistic construct alive when the world is no longer frozen into two ideologically antagonistic blocs?
Furthermore, given the proliferation of strategic partnerships that claim many NAM members (India, for example, has strategic partnerships with the United States, Japan, and Brazil), are the non-aligned really still non-aligned?
To this, the movement’s defenders ask: “Why persist with NATO and expand it ever eastward, until its troops now sit almost on the banks of the Indus, and in the foothills of the Hindu Kush?”
The Cold War has ended, they argue, but that only means that the world is divided in many more ways than before.
So maintaining NAM is not some nostalgic longing for an influential past; rather, it is a means for countries to maintain as much international influence as possible in our globalized world.
But how can NAM help its members when nothing else unites them?
According to Kanwal Sibal, a former head of India’s foreign service, “India’s own experience of NAM in areas of its core national interest has been most unsatisfactory, which is enough reason to shed any undue sentimental or ideological attachment to the movement.”
Indeed, as Sibal points out, NAM did not protect India from decades of “US/Western technology-related sanctions,” even when it was the movement’s leader.
Likewise, “in the 1962 conflict with China, NAM did not back India’s position.”
The same is true, Sibal continues, of Kashmir and India’s nuclear tests.
As a result, India, he argues, owes NAM’s other members nothing, and should act only according to what is “best for its own interests.”
And yet India, like so many other countries, maintains its NAM membership, because NAM does provide an additional platform, which India needs and treats as one tool among others in its diplomatic toolkit.
Occasionally, NAM provides a useful counterweight to Western pressure – say, regarding Iran, with which India remains eager to build trade and energy relationships.
So, to be blunt, NAM survives because of America’s recent global domination and its efforts to impose its policies globally.
And, with a rising China seeking to do much the same in its immediate neighborhood (and perhaps farther afield in the future), the movement has a second reason for surviving as a check on the super-powerful.
In a recent article, Ashley Tellis of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace bemoans that, “India’s foreign-policy establishment is in the process of disinterring a long-dead grand strategy from its Cold War grave.”
He cites a recent report, “Nonalignment 2.0,” that promotes non-alignment – a “doctrine that calls upon India to refuse staunchly any strategic alliances with other actors” – in order to ensure the country’s “strategic autonomy.”
At first glance, nonalignment looks like an attractive option for still-emerging countries like India, Indonesia, Brazil, and others, because it promises freedom from the insidious grip of entangling alliances.
But, more important, it holds out the prospect that a people can chart its own path, free from external pressure – a particularly attractive proposition for countries that remain scarred by their colonial pasts.
But how can these impulses be reconciled with the strategic partnerships that India, Brazil, and others are currently forming, or with those – like the US-Saudi relationship – that have lasted for decades?
The answer is simple: International order does not adhere to a logically consistent code.
In the harsh light of realpolitik, only power and influence matter.
If NAM enhances a country’s power and influence, it will maintain its membership.
Of course, the bothersome aspect of NAM’s Tehran summit is that Iran will head the movement for the next three years.
But that could well divide NAM even further: Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi, invited to sit next to Iran’s leadership, used the occasion to denounce publicly his hosts’ policy in Syria.
India’s participation in the Tehran summit should not strain its ties with the US.
Just because the US continues to pursue its sterile policy of not speaking with Iran, India – with its own strategic, geopolitical, and energy-related interests to protect – does not need to tag along.