Saving Greece, Saving Europe
BERKELEY – Whatever one thinks about the tactics of Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras’s government in negotiations with the country’s creditors, the Greek people deserve better than what they are being offered.
Germany wants Greece to choose between economic collapse and leaving the eurozone.
Both options would mean economic disaster; the first, if not both, would be politically disastrous as well.
When I wrote in 2007 that no member state would voluntarily leave the eurozone, I emphasized the high economic costs of such a decision.
The Greek government has shown that it understands this.
Following the referendum, it agreed to what it – and the voters – had just rejected: a set of very painful and difficult conditions.
Tsipras and his new finance minister, Euclid Tsakalotos, have gone to extraordinary lengths to mollify Greece’s creditors.
But when I concluded that no country would leave the eurozone, I failed to imagine that Germany would force another member out.
This, clearly, would be the effect of the politically intolerable and economically perverse conditions tabled by Germany’s finance ministry.
German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble’s idea of a temporary “time out” from the euro is ludicrous.
Given Greece’s collapsing economy and growing humanitarian crisis, the government will have no choice, absent an agreement, but to print money to fund basic social services.
It is inconceivable that a country in such deep distress could meet the conditions for euro adoption – inflation within 2% of the eurozone average and a stable exchange rate for two years – between now and the end of the decade.
If Grexit occurs, it will not be a holiday; it will be a retirement.
Early Monday morning, European leaders agreed to remove the reference to this “time out” from the announcement of the latest bailout deal.
But this door, having been opened, will not now be easily closed.
The Eurosystem has been rendered more fragile and subject to destabilization.
Other European finance ministers will have to answer for agreeing to forward to their leaders a provisional draft containing Schäuble’s destructive language.
Economically, the new program is perverse, because it will plunge Greece deeper into depression.
It envisages raising additional taxes, cutting pensions further, and implementing automatic spending cuts if fiscal targets are missed.
But it provides no basis for recovery or growth.
The Greek economy is already in free-fall, and structural reforms alone will not reverse the downward spiral.
The agreement continues to require primary budget surpluses (net of interest payments), rising to 3.5% of GDP by 2018, which will worsen Greece’s slump.
Re-profiling the country’s debt, which is implicitly part of the agreement, will do nothing to ameliorate this, given that interest payments already are minimal through the end of the decade.
As the depression deepens, the deficit targets will be missed, triggering further spending cuts and accelerating the economy’s contraction.
Eventually, the agreement will trigger Grexit, either because the creditors withdraw their support after fiscal targets are missed, or because the Greek people rebel.
Triggering that exit is transparently Germany’s intent.
Finally, the privatization fund at the center of the new program will do nothing to encourage structural reform.
Yes, Greece needs to privatize inefficient public enterprises.
But the Greek government is being asked to privatize with a gun held to its head.
Privatization at fire-sale prices, with most of the proceeds used to pay down debt, will not put Greek parliamentarians or the public in a mood to press ahead enthusiastically with structural reform.
Greece deserves better.
It deserves a program that respects its sovereignty and allows the government to establish its credibility over time.
It deserves a program capable of stabilizing its economy rather than bleeding it to death.
And it deserves support from the ECB to enable it to remain a eurozone member.
Europe deserves better, too.
Other European countries should not in good conscience accede to this politically destructive, economically perverse program.
They should remind themselves that Greece had plenty of help from its European partners in getting to this point.
They must continue to push for a better deal.
These partners should not allow the European project to be sacrificed on the altar of German public opinion or German leaders’ insistence on “rules.”
If Germany’s government refuses to see the light, the others should find a way forward without it.
Franco-German solidarity would be irreparably damaged, but Franco-German solidarity is worth nothing if the best it can produce is this agreement.
Last but not least, the German public deserve better.
Germans deserve a leader who stands firm in the face of extremism, rather than encouraging it, whether at home or abroad.
They deserve a Europe that can play a greater role in global affairs.
Above all, given Germany’s stunning political and economic achievements since World War II, they deserve their fellow Europeans’ admiration and respect, not renewed resentment and suspicion.
A Way Out for Greece
QUITO – The Greek crisis is a tragedy for the country and a danger for the world economy.
Germany is demanding that Greece continue to service its debts in full, even though Greece is clearly broke and the International Monetary Fund has noted the need for debt relief.
The collision of reality (Greece’s insolvency) with politics (Germany’s demands) was bound to create a disaster.
And, indeed, it has: the shocking collapse this week of the Greek banking system.
Yet there still is a way out of this mess.
Greece’s debt should be cut sharply, and the country should remain within the eurozone.
In negotiations with its creditors this spring, Greece recognized this, insisting that its debt be reduced.
Germany refused.
Though the United States and the IMF privately sided with Greece, Germany prevailed, as creditors usually do.
Yet creditors sometimes prevail to their own detriment; by pushing the debtor to the breaking point, they end up bringing about a complete default.
Germany’s mistake this past week was to push the Greek economy – already in conditions rivaling those of the Great Depression – into a complete financial collapse.
German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble has a clear negotiating strategy, aimed at getting Greece to agree to leave the eurozone.
Unfortunately for him, Greece does not want to exit, and it cannot be forced to do so under the treaties governing the European Union.
What Greece wants is to remain in the eurozone, with a lower debt burden – a position that is both economically astute and protected by treaty.
Indeed, a euro exit would be remarkably costly for Greece, and would almost certainly create political and social chaos – and perhaps even hyperinflation – in the heart of Europe.
The value of Greek residents’ savings would be slashed, as euros were suddenly converted into New Drachmas.
The middle class would be eviscerated.
And the currency conversion would not save the country one cent with regard to its external debt, which would, of course, remain denominated in euros.
Still, Greece’s debt burden is unsustainable.
This week, Greece defaulted on its payments to the IMF, rightly choosing pensions over debt service.
The country’s creditors should now negotiate a consensual debt reduction through some combination of lower (and fixed) interest rates, reduced face value of debt, and very long maturities.
There are plenty of precedents for such a course.
Sovereign debts have been restructured hundreds, perhaps thousands, of times – including for Germany.
In fact, hardline demands by the country’s US government creditors after World War I contributed to deep financial instability in Germany and other parts of Europe, and indirectly to the rise of Adolf Hitler in 1933.
After World War II, however, Germany was the recipient of vastly wiser concessions by the US government, culminating in consensual debt relief in 1953, an action that greatly benefitted Germany and the world.
Yet Germany has failed to learn the lessons of its own history.
I propose a four-step path out of the Greek crisis.
First, I recommend that the Greek people give a resounding “No” to the creditors in the referendum on their demands this weekend.
Second, Greece should continue to withhold service on its external debts to official creditors in advance of a consensual debt restructuring later this year.
Given its great depression, Greece should use its savings to pay pensioners, provide food relief, make crucial infrastructure repairs, and direct liquidity toward the banking system.
Third, Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras must use his persuasive powers to convince the public, in the style of US President Franklin D. Roosevelt, that the only thing they have to fear is fear itself.
Specifically, the government should make clear to all Greeks that their euro deposits are safe; that the country will remain within the eurozone (despite the false claims by some members of the Eurogroup that a no vote means a Greek exit); and that its banks will reopen immediately after the referendum.
Finally, Greece and Germany need to come to a rapprochement soon after the referendum and agree to a package of economic reforms and debt relief.
No country – including Greece – should expect to be offered debt relief on a silver platter; relief must be earned and justified by real reforms that restore growth, to the benefit of both debtor and creditor.
And yet, a corpse cannot carry out reforms.
That is why debt relief and reforms must be offered together, not reforms “first” with some vague promises that debt relief will come in some unspecified amount at some unspecified time in the future (as some in Europe have said to Greece).
To be sure, in the Greek debacle, both sides have made countless mistakes, misjudgments, and misdeeds over the last decade, and even before.
A country does not reach Greece’s parlous state without a generation of egregious mismanagement.
But nor does a country go bankrupt without serious mistakes by its creditors – first in lending too much money, and then in demanding excessive repayments to the point of the debtor’s collapse.
With both sides at fault, it is important for them not to lose the future by squabbling endlessly over the past.
Easing Greece’s debt burden while keeping the country within the eurozone is the correct and achievable path out of the crisis, and it can be accomplished easily through a mutual accord between Germany and Greece, to which the rest of Europe will subscribe.
The result would be a win not only for those countries, but also for the world economy.
A New Deal for Greece
ATHENS – Three months of negotiations between the Greek government and our European and international partners have brought about much convergence on the steps needed to overcome years of economic crisis and to bring about sustained recovery in Greece.
But they have not yet produced a deal.
Why?
What steps are needed to produce a viable, mutually agreed reform agenda?
We and our partners already agree on much.
Greece’s tax system needs to be revamped, and the revenue authorities must be freed from political and corporate influence.
The pension system is ailing.
The economy’s credit circuits are broken.
The labor market has been devastated by the crisis and is deeply segmented, with productivity growth stalled.
Public administration is in urgent need of modernization, and public resources must be used more efficiently.
Overwhelming obstacles block the formation of new companies.
Competition in product markets is far too circumscribed.
And inequality has reached outrageous levels, preventing society from uniting behind essential reforms.
This consensus aside, agreement on a new development model for Greece requires overcoming two hurdles.
First, we must concur on how to approach Greece’s fiscal consolidation.
Second, we need a comprehensive, commonly agreed reform agenda that will underpin that consolidation path and inspire the confidence of Greek society.
Beginning with fiscal consolidation, the issue at hand concerns the method.
The “troika” institutions (the European Commission, the European Central Bank, and the International Monetary Fund) have, over the years, relied on a process of backward induction: They set a date (say, the year 2020) and a target for the ratio of nominal debt to national income (say, 120%) that must be achieved before money markets are deemed ready to lend to Greece at reasonable rates.
Then, under arbitrary assumptions regarding growth rates, inflation, privatization receipts, and so forth, they compute what primary surpluses are necessary in every year, working backward to the present.
The result of this method, in our government’s opinion, is an “austerity trap.”
When fiscal consolidation turns on a predetermined debt ratio to be achieved at a predetermined point in the future, the primary surpluses needed to hit those targets are such that the effect on the private sector undermines the assumed growth rates and thus derails the planned fiscal path.
Indeed, this is precisely why previous fiscal-consolidation plans for Greece missed their targets so spectacularly.
Our government’s position is that backward induction should be ditched.
Instead, we should map out a forward-looking plan based on reasonable assumptions about the primary surpluses consistent with the rates of output growth, net investment, and export expansion that can stabilize Greece’s economy and debt ratio.
If this means that the debt-to-GDP ratio will be higher than 120% in 2020, we devise smart ways to rationalize, re-profile, or restructure the debt – keeping in mind the aim of maximizing the effective present value that will be returned to Greece’s creditors.
Besides convincing the troika that our debt sustainability analysis should avoid the austerity trap, we must overcome the second hurdle: the “reform trap.”
The previous reform program, which our partners are so adamant should not be “rolled back” by our government, was founded on internal devaluation, wage and pension cuts, loss of labor protections, and price-maximizing privatization of public assets.
Our partners believe that, given time, this agenda will work.
If wages fall further, employment will rise.
The way to cure an ailing pension system is to cut pensions.
And privatizations should aim at higher sale prices to pay off debt that many (privately) agree is unsustainable.
By contrast, our government believes that this program has failed, leaving the population weary of reform.
The best evidence of this failure is that, despite a huge drop in wages and costs, export growth has been flat (the elimination of the current-account deficit being due exclusively to the collapse of imports).
Additional wage cuts will not help export-oriented companies, which are mired in a credit crunch.
And further cuts in pensions will not address the true causes of the pension system’s troubles (low employment and vast undeclared labor).
Such measures will merely cause further damage to Greece’s already-stressed social fabric, rendering it incapable of providing the support that our reform agenda desperately needs.
The current disagreements with our partners are not unbridgeable.
Our government is eager to rationalize the pension system (for example, by limiting early retirement), proceed with partial privatization of public assets, address the non-performing loans that are clogging the economy’s credit circuits, create a fully independent tax commission, and boost entrepreneurship.
The differences that remain concern how we understand the relationships between the various reforms and the macro environment.
None of this means that common ground cannot be achieved immediately.
The Greek government wants a fiscal-consolidation path that makes sense, and we want reforms that all sides believe are important.
Our task is to convince our partners that our undertakings are strategic, rather than tactical, and that our logic is sound.
Their task is to let go of an approach that has failed.
A New Deal for Debt Overhangs?
CAMBRIDGE – The International Monetary Fund’s acknowledgement that Greece’s debt is unsustainable could prove to be a watershed moment for the global financial system.
Clearly, heterodox policies to deal with high debt burdens need to be taken more seriously, even in some advanced countries.
Ever since the onset of the Greek crisis, there have been basically three schools of thought.
First, there is the view of the so-called troika (the European Commission, the European Central Bank, and the IMF), which holds that the eurozone’s debt-distressed periphery (Greece, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain) requires strong policy discipline to prevent a short-term liquidity crisis from morphing into a long-term insolvency problem.
The orthodox policy prescription was to extend conventional bridge loans to these countries, thereby giving them time to fix their budget problems and undertake structural reforms aimed at enhancing their long-term growth potential.
This approach has “worked” in Spain, Ireland, and Portugal, but at the cost of epic recessions. Moreover, there is a high risk of relapse in the event of a significant downturn in the global economy.
The troika policy has, however, failed to stabilize, much less revive, Greece’s economy.
A second school of thought also portrays the crisis as a pure liquidity problem, but views long-term insolvency as an outside risk at worst.
The problem is not that the debt of countries on the eurozone’s periphery is too high, but that it has not been allowed to rise nearly high enough.
This anti-austerity camp believes that even when private markets totally lost confidence in Europe’s periphery, northern Europe could easily have solved the problem by co-signing periphery debt, perhaps under the umbrella of Eurobonds backed ultimately by all (especially German) eurozone taxpayers.
The periphery countries should then have been permitted not only to roll over their debt, but also to engage in full-on countercyclical fiscal policy for as long as their national governments deemed necessary.
In other words, for “anti-austerians,” the eurozone suffered a crisis of competence, not a crisis of confidence.
Never mind that the eurozone has no centralized fiscal authority and only an incomplete banking union.
Never mind moral-hazard problems or insolvency.
And never mind growth-enhancing structural reforms.
All of the debtors will be good for the money in the future, even if they have not always been reliable in the past.
In any case, faster GDP growth will pay for everything, thanks to high fiscal multipliers.
Europe passed up a free lunch.
This is a fully coherent viewpoint, but naive in its unqualified confidence (for example, in the polemical writings of the Nobel laureate economist Paul Krugman).
As a result, the anti-austerian view masks strong assumptions and risks.
In fact, piling loans atop already-high debt burdens in the eurozone’s periphery entailed a significant gamble, particularly as the crisis erupted.
Political corruption, exemplified by the revolving door between Spain’s government and financial sector, was endemic.
Dual labor markets and product-market monopolies still hobble growth, and oligarchs have disproportionate power to protect their interests.
In reality, Germany could not have underwritten all of the European periphery’s debt without risking its own solvency and creditworthiness, particularly in the absence of a functioning system of eurozone-wide checks and balances.
Expansive and open-ended guarantees might have worked, but if they didn’t, the economic rot from the periphery could have spread to the center.
A third point of view is that, given the massive financial crisis, Europe’s debt problem should have been diagnosed as an insolvency problem from the start, and treated with debt restructuring and forgiveness, aided by moderately elevated inflation and structural reform.
This has been my viewpoint since the crisis began.
In Ireland and Spain, private bondholders, not Irish and Spanish taxpayers, should have taken the hit from bank failures.
In Greece, there should have been faster and larger debt write-downs.
Of course, national governments would have had to use taxpayer funds to recapitalize northern European banks – especially in France and Germany – that lent too much to the periphery.
And transfers would have been needed to recapitalize the periphery banks.
But at least then the public would have understood the reality of the situation, while restructured and recapitalized banks would have been in a position to start lending again.
Unfortunately, too many policymakers in advanced economies allowed themselves to believe that such heterodox policies are only for emerging markets.
In fact, advanced countries have resorted to heterodox policies to reduce debt overhangs on many occasions.
Debt restructuring would have given Europe the reset it needed.
Yes, there would have been risks, as IMF chief economist Olivier Blanchard has pointed out, but running those risks would have been well worth it.
So what is the way forward?
Deeper European integration, stricter equity requirements for banks, and deeper but homegrown structural reforms are certainly key elements of any solution.
Further aid to the European periphery is still badly needed.
But, beyond that, Europe’s experience ought to spur a full rethink of the global system for administering sovereign bankruptcies.
That could mean bringing back older IMF proposals for a sovereign bankruptcy mechanism, or finding ways to institutionalize the Fund’s recent stance on Greek debt.
There is no free lunch in Europe, and there never was; but there are much better ways to deal with unsustainable debt.
The Threat of Greek Debt Relief
BERLIN – With Greece’s economic crisis still raging, prominent voices, ranging from Nobel laureate economists like Paul Krugman to officials like US Secretary of the Treasury Jack Lew, are calling for more lenient bailout terms and debt relief.
Even the International Monetary Fund – which, along with other European lenders, has provided Greece with emergency financing – recently joined that call.
But could such an approach really be the proverbial silver bullet for Greece’s crisis?
The short answer is no.
While Greece’s public debt is undeniably high, and evidence abounds that high debt can hold back economic growth, the country faces even stronger drags on growth, including structural weaknesses and political brinkmanship, that must be addressed first.
In fact, Greece will likely depend on concessional funding from official sources in the years ahead – funding that is conditional on reforms, not debt ratios.
Greece’s nominal debt stock will matter only once the country re-enters the debt markets and becomes subject to market, not concessional, borrowing terms.
In the meantime, Greece must implement the structural reforms needed to restore the country’s long-term growth prospects and thus to strengthen its capacity to repay its creditors without a large nominal debt reduction.
But there is another critical reason why debt relief is not the answer, and it lies in the political architecture of the European Monetary Union.
Because the eurozone lacks a strong central governing body, crisis policies emerge from a political process in which each of the 19 member states has veto power.
For such a complex system to work, eurozone policymakers must be able to trust one another to behave in a particular way – and that requires a common framework of rules and standards.
A restructuring of Greece’s official debt, despite offering short-term benefits, would weaken that framework in the long run by setting a precedent for exceptions, with other eurozone countries, sooner or later, requesting the same concession.
In 2013, the extension of Greece’s loan maturities prompted Ireland and Portugal to demand – and receive – comparable extensions, despite their less obvious need.
Instead of offering concessions, which could create long-term instability in the eurozone, Europe’s leaders must remain committed to creating strong incentives for all member states to maintain prudent fiscal policies capable of reducing public-debt ratios and restoring fiscal buffers against asymmetric shocks to the currency union.
Only then will the eurozone have a chance of upholding the Lisbon Treaty’s “no bailout” clause.
Greece may account for less than 2% of eurozone GDP, but the pursuit of shortsighted ad hoc solutions to its problems may set precedents that could bring down the entire monetary union.
To prevent such an outcome, it is critical that any solution to the Greek crisis reinforces, rather than undermines, the eurozone’s cohesion.
It is true that Greece has had to undergo painful adjustments to address its deep structural weaknesses, unsustainable public finances, and lack of price competitiveness – adjustments that led to a drop in Greek output.
But high unemployment and a lack of investment cannot be blamed on the medicine prescribed; they are symptoms of the country’s failure to reform its public administration and to enhance the flexibility of its economy.
The international debate about how much austerity is appropriate to balance the interests of Greece and its creditors has distracted policymakers for too long.
It is time to focus on the real imperative: designing and implementing vital structural reforms, at the national and European levels.
To guide this process, the German Council of Economic Experts, which I chair, has developed a set of reforms – called “Maastricht 2.0” – that would reinforce the rules-based framework that is so essential to the eurozone’s long-term success.
For example, the banking union needs to be strengthened through an enhanced resolution regime and an integrated financial supervisor, and a sovereign insolvency mechanism should be introduced.
Underpinning the proposed reforms is the so-called “principle of unity of liability and control,” which demands that both the power to make decisions and liability for their consequences are kept at the same political level, be it national or supranational.
In other words, if countries want to make their own fiscal decisions independent of their eurozone partners, they cannot expect those partners to step in and save them later.
To be sure, in recent years, the European institutional framework has undergone major reforms that reflect the principles of “Maastricht 2.0,” such as the need to emphasize national responsibility for public finances and international competitiveness.
But the reform process remains far from complete.
There is no denying that short-term measures to address acute problems – such as debt relief for Greece – threaten the eurozone’s long-term stability.
If the European Monetary Union is to survive and ultimately thrive, its leaders must not be tempted by facile solutions.
The Lethal Deferral of Greek Debt Restructuring
ATHENS – The point of restructuring debt is to reduce the volume of new loans needed to salvage an insolvent entity.
Creditors offer debt relief to get more value back and to extend as little new finance to the insolvent entity as possible.
Remarkably, Greece’s creditors seem unable to appreciate this sound financial principle.
Where Greek debt is concerned, a clear pattern has emerged over the past five years. It remains unbroken to this day.
In 2010, Europe and the International Monetary Fund extended loans to the insolvent Greek state equal to 44% of the country’s GDP.
The very mention of debt restructuring was considered inadmissible and a cause for ridiculing those of us who dared suggest its inevitability.
In 2012, as the debt-to-GDP ratio skyrocketed, Greece’s private creditors were given a significant 34% haircut.
At the same time, however, new loans worth 63% of GDP were added to Greece’s national debt.
A few months later, in November, the Eurogroup (comprising eurozone members’ finance ministers) indicated that debt relief would be finalized by December 2014, once the 2012 program was “successfully” completed and the Greek government’s budget had attained a primary surplus (which excludes interest payments).
In 2015, however, with the primary surplus achieved, Greece’s creditors refused even to discuss debt relief.
For five months, negotiations remained at an impasse, culminating in the July 5 referendum in Greece, in which voters overwhelmingly rejected further austerity, and the Greek government’s subsequent surrender, formalized in the July 12 Euro Summit agreement.
That agreement, which is now the blueprint for Greece’s relationship with the eurozone, perpetuates the five-year-long pattern of placing debt restructuring at the end of a sorry sequence of fiscal tightening, economic contraction, and program failure.
Indeed, the sequence of the new “bailout” envisaged in the July 12 agreement predictably begins with the adoption – before the end of the month – of harsh tax measures and medium-term fiscal targets equivalent to another bout of stringent austerity.
Then comes a mid-summer negotiation of another large loan, equivalent to 48% of GDP (the debt-to-GDP ratio is already above 180%).
Finally, in November, at the earliest, and after the first review of the new program is completed, “the Eurogroup stands ready to consider, if necessary, possible additional measures… aiming at ensuring that gross financing needs remain at a sustainable level.”
During the negotiations to which I was a party, from January 25 to July 5, I repeatedly suggested to our creditors a series of smart debt swaps.
The aim was to minimize the amount of new funding required from the European Stability Mechanism and the IMF to refinance Greek debt, and to ensure that Greece would become eligible within 2015 for the European Central Bank’s asset-purchase program (quantitative easing), effectively restoring Greece’s access to capital markets.
We estimated that no more than €30 billion ($33 billion, or 17% of GDP) of new, ESM-sourced financing would be required, none of which would be needed for the Greek state’s primary budget.
Our proposals were not rejected.
Although we had it on good authority that they were technically rigorous and legally sound, they simply were never discussed.
The political will of the Eurogroup was to ignore our proposals, let the negotiations fail, impose an indefinite bank holiday, and force the Greek government to acquiesce on everything – including a massive new loan that is almost triple the size we had proposed.
Once again, Greece’s creditors put the cart before the horse, by insisting that the new loan be agreed before any discussion of debt relief.
As a result, the new loan deemed necessary grew inexorably, as in 2010 and 2012.
Unsustainable debt is, sooner or later, written down.
But the precise timing and nature of that write-down makes an enormous difference for a country’s economic prospects.
And Greece is in the throes of a humanitarian crisis today because the inevitable restructuring of its debt has been used as an excuse for postponing that restructuring ad infinitum.
As a high-ranking European Commission official once asked me: “Your debt will be cut come hell or high water, so why are you expending precious political capital to insist that we deliver the restructuring now?”
The answer ought to have been obvious.
An ex ante debt restructuring that reduces the size of any new loans and renders the debt sustainable before any reforms are implemented stands a good chance of crowding in investment, stabilizing incomes, and setting the stage for recovery.
In sharp contrast, a debt write-down like Greece’s in 2012, which resulted from a program’s failure, only contributes to maintaining the downward spiral.
Why do Greece’s creditors refuse to move on debt restructuring before any new loans are negotiated?
And why do they prefer a much larger new loan package than necessary?
The answers to these questions cannot be found by discussing sound finance, public or private, for they reside firmly in the realm of power politics.
Debt is creditor power; and, as Greece has learned the hard way, unsustainable debt turns the creditor into Leviathan.
Life under it is becoming nasty, brutish and, for many of my compatriots, short.
Greece’s Two Currencies
ATHENS – Imagine a depositor in the US state of Arizona being permitted to withdraw only small amounts of cash weekly and facing restrictions on how much money he or she could wire to a bank account in California.
Such capital controls, if they ever came about, would spell the end of the dollar as a single currency, because such constraints are utterly incompatible with a monetary union.
Greece today (and Cyprus before it) offers a case study of how capital controls bifurcate a currency and distort business incentives.
The process is straightforward.
Once euro deposits are imprisoned within a national banking system, the currency essentially splits in two: bank euros (BE) and paper, or free, euros (FE).
Suddenly, an informal exchange rate between the two currencies emerges.
Consider a Greek depositor keen to convert a large sum of BE into FE (say, to pay for medical expenses abroad, or to repay a company debt to a non-Greek entity).
Assuming such depositors find FE holders willing to purchase their BE, a substantial BE-FE exchange rate emerges, varying with the size of the transaction, BE holders’ relative impatience, and the expected duration of capital controls.
On August 18, 2015, a few weeks after pulling the plug from Greece’s banks (thus making capital controls inevitable), the European Central Bank and its Greek branch, the Bank of Greece, actually formalized a dual-currency currency regime.
A government decree stated that “Transfer of the early, partial, or total prepayment of a loan in a credit institution is prohibited, excluding repayment by cash or remittance from abroad.”
The eurozone authorities thus permitted Greek banks to deny their customers the right to repay loans or mortgages in BE, thereby boosting the effective BE-FE exchange rate.
And, by continuing to allow payments of tax arrears to be made in BE, while prescribing FE as a separate, harder currency uniquely able to extinguish commercial bank debt, Europe’s authorities acknowledged that Greece now has two euros.
The real effects of the dual-currency regime on Greece’s economy and society can be gleaned only from the pernicious interaction between the capital controls and the “reforms” (essentially tax hikes, pension reductions, and other contractionary measures) imposed on the country by the eurozone authorities.
Consider the following beguiling example.
Greece’s companies fall roughly into two categories.
In one category are a large number of small firms asphyxiating under the tax office’s demand that they pay in advance, and immediately, 100% of next year’s corporate tax (as estimated by the tax authorities).
The second group comprises listed companies whose depressed turnover jeopardizes their already diminished share value and their standing with banks, suppliers, and potential customers (all of which are reluctant to sign long-term contracts with an underperforming company).
The coexistence, in the same depressed economy, of these two types of businesses gives rise to unexpected opportunities for shadowy trades without which countless businesses might close their doors permanently.
One widespread practice involves two such firms, say, Micro (a small family firm facing a large advance tax payment) and Macro (a publicly traded limited liability company that needs to demonstrate higher turnover than it has).
Macro agrees to issue invoices for (non-existent) goods or services rendered to Micro, up to, say, €20,000 ($22,000).
Micro agrees to pay €24,600 into Macro’s bank account (the price plus 23% value-added tax) on the understanding that Macro will reimburse the €20,000 to Micro.
This way, at a cost of €4,600, Micro reduces its taxable revenue by €24,600, while Macro boosts its turnover figure by €20,000.
Alas, due to capital controls, Macro cannot reimburse Micro in FE, nor can it wire €20,000 to Micro’s BE bank account (lest they be found out by the authorities).
So, to seal the deal, Micro and Macro approach a cash-rich vendor.
This is usually a gas-station owner who is flush with cash at the end of each day and who, for security reasons and in order to pay for his fuel supplies, is obliged to deposit his cash daily at his bank, turning valuable FEs into less valuable BEs.
The mutually beneficial deal is completed when Macro wires €20,000 in BE to the gas-station owner, who then hands over a smaller sum of FE (cash) to Micro’s owner, pocketing the difference.
The fact that this informal deal benefits all sides exposes the terrible inefficiency of current fiscal policy (namely, punitive business taxes) and how capital controls magnify it.
The state collects additional VAT from Micro (at a loss of corporate taxes that Micro cannot pay anyway); Macro enjoys the benefits of seemingly higher turnover; and the gas-station owner reduces his losses from converting FE into BE.
The downside is that economic activity is overstated and, more important, that reform becomes even harder as entrepreneurs internalize the necessity to find new, creative ways of bending the rules.
The sole purpose of the capital controls imposed on Greece last summer was to force the country’s rebellious government to capitulate to the eurozone’s failed policies.
But an unintended consequence was the formalization of two parallel (euro-denominated) currencies.
Combined with the punitive taxation caused by Europe’s refusal to recognize the unsustainability of Greek public debt, the dual-currency regime produces unforeseen incentives for informal transactions in a country that desperately needs to defeat informality.
The reality of Greece’s two currencies is the most vivid demonstration yet of the fragmentation of Europe’s monetary “union.”
In comparison, Arizona has never looked so good.
The Endgame in Greece
PARIS – After months of wrangling, the showdown between Greece and its European creditors has come down to a standoff over pensions and taxes.
Greece is refusing to acquiesce to demands by its creditors that it cut payments to the elderly and raise the value-added tax on their medicine and electricity.
Europe’s demands – ostensibly aimed at ensuring that Greece can service its foreign debt – are petulant, naive, and fundamentally self-destructive.
In rejecting them, the Greeks are not playing games; they are trying to stay alive.
Whatever one might say about Greece’s past economic policies, its uncompetitive economy, its decision to join the eurozone, or the errors that European banks made when they provided its government with excessive credit, the country’s economic plight is stark.
Unemployment stands at 25%.
Youth unemployment is at 50%.
Greece’s GDP, moreover, has shrunk by 25% since the start of the crisis in 2009.
Its government is insolvent.
Many of its citizens are hungry.
Conditions in Greece today are reminiscent of those in Germany in 1933.
Of course, the European Union need not fear the rise of a Greek Hitler, not only because it could easily crush such a regime, but also – and more important – because Greece’s democracy has proved impressively mature throughout the crisis.
But there is something that the EU should fear: destitution within its borders and the pernicious consequences for the continent’s politics and society.
Unfortunately, the continent remains split along tribal lines.
Germans, Finns, Slovaks, and Dutch – among others – have no time for the suffering of Greeks.
Their political leaders tend to their own, not to Europe in any true sense.
Relief for Greece is an especially fraught issue in countries where far-right parties are on the rise or center-right governments face popular left-wing opposition.
To be sure, European politicians are not blind to what is happening in Greece.
Nor have they been completely passive.
At the beginning of the crisis, Greece’s European creditors eschewed debt relief and charged punitive interest rates on bailout funds.
But, as Greeks’ suffering intensified, policymakers pressed private-sector banks and other bondholders to write off most of their claims.
At each stage of the crisis, they have done only what they believed their national politics would bear – no more.
In particular, Europe’s politicians are balking at steps that would implicate taxpayers directly.
The Greek government has asked Europe to swap existing debts with new debts to lock in low interest rates and long maturities.
It has also requested that interest payments be linked to economic growth.
(It has notably not asked for cuts in the face value of its debt).
But debt relief of this sort vis-à-vis European governments or the European Central Bank has been kept off the table.
Such measures would likely require parliamentary votes in countries across the eurozone, where many governments would face intense public opposition – no matter how obvious the need.
Rather than confront the political obstacles, Europe’s leaders are hiding behind a mountain of pious, nonsensical rhetoric.
Some insist that Greece finish its payment program, regardless of the humanitarian and economic consequences – not to mention the failure of all previous Greek governments to meet its terms.
Others pretend to worry about the moral-hazard implications of debt relief, despite the fact that the country’s private-sector debt has already been written off at EU insistence, and that there are dozens, if not hundreds, of precedents for restructuring the debts of insolvent sovereigns.
Almost a century ago, at World War I’s end, John Maynard Keynes offered a warning that holds great relevance today.
Then, as now, creditor countries (mainly the US) were demanding that deeply indebted countries make good on their debts.
Keynes knew that a tragedy was in the making.
“Will the discontented peoples of Europe be willing for a generation to come so to order their lives that an appreciable part of their daily produce may be available to meet a foreign payment?” he asked in The Economic Consequences of the Peace.
“In short, I do not believe that any of these tributes will continue to be paid, at the best, for more than a few years.”
Several European countries now seem content to force Greece into an outright default and provoke its exit from the euro.
They believe that the fallout can be contained without panic or contagion.
That is typical wishful thinking among politicians.
Indeed, it is the type of heedlessness that led US Treasury Secretary Hank Paulson to let Lehman Brothers fail in September 2008, ostensibly to teach the market a “lesson.”
Some lesson; we are still digging out from Paulson’s monumental mistake.
Similarly, Keynes watched in horror as economic policymakers blundered repeatedly in the years following WWI, through the upheavals of the 1920s, and into the Great Depression of the 1930s.
In 1925, Keynes criticized the insouciance of those “who sit in the top tier of the machine.”
He argued “that they are immensely rash in their regardlessness, in their vague optimism and comfortable belief that nothing really serious ever happens.
Nine times out of ten, nothing really serious does happen – merely a little distress to individuals or to groups.
But we run a risk of the tenth time…”
Today, Greece’s European creditors seem ready to abandon their solemn pledges on the irrevocability of the euro in order to insist on collecting some crumbs from the country’s pensioners.
Should they press their demands, forcing Greece to exit, the world will never again trust the euro’s longevity.
At a minimum, the eurozone’s weaker members will undergo increased market pressures.
In the worst case, they will be hit by a new vicious circle of panic and bank runs, also derailing the incipient European recovery.
With Russia testing Europe’s resolve to the east, the timing of Europe’s gamble could not be worse.
The Greek government is right to have drawn the line.
It has a responsibility to its citizens.
The real choice, after all, lies not with Greece, but with Europe.
A Greek Morality Tale
NEW YORK – When the euro crisis began a half-decade ago, Keynesian economists predicted that the austerity that was being imposed on Greece and the other crisis countries would fail.
It would stifle growth and increase unemployment – and even fail to decrease the debt-to-GDP ratio.
Others – in the European Commission, the European Central Bank, and a few universities – talked of expansionary contractions.
But even the International Monetary Fund argued that contractions, such as cutbacks in government spending, were just that – contractionary.
We hardly needed another test.
Austerity had failed repeatedly, from its early use under US President Herbert Hoover, which turned the stock-market crash into the Great Depression, to the IMF “programs” imposed on East Asia and Latin America in recent decades.
And yet when Greece got into trouble, it was tried again.
Greece largely succeeded in following the dictate set by the “troika” (the European Commission the ECB, and the IMF): it converted a primary budget deficit into a primary surplus.
But the contraction in government spending has been predictably devastating: 25% unemployment, a 22% fall in GDP since 2009, and a 35% increase in the debt-to-GDP ratio.
And now, with the anti-austerity Syriza party’s overwhelming election victory, Greek voters have declared that they have had enough.
So, what is to be done?
First, let us be clear: Greece could be blamed for its troubles if it were the only country where the troika’s medicine failed miserably.
But Spain had a surplus and a low debt ratio before the crisis, and it, too, is in depression.
What is needed is not structural reform within Greece and Spain so much as structural reform of the eurozone’s design and a fundamental rethinking of the policy frameworks that have resulted in the monetary union’s spectacularly bad performance.
Greece has also once again reminded us of how badly the world needs a debt-restructuring framework.
Excessive debt caused not only the 2008 crisis, but also the East Asia crisis in the 1990s and the Latin American crisis in the 1980s.
It continues to cause untold suffering in the US, where millions of homeowners have lost their homes, and is now threatening millions more in Poland and elsewhere who took out loans in Swiss francs.
Given the amount of distress brought about by excessive debt, one might well ask why individuals and countries have repeatedly put themselves into this situation.
After all, such debts are contracts – that is, voluntary agreements – so creditors are just as responsible for them as debtors.
In fact, creditors arguably are more responsible: typically, they are sophisticated financial institutions, whereas borrowers frequently are far less attuned to market vicissitudes and the risks associated with different contractual arrangements.
Indeed, we know that US banks actually preyed on their borrowers, taking advantage of their lack of financial sophistication.
Every (advanced) country has realized that making capitalism work requires giving individuals a fresh start.
The debtors’ prisons of the nineteenth century were a failure – inhumane and not exactly helping to ensure repayment.
What did help was to provide better incentives for good lending, by making creditors more responsible for the consequences of their decisions.
At the international level, we have not yet created an orderly process for giving countries a fresh start.
Since even before the 2008 crisis, the United Nations, with the support of almost all of the developing and emerging countries, has been seeking to create such a framework.
But the US has been adamantly opposed; perhaps it wants to reinstitute debtor prisons for over indebted countries’ officials (if so, space may be opening up at Guantánamo Bay).
The idea of bringing back debtors’ prisons may seem far-fetched, but it resonates with current talk of moral hazard and accountability.
There is a fear that if Greece is allowed to restructure its debt, it will simply get itself into trouble again, as will others.
This is sheer nonsense.
Does anyone in their right mind think that any country would willingly put itself through what Greece has gone through, just to get a free ride from its creditors?
If there is a moral hazard, it is on the part of the lenders – especially in the private sector – who have been bailed out repeatedly.
If Europe has allowed these debts to move from the private sector to the public sector – a well-established pattern over the past half-century – it is Europe, not Greece, that should bear the consequences.
Indeed, Greece’s current plight, including the massive run-up in the debt ratio,&nbsp;is largely the fault of the misguided troika programs foisted on it.
So it is not debt restructuring, but its absence, that is “immoral.”
There is nothing particularly special about the dilemmas that Greece faces today; many&nbsp;countries have been in the same position.
What makes Greece’s problems more difficult to address is the structure of the eurozone: monetary union implies that member states cannot devalue their way out of trouble, yet the modicum of European solidarity that must accompany this loss of policy flexibility simply is not there.
Seventy years ago, at the end of World War&nbsp;II, the Allies recognized that Germany must be given a fresh start.
They understood that Hitler’s rise had much to do with the unemployment (not the inflation) that resulted from imposing more debt on Germany at the end of World War I. The Allies did not take into account the foolishness with which the debts had been accumulated or talk about the costs that Germany had imposed on others.
Instead, they not only forgave the debts; they actually provided aid, and the Allied troops stationed in Germany provided a further fiscal stimulus.
When companies go bankrupt, a debt-equity swap is a fair and efficient solution.
The analogous approach for Greece is to convert its current bonds into GDP-linked bonds.
If Greece does well, its creditors will receive more of their money; if it does not, they will get less.
Both sides would then have a powerful incentive to pursue pro-growth policies.
Seldom do democratic elections give as clear a message as that in Greece.
If Europe says no to Greek voters’ demand for a change of course, it is saying that democracy is of no importance, at least when it comes to economics.
Why not just shut down democracy, as Newfoundland effectively did when it entered into receivership before World War II?
One hopes that those who understand the economics of debt and austerity, and who believe in democracy and humane values, will prevail.
Whether they will remains to be seen.
The Economic Consequences of Greece
TILTON – The first sentence of the 1957 Treaty of Rome – the founding document of what would eventually become the European Union – calls for “an ever-closer union among the peoples of Europe."
Recently, however, that ideal has come under threat, undermined by its own political elite, which adopted a common currency while entirely neglecting the underlying fault lines.
Today, those cracks have been exposed – and widened – by the seemingly never-ending Greek crisis.
And nowhere are they more evident than in Greece's relationship with the International Monetary Fund.
When the euro crisis erupted in 2010, European officials realized that they lacked the necessary expertise to manage the threat of sovereign defaults and the potential breakup of the monetary union.
For EU officials, avoiding the eurozone's collapse became the top political imperative, so they turned to the IMF for help.
The irregularities in the Fund's resulting intervention attest to how serious the eurozone's problems were – and continue to be.
For starters, the IMF's Articles of Agreement require it to interact only with entities that are fully accountable for the help received: a member country's “treasury, central bank, stabilization fund, or other similar fiscal agency."
But the institutions with which the IMF is dealing in the eurozone are no longer responsible for their country's macroeconomic management; that power lies with the European Central Bank.
In lending to Greece, it is as if the Fund had lent to a sub-national unit, such as a provincial or city government, without insisting on repayment guarantees from the national authorities.
Another problem is the sheer magnitude of the Fund's intervention.
The size of the Greek debt necessitated lending on a scale far exceeding what other countries could expect.
The “exceptional access" to IMF resources granted to Greece in 2010 was set at a “cumulative limit of 600%" of the country's IMF quota, a measure of a country's financial commitment to the IMF.
Instead, in April 2013, cumulative financing was programmed to peak at 3,212% of Greece's quota.
The reason the IMF had to take on such huge exposure was Europe's initial refusal to contemplate debt reduction for Greece, owing to the authorities' fear that financial contagion would overwhelm the eurozone's firewall-free banking system.
That decision resulted in uncertainty about the currency union's capacity to resolve the crisis and aggravated the contraction in Greek output.
When a debt-restructuring agreement was finally reached in 2012, it provided a window for private creditors to reduce exposure by offloading their residual claims onto taxpayers.
Initially, the IMF took the official position that Greek debt was sustainable.
But IMF staff knew otherwise.
In 2013, the Fund admitted that its analysts knew that Greece's debt was not sustainable, but decided to go ahead with the program “because of the fear that spillovers from Greece would threaten the euro area and the global economy."
In addition, from November 2010 to April 2013, the IMF revised downward its forecast for 2014 Greek nominal GDP by 27%.
This cast doubt on the transparency and accountability of the Fund's debt-sustainability projections.
The implication is shocking: the IMF was unable to provide a credible framework for the adjustment that Greece would have to make.
This background provides crucial context for the ongoing negotiations, for it reveals that the aim of the Greek bailout was not to restore prosperity to the country's people, but to save the eurozone.
Given this, the new Greek government is entirely justified in questioning the terms that the country was given.
The agreements previous administrations made will certainly reduce the range of policies available to the new government, especially with respect to debt reduction, which would require a unilateral default and withdrawal from the eurozone.
But a democratically elected government need not be bound by its predecessors' commitments, and this is doubly true in the wake of an election that was a referendum on those very policies.
Ultimatums from unelected institutions that have compromised their own legitimacy have inflamed anti-EU sentiment across the continent.
The single worst outcome of the current negotiations would be Greece's submission to its creditors' demands, with few concessions in return.
Such a result would fuel greater public support for anti-EU parties and movements elsewhere, and would amount to a missed opportunity for Greece and Europe.
That opportunity is default and exit from the eurozone, which would allow Greece to begin correcting past mistakes and putting its economy on the path to recovery and sustainable growth.
At that point, the EU would be wise to follow suit, by unraveling the currency union and providing debt reduction for its most distressed economies.
Only then can the EU's founding ideals be realized.
Why Greece is Different
BRUSSELS – The seemingly interminable negotiations between the new Greek government and its international creditors – the International Monetary Fund, the European Central Bank, and the European Commission – on a new loan deal have entered a dangerous phase.
At this point, a mistake on either side threatens to trigger the kind of accident that could precipitate a new crisis in Europe.
The IMF seems ready to throw in the towel – not least because of the recent revelation that Greece could post a small primary budget deficit (which excludes interest payments) this year, rather than the planned sizeable surplus.
But, with Greece’s economy tanking again, its government is convinced that the current repayment program is not working – and that, in the absence of significant adjustments, it never will.
Fundamental to Greece’s case for new bailout terms is the narrative – reinforced by its current economic travails – that it has been a victim of excessive austerity.
But this neglects a crucial fact: austerity worked in Europe’s other crisis-hit countries.
Indeed, Portugal, Ireland, Spain, and even Cyprus are showing clear signs of recovery, with unemployment finally falling (albeit slowly and from high levels) and access to capital markets restored.
Why is Greece different?
The short answer is exports.
In all of the other crisis-hit countries (and, indeed, in most of the dozens of countries that have received IMF loans in recent decades), rising exports offset, at least partly, the hit that demand took when their governments slashed spending and raised taxes to balance their books.
Of course, in a large economy where external financing is not a problem, as in the United States or the eurozone, attempting to reduce a budget deficit could conceivably lead to such a large decline in demand (and thus tax revenues) that austerity becomes self-defeating.
But this argument does not apply to Greece.
In fact, Greece was running very large current-account deficits – exceeding 10% of GDP – when external financing dried up suddenly in 2008-2009, forcing an adjustment in domestic spending.
If the Greek government had not made such an adjustment, domestic demand and employment would certainly have remained higher – but so would imports and large external deficits.
So, while austerity did cause a deep recession, it enabled Greece to avoid large external deficits, thereby reducing the size of the bailout the country needed.
Export performance is thus the key to escaping the austerity trap.
The problem for Greece is that what little export growth it has experienced lately is largely illusory, as it has come mostly from petroleum products.
Since Greece does not produce oil, this can mean only that Greek refiners, which now have considerable excess capacity, are simply exporting imported crude oil in a slightly different form.
With refinery margins typically less than 5%, the economy is gaining little added value from these exports.
Other exports that have increased, such as metals, raise a similar problem.
Moreover, Greece’s largest services export, maritime shipping, has few real links with the rest of the economy, given that companies in the sector pay no taxes and employ few Greeks (the crews hail from low-wage countries).
Undermining the sector’s economic contribution further is the fact that global commodity prices, on which shipping rates depend, have lately been declining.
Meanwhile, manufactured goods, which do add domestic value and employment, form only a small share of Greece’s overall exports.
In fact, Greece’s total foreign trade, if properly measured, amounts to only 12% of its GDP, much less than what one would expect from such a small economy.
More jarring is the fact that Greece’s total trade deficit (including both goods and services), was even higher in 2008, amounting to 13% of GDP, implying that, in order to avoid a subsequent decline in imports and thus in domestic demand, exports would have had to more than double.
In Portugal, by contrast, the trade deficit amounted to only about one-third of exports in 2008, meaning that exports had to increase by one-third to close the external deficit, without reducing imports.
Since then, Portugal has increased exports cumulatively by more than one-quarter, so that, despite a slight increase in imports since 2007, it runs a trade surplus.
To be sure, Greece’s trade deficit has declined, but only because imports collapsed.
Meanwhile, exports stagnated, even as wages declined by more than 20%.
That, not austerity, is Greece’s real problem.
If Greece had experienced the same growth in exports as Portugal (a country of similar size and per capita income), it would not have experienced such a deep recession, and tax revenues would have been higher, making it much easier for the government to achieve a primary budget surplus.
This suggests that a combination of fiscal consolidation, lower wages, and export-oriented reforms could have enabled Greece to move toward a sustainable recovery.
This approach has been tried before, and it has failed only once, when Argentina had to default on its foreign debt in 2002 and break a decade-long 1:1 peg to the US dollar.
Unfortunately, Greece resembles Argentina in two key respects.
Both countries have only a small export sector, which makes external adjustment much more difficult; and both have an export structure that is skewed toward commodities, the supply of which is unlikely to change much, even as structural reforms are pursued or wages decline.
Of course, this does not mean that Greece is doomed to follow in Argentina’s footsteps toward default.
But it does highlight the challenge that the country faces today – namely, to rebuild its export sector from the ground up.
It is time for Greece’s government to recognize this imperative and expand the scope of negotiations with its creditors to include not just the budget, but also strategies for stimulating exports.
But, first, Greece must finally recognize that austerity is not the enemy.
Austerity Is Not Greece’s Problem
CAMBRIDGE – When looking out a window, it is easy to be fooled by your own reflection and see more of yourself than the outside world.
This seems to be the case when US observers, influenced by their own country's fiscal debate, look at Greece.
For example, Joseph Stiglitz regards austerity in Greece as a matter of ideological choice or bad economics, just like in the US.
According to this view, those who favor austerity must be obsessed with the theory, given the availability of a kinder, gentler alternative.
Why would you ever vote for austerity when parties like Greece's Syriza or Spain's Podemos offer a pain-free path?
The question reflects a lamentable tendency to conflate two very different situations.
In the US, the issue was whether a government that could borrow at record-low interest rates, in the middle of a recession, should do so.
By contrast, Greece piled up an enormous fiscal and external debt in boom times, until markets said “enough" in 2009.
Greece was then given unprecedented amounts of highly subsidized finance to enable it to reduce gradually its excessive spending.
But now, after so much European and global generosity, Stiglitz and other economists argue that some of Greece's debt must be forgiven to make room for more spending.
But the truth is that the recession in Greece has little to do with an excessive debt burden.
And game theory explains why we act even more irresponsibly when making group decisions (owing to the so-called common pool problem).
Fiscal deficits, like unwanted pregnancies, are the unintended consequence of actions taken by more than one person who had other objectives in mind.
And lack of fiscal control is what got Greece into trouble in the first place.
So the problem is not that austerity was tried and failed in Greece.
It is that, despite unprecedented international generosity, fiscal policy was completely out of control and needed major adjustments.
Insufficient spending was never an issue.
From 1998 to 2007, Greece's annual per capita GDP growth averaged 3.8%, the second fastest in Western Europe, behind only Ireland.
But by 2007, Greece was spending more than 14% of GDP in excess of what it was producing, the largest such gap in Europe – more than twice that of Spain and 55% higher than Ireland's.
In Spain and Ireland, though, the gap reflected a construction boom; euro accession suddenly gave people access to much cheaper mortgages.
In Greece, by contrast, the gap was mostly fiscal and used for consumption, not investment.
Unsustainable growth paths often end in a sudden stop of capital inflows, forcing countries to bring their spending back in line with production.
In Greece, however, official lenders' unprecedented munificence made the adjustment more gradual than in, say, Latvia or Ireland.
In fact, even after the so-called Greek Depression, its economy has grown more in per capita terms since 1998 than Cyprus, Denmark, Italy, and Portugal.
Sudden stops are always painful: economics has not discovered a hangover cure.
But the way to minimize the pain is to cut spending without cutting output, which requires selling to others what residents can no longer afford.
In other words, unless Greece boosts exports, spending cuts will amplify the output loss in the same way that Keynesian multipliers amplified the output gain from borrowing.
The problem is that Greece produces very little of what the world wants to consume.
Its exports of goods comprise mainly fruits, olive oil, raw cotton, tobacco, and some refined petroleum products.
Germany, which many argue should spend more, imports just 0.2% of its goods from Greece.
Tourism is a mature industry with plenty of regional competitors.
The country produces no machines, electronics, or chemicals.
Of every $10 of world trade in information technology, Greece accounts for $0.01.
Greece never had the productive structure to be as rich as it was: its income was inflated by massive amounts of borrowed money that was not used to upgrade its productive capacity.
According to the Atlas of Economic Complexity, which I co-authored, in 2008 the gap between Greece's income and the knowledge content of its exports was the largest among a sample of 128 countries.
Too much of the debate since then has focused on what Germany, the EU, or the International Monetary Fund must do.
But the bottom line is that Greece needs to develop its productive capabilities if it wants to grow.
The unfocused set of structural reforms prescribed by its current financing agreement will not do that.
Instead, Greece should concentrate on activist policies that attract globally competitive firms, an area where Ireland has much to teach – and where Stiglitz has sensible things to say.
Unfortunately, this is not what many Greeks (or Spaniards) believe.
A large plurality of them voted for Syriza, which wants to reallocate resources to wage increases and subsidies and does not even mention exports in its growth strategy.
They would be wise to remember that having Stiglitz as a cheerleader and Podemos as advisers did not save Venezuela from its current hyper-inflationary catastrophe.
Greece is Playing to Lose