A market economy must rest on the economic principle of profit and loss.
An economy with neither bankruptcies nor a rule of law that applies equally to all is no market economy.
The law that is valid for all other companies should apply to banks as well.
Moreover, governments should guarantee insolvent banks’ loans to non-financial companies, as well as private customers’ current, fixed-term, and savings deposits, by reforming insolvency laws.
Certainly, governments should not guarantee interbank liabilities that do not affect customer deposits.
An insolvency administrator would manage the bank and ensure that all payments for which a state guarantee is given are carried out properly, with refinancing of these payments continuing to take place via the central bank.
After taking these steps, the payments system would be safe.
In case of insolvency, a bank’s computers would not be turned off, its employees would not instantly be dismissed, and payment transactions would not collapse.
Nor would a run on savings deposits occur, given the official guarantees that they remain unaffected by a bank’s insolvency.
After all, even a simple banknote is money only because the government says so, and thus is no different from savings deposits, which means that no saver has an advantage from holding cash.
So there would be no need for bank runs.
Of course, the deliberate restriction of the effects of bankruptcy to accounts other than private current, savings, and fixed-term deposits means that the insolvency of bank A could lead to the insolvency of bank B. For bank B, too, the same liquidation scenario would apply: savings deposits would be safe, payments could be made from its customers’ current deposits, and loans that it granted to non-financial companies would not be revoked.
Obviously, the domino effect need not stop there: the insolvency of banks A and B could get a bank C – and additional banks – into trouble.
Indeed, the entire over-indebted fractional reserve-banking subsystem might have to be liquidated.
But the payment system would survive.
This might trigger a positive domino effect as well, as other states – on grounds of international financial integration – adopt similar procedures for controlled liquidation of their own insolvent banks.
Zombie assets would be destroyed.
A large part of the money and credit that was created out of nothing from former interbank transactions, now excluded from official guarantees, would return to nothing.
Afterwards, the liquidated, formerly over-indebted banks could be sold.
We have it in our power to eliminate the financial system’s rapidly growing debt and to create a new monetary order that corresponds to free-enterprise principles and the rule of law, without risking a breakdown of the entire payment system.
All that is required to revive effective bank regulation – in Europe and elsewhere – is the will to resist blackmail by the banks themselves.
Call In the Reserves
The People’s Bank of China and the Bank of Japan – as well as other central banks in Asia – are in trouble.
They have accumulated vast foreign exchange reserves, estimated at more than $2 trillion.
The problem is that almost all of it is in US dollars – a currency that is rapidly losing its value.
All policy options for Asia’s central banks appear equally unattractive.
If they do nothing and simply hold onto the dollars, their losses will only increase.
But if they buy more, in an attempt to prop up the dollar, they will only have a bigger version of the same problem.
If, on the contrary, they try to diversify into other currencies, they will drive down the dollar faster and create greater losses.
They are also likely to encounter the same sort of problem with other possible reserve currencies.
The euro has been touted as the replacement for or alternative to the dollar.
Some enthusiastic Europeans encouraged Asians to diversify their reserve holdings.
But the same scenario might well be repeated with the euro in a few years.
Large fiscal deficits and slow growth might convince foreign exchange markets that there is little future in the euro, fueling a wave of selling – and hence losses for central bank holders.
There is a historical parallel to today’s concern about the world’s major reserve currency.
The interwar economy, shattered by the Great Depression of the early 1930’s, offers a whole series of painful, but important, lessons for the present.
In the 1920’s, the world economy was reconstructed around a fixed exchange rate regime in which many countries held their reserves not in gold (as was the practice before the First World War) but in foreign exchange, especially in British pounds sterling.
During the course of the 1920’s, some of the official holders of pounds grew nervous about Britain’s weak foreign trade performance, which suggested that, like today’s dollar, the currency was over-valued and would inevitably decline.
Foreign central banks asked whether the Bank of England was contemplating changing its view of the pound’s exchange rate.
Of course they were told that there was no intention of abandoning Britain’s link to gold, and that the strong pound represented a deep and long commitment (in the same way that US Treasury Secretary John Snow today affirms the idea of a “strong dollar”).
Only France ignored British statements and substantially sold off its sterling holdings.
When the inevitable British devaluation came on September 20-21, 1931, many foreign central banks were badly hit and were blamed for mismanaging their reserves.
Many were stripped of their responsibilities, and the persons involved were discredited.
The Dutch central banker Gerard Vissering resigned and eventually killed himself as a result of the destruction wrought on his institution’s balance sheet by the pound’s collapse.
Some countries that traded a great deal with Britain, or were in the orbit of British imperial rule, continued to hold reserves in pounds after 1931.
During World War II, Britain took advantage of this, and Argentina, Egypt, and India, in particular, built up huge claims on sterling, although it was an unattractive currency.
At the war’s end, they thought of a new way of using their reserves: spend them.
Consequently, these reserves provided the fuel for economic populism.
Large holders of sterling balances – Nehru’s India, Nasser’s Egypt, and Peron’s Argentina – all embarked on major nationalizations and a public sector spending spree: they built railways, dams, steel works.
The sterling balances proved to be the starting point of vast and inefficient state planning regimes that did long-term harm to growth prospects in all the countries that took this course.
Could something similar be in store for today’s holders of large reserves?
The most explicit call for the use of dollar reserves to finance a major program of infrastructure modernization has come from India, which has a similar problem to the one facing China and Japan.
It will be similarly tempting elsewhere.
This temptation needs to be removed before the tempted yield to it.
Reserve holdings represent an outdated concept, and the world should contemplate some way of making them less central to the operation of the international financial system.
To be sure, reserves are important to smooth out imbalances in a fixed exchange rate regime.
But the world has moved since the 1970’s in the direction of greater exchange rate flexibility.
Reserves are also clearly important for countries that produce only a few goods – especially commodity producers – and thus face big and unpredictable swings in world market prices.
Dependency on coffee or cocoa exports requires a build-up of precautionary reserves.
But this does not apply to China, Japan, or India, whose exports are diversified.
Today’s big surplus countries do not need large reserves.
They should reduce their holdings as quickly as possible, before they do something really stupid with the accumulated treasure.
Hamas Rising
GAZA CITY – Hamas, the militant political movement that has ruled Gaza since 2007, has emerged from the latest round of fighting with Israel with its regional status significantly enhanced.
At the same time, the movement faces new questions about its ability to take advantage of the diplomatic opportunities that it has gained.
Hamas’s forceful response to Israel’s military operation in Gaza in November, which included landing rockets near Tel Aviv and Jerusalem, demonstrated its commitment to its core value of steadfastness.
Moreover, in the wake of the eight-day clash, Hamas’s long-exiled leader, Khaled Meshal, who had never before dared to show himself openly to Israel, entered Gaza from Egypt.
Parading triumphantly through the streets, he reinforced the idea – at home and abroad – that Hamas had been victorious.
Beyond Gaza, the rise of political Islam in the Arab Spring countries, particularly Egypt and Tunisia, has created a more Hamas-friendly neighborhood.
Crucially, the negotiations in Cairo that produced a cease-fire with Israel involved direct, high-level diplomatic contact between Egypt and Hamas – a fundamental shift from former Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak’s avowedly anti-Hamas stance.
Visits to Gaza by the Emir of Qatar and Turkey’s foreign minister, as well as by other regional leaders, have further buttressed Hamas’s new stature.
Demonstrating support for Hamas now means building credibility at home, which creates an opportunity to elicit large donations from Arab and Muslim countries to finance Gaza’s reconstruction.
By contrast, Mahmoud Abbas, the president of the Palestinian Authority (PA), who embraces peace negotiations with Israel and disavows armed struggle, is more isolated than ever, despite his success in upgrading Palestine’s status at the United Nations to that of “non-member observer state” days after the fighting in Gaza ended.
Hamas initially reacted skeptically to the statehood bid, but supported it after the cease-fire, owing to its expectation that it will be able to exploit Palestine’s upgraded status.
Nonetheless, recent events, together with the PA’s dwindling resources, have diminished Abbas’s credibility among Palestinians, who increasingly view him as desperate.
Israel’s announcement after the UN vote of new settlements around Jerusalem weakened his standing further.
Indeed, Abbas’s time is running out.
The only question is who will replace him.
Meanwhile, Hamas is seeking to capitalize on its growing popularity by winning elections.
In last October’s municipal elections in the West Bank – the first in six years – the largely secular Fatah party technically retained its authority; but voter turnout of only 55%, following Hamas’s call for a boycott, reflected waning support for the party.
Hamas is now widely seen as the true representative of Palestinian national ambitions, and is set to unite the Palestinians under its flag.
But can Hamas find a basis for negotiations with Israel?
To be sure, Hamas has not abandoned its resistance mantra; even so, it has moderated its stance on the Palestinian-Israeli conflict over time.
Indeed, Hamas’s leaders have expressed support for the establishment of a Palestinian state based on the 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
This gradual shift, combined with Hamas’s endorsement of Abbas’s diplomatic approach in the UN, suggests that Hamas now believes that a military victory over Israel is not possible.
Palestinian and Israeli leaders will have to reconcile their differences and reach a diplomatic settlement.
Signs of Hamas’s shifting perspective are becoming increasingly apparent.
While Meshal maintained a hardline stance in his speech in Gaza (see below), in private discussions he expressed a readiness to accept a Palestinian state based on the 1967 borders.
Meshal even stated that, if Israel reconsidered its attitude toward the Arab Peace Initiative of 2002 – which calls upon the Arab world to recognize Israel’s right to exist in exchange for Israel’s return to its 1967 borders – Hamas would do the same.
But, although Meshal welcomed the idea of future negotiations with Israel, he maintained that the time is not yet right.
Hamas is convinced that Israel understands only the language of force and power, and it will not negotiate until Israel accepts the permanence of Palestinian demands.
Israel may be starting to get the message.
In fact, the recent fighting drove some Israeli politicians, such as Giora Eiland, former Prime Minister Ariel Sharon’s national security adviser, to acknowledge that Hamas is a political reality that can no longer be ignored.
Eiland even advised Israel’s government to recognize Hamas’s rule in Gaza, lift the siege, and negotiate a prolonged cease-fire directly with the movement.
But the success of such an approach depends on Israel’s readiness to engage Hamas, which it continues to regard as a terrorist group, and on the viability of Egyptian mediation.
Here, Israel may come under growing pressure from its principal ally.
Indeed, America’s acceptance of Islamist parties in the region, from Ennahda in Tunisia to the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, suggests that skepticism of Islamist groups may be losing ground.
It also raises doubts about whether the United States will maintain its strict policy of isolating Hamas.
Egyptian President Mohamed Morsi’s success in mediating between Israel and Hamas demonstrated that Islamists can be flexible – even when it comes to Israel.
There is room for moderation in both sides’ positions, but their leaders must be given the right platform on which to make the needed adjustments.
Can Asia Free Itself from the IMF?
BERKELEY – There has never been a question about the ultimate purpose of the Chiang Mai Initiative (CMI), the system of Asian financial supports created in 2000 in that Thai city.
That purpose, of course, is to create an Asian Monetary Fund, i.e., a regional alternative to the International Monetary Fund, whose tender ministrations during the 1997-98 financial crisis have not been forgotten or forgiven.
So far, however, the CMI has been all horse and no saddle. Its credits and swaps have never been activated.
The distress following the failure of Lehman Brothers would have been an obvious occasion.
Yet, revealingly, the Bank of Korea, the central bank hit hardest, negotiated a $30 billion foreign-currency swap with the United States Federal Reserve, not with its ASEAN+3 partners.
Now, we are told, ASEAN+3 has achieved another great breakthrough, the so-called Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralization (CMIM), aimed at turning its bilateral swaps and credits into a regional reserve pool.
The goal was set in 2005, and last month ASEAN+3 finance ministers negotiated the details.
They specified contributions to their $120 billion pool, set down borrowing entitlements, and allocated voting shares.
The agreement on contributions is significant, it is said, because China and Japan will both contribute 32%.
In previous regional agreements, like capital subscriptions to the Asian Development Bank, China had always been treated as a second-rate power and asked to contribute less.
Indeed, China had shunned Japan’s 1997 proposal to create an Asian Monetary Fund precisely because it worried that it would play second fiddle.
That China is now acknowledged as a co-equal means that it will not stand in the way of further cooperation.
Also significant, we are told, is the agreement to make decisions by simple majority, with countries’ votes to be roughly in proportion to their contributions.
This means that no single country can block action, in contrast to the IMF executive board, which makes decisions by consensus, giving large countries like the United States de facto veto power.
But do these new rules really matter?
Disbursing more than 20% of the credits available to a country still requires that it first reach an agreement with the IMF, and 20% of a country’s entitlement is actually less than it contributes to the pool.
This would appear to nullify the very purpose of the arrangement, which is to free Asia from the IMF.
While there is a plan to raise and then eliminate the 20% threshold, this is left to some future, unspecified date.
The reason for the contradiction is straightforward.
Countries putting money on the barrelhead want assurances that their resources will not be used frivolously, and they want to know that they will be repaid.
But regional neighbors find it hard to criticize one another’s policies and demand course corrections.
Political sensitivities run especially high in Asia.
Even in Europe, with its long history of cooperation, surveillance and conditionality are outsourced to the IMF.
Revealingly, the Fund, not the European Union, has taken the lead in negotiating emergency assistance packages for Hungary and Latvia.
Delinking the CMIM from the IMF will require Asian countries to undertake hard-hitting reviews of one another’s policies and to demand difficult policy adjustments.
Here ASEAN+3 talks the talk.
Its May agreement included a commitment to establish a regional surveillance unit.
But there is no agreement on where to situate it or how to staff it. It could be placed within ASEAN’s Secretariat in Jakarta.
It could be placed inside the Asian Development Bank in Manila. It could be given to the “neutral” Northeast Asian country, Korea.
The outcome matters – which is why governments are fighting over it. Recall how the fateful decision to situate the IMF in Washington, DC enhanced the influence of the US Treasury just down the street.
These dilemmas can be finessed by giving both surveillance responsibilities and the actual power to disburse funds to an independent board insulated from national politics.
Its members, with statutory independence and long terms in office, could function like the monetary policy committee of a central bank.
They could issue a Financial Stability Report that bluntly flags weak policies and financial vulnerabilities. And they could demand policy adjustments as a condition for disbursing funds.
The IMF could then be shown the door.
This scheme wouldn’t solve all of Asia’s problems. But it would at least head off one danger, namely the urge to accumulate even more reserves.
Recent volatility reinforces this temptation.
If Asian countries succumb, global imbalances and all their associated problems will return.
Pooling regional reserves as a way of making them go further is a better alternative.
But making this vision a reality requires further bold thinking.
Can Business Be Ethical?
That will, of course, prompt cynics to ask: “What about the other 80%?”  But those who have taken the oath are part of a larger turn toward ethics that has followed the recent flood of revelations of dishonesty and greed in the financial sector.
Interest in business ethics courses has surged, and student activities at leading business schools are more focused than ever before on making business serve long-term social values.
Business ethics has always had problems that are distinct from those of other professions, such as medicine, law, engineering, dentistry, or nursing.
A member of my family recently had an eye problem, and was referred by her general practitioner to an eye surgeon. The surgeon examined the eye, said that it didn’t need surgery, and sent her back to the general practitioner.
That is no more than one would expect from a doctor who is true to the ethics of the profession, my medical friends tell me.
By contrast, it’s hard to imagine going to a car dealer and being advised that you don’t really need a new car.
For physicians, the idea of swearing an oath to act ethically goes back to Hippocrates.
Every profession will have its rogues, of course, no matter what oaths are sworn, but many health care professionals have a real commitment to serving the best interests of their clients.
Do business managers have a commitment to anything more than the success of their company and to making money?
It would be hard to say that they do. Indeed, many business leaders deny that there is any conflict between self-interest and the interests of all.
Adam Smith’s “invisible hand,” they believe, ensures that the pursuit of our own interests in the free market will further the interests of all. 
In that tradition, the economist Milton Friedman wrote, in his 1962 book Capitalism and Freedom :  “there is one and only one social responsibility of business – to use its resources and engage in activities designed to increase its profits so long as it stays within the rules of the game, which is to say, engages in open and free competition without deception or fraud.”
For the true believers in this creed, the suggestion that the manager of a business should strive for anything except maximizing value for shareholders is heresy. 
But, while the global financial crisis did reveal fraud on a massive scale, the underlying cause of the crisis was not fraud but the failure of the market to knit together the self-interest of those who sold and resold sub-prime mortgages with the interests of the investors in financial institutions that bought them.
The fact that an even larger catastrophe would have resulted had governments not been willing to draw on taxpayer funds to bail out the banks was an additional blow to those who have told us to trust the unregulated market.
The MBA oath is an attempt to replace the Friedmanite view of the social responsibility of business with something quite different: a management profession that commits itself to promoting the long-term, sustainable welfare of all.
The sense of a professional ethic is conveyed by clauses in the oath that require managers to “develop both myself and other managers under my supervision so that the profession continues to grow and contribute to the well-being of society.”
SEOUL – The central banks of major advanced economies have been navigating uncharted territory in recent years.
While their use of a range of unconventional monetary-policy tools has had benefits, it has also generated significant uncertainty, without fully stabilizing the world economy.
Now the time has come to head back toward more familiar policy terrain.
Following the 2008 financial meltdown, the US Federal Reserve cut the policy rate to almost zero and pursued so-called quantitative easing (QE), by purchasing long-term securities from the public and private sectors.
The central banks of the European Union, Japan, and the United Kingdom soon launched similar unconventional programs.
The result was a vast amount of cheap liquidity that helped to stabilize the financial sector, restore stock and real-estate prices, and increase domestic demand.
All of this helped to limit the fallout of the financial crisis and push the global economy toward recovery.
But this aggressive approach has its limits.
Indeed, as Reserve Bank of India Governor Raghuram Rajan has pointed out, after years of effort, the benefits of unconventional monetary policy are diminishing, while the costs are increasing.
Recognizing this, the Fed ended QE at the end of last year and raised its policy rate by 25 basis points.
The rate hikes will likely continue this year, though the speed and extent of the increases are uncertain.
Yet the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan (BOJ) have decided to sustain their QE programs.
Moreover, they have adopted a negative interest-rate policy – which amounts to charging a fee for bank reserves – to revitalize depressed demand.
Unsurprisingly, the effects on inflation and real output have been limited.
Monetary policy is an effective means of managing inflation and can boost employment and output in a recession.
Lowering interest rates below zero, however, has hurt banks’ balance sheets, reducing their lending capacity.
As a result, it has failed to increase business investment.
Even low positive interest rates, if maintained for a prolonged period, could backfire, fueling asset bubbles and enabling household and corporate debt to grow to unsustainable levels.
Meanwhile, asset purchases have caused the balance sheets of major central banks to swell to unprecedented levels.
The orderly rewinding that is now needed will be very difficult to manage.
Beyond the domestic sphere, unconventional monetary policies have had far-reaching spillover effects.
In particular, they have sent emerging economies, with their financial links to advanced economies, on a capital-flow roller-coaster ride.
First, the emerging economies were flooded with liquidity flowing from the advanced economies.
Large capital inflows led to overheating and inflation, asset-price bubbles, and rapid currency appreciation.
Then, the Fed’s tapering of QE led to the sudden withdrawal of that capital, creating a risk of financial disruption and currency crises.
The emerging economies’ monetary authorities have struggled to cope with these shocks using available instruments, including interest rates, exchange rates, prudential regulation, and capital controls.
But that is not all.
Because advanced economies’ unconventional monetary policies have also depreciated their currencies and stimulated their exports, the risk of competitive devaluations is now a real concern.
If, say, the BOJ moved to intervene outright in the exchange-rate markets to depreciate the yen, the odds that the People’s Bank of China and the Bank of Korea would opt for weaker currencies would increase.
All of this would be highly destabilizing, particularly for emerging economies like Brazil that are facing a brutal combination of internal and external challenges.
Instead of viewing all of this as motivation to back away from unconventional monetary policy, however, some economists are recommending that the ECB and the BOJ pursue an even more extraordinary policy: so-called “helicopter drops.”
The idea, introduced by the Nobel laureate economist Milton Friedman in 1969, entails the distribution of freshly printed money directly to the public, with a commitment from the central bank never to withdraw it.
As Former Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke points out, monetary finance is essentially equivalent to a broad-based tax cut, with the central bank committing to purchase government debt.
Among the influential economists advocating helicopter drops for Europe and Japan are Bernanke, Willem Buiter, Kemal Derviş, and Adair Turner.
They argue that even if it is not an ideal solution, it can cure their economies.
For governments restrained by high public debt and deficits, the proposal is certainly tempting.
But helicopter drops are highly risky.
As Bernanke himself warns, such a policy could undermine central banks’ long-term independence.
Moreover, it would enable governments to monetize fiscal deficits without constraints, and potentially to abuse money-printing power for political considerations.
And it might not even work as intended, with the money benefiting only certain groups.
Given the difficulty of regaining lost sovereignty and credibility, central banks must keep helicopter drops as a last resort.
The reality is that recourse to easy windfalls produced through loose monetary policy could have serious long-term repercussions, especially if they are used to delay efforts to address underlying issues.
Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s economic revitalization strategy – so-called Abenomics – is a case in point.
The strategy was supposed to use a mix of monetary and fiscal expansion to help facilitate structural reforms.
Yet the reforms have faced delays, and employment and output growth has been limited.
What advanced-country central banks should be doing now is implementing monetary policies aimed at restoring their credibility, while governments focus on implementing effective fiscal policies and structural reforms.
Crucially, advanced and emerging economies must coordinate their policies, in order to foster confidence and strengthen growth.
This is the only way back onto the path of sustained global economic health.
Last month, finance ministers and central-bank governors of the G-20 countries acknowledged the limitations of monetary stimulus and embraced structural reforms, infrastructure investment, and fiscal policy as the key to future growth.
But they have yet to back their words with strong action.
Their credibility – not to mention the fate of the global economy – is on the line.
Cancer by the Numbers
PHILADELPHIA – It is difficult to communicate medical risk to a large audience, especially when official recommendations conflict with emotional narratives.
That is why, when the United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) in 2009 presented its guidelines for breast cancer screening, which recommended against routine screenings for asymptomatic women in their 40’s and biennial, rather than annual, mammograms for women over 50, the public responded with confused fury.
The key to understanding this response is to be found in the nebulous zone between mathematics and psychology.
People’s discomfort with the findings stemmed largely from faulty intuition: if earlier and more frequent screening increases the likelihood of detecting a possibly fatal cancer, then more screening is always desirable.
If more screening can detect breast cancer in asymptomatic women in their 40’s, wouldn’t it also detect cancer in women in their 30’s?
And, if so, why not, reductio ad absurdum, begin monthly mammograms at age 15?
The answer, of course, is that such intensive screening would cause more harm than good.
But striking the proper balance is challenging.
Unfortunately, it is not easy to weigh breast cancer’s dangers against the cumulative effects of radiation from dozens of mammograms over the years, the invasiveness of biopsies, and the debilitating impact of treating slow-growing tumors that would never have proven fatal.
The USPSTF recently issued an even sharper warning about the prostate-specific antigen test for prostate cancer, after concluding that the test’s harms outweigh its benefits.
Chest X-rays for lung cancer and Pap tests for cervical cancer have received similar, albeit less definitive, criticism.
The next step in the reevaluation of cancer screening was taken last year, when researchers at the Dartmouth Institute for Health Policy announced that the costs of screening for breast cancer were often minimized, and that the benefits were much exaggerated.
Indeed, even a mammogram (almost 40 million are given annually in the US) that detects a cancer does not necessarily save a life.
The Dartmouth researchers found that, of the estimated 138,000 breast cancers detected annually in the US, the test did not help 120,000-134,000 of the afflicted women.
The cancers either were growing so slowly that they did not pose a problem, or they would have been treated successfully if discovered clinically later (or they were so aggressive that little could be done).
A related concern is measurement.
Since the patient’s duration of survival is calculated from the time of diagnosis, more sensitive screening starts the clock sooner.
Survival times can thus appear longer, even if the earlier diagnosis had no real effect on survival.
Naturally, individual cases dictate which tests and treatments are best, but an additional concern about frequent screenings is the problem of false positives.
When one is looking for something relatively rare (whether cancer or terrorists), it is wise to remember that a positive result is often false.
Either the “detected” pathology is not there, or it is not the sort that will kill you.
Consider the following hypothetical example.
Assume that the screening test for a certain cancer is 95% accurate, meaning that if someone has the cancer, the test will be positive 95% of the time.
Next, assume that if someone does not have the cancer, the test will be positive only 1% of the time.
Finally, assume further that 0.5% of people – one of every 200 – actually have this type of cancer.
If your doctor tells you that you have tested positive, does this mean that you are likely to have the cancer?
Surprisingly, the answer is no.
A little arithmetic shows why.
Suppose that 100,000 screenings are conducted.
On average, 500 people will have the cancer.
Since 95% of them will test positive, there will be, on average, 475 positive tests.
Of the 99,500 people without cancer, 1% will test positive, yielding 995 false positives out of 1,470 positive tests.
In other words, even if you tested positive for the cancer, the probability that you actually have it is only about 32%.
That answer is decidedly counterintuitive and hence easy to reject.
Most people do not think in terms of probabilities other than “50-50” and “one in a million.”
But, whatever the probabilities, the fact remains that there will generally be a high percentage of false positives when screening for rare conditions.
Moreover, the patients who receive these faulty diagnoses will usually receive further treatments, which often will have harmful consequences.
The “availability heuristic” – a pervasive cognitive bias caused by people’s tendency to estimate the likelihood of a phenomenon by how easily an example of it comes to mind – routinely clouds the issue.
People relate much more readily to a friend dying of cancer than they do to statistics about strangers suffering from the consequences of testing.
But the bottom line is that the ongoing reevaluation of cancer screening is evidence-based.
When it comes to policymaking, decisions must be based on facts and argument, not anecdotes and stories, however compelling those narratives may be.
Cancer Care for the Developing World
BOSTON – More than four decades ago, US President Richard Nixon, inspired by early and encouraging results that showed that chemotherapy could cure diseases such as acute lymphoblastic leukemia and Hodgkin’s lymphoma, declared “war on cancer.”
Since then, steady progress has been made using chemotherapy, surgery, and radiation to treat and cure an increasing number of cancer patients.
But access to these life-saving advances remains elusive in low- and middle-income countries, where the majority of cancer patients reside today.
In the United States, more than 80% of patients with breast cancer are long-term survivors, and more than 80% of cancer-stricken children survive.
In my nearly 40 years as an oncologist at Harvard University, I have cared for thousands of patients who would have had little chance of survival were it not for chemotherapy.
Many of the patients who received treatment in the 1970s are alive and well today; their children are now productive adults.
But it was not until I began working in Rwanda in 2011 that I fully grasped the power of the tools at my disposal, by witnessing the impact of their absence.
Stepping into the pediatric cancer ward at the central public referral hospital in Kigali was like traveling back in time.
Outcomes among Rwandan children with Wilms’ tumor, a form of kidney cancer that rarely afflicts adults, mirrored those in the US 80 years ago, before the availability of drugs that today enable more than 90% of diagnosed American children to survive.
According to Rwanda’s health minister, Agnes Binagwaho, the cancer ward in Kigali resembled the HIV/AIDS unit when she was a pediatrician at the hospital, a decade earlier.
With no antiretroviral therapy, the prescription for HIV/AIDS was food and rest – meaning that infection essentially amounted to a death sentence.
At the time, some were caught, if only briefly, on the wrong side of history.
In 2001, a senior US official claimed that it would be impossible to treat HIV/AIDS in Africa, owing to its “complexity” and high cost.
But he – along with the many others who shared his view – was proved wrong.
Today, rates of treatment adherence in Africa among HIV-positive patients with access to drugs have long exceeded those in the US.
Indeed, Rwanda was one of the first countries to achieve universal access to AIDS treatment.
Despite this experience, the prospect of effective cancer treatment in Africa has been met with similar skepticism.
True, cancer therapy is complex.
It requires a broad range of diagnostic and therapeutic capacities – pathology, surgery, radiation, chemotherapy, and targeted medicines – together with the knowledge and skill to safely administer these life-saving treatments.
But the Butaro Cancer Center of Excellence and others like it have proved that it is possible to treat cancer patients safely and effectively, even in poor, rural settings.
Thanks to the Rwandan Ministry of Health, Partners In Health, and the Boston-based Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, the Butaro Center has treated more than 3,000 cancer patients, most of whom are referred from outside the region, since its dedication in July 2012 by former President Bill Clinton and Binagwaho.
Support from the Jeff Gordon Children’s Foundation, the Breast Cancer Research Foundation, LIVESTRONG, and private donors has also been critical to this achievement.
Fortunately, some major institutions are already stepping up to bolster this effort.
The World Health Organization, together with the International Union for Cancer Control, is re-examining the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines for Cancer to identify more accurately which cancers are most responsive to treatment, and which place the heaviest burdens on populations.
The most efficient approach to reducing global cancer mortality rates would be to bring existing therapies to cancer patients in developing countries.
Add to that international funding for cancer treatment, like that which was mobilized for HIV/AIDS through the US President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief and The Global Fund, and cancer mortality rates in developing countries could decline considerably – and quickly.
More than a decade ago, the international community decided that it would no longer accept certain death for HIV patients.
We must make the same commitment today to bring life-saving cancer treatment to patients everywhere.
Cancer World
PITTSBURGH – In 1971, President Richard M. Nixon launched a “war” against cancer.
But, nearly four decades later, the battle remains focused on highly profitable efforts to develop drugs and technologies to treat the disease while virtually ignoring environmental factors that cause it.
True, cancer deaths have dropped chiefly because of long-delayed – and still poorly supported – efforts to curb smoking.
Successes with screening and treatment of breast, colo-rectal, and cervical cancer have also helped.
But blacks and other minorities in the United States – and elsewhere in the world – do not share in these successes, and environmental factors appear to explain the disparity.
For example, while one in eight Americans is black, one in three is employed in sanitation or other blue-collar jobs.
Moreover, they have half the level of cancer-protective vitamin D as whites, and they are much more likely to live in polluted neighborhoods.
Indeed, cases of cancer that are not tied to smoking or aging are increasing.
Cancer is the leading cause of death in middle-aged persons and children (after accidents), and we can’t explain why, for most forms of cancer, death rates are higher for blacks than they are for whites. 
What we can say is that the disease itself is the wrong enemy.
Instead, we should be attacking known environmental carcinogens – not just tobacco, but also radiation, sunlight, benzene, solvents, and some drugs and hormones.
Modern cancer-causing agents like diesel exhaust, pesticides, and other air pollutants are not systematically studied.
When they are considered at all, they are deemed to be the inevitable price of progress. 
But most cancers are made, not born, arising from damage to our genes that occurs throughout our lives.
Despite having remarkably similar genes at birth, identical twins do not develop the same cancers.
By age 50, their chromosomal bands are profoundly different from one another.
America’s Centers for Disease Control and Prevention confirm that children’s blood today contains dozens of chemicals that did not exist two decades earlier, including many gene-damaging compounds known to cause cancer and a host of other diseases.
Men and women of child-bearing age now carry enough hormone-disturbing compounds in their bodies to impair their fertility.
Women exposed to higher levels of the pesticide DDT before the age of fourteen have a five times higher chances of developing breast cancer when they reach middle age.
Could such compounds play a role in unexplained and growing rates of childhood cancer, testicular cancer, and non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma throughout the industrial world?   Should we wait to find out?
While we are phenomenally successful at keeping young people from dying of cancer today, that success comes as a Faustian bargain.
One of three young women treated with radiation to the chest to arrest Hodgkin’s disease will develop breast cancer by age 32.
Of course, many cancers might not have developed in the first place had these patients not been exposed to other cancer-causing agents in the environment.
Our dependence on many modern conveniences makes us the subject of vast uncontrolled experiments to which none of us is asked to consent.
For example, the long-term safety of mobile phones remains unproven.
Widely publicized studies in the early 1990’s touting their safety excluded business users.
Recent reports from France and Sweden find that those who have used mobile phones for ten or more years have double the risk of brain cancer.
Also troubling is the fact that the limit for microwave emission from mobile phones is 500 times lower in Switzerland and China than in the US. 
A way of looking is a way of not looking, runs a Chinese proverb.
The limited nature of evidence on some environmental cancer hazards should not be confused with proof that no harm has occurred: the research is hard to do, and, in the US, very little of it is now funded by the government and private sector.
Moreover, confusion about environmental cancer risks also results from longstanding, carefully cultivated, and well-financed disinformation campaigns inspired by the machinations of the tobacco industry.
We cannot afford to ignore the signs of the importance of the environment for our health.
To address the scourge of cancer, we must complement efforts to detect and treat cancer with new ways to keep people from developing the disease in the first place.
Can China Beat Deflation?
BEIJING – At a time of slowing economic growth and massive corporate debts, a deflationary spiral would be China’s worst nightmare.
And the risk is mounting.
The producer price index (PPI) has been in negative territory for 39 consecutive months, since February 2012.
The growth of China’s consumer price index (CPI), though still positive, has also been falling steadily, from 6.5% in July 2011 to 1.2% in May.
If past experience is any indication, China’s CPI will turn negative very soon.
In China’s last protracted bout of deflation, from 1998 to 2002, persistent declines in prices were the result of monetary and fiscal tightening that began in 1993, compounded by the lack of exit mechanisms for failed enterprises.
After peaking at 24% in 1994, inflation began to decline in 1995.
But GDP growth soon began deteriorating rapidly.
In an effort to revive growth in a difficult global environment and buffer exports against the impact of the Asian financial crisis, the Chinese government loosened monetary and fiscal policy beginning in November 1997.
But it was too little too late.
By 1998, when CPI inflation began to fall, producer prices had already been declining for eight months, and remained negative for a total of 51 months, with CPI growth beginning to recover after 39 months.
An obvious lesson is that the government should have switched to loosening earlier, and more forcefully.
But this experience also underscores the impotence of monetary policy in a deflationary environment, owing to the unwillingness of banks to lend and of enterprises to borrow.
The fact that loss-making enterprises were allowed to churn out cheap products, eroding the profitability of high-quality enterprises (and thus their incentive to invest), prolonged the deflation.
Nonetheless, China eventually managed to rid itself of deflation and return to rapid economic growth.
For starters, a decline in investment during the deflationary period – together with firm closures, mergers, and acquisitions – reduced overcapacity, clearing the way for investment to rebound strongly in 2002.
At the same time, expansionary fiscal policy increased effective demand, while the government, backed by its strong public-finance position, was able to tackle nonperforming loans effectively, thereby increasing commercial banks’ willingness to lend and firms’ ability to borrow.
Moreover, housing-market reforms and the development of a mortgage-loan market in the late 1990s fueled rapid growth in real-estate investment, which reached an annual rate of over 20% in 2000.
As a result, real-estate development became the most important contributor to economic growth, even as exports boomed following China’s accession to the World Trade Organization.
The problem with the emergence of these new growth engines is that it enabled China’s leaders to delay important structural reforms.
As a result, China now faces many of the same challenges it faced in the late 1990s – beginning with overcapacity.
After 15 years of rapid growth in real-estate development, this is not surprising.
But that does not make it any less risky.
In fact, if overcapacity is allowed to continue putting downward pressure on prices, China’s economic growth will not stabilize at a rate consistent with its potential; instead, the economy will be pushed into a vicious spiral of debt deflation.
At this point, the authorities could eliminate overcapacity through firm closures, mergers and acquisitions, and other structural measures.
They could also seek to eliminate excess capacity by using expansionary monetary and fiscal policies to stimulate effective demand.
In theory, the long-term solution would be to pursue structural adjustments that would improve the allocation of resources.
But that would be painful and slow.
Striking a balance between the short- and long-term approaches will prove to be a major challenge for China’s leadership.
Complicating this effort is the fact that, unlike in 1997-2002, China cannot absorb overcapacity by stimulating real-estate investment and exports.
And no one knows whether the much-discussed “innovative industries” can have the impact that real-estate investment and exports did – not least because there is so much excess capacity in the traditional industries.
China must do what it takes to avoid falling into the debt-deflation trap.
Fortunately, China still has room to invest in growth-enhancing infrastructure and innovative industries.
Policies to expand social security and improve the provision of public goods could support these efforts, boosting domestic consumption by allowing households to reduce their precautionary savings.
At the same time, however, China’s leadership must continue to pursue its agenda of structural reform and adjustment, even if it may have an adverse impact on growth in the short run.
China simply cannot afford to continue to kick the reform can down the road.
As Mark Twain once purportedly said, “History doesn’t repeat itself, but it does rhyme.”
China should brace itself for a period of deflation, which may be even more protracted than the last one.
But, with the right approach – and a bit of good luck – it can make sure that, this time, it recovers more sustainably than in the past.
The Renminbi Challenge
SEOUL – Last month, China unveiled its first aircraft carrier, and is gearing up to challenge the United States in the South China Sea.
By initiating a plan to internationalize its currency, China is similarly seeking to challenge the dollar on the international stage.
In carving out a global role for the renminbi, Chinese policymakers are proceeding deliberately.
In the words of the venerable Chinese proverb, they are “feeling for the stones while crossing the river.”
The authorities’ first step was to authorize Chinese companies to use the renminbi in cross-border trade settlements.
As foreign firms exporting to China accepted payment in renminbi, the currency piled up in their bank accounts in Hong Kong.
That led to the next step: Foreign firms wishing to invest in China were allowed to tap those deposits by issuing renminbi-denominated bonds, and eligible offshore financial institutions were permitted to invest renminbi funds in China’s interbank bond market.
Then, last summer, China announced plans to allow banks in Hong Kong to lend renminbi to companies in Shenzhen, opening that city financially to the rest of the world.
The expectation is that if financial opening works in Shenzhen, it will be implemented more widely.
Finally, as a step toward making the renminbi a reserve currency, China signed currency-swap agreements with the Philippines, South Korea, Japan, and Australia.
Meanwhile, Malaysia, Nigeria, and Chile have already acquired modest amounts of renminbi reserves.
Other central banks are expected to follow.
So, will China’s plan for transforming the renminbi into an international rival to the dollar succeed?
The answer, in my view, turns on how China addresses four challenges.
First, China will have to build more liquid financial markets.
Its bond markets remain small, and trading volume is low, because the majority of bonds are held to maturity by domestic investors.
This is a matter of considerable importance to central banks, which value liquidity when deciding which currencies to hold as reserve.
After all, it is the liquidity of US Treasury bonds that makes them the world’s leading reserve asset.
Second, much will depend on how China navigates the transition to a more open capital account.
History is littered with financial crises occurring in the wake of precipitous capital-account liberalization.
Falling prey to a crisis would not exactly encourage international use of China’s currency.
Third, the renminbi’s international and reserve-currency prospects will be shaped by how China handles its growth slowdown.
The key will be whether it manages a smooth deceleration, in which case renminbi internationalization will proceed, or suffers a hard landing, in which case social unrest will intensify and all bets are off.
The last challenge can be stated as a question that is rarely posed: Is China’s political system an obstacle to renminbi internationalization?
The pound sterling and the dollar, the principal international and reserve currencies of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries respectively, were issued by democracies.
Britain and the US had contested elections and political systems that limited the arbitrary exercise of executive power – institutions that are absent in China’s political system.
One reason why democracy might matter for international currency status is that democratically elected governments are best able to make the credible commitments needed to develop deep and liquid financial markets.
They can commit not to expropriate creditors, since the latter will vote them out of office if they do.
And the same respect for creditor rights that reassures domestic investors reassures foreign investors – both official and private – as well.
Might it be possible for China to establish limits on arbitrary executive power and strengthen creditor rights sufficiently without undertaking a full-fledged transition to democracy?
Until now, constraints on decision-making by the general secretary of the Chinese Communist Party, the country’s highest-ranking official, have been – how to put it politely? – limited.
But that is beginning to change.
The general secretary is increasingly constrained by the CCP’s other institutions.
The deliberations of the National People’s Congress, for example, are becoming less ceremonial and more substantive.
Other bureaucratic decision makers, for their part, are increasingly constrained by requirements of transparency and disclosure.
Internet-based movements are forcing Chinese policymakers to strengthen labor and environmental standards.
Why not creditor rights?
Since the early nineteenth century, the leading international currencies have been those of countries with democratic political systems, where arbitrary official action is constrained and creditors are well represented.
This does not imply that China must have a Democratic Spring before the renminbi becomes a leading international and reserve currency.
But it does suggest that it will have to strengthen the powers of the National People’s Congress further and create a more transparent rules-based bureaucracy in order to achieve its monetary goals.
Poison-Proofing China
STANFORD – Last January, China’s environmental authorities barely averted the contamination of nearly three million people’s drinking water after a mining company dumped cadmium – a toxic heavy metal used in the manufacture of batteries, paint, solder, and solar cells – into the Longjiang River.
To stop the contamination from spreading, the local fire department had to add significant quantities of dissolved aluminum chloride, which binds to cadmium and settles on the river bottom.&nbsp;The toxic sediment will eventually be dredged. 
Such threats to health and the environment are not uncommon in China.
The water in as many as half of the country’s rivers and lakes is unfit for human consumption or contact.
China has also gained a reputation for food and drug contamination (not to mention lead paint in toys and poisonous toothpaste).
For example, in 2008, the industrial chemical melamine was added to milk products in order to give falsely high readings of milk protein, causing the death of six infants and sickening 300,000 other people.
Similarly, Mengniu, China’s largest dairy company, announced last December that it had destroyed hazardous products at a plant in the Sichuan province after government safety inspectors discovered the carcinogen aflatoxin in a batch of its milk.
(The company denied that any contaminated milk had reached consumers.)
In 2007, melamine was deliberately added to an ingredient in pet food to enhance artificially its protein levels, causing renal failure in hundreds of cats and dogs in North America, Europe, and Africa.
Later that year, diethylene glycol was mislabeled as non-toxic glycerin, then mixed into cold medicine, killing at least 100 people in Panama, including many children.
The following year, crude precursors of the blood-thinning medication heparin were contaminated, causing hundreds of allergic reactions and 19 deaths in the United States, and at least 80 serious adverse health events in Germany.
Eggs contaminated that year with melamine caused kidney stones and renal failure in children.
Internal criticism of the Chinese government’s management of health, safety, and overall quality-of-life issues is growing.
In July 2011, following the highly publicized crash of a supposedly state-of-the-art high-speed train in eastern China, Qiu Qiming, a news anchor for the national broadcaster CCTV, turned the disaster into a metaphor.
“While satisfying our need for speed, we might be forsaking many things,” she said. “China, please slow down.
If you’re too fast, you may leave the souls of your people behind.”  
Given the pervasiveness of Chinese-made goods, China’s safety record concerns consumers worldwide.
But Chinese officials’ piecemeal efforts to restore confidence in the country’s exports – for example, establishing limits for trace amounts of melamine in dairy products and tightening quality-control regulations for the dairy industry – are unlikely to reassure foreign consumers or importers.
Indeed, Chinese policymakers seem unable to grasp the importance of crafting appropriate incentives and disincentives.
Rather than adopting the Western model of motivating every link in the supply chain to adhere to specified quality and safety standards, the government continues to rely on top-down policies.
But the decentralized, dispersed nature of many industries, the absence of an effective regulatory infrastructure, and the lack of firm-level inducements undermine the effectiveness of this approach.
In fact, perverse incentives throughout the supply chain facilitate the widespread, systematic contamination of food and drugs.&nbsp;Both milk producers and heparin-precursor suppliers were motivated to add adulterants that would make their products appear to be of a higher quality than they actually were.
To be sure, Chinese authorities face a daunting task.
Only a few decades ago, China was a poor, largely rural country with an agrarian economy and almost no middle class.
Today, it boasts the world’s second-largest economy, a thriving manufacturing sector, and a rapidly growing, prosperous middle class, while more than half of China’s 1.5 billion citizens now live in cities. 
Until relatively recently, environmental protection and consumer safety were secondary issues in the United States and Europe.
In 1952, London experienced five days of lethal, particulate-laden smog that killed 12,000 people and sickened more than 100,000.
And, in 1969, America’s heavily polluted Cuyahoga River caught on fire.
Just as Europe and the US have made substantial progress in implementing effective health and environmental policies, China’s quality-control mechanisms can be improved.
But, in tackling the issue, Chinese officials would do well to heed the proverb: “With time and patience, the mulberry leaf becomes a silk gown.”
Can China Rescue Europe?
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA – The debt crisis in Europe is no longer a European affair.
Coupled with fears of a double-dip recession in the United States, the European debt crisis is dragging the global economy into another cycle of financial panic and economic recession.
Sitting on the sidelines, emerging-market economies in general, and the so-called BRIC countries (Brazil, Russia, India, and China) in particular, may feel fortunate to be spared this financial maelstrom.
But they should think again.
With closely integrated global financial markets and trading networks, financial crises and economic contractions in the developed economies, which still account for nearly 60% of the world’s GDP, will inevitably undermine emerging-market countries’ prosperity.
Some have thus called upon major emerging countries to step up and use their huge foreign-exchange reserves to purchase the debt of crisis-ravaged countries, such as Greece, Italy, and Spain.
In particular, China, with its $3.2 trillion in foreign-exchange reserves, is seen as a potential white knight coming to the rescue of debt-ridden European nations.
Playing upon such hopes, China has been both coy and demanding.
Without committing itself to any substantive assistance, the Chinese government has publicly demanded that the European Union grant China the coveted status of “market economy” if it expects China to loosen its purse strings.
That status matters, because achieving it will make it more difficult for Chinese firms to be found guilty of dumping goods on overseas markets.
Unfortunately, those who expect China to play a direct role in calming the financial panic in Europe are being unrealistic.
Chinese leaders have been extremely risk-averse in their forays into international financial affairs, and, on the eve of a leadership transition (expected to take place a year from now), no senior official dares to risk his political prospects by advocating bold and controversial action.
Even assuming China’s willingness to help Europe’s troubled economies, it would be able to contribute only a modest portion of the huge amount of financing required to restore confidence in European sovereign debt.
But this does not mean that China can do nothing to help Europe.
While the attempt by Chinese officials to extract a huge concession – market-economy status – is ill-timed and in poor taste, China’s government needs to weigh the significant benefits that it could receive by providing limited but meaningful assistance to Europe in its hour of need.
Indeed, to do so would be in China’s own interest as a key stake-holder in Europe’s economic stability.
The EU is China’s largest trading partner, accounting for $383 billion in merchandise exports in 2010.
So a recession in Europe would cause a slowdown in China’s export-dependent economy as well.
The financial fallout from the debt crisis could also result in huge losses for China.
About $800 billion of China’s foreign-exchange reserves are invested in euro-denominated assets.
A disorderly default, and the resulting downward pressure on the euro, would unavoidably cause Chinese investments to lose value.
China can take three measures to help Europe, but, if they are to succeed, the EU must set aside some of its long-standing suspicions about China.
First, China can help boost the EU’s exports by lowering its administrative trade barriers to products from the EU.
In the short term, this might dampen China’s own growth, but, given China’s mammoth trade surplus with the EU ($230 billion in 2010), this is both long overdue and reasonable.
A 10% increase in the EU’s exports to China (a net increase of $15 billion a year) would help create at least 300,000 jobs and boost Europe’s growth prospects.
Second, China can participate in bank recapitalization in Europe.
At the moment, Europe’s banks desperately need to shore up their balance sheets.
China’s sovereign wealth fund and non-bank financial institutions have been eager to invest in well-established Western banks.
This is a good time to do so, as these banks’ valuations have plunged.
Finally, Europe’s crisis presents an attractive opportunity for China to expand its direct investment there.
In 2010, Chinese direct investment in the EU totaled only $1.3 billion.
Today, when governments and companies in Europe are opening their arms to foreign investors, Chinese companies eager for markets, technologies, and diversification should find rich pickings.
But Chinese money has been viewed with suspicion in Europe, reflecting fears that China has a hidden political agenda.
Such bias has discouraged Chinese capital from making bigger bets on Europe.
It is now time for Europe to gamble on China.
Such measures are likely to boost Europe’s medium-term growth prospects.
While they would most likely have no immediate calming effect on today’s panic-stricken financial markets, they are far superior to watching with folded hands as Europe descends into a financial abyss.
Can Democracy Defeat Terrorism?
The Bush administration provided three major rationales for going to war in Iraq. Only one remains at all credible: the need to transform the Middle East through democratization and thereby undercut support for terrorists.
But does this argument really have any more basis in reality than the administration’s previous claims of an “imminent” threat from weapons of mass destruction or Saddam Hussein’s alleged support for al‑Qaeda?
With post-invasion inspectors concluding that no WMD stockpiles existed, and intelligence agencies now convinced that the Iraq war’s net effect has been to boost al‑Qaeda recruitment throughout the Islamic world, the Bush administration is understandably emphasizing the claim about democratization.
Indeed, it has become a dominant theme of Bush’s second term.
As Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice put it in a recent speech in Cairo, “Freedom and democracy are the only ideas powerful enough to overcome hatred, division, and violence.”
Cynics view this as merely an argument of convenience, one that has gained in prominence only because the other two rationales for the war collapsed.
More importantly, skeptics also doubt the validity of the administration’s argument linking democracy and reduction of terrorism.
After all, British citizens in one of the world’s oldest democracies carried out the recent terrorist attacks in London.
Similarly, an American citizen carried out the worst terrorist attack in the United States before September 11, 2001.
The skeptics have a point, but they go too far.
For one thing, it is still too early to judge the merits of the argument.
A full assessment of the Iraq war and its effects on the Middle East will take a decade or more.
Clearly, the January 2005 election there was a positive step for the region.
In the last six months, there have been national elections in Lebanon and local elections in Saudi Arabia.
Egypt has amended its constitution to allow it presidential election to be contested.
Further elections are scheduled in Iraq and the Palestinian Authority.
As Walid Jumblatt, the Lebanese Druze leader said, “It’s strange for me to say it, but this process of change has started because of the American invasion of Iraq.”
Perhaps that outcome shouldn’t seem so strange.
After all, as the columnist David Brooks recently observed, “If there is one soft power gift that America does possess, it is the tendency to imagine new worlds.”
In other words, the invasion of Iraq, and the subsequent increase in the rhetoric of democracy in the Middle East, may have changed frames of reference about the status quo.
Democracy, however, is more than just elections. It also requires tolerance of minorities and respect for individual rights, as well as the development of effective institutions for resolving political conflicts in divided societies.
If this occurs in Iraq, it may provide some post hoc legitimization for the war.
But such an outcome remains in doubt.
In the short run, the invasion of Iraq has created an intensifying insurgency and incipient civil war.
The presence of foreign troops creates a stimulus for nationalist and jihadist responses.
The future of Iraq, not to mention democracy there, remains uncertain at best.
Nevertheless, we can still conclude from the Iraqi experience that while the development of democracy can be aided from outside, it cannot easily be imposed by force.
While it is true that Germany and Japan became democratic after American occupation, it required their total defeat in a devastating war, and a seven-year occupation.
Moreover, Germany and Japan were relatively homogeneous societies with some prior experience of democracy.
It is hard to see such conditions repeated in today’s world.
The Bush administration may be correct in arguing that the extremely high costs and risks of promoting democracy are less than the costs and risks of allowing the authoritarian status quo in the Middle east to persist indefinitely.
But democracy is not the only instrument for a transformation that addresses the roots of terrorism.
The development of civil societies, economic growth, and openness to the world are equally important.
So is employing young men, educating young women, and addressing values of liberty and justice, which means ameliorating the sense of indignity in the region that stems from issues like the Israel-Palestine conflict.
Moreover, democracy alone will not convert the current crop of extremist jihadis to peaceful change.