First, it will be difficult to afford these expensive new sources of energy.
Second, energy rationing policies like cap-and-trade will be a permanent drag on economic activity.
Ironically, emissions have not decreased as a result of these policies, but are doing so now as the world economy moves into recession.
This is not a surprise to someone like me, having been actively involved in my country’s transition from communism to a free society and market economy.
The old, outmoded heavy industries that were the pride of our Communist regime were shut down – practically overnight – because they could not survive the opening of the economy.
The result was a dramatic decline in CO2 emissions.
The secret behind the cut in emissions was economic decline.
As the economies of the Czech Republic and other central and eastern European countries were rebuilt and began to grow again, emissions have naturally started to increase.
It should be clear to everyone that there is a very strong correlation between economic growth and energy use.
So I am amazed to see people going along with the currently fashionable political argument that policies like cap-and-trade, government mandates, and subsidies for renewable energy can actually benefit an economy.
It is claimed that government, working together with business, will create “a new energy economy,” that the businesses involved will profit, and that everyone will be better off.
This is a fantasy.
Cap-and-trade can only work by raising energy prices.
Consumers who are forced to pay higher prices for energy will have less money to spend on other things.
While the individual companies that provide the higher-priced “green” energy may do well, the net economic effect will be negative.
It is necessary to look at the bigger picture.
Profits can be made when energy is rationed or subsidized, but only within an economy operating at lower, or even negative, growth rates.
This means that over the longer term, everyone will be competing for a piece of a pie that is smaller than it would have been without energy rationing.
This does not auger well either for growth or for working our way out of today’s crisis.
The Reality of Virtual Power
DAVOS – As Arab regimes struggle with demonstrations fueled by Twitter and Al Jazeera, and American diplomats try to understand the impact of WikiLeaks, it is clear that this global information age will require a more sophisticated understanding of how power works in world politics.
That is the argument of my new book, The Future of Power.
Two types of power shifts are occurring in this century – power transition and power diffusion.
The transition of power from one dominant state to another is a familiar historical pattern, but power diffusion is a more novel process.
The problem for all states today is that more is happening outside the control of even the most powerful of them.
As for power transition, much attention nowadays is lavished on a supposed American decline, often with facile historical analogies to Britain and Rome.
But Rome remained dominant for more than three centuries after the apogee of its power, and, even then, it did not succumb to the rise of another state, but suffered a death by a thousand cuts inflicted by various barbarian tribes.
Indeed, for all the fashionable predictions that China, India, or Brazil will surpass the United States in the coming decades, the greatest threats may come from modern barbarians and non-state actors.
In an information-based world of cyber-insecurity, power diffusion may be a greater threat than power transition.
Conventional wisdom has always held that the state with the largest military prevails.
In an information age, however, it may be the state (or non-state) with the best story that wins.
Today, it is far from clear how to measure a balance of power, much less how to develop successful survival strategies for this new world.
Most current projections of a shift in the global balance of power are based primarily on one factor: projections of countries’ GDP growth.
They thus ignore the other dimensions of power, including both hard military power and the soft power of narrative, not to mention the policy difficulties of combining them into successful strategies.
States will remain the dominant actor on the world stage, but they will find the stage far more crowded and difficult to control.
A much larger part of their populations than ever before has access to the power that comes from information.
Governments have always worried about the flow and control of information, and the current period is not the first to be strongly affected by dramatic changes in information technology.
What is new – and what we see manifested in the Middle East today – is the speed of communication and the technological empowerment of a wider range of actors.
The current information age, sometimes called the “Third Industrial Revolution,” is based on rapid technological advances in computers, communications, and software, which in turn have led to a dramatic fall in the cost of creating, processing, transmitting, and searching for information of all kinds.
And this means that world politics can no longer be the sole province of governments.
As the cost of computing and communication comes down, the barriers to entry decline.
Individuals and private organizations, ranging from corporations to NGOs to terrorists, have thus been empowered to play a direct role in world politics.
The spread of information means that power will be more widely distributed, and informal networks will undercut the monopoly of traditional bureaucracy.
The speed of Internet time means that all governments will have less control over their agendas.
Political leaders will enjoy fewer degrees of freedom before they must respond to events, and then will have to compete with an increasing number and variety of actors in order to be heard.
We see this as American policymakers struggle to cope with today’s Middle East disturbances.
The fall of the Tunisian regime had deep domestic roots, but the timing caught outsiders, including the US government, by surprise.
Some observers attribute the acceleration of the revolution to Twitter and WikiLeaks.
As the Obama administration formulates policy towards Egypt and Yemen, it faces a dilemma.
In Yemen, Ali Abdullah Saleh’s regime has provided important assistance in dealing with the threat from Al Qaeda-affiliated terrorism.
In Egypt, Hosni Mubarak’s rule helped to moderate the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and balanced Iranian power in the region.
Simplistic endorsement of democracy by George W. Bush’s administration was costly both in Iraq and in Gaza, where elections gave rise to a hostile Hamas-led government.
In an information age, smart policy combines hard and soft power.
Given what the US is, the Obama administration cannot afford to neglect the soft-power narrative of democracy, liberty, and openness.
Thus, Obama and US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton have issued public as well as private appeals for reform and change in Egypt and the wider Arab world, while also urging limits to violence by all parties.
Moreover, they have aligned themselves with freedom of information in the face of efforts by the Egyptian regime to block Internet access.
How events in the Middle East will play out is anyone’s guess, but in today’s information age, upholding the freedom to access it will be an important component of smart power.
Open-Access Economics
CANBERRA – The brouhaha over Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff’s article “Growth in a Time of Debt” may be the most conspicuous and incendiary scholarly controversy since 1974, when two earlier economists, Robert Fogel and Stanley Engerman, published a notorious book, Time on the Cross, defending the efficiency of American plantation slavery.
As with Time on the Cross, the Reinhart/Rogoff controversy, while ostensibly stemming from the authors’ statistical procedures, is actually rooted in the purposes to which others put their study.
Some of the results reported by Fogel and Engerman were used – not by the authors themselves, it should be noted – to challenge affirmative action and question the civil-rights movement.
Similarly, some of the results reported by Reinhart and Rogoff have been used by politicians and others to justify fiscal austerity.
When the problems with the Reinhart/Rogoff analysis came to light, the critics were aghast.
The authors had inadvertently omitted data, used a questionable weighting scheme, and employed an erroneous observation on GDP growth.
This raised uncomfortable questions not only about the efficacy of austerity, but also about the reliability of economic analysis.
How could a flawed study have appeared first in the prestigious working-paper series of the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) and then in a journal of the American Economic Association?
And, if this was possible, why should policymakers and a discerning public vest any credibility in economic research?
It was possible because economists are not obliged to make their data and programs publicly available when publishing scientific research.
It is said that NBER working papers are even more prestigious than publication in refereed journals. Yet the Bureau does not require scholars to post their data and programs to its Web site as a condition for working-paper publication.
Independent scholars seeking to replicate these studies’ findings must first replicate the data and then replicate the programs.
And, as empirical economics has progressed, the difficulty of doing so has grown.
Reinhart and Rogoff may have used a relatively small set of mostly publicly available data, but the profession as a whole is using ever-larger tailor-made data sets.
Big data promises big progress.
But large data sets also make replication impossible without the author’s cooperation.
And the incentive for authors to cooperate is, at best, mixed.
It is therefore the responsibility of editorial boards and the directors of organizations like the NBER to make open access obligatory.
Moreover, in a discipline that regards ingenuity as the ultimate virtue, those who engage in the grunt work of data cleaning and replication receive few rewards.
Nobel prizes are not awarded for constructing new historical estimates of GDP that allow policy analysis to be extended back in time.
Then there is the fact that correlation is not causation.
In the case of Reinhart and Rogoff, the observation that highly indebted countries grow more slowly, even if true, does not tell us anything about whether high debt causes slow growth or vice versa.
These are difficult questions, but they have simple solutions.
What is needed is not more sophisticated statistical methods, but serious historical analysis of the political and economic particulars of specific historical cases in which countries were burdened with heavy debts.
A proper historical analysis would help to identify cases in which debt was incurred for reasons other than the state of the economy, so that causality arguably runs from debt to growth, rather than the other way around.
Economic historians have shown how this can be done.
My Berkeley colleagues David and Christina Romer, for example, faced an analogous problem when seeking to determine whether monetary-policy shocks affect economic growth.
They used careful historical analysis to identify and focus on cases in which the policy stance changed for reasons not having to do with the current state of the economy.
Doing so allowed them to isolate the impact of monetary shocks on growth.
Statistics are helpful. But in economics, as in other lines of social inquiry, they are no substitute for proper historical analysis.
In impugning the authors’ motives and criticizing the uses to which others have put their research, critics of Reinhart and Rogoff have taken their eye off the ball.
The real problem is scholarly procedures and priorities, not motives.
If the problem of procedures and priorities is addressed, the fact that politicians are tempted to misuse scholarly analysis for their own ends will take care of itself.
In other words, what is true of the economy is equally true of economic analysis.
A crisis is a terrible thing to waste.
The Real Route to Democracy at the IMF
Emerging market countries from Chile to China have been arguing for some time that the International Monetary Fund – the nerve center of the international financial system ­– needs to become more “democratic.”
They want more policy influence the next time the Fund decides to bail out a fellow emerging-market country like Argentina, Brazil, Indonesia, and Turkey.
(Unfortunately, benign as current market conditions may seem, there will surely be a next time for some countries.)
In the meantime, as a new “Washington Consensus” of best-practice economic policies inevitably emerges, developing countries want to feel that they helped design it, for better or worse.
I couldn’t agree more.
The IMF’s perceived “democratic deficit” is a serious challenge to the Fund’s political legitimacy and to its ability to effectively stabilize crisis situations.
But let’s recognize that real democracy is only going to come when middle-income developing countries are prepared to back up their lofty rhetoric with hard cash.
Right now is precisely the time to do so, given that the United States has become, without rival, the world’s most reckless borrower.
The US is draining a whopping 75% of the world’s surplus savings.
Today, even formerly bankrupt governments from Korea to Russia to Mexico are awash in dollars.
Why not put some of those dollars to good use?
These countries need to understand that calls to cut rich-country voting shares at the IMF, unless they are backed up by real money, are naïve, if not downright hypocritical.
At the end of the day, as long as the IMF is in the lending business, it needs to keep its creditors happy.
Otherwise, they will pull up stakes, and the Fund (and its sister organization, the World Bank) will have a debt crisis of its own.
Right now, the US, Europe, and Japan put up the lion’s share of the capital, so they have disproportionate power.
It doesn’t have to be this way.
Many middle-income countries’ central banks are hoarding dollars today in order to prevent their currencies from appreciating too much against the sinking dollar.
China alone, with over $600 billion in reserves, holds more than enough dollars to recapitalize the IMF four times over.
Even Latin American governments now hold enough dollar reserve assets to buy out Europe’s shares in the Fund.
It may seem strange to make middle-income countries pay for their own bailout insurance, but it isn’t.
They have much more at stake in IMF policies than do rich countries.
Many people have forgotten that the Fund was originally conceived as a cooperative – it bailed out England only a few decades ago, and almost had to bail out France.
People forget these episodes because the Fund’s resources have not kept pace with the explosion of global capital markets so that today, the IMF lacks the capacity to bail out an Italy or a Japan (though the issue may well arise one day.)
So, if the Fund is to resume its identity as a cooperative, it makes sense to shift its center of gravity.
Would middle-income developing countries actually change things if they were big creditors at the Fund?
I wonder.
Admittedly, no developing country ever seems to vote against a big bailout for one of its brethren, no matter how ill conceived.
But would such indiscriminate largesse persist if middle-income countries knew that their votes really counted, and that they were spending their own money?
I doubt it.
On the whole, I expect that the bailout policies of a more “democratic” IMF would look much as they do now.
After all, the laws of economics are always going to force prodigal debtor countries into adopting austerity measures.
If a country that has been borrowing like a drunk suddenly sees its credit dry up, it will tighten its belt – raise taxes, cut spending, or do both – with or without an international lender of last resort.
Perhaps the IMF’s bedside manners would improve, perhaps not.
In any case, greater political legitimacy would likely make the Fund’s crisis leadership smoother and more credible, potentially shortening crises and minimizing their pain.
The big question is whether the rich countries that have long ruled the roost at the Fund would actually surrender some of their power.
They might, and they should, even if global financial markets take time to adjust to a slightly smaller role for the dollar.
They really have little to lose and much to gain.
So there is an upside to today’s massive US fiscal and current account deficits.
The structure of global imbalances, with the US the big borrower and emerging markets the creditors, presents a rare opportunity to finance a change in governance at the IMF.
Let’s do it now before the chance slips away when the next round of crises hits.
Fulfilling the Genomic Promise
VIENNA – For most people, a promise is a reason to expect something, a well-founded hope without hype.
And it is a promise in this sense that connects science to society: the public trusts that scientific and technological advancement are the keys to navigating the uncertain road to a better world, in which future generations can live longer, healthier, and happier lives.
This promise originated almost 400 years ago, with the institutionalization of modern science.
After discovering that mathematics could be applied to understanding the physical world, a small group of natural philosophers turned toward experimental empiricism with practical objectives.
Spearheaded by this minority, the scientific revolution swept through Europe and, later, spread to the rest of the world.
In his Instauratio Magna, Francis Bacon, one of modern science’s most articulate proponents, conveyed a vision of a new world, transformed through the systematic inquiry of natural phenomena.
By imitating and twisting nature, he declared, its secrets would be revealed – and could be manipulated to improve humans’ lives.
Bacon’s pragmatic objective of using a scientific understanding of natural causes to “effect all things possible” – what is now called innovation – was science’s original promise to society, and formed the core of the Age of Enlightenment.
While many of science’s promises have been fulfilled – notably, the dramatic extension of the human lifespan and of leisure time – many others have been only partly achieved, or not at all.
And yet society’s trust in science has not wavered.
While specific objectives have changed, the overarching belief that scientific knowledge transforms people’s lives – as cultural, educational, and institutional factors converge with technological and industrial dynamics – has remained strong.
Today, genetics is the leading source of scientific promise.
Since James D. Watson and Francis Crick uncovered DNA’s structure in 1953, a massive amount of available genetic data has been identified, and novel forms of scientific organization and modes of working have emerged.
As a result, genetics has brought science to the brink of a new era of enlightenment, in which individuals are understood in terms of the relationships among their unique genomic data.
This movement – the latest incarnation of the endless quest for human advancement – poses new challenges to the relationship between science and society.
As the American Museum of Natural History provocatively asked at the 2001 opening of its genetics exhibition: “The genomic revolution is here – are you ready?”
For example, this revolution will undoubtedly lead to the engineering of life through synthetic biology, a prospect that remains controversial.
Likewise, epigenetics (the study of heritable changes in gene function that occur without altering the DNA sequence) has reshaped the old nature-versus-nurture debate by highlighting the multi-dimensional character of the relationship between biological and social development.
The growing understanding of transgenerational epigenetic modifications, whether nutritional or neurological, has opened new perspectives on the plasticity of the phenotype (an organism’s observable characteristics), and the factors that might affect it.
As a result, it is now clear that people’s lifestyles do not concern only themselves.
These developments – and the questions that they raise – underscore the need to redraw the map of the sciences.
A more integrated research agenda that includes the social sciences is crucial to ensuring that the promise of genetic research benefits all.
In fact, such research is integral to improving upon the factors that contribute most to a society’s wealth: health, education, and ethics.
Indeed, more encompassing knowledge of personal genomics can engender a new sense of commonality.
With a better understanding of people’s relationships to each other – from the impact that one’s lifestyle could have on the health of future generations to the corrosive effects of existing inequalities and the concomitant risk of a new genetic divide – a healthier, more equal society could be created.
But realizing this vision requires accounting for the different choices that people make within a pluralistic society.
To this end, the collaboration of social and scientific institutions would help to break down language and cultural barriers, ensuring that the genomic revolution aids, rather than alienates, the public, and thereby passes the true test of any scientific advancement: relevance to everyday experience.
In a world characterized by multiple, overlapping crises, people need to see, understand, and identify with what genetics has to offer.
When asked what should keep us awake at night, the economist Amartya Sen answered, “The tragedies that we can prevent, the injustice that we can repair.”
Applying scientific advances to the prevention of tragedy and the redress of injustice fulfills science’s core promise.
Strengthening the real-world role of genetics is an essential step in that direction.
The Re-Birth of Utopia
Franz Müntefering’s resignation as chairman of Germany’s Social Democrats in the face of a challenge from his party’s leftwing has, like the divisive French referendum on the European Constitution this past May, exposed deep ideological cleavages – divisions not only about Europe, but about the very foundations of society and the economy.
Behind the critiques directed at the EU and national governments as “not being social enough,” lurks an image of the Union as a trap that is forcing its members to bend to the fateful disciplines of the market, thus depriving national leaders of their ability to realize important social goals.
This cleavage now seems set to shape not only Germany’s future coalition government, but the future of politics across Europe.
In France, this division is evident not only on the extremes of right and left, and in traditionally nationalist Gaullist circles, but also among most socialist voters, who decided to spurn the party leadership’s pro-European stance.
This fundamental debate is not about to abate.
On the contrary, as the German election shows and with a presidential election looming in France, the debate has intensified.
In France, this intensity is particularly visible within Socialist ranks.
With preparations for the party’s November congress in full swing, a conflict that goes back to the party’s founding is reappearing.
On one side is a social-democratic vision, which basically favors the market economy but seeks to alleviateits harsher effects; on the other side stands a radical vision that extols a revolutionary “break with capitalism.”
With the disappearance of the communist world and the failure of its collectivist policies, one would think that this debate had been resolved in favor of the reformist vision.
But the surprise of the last few months is that an important part of the Socialist electorate and party leaders back radical change.
Moreover, a substantial portion of the broader anti-liberal left, composed of communists, ecologists, union activists, and adherents of the movement Attac accuse the reformists of subordinating themselves to liberal globalization and advocate, instead, a radical transformation of society and the economy.
The media success of Olivier Besancenot, a 31-year-old representative of the most intransigent section of the Trotskyist Revolutionary Communist League, reflects the power of this dream.
Having received over 4% of the vote during the first round of the presidential election of 2002, Besancenotis now, according to opinion polls, the 38th most popular person in France.
Interestingly, an echo of the ideas mooted by radical anti-globalists can be found in someinitiatives coming from the right.
President Jacques Chirac of France, but also Brazil’s leftist president, Lula da Silva support a tax on airline tickets designed to finance poor countries’ development.
Similarly, the centrist leader François Bayrou, has proposed imposing a “Tobin tax” (named after its creator, the Nobel laureate economist James Tobin) on financial transactions, with the proceeds to be used to support socially worthy causes.
How do we explain this resurgent radicalism, which seems to ignore European and international political realities?
One might suspect the influence of French political traditions which, on the right as much as on the left, always prefer purity of principle to messy compromise.
Add to this the congenital French mistrust of liberalism – indeed, French is one of the rare languages in which the word “liberalism” has a pejorative connotation – joined to an equally deep-rooted perception of the state (again, on both the right and the left) as the defender of the general interest par excellence.
While pragmatism has come to dominate northern Europe’s socialist parties since the 1930’s – and, after the 1957 Congress of Bad Godesberg, the Germany’s Social Democratic Party (SPD) as well – a preference for revolutionary ideology has always prevailed, at least on the rhetorical level, among French socialists.
But this cannot be the whole explanation, because a similar radicalization is occurring within German’s left, where the alliance of the post-communist PDS – still powerful in the Länder of what was East Germany – and SPD dissidents led by Oskar Lafontaine promotes equally radical proposals.
With the evident failure of both leftist and rightist governments to stem the rising wave of unemployment, a growing part of the French and German electorates no longer seems to believe in traditional solutions.
The welfare state, largely associated with the reformist social-democratic movement, is now reaching its limits in the form of uncontrolled public deficits and unsupportable levels of taxation.
Similarly, the social mobility once fostered by the welfare state has suffered serious reverses.
Globalized markets are viewed as bringingmore inequalities, austerity, and insecurity than the promised benefits of economic growth.
In this disenchanted environment, dreams of utopia thrive.
But it is a fundamental characteristic of utopias that they cannot be implemented.
What is now needed is a more modest debate about how to reconcile the deficiencies of the market with the demands of solidarity.
Should the state confine itself to creating an economic environment favorable to private enterprise?
How extensively should it contribute to security, education, research, innovation, and protection of the poor?
But such debates can be fruitful only if they recognize the economic and political constraints under which modern states operate.
Indeed, the role of the state is made more complicated by the fact that market regulation is becoming less national and more transnational.
Instead of throwing up our hands in despair, we should adhere to a distinction dear to the great German sociologist Max Weber, for now is a time when the ethics of responsibility must prevail over the ethics of conviction.
The Re-Education of Hong Kong
HONG KONG – After less than 100 days in office, C.Y. Leung, Hong Kong’s new Chief Executive, is already in political intensive care. In record time, he has managed to lose his veneer of competence, credibility, and steely leadership.
One of his cabinet appointees was arrested for corruption within two weeks of Leung’s assumption of his official duties.
Another was found to have been a slumlord who owned illegal cage-like flats that he blamed entirely on his wife, denying any involvement whatsoever.
Leung himself was caught with several illegal structures in his house, a violation that he exploited successfully against his rival, Henry Tang, in the election campaign.
Leung has also distinguished himself by inciting a large swathe of school teachers and students to stage massive street protests against his hasty effort to insert a “national education” program into the school curriculum in order to “reconnect” Hong Kong’s young people with the motherland.
For tens of thousands of student protesters, many with their parents in tow, the potential death of an honest education was too much to bear.
The goal of the program, inherited from the previous administration, is a good one: expand knowledge among the young about modern China.
But, as Tang correctly pointed out in response to a question about the protests, the “devil is in the details.”
What triggered the uproar was the appearance of a “model” textbook, financed by the government and published by a pro-China think tank.
The textbook contains mostly propaganda, including assertions that China’s one-party system is wonderful, whereas multiparty democracy as practiced in the United States has created harmful social turbulence.
It offers no discussion of the lethal policies since 1949 that led to the persecution and starvation of tens of millions of Chinese.
Nor does it mention the fratricidal political movements from the Great Leap Forward to the Cultural Revolution.
The program was clearly meant to indoctrinate, not educate.
Massive protests forced Leung to withdraw a deadline to implement the new curriculum. He has also given the schools flexibility concerning when and perhaps how to introduce it.
Since nearly all schools are dependent on government subsidies, the grant of flexibility is widely perceived to be a tactical delay.
With the job security of schoolmasters at risk, most are sure to implement the program.
The protesters, led by a 15-year-old student, now a folk hero, have retreated, but that, too, is a tactical decision.
The students have promised to continue to fight the program until it is scrapped.
But why does China’s government seek to impose the curriculum in the first place?
After all, Hong Kong has one of the world’s most educated populations: the city has, in per capita terms, perhaps more graduates of the world’s top 20 universities than anywhere outside of Manhattan.
Nevertheless, after more than 60 years in power, the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) continues to retain a deep sense of insecurity.
The Internet may be ubiquitous in modern China, but YouTube and Facebook, so accepted as a part of normal life around the world, are still banned, and the Public Security Bureau has built a vast Internet monitoring system to filter and censor whatever China’s leaders believe they must fear.
While dissent is the lifeblood of any open society, for China it is a dangerous poison.
Moreover, China fears that Hong Kong, with a population of less than eight million, might present a systemic problem as an alternative form of government, even though many Communists and their allies hold key positions in Hong Kong’s private and public sectors.
Instead of accepting that “love” cannot be enforced and must be won, Hong Kong’s over-zealous “patriots” cannot wait to show their loyalty by trying to mandate primitive propaganda.
Few in Hong Kong are buying the political elite’s mantra that the national education program is the “right” thing to do.
They know that practically all of the ruling elite’s children attend expensive schools in the United States and the United Kingdom, where they would be shielded from the mindless drivel at home.
Leung’s son, for example, is reportedly a student at Winchester College, one of the UK’s most exclusive boarding schools. And most, if not all, of the children of the ruling elite in Beijing are in a similar position.
The daughter of Xi Jinping, the presumptive future leader who has now reemerged from an unexplained absence, is attending Harvard under an assumed name.
Disgraced ex-Politburo member Bo Xilai’s hard-partying son, Bo Guagua, attended Harrow, Winston Churchill’s alma mater, then Oxford and Harvard.
Their parents clearly know that “national education” is not needed for a good education.
Unfortunately, Hong Kong’s younger generation is losing confidence in democracy.
Popular elections do not translate into representation in a system designed by China to ensure that its allies win a majority every time.
As a result, more and more young people are turning to street demonstrations to make their voices heard.
And, while no one in Hong Kong wants independence from China, continued strong-arm tactics to force Hong Kong to “love” China could begin to inspire such sentiments.
Leung’s tone-deafness to popular feeling revives one of the main issues that he managed to dodge during the election campaign.
At the time, he denied vehemently that he was a member of the CCP.
He claimed that he had only Hong Kong’s interest in mind within the limits of China’s “one country, two systems” formula.
So far, however, he seems inclined to make one of those systems resemble the other.
But China’s national interest is to ensure that Hong Kong remains a first-rate city, modern and open.
Pulling Hong Kong down, in the name of patriotism, can only impede the advance to modernity that all of China needs to become truly great.
The Reform Game
Reform, when long discussed but never implemented, can do far more harm than good.
Anticipation of a reform – say, of pension rules, the health system, or unemployment benefits – worries everyone who might feel the impact.
In response, they cut consumption and save more, expecting that sooner or later they will have to start paying for some of the services they had been used to getting free or at subsidized rates.
But because reform in Europe is usually only discussed, the benefits fail to materialize: people work harder only when they are sure that tax rates are actually cut, and in financial markets the positive effects of lower government spending do not come before any reform is approved.
In the meantime, as politicians debate and do nothing, consumer confidence falls, economic performance worsens, and the consensus needed to get reforms approved in the first place vanishes.
Still the talk does not stop, nor does the fall in consumer confidence.
Germany’s recent experience provides a worrying example of this vicious circle.
Reform of Germany’s generous social system has claimed the front pages for German papers for more than ten years.
Some timid measures have been implemented, but the general feeling among Germans is best described by the following answer to a survey conducted two months ago by the newspaper Die Welt : “47% of those interviewed plan to cut consumption due to the uncertainty about pensions and health reform.”
The result has been a sharp fall in consumer confidence: the German index of consumer sentiment was small but positive in November 2000; it has since fallen to -20, the sharpest decline in the euro area.
Out on the street, pessimism runs rampant.
For two years now, the growth rate of private consumption (measured at constant prices) has been negative: - 1% in 2002, -0.5% in 2003.
Similar declines in real consumption are rare in industrial countries, as in bad years consumers typically draw on their savings to keep their consumption relatively constant. In the case of Germany, one has to go back to the early 1980’s to see similar negative numbers in consumption growth.
As a result, rather than falling, the household saving rate has increased, rising from 9.7% of disposable income in 2000 to 11.8% last year.
Depressed consumption and higher savings have affected all age groups, but the relatively old have been more prone to the trend than the relatively young.
The only positive signs in consumption are seen among the youngest households, those headed by people in their early twenties, who evidently hope that sooner or later the reforms will be approved and their tax burden reduced.
But the saving rate even in households in their thirties has risen along with concern about reforms.
Not surprisingly, elderly people cut consumption more.
With retirement, they have lost almost all options: they can no longer work more, nor can they sign up for private health plans – the insurance premiums at their age are too high.
So they are forced to rely on their savings, and virtually stop consuming.
Put this in the context of a rapidly aging population and the effects on overall consumption are dramatic.
Interestingly, France is the only large Euro area country where consumer confidence is growing (from -24 a year ago to -13 today).
The reason is simple: as the 2006 elections approach, reforms have been shifted off the political agenda.
If a government does not have the will to adopt a reform program, then the best thing it can do is stop talking about reform altogether.
This may start happening in Germany and for the same reason: consumer confidence remains lackluster.
Europe’s economy grew at an anemic 1.8% annual rate in 2004, and the OECD has recently revised downward its growth forecast for next year, from 2.5 to 1.9%, owing to the rising euro and the fall in exports – so far the only driver of the euro area economies.
The common wisdom is that to faster European growth requires a boost from domestic demand.
But this will not happen as long as politicians keep talking about reforms, while doing virtually nothing to realize them.
On the contrary, all they are doing is spreading pessimism.
Europe has two ways ahead.
It can forget about reform and enjoy the four or five decades it will take for its per capita income to fall below the level of, say, Chile, or it can deeply change its social model and start growing like the US.
Doing nothing but talking, which is Europe’s current model of inaction, is the worst possible course.
The Refugee Dilemma
One reason Greek Cypriots rejected last April UN Secretary General Kofi Annan's plan for the reunification of Cyprus was that an overwhelming majority of them felt it did not do justice to the claims of refugees displaced during the 1974 Turkish invasion.
This was also one of the few occasions when international public opinion became aware that there was a refugee problem on the island, because few people knew that refugees from that war still exist.
When Turkey invaded Cyprus in 1974 after an abortive attempt by the Greek military junta in Athens to carry out Enosis (unification with Greece), 250,000 or so Greek Cypriots were uprooted from their homes.
Some fled in terror from the invading army, some were expelled - the usual complex, morally problematic picture that emerges in such situations.
Although overwhelmed, the Greek Cypriot community reacted with humanity, solidarity, and prudence.
Initially, refugees camps were set up, but the Greek Cypriot government decided that while it will not surrender the refugees' claim eventually to return to their homes in the North, it would do its utmost in the interim not to leave them vegetating in squalid camps.
No UN-sponsored refugee agency was established to help the refugees.
Instead, with some international help, but mostly out of its own resources, the Republic of Cyprus - a small, then not very prosperous country that was devastated by war - launched a re-settlement and rehabilitation program as a national project.
Government loans were offered for housing construction.
In many cases, refugees built their own new homes.
Businesses were encouraged with government subsidies and loans.
Schools and training centers were established.
Within a few years, the refugees were absorbed into the economy and society of the southern, Greek Cypriot sector of the island.
As in post-World War II West Germany, much of the current prosperity in Cyprus today is an outcome of the boost the economy received from the absorption of refugees.
Anyone visiting the Greek Cypriot part of the island nowadays will not find refugee camps: most of the millions of tourists are unaware of the fact that more than a third of the Greek Cypriots they encounter are refugees or descendants of refugees.
The Greek Cypriot community can justly be proud of the way they handled the humanitarian and social problems of the refugees, without at any point surrendering their claims to the lands they lost.
Equally commendable has been the Greek Cypriot strategic decision to follow a Gandhi-like policy of non-violence: while there is deep bitterness about the Turkish occupation, and the fact that Turkish settlers were implanted in the North, the Greek Cypriot community decided not to use violence against the occupation.
Not one incident of Greek Cypriot terrorism or violence against Turkish occupation has occurred in more than a quarter of a century.
This is also one of the reasons few people have ever heard about the Greek Cypriot refugees.
It could, of course, be different: had Greek Cypriots followed the Palestinian example since 1948 - that is, kept the refugees in camps, segregated them from the non-refugee society, and fed their children a daily militaristic message of hatred, revenge, and terrorism - a completely different atmosphere would permeate the island.
The Greek Cypriot example shows that it is simply not true that the occupied have no recourse other than violence and terrorism.
Recourse to violence and terror is a moral and strategic choice.
The Greek Cypriots chose the path of non-violence; the Palestinians chose the opposite route.
There is always a choice, and there are always consequences.
Consider what the Greek Cypriot community has achieved - a thriving economy, no one living under conditions of misery and humiliation in camps, membership in the European Union - compared to the catastrophe the Palestinian choice has brought to their own people.
Perhaps on the level of public relations, the Palestinian leadership - sacrificing their own people on the altar of propaganda - can bask in their achievement: yet it is their own people who suffer.
These leaders would do better to look across the Mediterranean at Cyprus and see how - without giving up claims to disputed land - refugees can live in dignity and honor.
But then again, the Republic of Cyprus is a democracy, while the Palestinians have not been able to emancipate themselves from the violent militarized option that has brought them such misery.
The Renminbi Goes Forth
BEIJING – In June, the Peoples’ Bank of China (PBC), China’s central bank, announced an end to the renminbi’s 23-month-old peg to the dollar and a return to the pre-crisis exchange-rate regime adopted in July 2005.
So far, however, the RMB’s appreciation against the dollar has been slow.
Will the pace of appreciation accelerate enough to satisfy American demands?
If it does, will global imbalances disappear sooner?
It is hard to argue that the RMB is not undervalued, given China’s large and persistent current-account and capital-account surpluses.
But, despite ending the dollar peg, faster appreciation of the RMB seems unlikely for the foreseeable future.
China’s official position is that, to avoid the negative impact of a stronger RMB on China’s exports and hence employment, appreciation must proceed in an autonomous, gradual, and controllable manner.
The current exchange-rate regime, which links the RMB to a basket of currencies, was designed to give the PBC leeway to control the pace of RMB appreciation, while creating two-way fluctuations in the exchange rate against the US dollar in order to discourage speculators from making one-way bets on the RMB.
RMB appreciation should have started earlier and at a faster pace, when China’s trade surplus was much smaller and its growth was much less dependent on exports. Delay has made current-account rebalancing via RMB appreciation costly.
And now China faces a dilemma.
As a result of the global financial crisis, China’s export growth in 2009 dropped by 34% compared to 2008.
In the first seven months of 2010, China’s trade surplus was $84 billion, down 21.2% from January-July 2009.
This large, steady fall in the country’s trade surplus makes the Chinese government hesitant to allow the RMB to appreciate significantly, for fear of the lagged impact on the trade balance.
But the PBC is also reluctant to buy dollars constantly.
The PBC knows that rapid deterioration in America’s fiscal position and continual worsening in its external balance may create an irresistible temptation for the US to inflate away its debt burden.
The more the PBC intervenes, the larger the national welfare losses that China may suffer in the future.
The Chinese government must, therefore, strike a balance between protecting China’s export sector and preserving its national welfare.
The dilemma that officials face is that the impact of a fall in exports as a result of RMB appreciation will be felt acutely and immediately, whereas the large welfare losses due to the evaporation of the value of China’s foreign-exchange reserves will be borne by society as a whole – but not immediately.
Moreover, the increase in China’s overall price level – and wage levels in particular – has caused the RMB to strengthen steadily in real terms, reducing (to a certain extent) the need for nominal RMB appreciation.
True, commerce ministry officials recently declared their wish to see a further fall of China’s trade surplus in 2010.
But RMB appreciation is not the preferred instrument for achieving this goal.
Thus, nothing dramatic will happen to the RMB exchange rate in the near term – unless something dramatic happens.
At the same time, the effect of currency appreciation on the trade balance should not be exaggerated.
The fall in China’s trade surplus since late 2008 is attributable mainly to the global slowdown and the stimulus package introduced by the Chinese government, rather than to changes in the RMB’s exchange rate.
But if the RMB is allowed to float, isn’t a balanced trade account likely?
Probably not.
With a fast-rising RMB, net capital outflows will increase, which is what Japan experienced after the Plaza Accord of 1985 pushed the yen upward.
As a result, balance-of-payments equilibrium would be reached at a certain exchange-rate level, but a current-account surplus (albeit smaller) would still exist.
America should not pin too much hope on a weakening dollar to correct its trade imbalances.
For the US, the fundamental cause of imbalances is not a strong dollar, but America’s over-consumption and over-borrowing.
A strengthening dollar would worsen the US trade balance, but a weakening dollar could cause panic in capital markets, which might push up risk premia on dollar-denominated assets, including US government securities, in turn leading to an economic slowdown and a further weakening of the dollar.
Of course, RMB appreciation may displace Chinese goods sold in the US. But if the US fails to narrow its savings gap, its current-account deficit will not disappear, regardless of where the dollar goes.
Whether America can achieve decent growth while keeping its current-account deficit in check depends on whether it can reinvigorate its ability to innovate and create, thereby restoring competitiveness and creating demand at the same time.
For both China and America, the RMB-dollar exchange rate is important for achieving growth and a more balanced current account.
But that dual objective requires structural change in the Chinese and US economies.
May’s Day
LONDON – Britain’s new prime minister, Theresa May, has a monumental task ahead of her: fulfilling British – or, more accurately, English and Welsh – voters’ demand to “Brexit” the European Union, and managing the far-reaching consequences of that effort.
Her challenge dwarfs those faced by her recent predecessors.
But she may well be up to it.
No one should underestimate May.
Like German Chancellor Angela Merkel, who has proved her mettle in successive crises, May has all the tools she needs to get things done.
She is clever and tough, with little patience for nonsense.
She has a strong sense of public service, and an equally strong set of values.
She carries little ideological baggage, and is adept at staying in control, operating within self-imposed boundaries that keep her on familiar terrain.
May wins most of the battles she fights, and shows little mercy to those who have used underhanded tactics against her.
Yet she has few known enemies within her party and is popular with its rank and file.
It is a robust combination – one that she will need to use fully as she attempts to lead Britain out of the EU.
And make no mistake: Britain is on its way out.
May has repeatedly stated that there can be no going back on the vote to leave, even though Scotland and Northern Ireland voted to stay.
“Brexit means Brexit,” she insists, with her ministers echoing her refrain.
But May has yet to elucidate precisely how she defines Brexit.
That’s the hard part.
Imagine if someone told you, “Breakfast means breakfast,” and then headed off to prepare your meal.
You would have little idea what you were actually going to eat.
A Northern Irish “Ulster fry-up” – eggs, bacon, pork sausage, black pudding, potato and soda bread, and a fried tomato – with a cup of tea?
Coffee and a pastry?
Depending on your circumstances and preferences, you would probably feel very differently about the various possibilities.
The same goes for Brexit.
Some are concerned primarily with stopping EU labor from entering the United Kingdom.
Others are focused on maintaining access to the single market.
But, unlike a breakfast, Britain can’t just demand everything on the menu.
The reality, so often ignored by the Brexiteers, is that the EU is not going to offer something for nothing.
That is not because its leaders want to score points, or punish the UK for rejecting the EU (sometimes with inflammatory rhetoric, as when Britain’s new foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, referred to its “Hitlerian imperialism”).
Rather, as we British tend to forget, everyone – including the EU and each of its member states – has their own political or commercial interests, which they are committed to protect.
For May, a central challenge over the next few months will be to determine what, realistically, Britain should be seeking when it begins the laborious negotiations on its relationship with Europe (and, on the trade front, with the world).
Given the scope of the agenda (I can think of at least six major topics that will demand their own negotiations), the process could take several years.
(My 11-year-old granddaughter could be starting university by the time they conclude!)
Clear priorities will be essential to keep them from dragging on even longer.
The goal, of course, must be to strike a balance between ensuring access to the rest of Europe for British exporters of goods and services (especially financial services) and limiting the movement of EU citizens into Britain.
The more the negotiators secure in one area, the more they will have to compromise elsewhere.
May will have to muster all of her considerable knowledge, skill, and political capital to negotiate a reasonable deal.
But even if she succeeds, she may find that not just some people are dissatisfied – an unavoidable outcome – but that everyone is.
That would compound another major challenge facing May’s government: narrowing the yawning divide in British society that the Brexit campaign exposed.
The Brexit vote was driven by the blue-collar workers of England’s North and Midlands, who have long felt alienated from their political leaders, left behind by globalization, and marginalized by its perceived agent, the EU.
Metropolitan England – especially London – may have benefited, but they did not.
Lacking faith in a Labour Party that is melting down under its left-wing leader Jeremy Corbyn, many members of this group fell prey to the populist promises of the Brexiteers.
“We will reverse globalization,” they declared.
“We will turn away the migrants who are suppressing your wages, and redirect millions of pounds from the EU to public services.”
Brexit, they pledged, would return Britain to a safer and more prosperous past.
The promises were false.
Globalization cannot be undone, and migration from the EU cannot be cut off.
Any attempt to do so would devastate UK businesses.
Even if a faltering economy leads to falling immigration, the workers who voted for Brexit will probably find, frustratingly, that low-paid jobs are still low paid, and that their public services are still under pressure.
This is unlikely to boost social cohesion.
The Brexit vote has unleashed a storm of populist sentiment that will be difficult to control.
Just as Donald Trump will not make his working-class constituents better off in the United States, Brexit will utterly fail to benefit those who chose it – no matter what it looks like.
That is the one challenge that May, despite all of her assets, may not be able to overcome.
Mayday in the UK
LONDON – Conservative Brexiteers – who campaigned for the United Kingdom to vote to leave the European Union – continue to blather about building an open, outward-looking, free-trading Britain.
But the UK is in fact turning inward. Prime Minister Theresa May, who styles herself as the UK’s answer to Angela Merkel, is turning out to have more in common with Marine Le Pen, the leader of France’s far-right National Front, than with Germany’s internationalist chancellor.
May set out her vision for Britain’s future at the Conservative Party conference this month.
She pledged to trigger the UK’s formal exit process by the end of March 2017, and declared national control over immigration – not continued membership in the EU single market – to be her priority in the upcoming “Brexit” negotiations.
That stance puts the UK on course for a “hard Brexit” by April 2019.
EU governments rightly insist on freedom of movement as a central pillar of the single market, and May’s nativist lurch has already prompted Merkel and other EU leaders, notably French President François Hollande, to take a tougher line with the UK.
The pound has duly plunged on currency markets, anticipating the economic harm of a hard Brexit: costly trade barriers – customs controls, rules-of-origin requirements, import duties, and discriminatory regulation – will divide UK and EU markets and affect nearly half of Britain’s trade.
But May has not only set the stage for a complete break with the EU; she has also adopted a deeply illiberal vision for the UK’s future, consisting of economic interventionism, political nationalism, and cultural xenophobia.
This unelected prime minister is rejecting former Prime Minister David Cameron’s liberal Conservative manifesto (which won him a parliamentary majority last year), Margaret Thatcher’s embrace of globalization in the 1980s, and Britain’s much longer tradition of liberal openness.
After being a near-silent supporter of remaining in the EU during the Brexit campaign, May has now donned the mantle of Brexiteer populism, targeting both “international elites” and Britons with a cosmopolitan outlook.
“Just listen to the way a lot of politicians and commentators talk about the public,” she said in her keynote conference speech. “They find your patriotism distasteful, your concerns about immigration parochial, your views about crime illiberal.”
Echoing nationalists such as Le Pen and Viktor Orbán, Hungary’s authoritarian prime minister, she asserted that, “If you believe you’re a citizen of the world, you’re a citizen of nowhere. You don’t understand what the very word ‘citizenship’ means.”
Ironically, it is May’s notion that there is a single way of belonging to Britain’s political community that is un-British.
May demanded that UK-based businesses privilege British workers in the “spirit of citizenship” – another term for what Le Pen calls “national preference.” This is more than just rhetoric.
The status of EU nationals in the UK is a bargaining chip in the upcoming Brexit negotiations. May wants to keep out future EU migrants, whom she wrongly blames for taking Britons’ jobs and depressing their wages.
Home Secretary Amber Rudd would go even further. She recently called for UK-based businesses to list their foreign staff, in order to “name and shame” companies that do not recruit “enough” British workers.
“British jobs for British workers” was a slogan used by the racist National Front party in the UK in the 1970s. Now it has backing in the cabinet.
This chauvinism is not just despicable; it is foolish. It has already prompted outrage and threats from other countries.
At a time when many companies are reconsidering their post-Brexit investment plans, it makes a mockery of the government’s claim that the UK is open for business.
Apparently, May’s government expects Citibank to operate in London without American staff, Nissan without Japanese managers, and global companies without their diverse talent.
Even foreign-born doctors who save British lives are no longer welcome; May wants the UK to be “self-sufficient” in health care by 2025.
Since one in three physicians in the UK is an immigrant, the country would suffer if many now decided to practice elsewhere.
May’s government experience has been limited to command-and-control functions, overseeing internal security and immigration as Home Secretary in Cameron’s cabinet.
She seems clueless about how an open market economy works, and unaware that international trade, investment, and migration are intertwined.
She recently boasted that London is the world’s financial capital, without acknowledging that this is thanks mostly to foreign banks that employ foreign staff (those “citizens of the world”) to serve international markets, including the EU’s.
More fundamentally, May doesn’t seem to realize that immigration controls are trade barriers.
It is called “trade” if a British company outsources computing work to Bangalore, and “migration” if Indian programmers do the same work in Birmingham – yet the transactions are analogous.
If Poland specializes in construction, and the UK wants to procure its services, people have to move between countries to trade.
Officially, the British government remains gung-ho about free trade. In practice, its illiberal politics are taking precedence: Europhobia trumps free exchange with Britain’s neighbors and main trading partners, while xenophobia trumps the need for foreign workers.
How long will the rest of its globalization agenda survive?
Assuming that it can find willing partners, populism may preclude any trade deal that appears to serve “international elites.”
Nationalism may lead Britain to slam the door on Chinese investment, too.
British voters chose to leave the EU, but they did not specify how; so May has no electoral mandate for her swing toward illiberalism.
But her official opposition is a Labour Party that, taken over by the hard left, is not electorally viable.
So, unless the Liberal Democrats can bounce back, Britain may need a new political party (or cross-party alliance) to fight for a country that is outward-looking, liberal, and tolerant.
The Resisted Rise of Segolene Royal
Two months ago, Paris’s political insiders were unanimous: the presidential race was still open, but Ségolène Royal was clearly the favorite.
Today, the reverse seems true.
While the race is not over, Nicolas Sarkozy has emerged as the consistent favorite in the polls, as well as of those who declared “him” nearly defeated in early December.
The new consensus can be described as follows: Ségolène Royal cannot defeat Nicolas Sarkozy, but Sarkozy can defeat himself.
Why has the Socialist candidate, the first woman who had a serious chance to be elected President of France, fallen from grace so quickly?
And why has Sarkozy proved to be so resilient, despite the often negative passions aroused by his personality?
If Ségolène Royal is defeated, it will not be because she is a woman, but in spite of it.
The French are ready for a woman, but perhaps not this one.
She is beautiful, energetic, resolute, and in many ways surprising.
Indeed, on issues such as law and order, respect for authority, and nationalism, one finds her positions far from what one would expect of a Socialist candidate.
But Royal has so far failed to rally her camp behind her.
Her campaign’s combination of authoritarianism and confusion, if not sheer incompetence, is sapping her supporters’ morale while confirming the deep reservations of her opponents.
Whatever their political preferences, many French voters have the feeling that an “amateur” is facing a “professional.”
Whereas Sarkozy has managed to impose himself on the right without the support of Jacques Chirac, the Socialist heavyweights cannot fully convince themselves to come out behind Royal.
Her defeat would be theirs, too, but their resentment over losing the nomination to her is so far proving stronger than their political survival instincts.
Royal’s emphasis on the concept of participatory democracy – “Tell me what you want, I will be your spokesperson” – has so far shown itself to have limited appeal.
Voters like to be consulted, and citizens love to express themselves, but at the end of the day, they want a leader, someone they can trust.
In other terms, they don’t want only a receptive ear, but a reassuring, authoritative, and competent figure.
Two months before the vote, the presidential campaign has demonstrated that the modernization, if not “Americanization,” of French politics (for example, heavy use of the Internet) has taken hold.
But the campaign is also proving the resilience of “classical politics.”
Royal may have presented herself as a “post-modern” politician, but it is a “classical” politician who seems to be winning.
At the same time, Sarkozy has been able to emerge as the natural leader of the right partly because Chirac has been less of a liability than many people, including the experts, predicted.
Indeed, the reverse seems to be true, which perhaps reflects the tendency of French voters to adopt a positive view of departing presidents.
Chirac himself has orchestrated his departure with a grace, presenting himself in the best possible light with personal confidences and public speeches.
It is as if France were now seized by a kind of nostalgic generosity toward a presidency that had been marked by suspicion and derision.
Chirac is not about to present himself as a candidate to divide the conservative camp, and the new leniency surrounding his record may actually benefit Sarkozy, his impatient and rebellious heir.
Yet opposition to Sarkozy remains high, and not only among minorities and young people, who have registered to vote in high numbers, supposedly to oppose him and his heavy use of the police in the banlieues .
“Bonaparte” may be about to triumph easily over “Joan of Arc,” as some foreign commentators like to describe the two leading candidates, but Sarkozy’s supposedly “Bonapartist” qualities have fueled a potent sense of apprehension.
In fact, the persistence of strong reservations about both Royal and Sarkozy helps explain the surge in popularity for a third candidate, Francois Bayrou, a traditional centrist, pro-European politician.
Bayrou has never had it so good, but, barring the unlikely collapse of one of the two leading candidates’ campaigns, he will fail to qualify for the second-round runoff.
In our media-dominated age, personalities ultimately matter more than programs, which means that elimination prevails over selection.
That process seems to favor Sarkozy.
An anybody-but-Sarkozy reflex may exist in some circles of French society, but, in order to prevail, a credible alternative is required.
So far, Royal has failed to play that role.
The Resistible Rise of Asia?
NEW DELHI – A favorite theme in international debate nowadays is whether Asia’s rise signifies the West’s decline.
But the current focus on economic malaise in Europe and the United States is distracting attention from the many serious challenges that call into question Asia’s continued success.
To be sure, today’s ongoing global power shifts are primarily linked to Asia’s phenomenal economic rise, the speed and scale of which have no parallel in world history.
With the world’s fastest-growing economies, fastest-rising military expenditures, fiercest resource competition, and most serious hot spots, Asia obviously holds the key to the future global order.
But Asia faces major constraints.
It must cope with entrenched territorial and maritime disputes, such as in the South China Sea; harmful historical legacies that weigh down its most important interstate relationships; increasingly fervent nationalism; growing religious extremism; and sharpening competition over water and energy.
Moreover, Asia’s political integration badly lags behind its economic integration, and, to compound matters, it has no security framework.
Regional consultation mechanisms remain weak.
Differences persist over whether a security architecture or community should extend across Asia, or be confined to an ill-defined “East Asia.”
One central concern is that, unlike Europe’s bloody wars of the first half of the twentieth century, which made war there unthinkable today, the wars in Asia in the second half of the twentieth century only accentuated bitter rivalries.
Several interstate wars have been fought in Asia since 1950, when both the Korean War and the annexation of Tibet started, without resolving the underlying Asian disputes.
To take the most significant example, China staged military interventions even when it was poor and internally troubled.
A 2010 Pentagon report cites Chinese military preemption in 1950, 1962, 1969, and 1979 in the name of strategic defense.
There was also China’s seizure of the Paracel Islands from Vietnam in 1974, and the 1995 occupation of Mischief Reef in the Spratly Islands, amid protests by the Philippines.
This history helps to explain why China’s rapidly growing military power raises important concerns in Asia today.
Indeed, not since Japan rose to world-power status during the reign of the Meiji Emperor (1867-1912) has another non-Western power emerged with such potential to shape the global order.
But there is an important difference: Japan’s rise was accompanied by the other Asian civilizations’ decline.
After all, by the nineteenth century, Europeans had colonized much of Asia, leaving in place no Asian power that could rein in Japan.
Today, China is rising alongside other important Asian countries, including South Korea, Vietnam, India, and Indonesia.
Although China now has displaced Japan as the world’s second largest economy, Japan will remain a strong power for the foreseeable future.
On a per capita basis, Japan remains nine times richer than China, and it possesses Asia’s largest naval fleet and its most advanced high-tech industries.
When Japan emerged as a world power, imperial conquest followed, whereas a rising China’s expansionist impulses are, to some extent, checked by other Asian powers.
Militarily, China is in no position to grab the territories that it covets.
But its defense spending has grown almost twice as fast as its GDP.
And, by picking territorial fights with its neighbors and pursuing a muscular foreign policy, China’s leaders are compelling other Asian states to work more closely with the US and each other.
In fact, China seems to be on the same path that made Japan an aggressive, militaristic state, with tragic consequences for the region –&nbsp;and for Japan.
The&nbsp;Meiji Restoration created a powerful military under the slogan “Enrich the country and strengthen the military.” The military eventually became so strong that it could dictate terms to the civilian government.
The same could unfold in China, where the Communist Party is increasingly beholden to the military for retaining its monopoly on power.
More broadly, Asia’s power dynamics are likely to remain fluid, with new or shifting alliances and strengthened military capabilities continuing to challenge regional stability.
For example, as China, India, and Japan maneuver for strategic advantage, they are transforming their mutual relations in a way that portends closer strategic engagement between India and Japan, and sharper competition between them and China.
The future will not belong to Asia merely because it is the world’s largest, most populous, and fastest-developing continent.
Size is not necessarily an asset.
Historically, small, strategically oriented states have wielded global power.
In fact, with far fewer people, Asia would have a better balance between population size and available natural resources, including water, food, and energy.
In China, for example, water scarcity has been officially estimated to cost roughly $28 billion in annual industrial output, even though China, unlike several other Asian economies, including India, South Korea, and Singapore, is not listed by the United Nations as a country facing water stress.