From now on, the issues of skin color, eye shape, or gender will no longer play a deciding role for a candidate for high, or even the highest, office.
The US political system now reflects the country’s demographic changes, as non-white sections of the population grow the fastest.
Second, Obama’s election will lead to a reorientation of US foreign policy in the medium term.
In particular, the transatlantic/European focus of American foreign policy, which was previously a matter of course, will increasingly become a thing of the past.
Third, the internal realignment of America’s political-cultural perspective will be reinforced by the ongoing global shift of wealth and power from the West to the East.
The Northeastern Pacific powers – China, Japan, and South Korea – are already America’s most significant creditors by far, and their importance will increase further as a result of the financial crisis.
For the foreseeable future, the greatest opportunities for growth lie in this region, and for both economic and geopolitical reasons America will increasingly turn toward the Pacific region, thus downgrading its transatlantic orientation.
All of this is bad news for Europe, because once this global crisis is over, Europeans will simply have become less important.
And, unfortunately, Europe is not only doing nothing to hold off or reverse its decline – it is accelerating the process through its own behavior.
With the election of Obama, America has turned toward the future within a globalized, multipolar world; Europe, on the other hand, is rediscovering national action in this time of crisis, and thus banking on the past!
The European constitution has failed, the Lisbon reform treaty is in limbo after the Irish rejected it, and stronger European economic governance is blocked by German-French disunity.
The reaction of EU member states to this ongoing self-inflicted impasse is unambiguous: rather than trying to reenergize the process of further political and economic integration, they are primarily acting on their own to try to fill the vacuum that has emerged.
Certainly, coordination between the member states exists, and is even successful at times, but without strong European institutions, such singular successes will not last.
There is a very real danger that Europe will simply miss out on an historic strategic turn towards a multipolar world – and at a high price.
After the summit in Washington, it should have sunk in among Europeans everywhere – even the Euroskeptics of the British Isles – that this strategic realignment is taking place right now!
If Europeans cannot get their heads around the fact that the nineteenth century is over, the global caravan will continue to move forward into the twenty-first century without them.
The Power of a European Energy Union
DUBLIN – One of the top priorities established by European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker ahead of his election last summer was the creation of a European energy union.
He was right to do so.
Done properly, a more cohesive energy policy could achieve three strategic objectives simultaneously.
By coordinating research and investment, encouraging conservation, and integrating energy markets, an energy union would help fight climate change, provide Europe with a much needed economic stimulus, and protect the continent from supply shocks, such as those caused by the crises in North Africa and Ukraine.
Of course, the European Union's ability to act is dependent on the willingness of its member states; and, though some of the continent's leaders have championed the initiative, others have proved less enthusiastic.
A crucial test of their collective resolve will be whether they are willing to support key infrastructure projects that deliver on all three objectives.
One good example of such a project is the North Sea Countries' Offshore Grid Initiative, a proposal that would link offshore wind farms to a new regional grid, and allow countries to balance variable power supplies across borders.
The idea – first advanced in a 2009 memorandum of understanding signed by nine EU member states and Norway – has enormous potential; by 2030, North Sea winds could provide Europe with 10% of its electricity – carbon-free.
But if the project is to go forward, it urgently needs a political mandate.
The integrated grid can be imagined as a large ring, connecting Norway with the United Kingdom, and then linking across the channel to France, Belgium, and Holland, before moving on to Germany and returning to Scandinavia.
Its implementation would allow Europe to introduce a free-trade zone for renewable energy, reducing the need for storage and excess capacity to back up variable power supplies.
Not only would the grid pay for itself; once in place, it would reduce the cost of new wind farms by some 30%, by providing them with an existing connection to energy markets.
An interconnected energy system would make particular sense for the UK and Germany, which could use the one-hour time difference between them to smooth out the peaks and troughs in demand.
Renewable energy production is by nature intermittent, and the sheer number of fluctuating power sources in Germany is already pushing its existing grid to the limit.
Interconnection would also reduce the number of new onshore transmission lines the country needs.
The German government has produced a policy paper outlining how a more integrated regional market might work.
Last year, the UK matched Germany's investments in clean energy, spending some $15.2 billion on solar panels and wind farms.
But Britain will need to do a lot more if it is to meet its climate targets.
According to a parliamentary report, “the cost of developing such a supergrid could be very high...but it may bring a host of economic benefits – including tens of thousands of new jobs in the offshore renewable industry."
A regional initiative would also allow Prime Minister David Cameron to accommodate opposition within his party to onshore renewable energy plants.
Each of the individual countries involved in the project would benefit from its construction.
Holland and Belgium need a cost-effective way to develop their own offshore resources.
Denmark already benefits from an interconnected electricity market; and the lesson it has learned is that it makes sense to integrate even further.
Norway would be able to sell its hydropower and secure a backup supply should climate change leave it running dry.
Advances in cable technology would allow Ireland to link to France, providing an alternative route to European markets if the UK elects to remain outside the network.
Juncker's €315 billion ($360 billion) investment plan, proposed in December, includes some €87 billion in interconnection projects.
It would make sense to combine these into a single initiative, with common standards for technology, planning, and regulations.
Doing so would lower the cost of capital on loans from the European Investment Bank and give a boost to European technology companies.
The Baltic states are also planning their own offshore grid.
But it is not just Northern Europe that could gain from such an approach.
Europe's southeastern and Mediterranean countries could also benefit from sharing power.
Most of the necessary legal and regulatory framework is already in place. There is no need for treaty changes or complex new legislation.
All that is needed is political direction, so that the European Commission can establish the necessary governance structures.
The strength of Europe's commitment to a true energy union will be revealed when the European Council meets on March 19.
Among the decisions it will make will be whether to build these regional grids.
If the EU and its member states reach an agreement, they could simultaneously boost their economies and improve their energy security.
If not, they could end up buying the technology from China or the United States, which will be investing in their own grids in the coming years.
Europe’s Energy Essentials
MADRID – At last month’s European Council meeting in Brussels, energy issues dominated the agenda – for the third time this year.
Energy’s emergence as a focal point for European leaders makes sense, given that it lies at the confluence of the three existential threats facing the European Union: a revisionist Russia, the declining competitiveness of European businesses, and climate change.
As these developments challenge Europe’s values, its social model’s viability, and the world’s long-term security,&nbsp;EU leaders must focus on building a new energy system that ensures a reliable supply, sensible pricing, and ecological sustainability.
The good news is that a framework is already emerging that could facilitate this initiative.
Indeed, beyond widely discussed targets for energy production for 2030 – covering greenhouse-gas emissions, energy efficiency, and renewable resources – the European Council’s conclusions embrace key elements of a practical and effective approach to energy.
But, in order to move from aspiration to implementation, Europeans must muster the unity of purpose that so far has been conspicuously absent in EU energy policy.
The most tangible element of the EU’s emerging energy-policy framework is the internal energy market, which, once completed, will allow for the unimpeded flow of energy and related investments throughout the EU.
Such an integrated energy market would lead to significant savings – estimates go as high as €40 billion ($51 billion) annually by 2030 – thereby providing a much-needed competitiveness boost.
The internal energy market would enhance Europe’s energy security as well.
Though the EU as a whole maintains a balanced energy mix, with supply divided relatively evenly among gas, coal, oil, renewables, and nuclear generation, individual countries are often excessively dependent on a single source and, more dangerously, a single supplier: Russia.
Unrestricted energy flows within the EU would mitigate the risks of supply disruptions or shocks.
Of course, establishing an internal energy market is not just a matter of policy.
The EU needs the right infrastructure to facilitate the movement of energy among states and regions.
On this front, there is much to be done.
Spain, for example, can currently transmit only 1.5% of its electricity-generating capacity to the rest of Europe, owing to a lack of transmission infrastructure in the Pyrenees and France’s reluctance to open its energy market to competition from the Iberian Peninsula.
The European Council, recognizing the urgency of this issue, has called for greater electricity interconnection, targeting 10% of generating capacity by 2020 and 15% by 2030, with countries exporting 15 megawatts of power for every 100 megawatts they produce.
Achieving these benchmarks will require both significant capital investment and a shift in EU member states’ mentalities, so that fears like France’s do not continue to impede progress.
Countries need to know that their companies will not suffer either from outflows of electricity to other EU countries during shortages, or from price increases, owing to the rising emphasis on renewables.
The emerging European “energy union,” which the Council has endorsed, could be the ideal vehicle to facilitate this shift.
The problem is that EU leaders have yet to define a compelling and effective strategy for building it.
Indeed, though European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker has established a vice-presidential post responsible for energy union – now held by Maroš Šefčovič – no one seems to know what exactly the position will entail.
So far, Šefčovič has merely presented five vague pillars for the energy union, leading many to consider the current policy approach to an energy union hollow.
The EU needs a well-defined energy strategy that helps to overcome the trust deficit that is hampering effective solutions.
This means, first and foremost, establishing clear and predictable community rules and cost-sensitive policies for the energy union.
Doing so would help the EU to achieve another critical goal: presenting a more united front to the rest of the world.
The Council’s recent conclusions recognize this imperative, and the new Commission structure is conducive to policy coherence.
Member states must now fall into line.
A major test will be next year’s United Nations climate change conference (COP21) in Paris.
The 2009 conference in Copenhagen was an unmitigated disaster, as Europe’s “lead by example” approach failed to attract followers.
The EU cannot afford to isolate itself, or misunderstand the geopolitical forces at play, yet again.
Fortunately, the Council seems to have internalized this lesson, leaving open the possibility of reconsidering its commitments after COP21.
But it has a lot to&nbsp;do before then, not only to establish a unified approach, but also to translate that approach into strong tactics and a clear message at COP21.
Success would provide a strong foundation for the broader EU energy agenda.
If the EU is to address the key challenges of energy security, competitive pricing, and sustainability, it will need a unified, comprehensive, and compelling policy approach.
The foundations of such an approach – an internal energy market, the framework of an energy union, and a cohesive external voice – are emerging.
Now Europe needs to follow through and make it work.
Europe, An Engine of Peace
Critics of European monetary integration often point out that, in the absence of political union, monetary union is doomed to fail.
I agree with the critics’ conclusion, but not with their premise, for the success of the single currency so far has been due precisely to the political commitments of the Union’s member countries.
In other words, it is not true that the European Union does not constitute a political union.
European economic integration – in all its aspects – reflects the desire to integrate Europe politically, which, at least in my view, implies that European economic and monetary integration is irreversible.
This has been true from the outset of the European integration process in 1952, when six countries established the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC).
The aim of the ECSC was explicitly political: to remove control of the two most important raw materials for the production of heavy weaponry from states that had just fought the bloodiest war in history.
This drive for peace remained, quietly, the key motivation behind further steps toward Europe’s economic integration, which was regarded as the vehicle for achieving political integration.&nbsp;
In 1951, French Prime Minister Rene Pléven proposed establishing a European Defense Community (EDC) alongside the ECSC.
He failed, but the idea did not vanish.
Later that year, Robert Schumann – the French foreign minister at the time and a founding father of European integration – explicitly identified the ECSC with the drive for peace.
He described it as a means for creating a “fusion of interests…that will be the leavening from which may grow a wider and deeper community between countries long opposed to one another by bloody conflicts.”
These words were echoed on the eve of the introduction of the single currency.
In particular, Germany under Chancellor Helmut Kohl often linked monetary integration with the objective of political union.
Kohl once referred to the single currency’s success as a matter of “war and peace.”
For this reason, I do not agree with those who argue that Germany’s support for European monetary integration was the price it paid for Europe’s acceptance of German reunification.
On the contrary, the historical record shows that Germany made the case for a parallel drive to monetary and political integration well before the fall of the Iron Curtain.
Of course, there are other motives behind support for economic integration.
The EU’s leaders are convinced that achieving the so-called four freedoms – i.e., freedom of movement of goods, services, capital, and people – will optimize the well-being of Europe’s population.
They also aspire to increase the Continent’s strategic power.
But peace was the principal driving force in the minds of people like Schumann and Jean Monnet at the beginning of the European integration process, as it was for Helmut Schmidt and Valéry Giscard d’Estaing when they laid the foundations of the single currency and today’s European Central Bank.
For half a century, the process of European integration proceeded – sometimes with setbacks, sometimes with giant steps forward – joining formerly separate markets by creating very close trade relations.
Over time, this stimulated ever-greater economic convergence.
Of course, Europe’s economies have not become “look-alikes,” nor has GDP per capita been fully equalized.
But the differences between Europe’s economies were never so dramatic as to form an insurmountable barrier to embarking upon the most ambitious project of all: adopting a common currency.
Understanding this history is vital, because Europe’s Union once again stands at a threshold: should it keep its promise to start membership talks with Turkey?
In the wake of the defeat of the EU’s Constitutional Treaty in France and the Netherlands this spring, many say that Europe’s decade-old promise cannot and should not be kept.
What strikes me as dangerous is that the issue of peace – the motor that has driven European integration from the start – rarely comes up in the debate about what to do in the wake of these events.
On the contrary, responsible statesmen and party leaders have come out openly against Turkish membership.
I would have hoped that these people had learned from Schumann and Monnet what really matters for Europe and its future; sadly, this does not seem to be the case.
Of course, I do not fear some sort of military clash between Turkey and the EU.
After all, Turkey has been and remains a loyal member of NATO.
But an increasingly virulent and violent clash of cultures is emerging in Europe – particularly in France, Germany, Spain, and the Netherlands – between Islam and the humanitarian, Christian, and Jewish traditions.
For me, Europe’s integration of Muslim Turkey into its political union is the same sort of question of peace that Schumann and Monnet successfully confronted.
Today, Europe needs peace between cultures as much as it once needed peace between nations, and it is for this reason that we must welcome Turkey into our midst.
The EU’s Bold New Strategy
BRUSSELS – When problems accumulate, as in Europe – where the failed coup in Turkey comes hard on the heels of the United Kingdom’s decision to leave the European Union – attention is often focused on the most recent issue to arise.
Earlier problems, now seeming less urgent, are neglected.
For many years, we Europeans have seen how this plays out: in the end, none of the problems ever seems to be resolved.
The Turkish coup appears now to be resolving itself, though no one yet knows what long-term implications it will have for that vital country.
Brexit is, without doubt, a veritable blow to the European project.
A member state has regrettably chosen to move ahead alone. But this mustn’t lead the EU into the most damaging situation of all: paralysis.
The many issues that the Union must still resolve won’t disappear merely with the passage of time.
And one of the most urgent is Europe’s security: each day that passes without taking joint action is an opportunity lost and leads to greater risk.
Addressing such issues effectively, rather than falling into the trap of the immediate, requires adhering to accepted strategies.
By identifying challenges, establishing long-term objectives, and designing collective action to achieve those objectives, strategies provide a framework for initiatives to address problems in a more far-sighted, coherent way.
With this in mind, Federica Mogherini, the EU’s high representative for foreign affairs, and her team have designed and presented a Global Strategy for European security that has clearly defined aims befitting conditions both within and beyond our borders.
Many observers have indicated that now is not the best time to elaborate a vision that assumes that all Europeans are united by common interests.
But, as the strategy clearly declares, cooperation is no longer a question of principle; it is an existential imperative.
That is why I disagree with those who call the Global Strategy ill-timed and even useless.
Even though it was presented to the European Council a week after the Brexit referendum, its aim is to implement the provisions foreseen in the Treaty of Lisbon, seven years after the treaty entered into effect.
It is also the result of a June 2015 mandate from the European Council itself.
And it aims to develop a policy to strengthen the EU, which many citizens want.
To remain immobile would have been a grave error.
The Global Strategy defines clear objectives, considers the mistakes of the past, and is deeply anchored in the EU’s present-day reality.
It calls for a more responsible, united, and credible EU – the only response capable of overcoming Euroskepticism.
It defines the actions Europe must take and the capacities it must have for its own defense and security.
It takes into account the long-term effects of its actions and understands that the development of the EU’s member states is essential to conflict prevention.
And it recognizes that only greater unity will enable Europe to confront the challenges of terrorism, migration, and climate change.
A fundamental fact should be borne in mind when assessing the Global Strategy’s usefulness: The threats to Europe’s security are not common because some treaty or intergovernmental consensus has said so.
They are common because we are neighbors, and because, like it or not, the world around us is irremediably global.
One consequence of a document like the Global Strategy is the creation of a common discourse.
In 2003, Europeans also needed to unite behind a common foreign policy, following the differences created by the intervention in Iraq.
But the problem today is on a very different level: the European project itself is being questioned.
Revealing the EU’s capacity to act effectively would help to confirm the necessity of its existence.
The Global Strategy can be useful here.
European citizens perceive terrorism and the refugee tragedy as questions of vital importance and want the EU to play a greater role in addressing them and other global issues.
A Pew Research Center study in ten European countries (including supposed bastions of Euroskepticism like the UK, Poland, and Hungary) found that an average of 74% of those polled supported more decisive action by the EU abroad.
In recent years, we have seen how internal and external security conditions are closely linked.
That is why, in the interest of safeguarding internal security, the Global Strategy emphasizes the need for more and improved external action.
It is also why the EU requires an integral approach to conflicts and crises that uses every available instrument and policy.
Moreover, the manner in which we conduct external action characterizes us as Europeans.
In the field of human security, few organizations can deploy missions and operations as complete as the EU’s, combining military and civilian elements, such as police or judges.
Much has changed since the European Security Strategy of 2003: Europe must now find its place amid the competition of great powers and negotiate the conflicts and instability on its eastern and southern flanks.
There have been important changes within Europe as well, and opposition to strengthening the EU seems to be on the rise, as evidenced by the Brexit vote and the position recently expressed by the Visegrad Group (the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, and Slovakia).
With the presentation of the Global Strategy, those in favor of moving the European project forward have placed an initiative on the table.
Without it, only proposals for less Europe would have been heard.
Over the coming months, we must move our foreign and security policy forward, in order to implement the strategy’s objectives.
Those of us who are in favor of continuing to advance cannot remain silent.
Europeanizing Europe
BERLIN – The eurozone is at the center of the global financial crisis, because only there, in the realm of the second most important currency after the dollar, does the crisis hit a weak “structure” rather than a state with real power.
It is a structure that is squandering the trust of citizens and markets in its ability to resolve conflicts – while pushing the international financial system to the brink of disaster.
In other words, the financial crisis now reflects a political crisis of the eurozone – one that calls into question the very existence of the European project as a whole.
If Europe’s monetary union fails, not much of the common market, or of European institutions and treaties, will be left.
We would have to write off six decades of successful European integration, with unknown consequences.
This failure would coincide with the emergence of a new world order, as two centuries of Western predominance come to an end.
Power and wealth are shifting towards East Asian and other emerging countries, while America will be preoccupied with its own problems and turning from the Atlantic towards the Pacific.
If Europeans don’t address their interests now, no one will do it for them.
If Europe today does not become the agent of its own destiny, it will become the object of new world powers.
The cause of the European crisis is not three decades of neo-liberalism. Nor is it the result of the collapse of a speculation-fueled asset bubble, the violation of the Maastricht criteria, ballooning debt, or greedy banks.
As important as all of these factors are, Europe’s problem is not what happened, but what did not happen: the creation of a common European government.
At the beginning of the 1990’s, when the majority of the European Union’s member states decided to form a monetary union with a common currency and a central bank, the idea of a central government lacked support.
As a result, that phase of the monetary union’s construction was postponed, leaving an impressive edifice that lacked a strong foundation to ensure stability in times of crisis.
Monetary sovereignty was made a common cause; but the power needed to exercise it remained in national capitals.
It was believed at the time that formalized rules – imposing mandatory limits on deficits, debt, and inflation – would be enough.
But this foundation of rules turned out to be an illusion: principles always need the support of power; otherwise they cannot stand the test of reality.
The eurozone, a confederation of sovereign states with a common currency and common principles and mechanisms, is now failing that test.
Unable to respond decisively to a crisis, the eurozone is losing the confidence that is any currency’s most important asset.
Unless political power in Europe is Europeanized, with the current confederation evolving into a federation, the eurozone – and the EU as a whole – will disintegrate.
The political, economic, and financial costs of renationalization would be enormous; an EU collapse is feared around the world for good reason.
By contrast, if the currency union’s political deficit is addressed now, first by establishing a fiscal union (a common budget and common liabilities), a real political federation will be possible.
And let us be clear: anything less than a United States of Europe will not be powerful enough to prevent the looming disaster.
Like it or not, the eurozone will have to act as the EU’s avant-garde, because the EU as a whole, with its 27 member states, will be neither willing nor able to accelerate political unification.
Unfortunately, unanimous support for the necessary EU treaty changes simply could not be secured.
So, what should be done?
Europeans made decisive progress on integration outside the scope of the EU treaties (but very much in the European spirit) when they agreed to open their borders with the so-called Schengen Agreement (today a part of the EU treaties).
Drawing on that successful experience, the eurozone should avoid the EU’s original sin of creating a supra-national structure that lacked democratic legitimization.
The eurozone needs a government, which, as things stand at the moment, can consist only of the respective heads of state and government – a development that has already started.
And, because there can be no fiscal union without a common budget policy, nothing can be decided without the national parliaments.
This means that a “European Chamber,” comprising national parliaments’ leaders, is indispensable.
Initially, such a chamber could be an advisory body, with the national parliaments maintaining their competencies; later, on the basis of an intergovernmental treaty, it must become a real parliamentary control and decision-making body, made up of national parliaments’ delegated members.
Of course, because a treaty of this kind would mean extensive transfer of sovereignty to European intergovernmental institutions, it would need direct popular legitimization through referendums in all member states, including (and especially) Germany.
None of this addresses important questions, such as common policies to ensure economic stability and promote growth.
But, if we have learned anything from the current crisis, it is that such issues cannot even be framed unless and until the eurozone has a reliable institutional framework, with a sturdy foundation consisting of a real government, effective parliamentary control, and genuine democratic legitimization.
Europe at War
NEW YORK – By invading Ukraine in 2014, President Vladimir Putin’s Russia has posed a fundamental challenge to the values and principles on which the European Union was founded, and to the rules-based system that has kept the peace in Europe since 1945.
Neither Europe’s leaders nor its citizens are fully aware of the scope of this challenge, much less how to deal with it.
Putin’s regime is based on rule by force, manifested in repression at home and aggression abroad.
But it has been able to gain a tactical advantage, at least in the short term, over the EU and the United States, which are determined to avoid direct military confrontation.
Violating its treaty obligations, Russia annexed Crimea and established separatist enclaves in eastern Ukraine’s Donbas region.
When it appeared last summer that the Ukrainian government might win the war in Donbas, Putin ordered an invasion by regular Russian armed forces.
Preparations for a second wave of military action began in November, when Putin provided separatists with a new influx of armored columns and personnel.
The West, sadly, has provided embattled Ukraine with only a façade of support.
Equally disturbing has been the continuing reluctance of international leaders to provide new financial commitments to Ukraine, despite growing pressure on its foreign-currency reserves and the specter of a full-blown financial meltdown.
As a result, the mere threat of military action may be sufficient to bring about Ukraine’s economic collapse.
Putin seems to be holding out the prospect of a grand bargain, with Russia helping in the fight against the Islamic State – for example, by not supplying S300 missiles to Syria (thus preserving US air domination) – in exchange for the US giving Russia control over its so-called “near abroad.”
Should US President Barack Obama accept such a deal, the entire structure of international relations would be dangerously altered in favor of the use of force.
That would be a tragic mistake, with far-reaching geopolitical consequences.
The collapse of Ukraine would be a tremendous loss for NATO and indirectly for the EU and the US.
A victorious Russia would pose a potent threat to the Baltic states, with their large ethnic Russian populations.
Instead of supporting Ukraine, NATO would have to defend itself on its own soil, exposing both the EU and the US to the danger they have been so eager to avoid: direct military confrontation with Russia.
The threat to the EU’s political cohesion is even greater than the military risk.
The euro crisis has transformed an ever-closer union of equal sovereign states, willingly sacrificing a share of their independence for the common good, into an association of creditor and debtor countries, with the debtors struggling to meet the creditors’ terms.
This new EU is neither equal nor voluntary.
In fact, for many young people in the debtor countries, the EU seems like a foreign oppressor.
And about 30% of the recently elected European Parliament ran on anti-European platforms.
It is this internal weakness that has allowed Putin’s Russia – which, on its own, is far from attractive – to emerge as a potent rival to the EU.
Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán has gone so far as to cite Putin as his role model – and he is no anomaly.
Neither Europe’s leaders nor its citizens seem to recognize that Russia’s attack on Ukraine is indirectly an assault on the EU and its principles of governance.
It should be clear that it is inappropriate for a country, or association of countries, at war to pursue fiscal austerity, as the EU continues to do.
All available resources should be put to work in the war effort, even if that requires running up budget deficits.
Europe is fortunate that German Chancellor Angela Merkel has behaved as a true European with regard to the threat posed by Russia.
The foremost advocate of sanctions, she has been more willing to defy German public opinion and business interests on the issue than on any other.
But Germany has also been the main advocate of fiscal austerity, and Merkel needs to understand the contradiction between these positions.
Sanctions against Russia are necessary, but they are not without repercussions.
European economies, including Germany, are suffering, as the sanctions’ depressive impact aggravates the recessionary and deflationary forces that are already at work.
By contrast, helping Ukraine to defend itself against Russian aggression would have a stimulative effect on Ukraine and Europe.
The EU’s members are at war – and they need to start acting like it.
That means modifying their commitment to fiscal austerity and recognizing that they are better off helping Ukraine to defend itself than hoping that they will not have to defend the EU themselves.
Ukraine needs an immediate cash injection of, say, $20 billion, with a promise of more when needed, in order to stave off a financial collapse.
The International Monetary Fund could provide these funds, as it did previously, with the EU promising to match the IMF’s contribution.
Actual expenditures would remain under the IMF’s control and subject to the implementation of far-reaching structural reforms.
In Ukraine, there is one more factor working in the EU’s favor: the country’s new leadership is determined to correct previous governments’ corruption, mismanagement, and abuses.
Indeed, it has already created a detailed strategy to cut household gas consumption by more than half, with the goal of dispersing the corrupt gas monopoly of Naftogaz and ending Ukraine’s energy dependence on Russia.
The “new Ukraine” is resolutely pro-European, and ready to defend Europe by defending itself.
But its enemies – not only Putin’s Russia, but also its own bureaucracy and financial oligarchy – are formidable, and it cannot defeat them alone.
Supporting the new Ukraine in 2015 and beyond is the most cost-effective investment the EU could make.
It could even help the EU recapture the spirit of unity and shared prosperity that led to its creation.
In short, by saving Ukraine, the EU could also save itself.
The Price of European Indifference
BAGHDAD – Europe’s migration debate has taken a disturbing turn.
It began with the creation of the catch-all concept (a legal freak) of a “migrant,” which obscures the difference, central to the law, between economic and political migration, between people escaping poverty and those driven from their homes by war.
Unlike economic migrants, those fleeing oppression, terror, and massacre have an inalienable right to asylum, which entails an unconditional obligation by the international community to provide shelter.
Even when the distinction is acknowledged, it is often as part of another sleight of hand, an attempt to convince credulous minds that the men, women, and children who paid thousands of dollars to travel on one of the rickety boats washing up on the islands of Lampedusa or Kos are economic migrants.
The reality, however, is that 80% of these people are refugees, attempting to escape despotism, terror, and religious extremism in countries like Syria, Eritrea, and Afghanistan.
That is why international law requires that the cases of asylum-seekers are examined not in bulk, but one by one.
And even when that is accepted, when the sheer number of people clamoring to get to Europe’s shores makes it all but impossible to deny the barbarity driving them to flee, a third smokescreen goes up.
Some, including Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov, claim that the conflicts generating these refugees rage only in Arab countries that are being bombed by the West.
Here again, the figures do not lie.
The top source of refugees is Syria, where the international community has refused to conduct the kinds of military operations required by the “responsibility to protect” – even though international law demands intervention when a mad despot, having killed 240,000 of his people, undertakes to empty his country.
Jordan, with a population of 6.5 million, has taken in nearly 700,000.
Meanwhile, Europe, in a display of united selfishness, has scuttled a plan to relocate a mere 40,000 asylum-seekers from their cities of refuge in Italy and Greece.
Second, the minority who do choose Germany, France, Scandinavia, the United Kingdom, or Hungary are not enemies who have come to destroy us or even to sponge off of European taxpayers.
They are applicants for freedom, lovers of our promised land, our social model, and our values.
They are people who cry out “Europe!
Europe!” the way millions of Europeans, arriving a century ago on Ellis Island, learned to sing “America the Beautiful.”
Then there is the ugly rumor that this imaginary assault has been clandestinely orchestrated by the strategists of a “great replacement,” with foreigners supplanting native Europeans, or, worse, by agents of an international jihad, in which today’s migrants are tomorrow’s terrorists on bullet trains.
It should go without saying that this is nonsense.
Taken together, these distortions and delusions have had serious consequences.
For starters, the Mediterranean Sea has been all but abandoned to human smugglers.
The Mare Nostrum is gradually becoming the kind of vast and watery mass grave described by a faraway poet.
Some 2,350 people have drowned already this year.
But, for most Europeans, these people are little more than statistics, just as the women and men who have survived the journey remain unidentified and indistinguishable, a threatening anonymous mass.
Our society of the spectacle, normally so quick to manufacture an instant celebrity to serve as the “face” of the crisis du jour (anything from swine flu to a truckers’ strike), has not taken an interest in the fate of a single one of the “migrants.”
These individuals – whose course to Europe resembles that of the Phoenician Princess Europa, who arrived from Tyre on Zeus’s back several millennia ago – are being wholly rejected; indeed, walls are being constructed to keep them out.
The result is another group of people being denied basic rights.
Such people, as Hannah Arendt once observed, will ultimately come to see in the commission of a crime their only path into the world of law and of those who enjoy the rights the law confers.
Europe, harassed by its xenophobes and consumed by self-doubt, has turned its back on its values.
Indeed, it has forgotten what it is.
The bell tolls not only for the migrants, but also for a Europe whose humanistic patrimony is crumbling before our very eyes.
Europe’s Jihadi Generation
MADRID ‒ He came from Algeria seeking a better life, anticipating an escape from poverty, oppression, and hopelessness.
In Paris, he found a low-skill job and had children and grandchildren.
As French citizens, they had the right to an education and health care.
But they grew up in the ghettos that ring France’s major cities, surrounded by families like theirs, literally on the margins of society.
Unable to integrate fully, they had few opportunities for economic advancement.
Paradise was never gained.
This story has been repeated millions of times in the countries of Western Europe, with immigrants and their families ending up poor and excluded.
In the worst-case scenario, they are recruited by extremist groups that seem to offer what they are missing: a sense of belonging, identity, and purpose.
After a lifetime of marginalization, participation in a larger cause can seem worth the lies, self-destruction, and even death that inclusion demands.
In the wake of the attack on the French satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo in Paris and the thwarting of another attack in Belgium, Europe needs to take a good look at itself.
It must recognize that second- and third-generation immigrants are susceptible to the blandishments of terrorist organizations because European citizenship has not translated into social and economic inclusion.
If anything, growing inequality – exacerbated by years of crisis – is making the problem worse.
People need hope.
They need to believe in a vision, a project that promises a better future for them and their communities.
European countries once offered that sense of hope.
But the crisis, and the official response to it, has replaced hope with frustration and disillusionment.
This has created fertile ground for anti-immigrant populists and Islamist terrorists alike.
More than 1,200 French citizens are estimated to have joined the jihadi cause in Syria, along with 600 from the United Kingdom, 550 from Germany, and 400 from Belgium.
Other European countries, including Spain, are experiencing a similar phenomenon.
And some European citizens, like the Charlie Hebdo assassins, have acted at home.
While intelligence services and police forces must be engaged to prevent attacks, devising an effective strategy to counteract extremist movements requires, first and foremost, understanding what drives them.
Western countries must go beyond defending freedom of speech and improving police coordination to develop lasting solutions that address adherents’ economic and social marginalization, while avoiding cultural confrontation and reliance on repression alone.
More fundamentally, such solutions require abandoning the false dichotomy of liberty and security.
If security concerns trump basic rights and freedoms, fanaticism will have scored a victory; and the same thing will happen if expressions of Islamophobia and xenophobia increase.
A week after the Paris attacks, German Chancellor Angela Merkel reiterated the sentiment expressed by former President Christian Wulff in 2010: standing beside Turkish Prime Minister Ahmet Davutoğlu, Merkel declared that Islam is as much a part of Germany as Judaism and Christianity.
This statement represents the right way forward.
Muslim immigrants, whether first-, second-, or third-generation, must be able to integrate fully into European society, gaining the same opportunities as Europe’s other residents and citizens.
That principle should be applied at the global level as well, through the establishment of an inclusive framework that fosters development – and encourages the rejection of fanaticism – in the Islamic world.
The aggressive fundamentalism and infighting that held down Christian societies for centuries has been relegated to the past, and that is where it must remain.
A religion is not only a belief system; it is also an institution, a language, and even a kind of market actor, competing for supporters.
Radical terrorist groups attempt to consolidate their distorted version of “true” Islam as the only institution, imposing their language to win the entire Muslim market.
Today, groups like the Islamic State and Nigeria’s Boko Haram have joined Al Qaeda in a struggle to attract Muslims from all over the world, thereby securing their leadership in global jihad.
These groups take advantage of unruly environments and weak or collapsing institutions to gain a territorial foothold.
Indeed, it was the failed transitions in Syria, Libya, and Yemen after the Arab Spring revolts that fueled the Islamic State’s emergence.
Millions of young people, though disillusioned by decades of social paralysis, unemployment, and brutal dictatorships, had dared to expect better.
Though Tunisians have made progress, the other affected populations, like many Muslim immigrants in Europe, have had their hopes shattered.
Jihad, like any other reductionist political program, is capable of seducing a wide variety of people.
The attribute they almost always share is a sense of futility or a lack of purpose.
The West must recognize that, as Afghanistan and Iraq have shown, conflict in the Arab world cannot be resolved through foreign military intervention.
The only way to restore order and spur progress in the region is by empowering moderate Muslims, so that they can triumph over the forces of radicalism and violence.
The West’s role is to identify them and offer them acceptance and support.
This lesson should be applied both abroad and at home.
Europe’s Clash of Generations
LONDON – As Europe’s financial crisis goes from acute to chronic, the dispute over who will bear the costs of resolving it is fueling the emergence of a new generation of political movements.
In the so-called periphery, political upstarts promise citizens an alternative to austerity.
In the eurozone’s “core” countries, they purport to protect taxpayers from relentless demands for debtor-country relief.
How Europe’s leaders respond to these new political challengers will determine whether the monetary union stabilizes or fractures.
Europe’s political elite have, for the most part, been strongly integrationist.
Given that they are largely of the post-World War II generation, they are acutely aware of the benefits of a peaceful Europe.
In the 1990’s, differing visions of European integration led to a problematic compromise.
In order to secure France’s backing for German reunification, Germany agreed to create a monetary union – but not a fiscal union.
Now, Europe is suffering the consequences of that Faustian bargain.
At the same time, Europe’s leaders are under pressure from a new generation of voters, who grew up in the shadow of the Berlin Wall’s collapse.
The lifting of the Iron Curtain gave the West access to a vast supply of cheap labor in Eastern Europe.
China’s subsequent emergence expanded that supply further, culminating with China’s entry into the World Trade Organization in 2001.
As a result, many of Europe’s economies began to fall behind.
European leaders hoped that a monetary union would help Europe’s less competitive economies catch up to the richer countries of the north.
And, during its first decade, the euro ostensibly delivered.
Just as cheap mortgage financing papered over the cracks of growing income inequality in the United States, cheap capital from the north accelerated Europe’s apparent economic convergence.
The post-Wall generation seemed to have all the luck – at least for a while.
But income inequality was worsening steadily in all member countries, with more highly educated citizens benefiting from the booming services industry, while the less educated suffered as manufacturing moved to cheaper locations.
Then, the global financial crisis struck, income inequality rose sharply, and the post-Wall generation in southern Europe suffered the largest drop in living standards since WWII.
Unlike the US, which was founded on a political cause – opposition to British colonialism – that forged a common national identity, countries joining the European Union sought simply to avoid further warfare on the continent.
While laudable, this cause was inadequate to foster a shared European identity.
On the contrary, it allowed national identity to flourish.
The post-Wall generation, whose members are less than 40 years old and thus far removed from WWII, has little appreciation for this cause.
For them, debtor and creditor countries’ increasingly divergent economic objectives are much more meaningful.
Citizens of debtor economies, who grew up complacent about economic convergence, have lost their savings and, in many cases, have run out of hope.
Meanwhile, citizens of creditor countries are focused on protecting the gains made before the crisis; after all, it was their savings that financed their neighbors’ reckless spending.
Throughout the eurozone, rising income inequality has created an underclass that is increasingly suspicious of the monetary union.
As the post-war generation ages – with most of its members now at least 60 years old and its leaders either in senior leadership positions or acting as senior statesmen – the remaining support for integration is waning.
Many post-Wall voters stand on the margins of established parties or are forming parties of their own, while a more pragmatic group is being pulled between the old order and new movements.
The muddled, reactive response to the euro crisis reflects the compromises that traditional political parties have made in order to remain in power as generational differences have become increasingly extreme.
Political revolutions rarely arise out of brief periods of acute crisis.
Rather, they follow one or more generations of chronic decline, when fear of economic loss gives way to targeted anger, and charismatic voices surface to orchestrate the response.
This pattern has recurred throughout history, from the French Revolution all the way to the fall of the Berlin Wall.
Although markets may have been cowed into submission for now, the cracks in the eurozone’s political foundations are beginning to show.
For now, the post-Wall generation lacks a clear focus for its anger.
New populist parties in Italy, Greece, and Germany reflect the direction in which politics is moving, not the final destination.
Their ability to win support from both the left and the right suggests a shared aspiration to rebuild the protective national barriers that the post-War generation demolished.
Against this background, most European leaders are afraid that their electorates will reject anything that seems to imply more integration.
It is a classic prisoner’s dilemma: all countries are better off if they contribute to a common cause, but the pressure of national elections impedes politicians’ ability to champion that cause.
The ultimate test of leadership will be a commitment to EU treaty reform, with all the thorny negotiations and referenda that this entails.
The post-war generation’s political leaders must respond promptly and effectively to the challenge posed by emerging political movements while they are still immature.
If they wait too long, the old walls will be restored and the euro’s guardians will be left out in the cold.
European Politics With an Islamic Face?
LONDON – Donald Trump’s call to bar Muslims from the United States provoked the following exchange with two young friends of mine: “If the choice was between Muslim immigration and preserving liberal moral values,” I asked, “which would you choose?”
They both denied the question’s premise.
The immigrants themselves, they suggested, might have reactionary moral codes, but their children, growing up in today’s Britain, America, or Continental Europe, would be quite different.
But is that true?
My question focused not on Islamist terrorism – the ostensible ground of Trump’s outburst – but on the threat posed by large-scale Muslim immigration to the code of morals that my young friends, like most educated Europeans, now accept without question.
Terrorism aside, wouldn’t they worry if Islam came to have a growing influence on British law and politics?
This is not just a hypothetical possibility.
The Muslim population in Europe was 44.1 million in 2010, or 6% of the total.
There were 2.7 million Muslims in the United Kingdom in 2011 (4.8% of the population), up from 1.6 million in 2001.
Given recent immigration trends and, more important, Muslims’ above-average fertility rate (three children per family versus the British average of 1.8), the Muslim share of the UK population is bound to grow for decades to come.
Much of Europe is on the same demographic trajectory.
Of course, demographics is not an exact science: Much depends on assumptions about age profiles, standards of living, inequality, and so on, and sooner or later the Muslim fertility rate will converge with the national average.
But by then the Muslim population will have expanded rapidly – to 10-20% of the total in the UK.
The interesting question concerns the consequences of this.
Liberals have not worried about ethnic demographics, because they assume that individuals eventually identify with the host society’s norms.
The standard argument is that immigrants enrich the host, while leaving any incompatible characteristics at home.
In particular, their political behavior will fall into line with that of the general population.
If this is right, the sociopolitical impact of a change in the ethnic composition of a population is neutral, or even beneficial.
Immigrants from Algeria, Bangladesh, Pakistan, or Turkey will, in the course of a generation or two, become European in outlook and politics.
Their religion will become for them a private matter, as it now is for most Europeans, and they will become integrated in all important respects.
But that historical pattern, in my view, depended crucially on the small size of the immigrant population and its cultural closeness to the home population.
(Even so, the process of assimilation was far from frictionless.)
Historical experience offers little guide to the social and political consequences of the much greater numbers and more pronounced cultural differences at stake in the postwar migrations to Europe, especially from the Muslim world.
The incompatibilities are much greater.
The nub of the problem is that contemporary European civilization is secular, whereas Muslim civilization is religious.
In Europe, religion has lost its authority over law, legislation, education, morals, and business life.
The Islamic world has undergone no comparable process.
There is no systematic separation of faith and state; the family, not the individual, remains the basic social unit.
The essential elements of modern European political life – individual rights and duties, and the accountability of government to the governed – are lacking, particularly in the Arab Middle East.
Despite efforts at secularization, the gap between Muslim and Western outlooks has, if anything, grown in recent years, as religion has regained ascendancy in most Muslim countries.
Sharia religious law – extreme versions of which hold that conduct decriminalized in the West, such as adultery and homosexuality, is punishable by death – influences their legal codes.
Moreover, in many countries, large majorities of Muslims say Sharia should be the official law.
In Europe, Islam is the fastest-growing religion, and Sharia has penetrated European legal systems.
In the UK, a hundred Sharia courts adjudicate on divorce and other family cases, prompting Home Secretary Theresa May to promise a review of Sharia courts “to determine whether they are consistent with British values.”
Secularization is not inevitable.
As the political philosopher Larry Siedentop has argued, “secularization is Christianity’s gift to the world.”
According to Siedentop, features specific to Christianity led to liberal individualism, and they are absent from the other great world religions.
The great gift of secularism, in turn, has been tolerance.
Despite horrific twentieth-century backsliding in Europe, secularism has served to blunt the edge of bigotry, because secular reasoning, unlike divine revelation, is never conclusive.
Economists regard migration as a movement of individuals in search of a better life and call for more immigration to offset population aging, or to provide workers to do the “dirty jobs.”
But such evocations of “economic man” miss a key dimension of migration: People carry their culture with them across political frontiers.
We should not assume that economic success automatically leads to cultural convergence.
This brings us back to Trump.
Whatever happens in the US, Muslim immigration into Europe will continue and even expand in the next few years.
The Syrian catastrophe alone ensures this.
Everything that dialogue and education can do to close the gap between immigrant and host communities should be done.
But it may not be possible to prevent a return to religious politics – and the conflict which religious bigotry brings.
If we are to avoid sleepwalking into a highly troublesome future, we must recognize that failed integration, not terrorism, is the main danger we face.
Europe’s Lapse of Reason
NEW YORK – At long last, the United States is showing signs of recovery from the crisis that erupted at the end of President George W. Bush’s administration, when the near-implosion of its financial system sent shock waves around the world.
But it is not a strong recovery; at best, the gap between where the economy would have been and where it is today is not widening.
If it is closing, it is doing so very slowly; the damage wrought by the crisis appears to be long term.
Then again, it could be worse.
Across the Atlantic, there are few signs of even a modest US-style recovery: The gap between where Europe is and where it would have been in the absence of the crisis continues to grow.
In most European Union countries, per capita GDP is less than it was before the crisis.
A lost half-decade is quickly turning into a whole one.
Behind the cold statistics, lives are being ruined, dreams are being dashed, and families are falling apart (or not being formed) as stagnation – depression in some places – runs on year after year.
The EU has highly talented, highly educated people.
Its member countries have strong legal frameworks and well-functioning societies.
Before the crisis, most even had well-functioning economies.
In some places, productivity per hour – or the rate of its growth – was among the highest in the world.
But Europe is not a victim.
Yes, America mismanaged its economy; but, no, the US did not somehow manage to impose the brunt of the global fallout on Europe.
The EU’s malaise is self-inflicted, owing to an unprecedented succession of bad economic decisions, beginning with the creation of the euro.
Though intended to unite Europe, in the end the euro has divided it; and, in the absence of the political will to create the institutions that would enable a single currency to work, the damage is not being undone.
The current mess stems partly from adherence to a long-discredited belief in well-functioning markets without imperfections of information and competition.
Hubris has also played a role.
How else to explain the fact that, year after year, European officials’ forecasts of their policies’ consequences have been consistently wrong?
These forecasts have been wrong not because EU countries failed to implement the prescribed policies, but because the models upon which those policies relied were so badly flawed.
In Greece, for example, measures intended to lower the debt burden have in fact left the country more burdened than it was in 2010: the debt-to-GDP ratio has increased, owing to the bruising impact of fiscal austerity on output.
At least the International Monetary Fund has owned up to these intellectual and policy failures.
Europe’s leaders remain convinced that structural reform must be their top priority.
But the problems they point to were apparent in the years before the crisis, and they were not stopping growth then.
What Europe needs more than structural reform within member countries is reform of the structure of the eurozone itself, and a reversal of austerity policies, which have failed time and again to reignite economic growth.
Those who thought that the euro could not survive have been repeatedly proven wrong.
But the critics have been right about one thing: unless the structure of the eurozone is reformed, and austerity reversed, Europe will not recover.
The drama in Europe is far from over.
One of the EU’s strengths is the vitality of its democracies.
But the euro took away from citizens – especially in the crisis countries – any say over their economic destiny.
Repeatedly, voters have thrown out incumbents, dissatisfied with the direction of the economy – only to have the new government continue on the same course dictated from Brussels, Frankfurt, and Berlin.
But for how long can this continue?
And how will voters react?
Throughout Europe, we have seen the alarming growth of extreme nationalist parties, running counter to the Enlightenment values that have made Europe so successful.
In some places, large separatist movements are rising.
Now Greece is posing yet another test for Europe.
The decline in the Greek economy since the start of the crisis is in many ways worse than that which confronted America during the Great Depression of the 1930s.
Youth unemployment is over 50%.
Prime Minister Antonis Samaras’s government has failed, and now, owing to the parliament’s inability to choose a new Greek president, an early general election will be held on January 25.
The left opposition Syriza party, which is committed to renegotiating the terms of Greece’s EU bailout, is ahead in opinion polls.
If Syriza wins but does not take power, a principal reason will be fear of how the EU will respond.
Fear is not the noblest of emotions, and it will not give rise to the kind of national consensus that Greece needs in order to move forward.
The issue is not Greece.
It is Europe.
If Europe does not change its ways – if it does not reform the eurozone and repeal austerity – a popular backlash will become inevitable. Greece may stay the course this time.
But this economic madness cannot continue forever. Democracy will not permit it.
But how much more pain will Europe have to endure before reason is restored?
E Pluribus Europe?
BRUSSELS – The European Union’s economic crises of the last half-decade have fueled the emergence of a deep divide between the northern creditor countries and the southern debtors.
Now Europe’s migrant crisis is creating an east-west divide between the countries that are welcoming toward the ongoing influx of refugees, and those who want to do little, or nothing, to help.
Add to that growing political divisions within member countries, and one must ask: Is the EU coming unglued?
The creditor/debtor split was thrown into sharp relief this summer, during the negotiations over Greece’s third bailout agreement.
Germany, the leading proponent of austerity and the most influential creditor, was accused of insufficient flexibility and solidarity; Greece, for its part, was lambasted for failing to implement the reforms that it promised the first two times it was bailed out.
(It was France, neither entirely “north” nor entirely “south,” that ended up playing a vital role in facilitating the deal.)
Germany is now trying to lead the way in the migrant crisis as well, but this time by its generosity.
Chancellor Angela Merkel has pledged to take in more than 800,000 refugees just this year.
Welcoming crowds have lined streets and filled train stations in German cities, offering drinks, food, and clothing to the exhausted refugees, many of whom have walked hundreds of miles and risked their lives to get to safety.
Whereas Merkel declared forcefully that Islam was also a religion of Germany, some in Eastern Europe have declared that they will welcome only a small number of refugees – and only if they are Christian.
Such bigotry plays directly into the hands of Islamist extremists worldwide.
The refugee crisis is all the more challenging in view of EU member countries’ internal political fragmentation.
While those on the left support cautious acceptance of refugees, the further one moves to the right, the more negative the attitude becomes.
Even the Christian Social Union, the Bavarian sister party to Merkel’s Christian Democratic Union, has proved a reluctant partner in this area.
Yet another divide lies between the United Kingdom and the rest of the EU.
Given the UK’s role, alongside France, as the key force in European defense and a significant authority in world affairs, particularly with regard to climate- and development-related issues, the prospect of a genuine split should be a source of serious concern for the EU.
These divisions have created deep doubts about the dream of ever-closer union in Europe, underpinned by a shared system of governance that allows for more effective decision-making.
Likewise, they are not conducive to implementation of the reforms that are needed to spur economic growth.
Yet it is still too early to write off progress toward increased European integration.
In fact, when it comes to EU cohesion, more cleavages are probably better than a single divide.
When economic considerations alone were dominating the debate, austerity-obsessed northern Europe, oblivious to any Keynesian considerations, and struggling southern Europe, desperately in need of fiscal room to make demand-boosting, job-creating structural reforms politically feasible, were at loggerheads.
The situation became so heated that some respected observers even proposed creating a “northern euro” for the region around Germany, and a “southern euro” in the Mediterranean (where France would fit was unclear).
In such a eurozone, the European Central Bank would have to split, and the northern euro would appreciate.
Exchange-rate uncertainty would reappear, not only between the two euros, but also, before long, within the “northern” and “southern” zones, owing to the collapse of confidence in the very idea of a currency union.
Within the northern bloc, Germany would play an even more outsize role than it does now, a situation that would likely generate new tensions.
Similarly, a clear division between a refugee-friendly west and a closed east would effectively end the Schengen Agreement, because the political disagreement would harden into a physical barrier blocking the free movement of people within the EU.
Such a split would be as damaging to Europe’s cohesion as a divided eurozone.
But what if countries that are on opposite sides of one cleavage are on the same side of another?
Germany, Italy, Spain, and Sweden may agree on the immigration issue, while Greece, France, Italy, and Portugal agree on eurozone macroeconomic policies.
France, Poland, and the UK may be willing to spend more on defense, while Germany remains more pacifist.
And Germany, the Scandinavian countries, and the UK may be at the forefront of the fight against climate change.
Moreover, the Europe-wide political “families” of Christian Democrats, Social Democrats, and so on could be allies on some policies and opponents on others, transcending national or regional borders, and moving toward pan-European politics, with the European Parliament increasing its democratic debate and oversight functions.
A Europe where countries do not fit neatly into one category or another, and where flexible coalitions emerge on various issues, probably has a greater chance of progressing than one divided simply between north and south or east and west.
Of course, there remains the challenge of strengthening institutions so that they can manage this diversity and reconcile it with political effectiveness.
Here, greater scope for weighted and double-majority voting is crucial.