So, although both sides endorse the idea of a “mutually beneficial strategic relationship,” and despite progress bilateral on military exchanges, mutual trust and confidence-building have a long way to go.
Moreover, today’s “warm politics, cool economics” trend is the reverse of the “cold politics, warm economics” pattern under Koizumi.
Last year, Japan’s committed investment projects in China fell 24% from 2006, while actual investment volume decreased by 25%, partly owing to regulatory changes in China regarding foreign investment.
Recent food safety issues, such as the “poisoned dumplings” cases, have clearly heightened the Japanese public’s sensitivity about Chinese exports.
Finally, historical issues could still resurface to cause new problems.
While Fukuda has made it clear that he will not visit the Yasukuni Shrine, 160 other parliamentarians paid homage at the site last month, an indication that conservative forces in Japan remain strong and that future prime ministers may not abstain from visiting Yasukuni.
And Japan has so far failed to live up to its treaty obligations to clean up between 700,000 and two million chemical weapons that were abandoned in China by the Japanese army at the end of World War II, another potential flash point if any of these weapons causes casualties in China.
A Fresh Start for Europe
As Europe’s leaders gather in Portugal to put the finishing touches on the new, slimmed down, Reform Treaty, it might be helpful if they all pretended that the last 50 years of European integration had never taken place.
Let’s then imagine what Europe needs to do to confront its most pressing challenges, especially if it were able to do so without the political constraints of 50 years of EU deal-making and ramshackle institution-building.
On top of that, let us make a major leap of imagination and suppose that even though this scenario of the EU at “Year Zero” means we would not have a half-century of intra-European cooperation to draw on, the nations that today make up the EU would nevertheless be keen to adopt far-reaching joint policies.
Let’s suspend our disbelief, then, and try to imagine what Europe could and should be doing to tackle some of the most far-reaching and obstinate policy challenges that will determine whether the next 50 years are as constructive as the last.
On conflict and security issues, Europe should be advancing to a new phase in which it takes much clearer and unambiguous positions on issues ranging from nuclear proliferation to sanctions against Burma’s military regime.
The purpose must be to establish Europe as a forceful and fair-minded player on the world stage, rather than as a “broad church” in which different viewpoints co-exist.
The aim should be that “soft power” instruments like EU development aid and economic partnerships would be linked with a growing sense of political and security outreach to ensure Europe is a global player to be reckoned with.
That means, of course, that the EU should seek to widen its transatlantic thinking so that the EU and the United States cooperate more closely on defining – and thus protecting – their common interests in a world where together they account for little more than 10% of the total population.
These points are far from a blanket criticism of the EU’s efforts to create a common foreign and security policy.
But they are intended to underline what many people in Europe know very well, which is that the speed with which problems concerning international development and conflict are growing easily outpaces the EU’s policy responses so far.
Building more human capital in Europe and worldwide is a crucially important element in future EU activities.
Education is by far the most profitable investment Europe can make, so it should be launching its most ambitious strategy ever to create a new knowledge dynamic and employment inside the EU while helping to expand greatly education in the world’s poorest countries.
Europe also must at last grasp the nettle of immigration policy – something that has persistently eluded generations of political leaders.
Agreed EU-wide immigration rules are needed to reconcile shrinking Europe’s hunger for imported labor with widespread fears of cultural tensions and social unrest.
It won’t be easy to create a fairer and more multi-cultural Europe, but failure to address this problem openly will carry an even heavier price.
By much the same token, Europe’s governments should be making a determined new effort to strengthen Europeans’ sense of a shared history and common values.
A stronger European identity is the soundest basis for creating the more multi-cultural society that demographers regard as inevitable.
Meanwhile, doubts still surround the political and institutional machinery the EU will need to realize these and other ambitious goals.
Sighs of relief greeted EU leaders’ mid-year agreement on a Reform Treaty aimed at overhauling the Union’s decision-making mechanisms, but it is still uncertain whether the new pact will survive the ratification process in 27 countries.
We believe, though, that the increased use of qualified majority voting by member governments embodied in the new treaty should also be applied to the ratification process itself.
That way, if a small minority of EU governments prove unable to ratify the treaty, it would not be torpedoed the way that its predecessor, the Constitutional Treaty, was in 2005.
Cara untuk Membantu Daerah yang Dilanda Kekeringan di Afrika
SEATTLE – Bayangkan sebuah lahan pertanian kecil di wilayah yang sangat panas.
Kekeringan melanda daerah sekitar lahan tersebut, prospek panen terlihat suram, dan sistem finansial tidak dapat memberikan pinjaman yang dibutuhkan petani untuk bertahan hidup.
Hal ini menggambarkan keadaan di bagian selatan Afrika saat ini, yang sedang dilanda kekeringan yang sangat parah.
Hal ini juga menggambarkan keadaan di bagian timur Nebraska pada masa kekeringan yang terjadi di awal tahun 1930an – sebuah masa yang dialami oleh keluarga Saya. 
Ayah Saya, Ralph Raikes, adalah orang pertama dikeluarganya yang lulus kuliah.
Setelah bekerja di Standard Oil di Kalifornia, beliau mampir ke lahan pertanian milik orang tuanya sebelum pergi ke Cambridge, Massachusetts, dimana beliau akan mengambil program pasca sarjana di MIT.
Namun beliau tidak jadi mengambil program tersebut.
Hal ini karena beliau harus tinggal di Nebraska untuk membantu kakek Saya menyelamatkan lahan pertaniannya agar tidak disita seluruhnya oleh bank, yang pada saat itu sudah menyita sepertiga lahan kakek Saya.
Hal terpenting yang ayah Saya lakukan adalah mengubah pola pikirnya; beliau melihat lahan pertanian tersebut bukan hanya sekedar cara untuk bertahan hidup, namun sebagai bisnis keluarga.
Beliau pergi ke Universitas Nebraska, tempat dimana Beliau mendapatkan gelar sarjana, dan membeli bibit jagung hibrida dan juga bibit-bibit lain yang telah dimuliakan oleh universitas tersebut.
Lalu Beliau mancatat bibit dan kondisi cuaca, yang pada saat itu masih jarang dilakukan.
Ayah Saya menyadari bahwa Beliau tidak bisa melakukan hal ini sendirian, dan bahwa beliau membutuhkan akses terhadap pinjaman yang lebih baik.
Oleh karena itu, Beliau membantu memandu – pertama sebagai konsumen, dan kemudian sebagai pensehat dan direktur – Credit Farm, sebuah jaringan koperasi bank nasional, dalam upayanya untuk membantu petani-petani di daerah tersebut bertahan hidup selama masa-masa kemarau.
Beliau juga membantu mendirikan Asosiasi Bisnis Pertanian Nebraska, yang mengagregasi data yang beliau dan rekan-rekannya kumpulkan, sehingga mereka bisa menentukan praktek terbaik yang akan dilakukan.
Dan Beliau juga bekerja sama dengan Ibu Saya, Alice, yang menjalankan bisnis ternak unggas milik keluarga.  
Farm Credit dan laboratorium serta rumah kaca Universitas Nebraska didirikan dari dana program pemerintah Amerika yang bertujuan untuk meningkatkan kinerja sektor pertanian.
Sektor ini berada dalam kondisi terpuruk sejak tahun 1933; mengingat bahwa sepertiga penduduk Amerika berprofesi sebagai petani pada saat itu, maka dibutuhkan lebih banyak investasi dalam bidang tersebut.
Pada tahun itu, Kongres menyetujui Undang-Undang Pertanian yang pertama, Undang-undang Penyesuaian Pertanian berhasil meningkatkan investasi ke perekonomian pedesaan dan meningkatkan pendapatan sebesar 50% dalam dua tahun.
Program pertanian Pemerintahan Federal menganggap pertanian sebagai sebuah bisnis, sehingga memungkinkan pebisnis seperti ayah Saya untuk mencapai kesuksesan.  
Delapan puluh tahun kemudian, para petani di Afrika perlu melakukan perubahan yang sama, mereka perlu berpikir bahwa pertanian bukan hanya sekedar cara bertahan hidup, namun merupakan sebuah bisnis keluarga.
Dan, seperti yang ayah Saya lakukan dulu, mereka juga memiliki cara untuk membantu mereka melakukan perubahan: sejumlah bibit baru dan teknologi yang telah dikembangkan dan bisa digunakan oleh pertanian keluarga di Afrika – yaitu petani dengan lahan seluas atau kurang dari 4-5 acre.
Pada bulan Oktober, sekelompok ilmuwan menerima Penghargaan Pangan Dunia karena telah menciptakan dan menyebarkan jenis ubi yang menambahkan vitamin A dalam pola makan orang yang tinggal di Sub-Sahara Afrika, dan jenis bibit lain yang mampu bertahan dalam musim kemarau. 
Namun, seperti yang telah diungkapkan dengan jelas dalam laporan terbaru Aliansi Revolusi Ramah Lingkungan di Afrika (AGRA), investasi pemerintah harus sesuai ilmu pengetahuan yang ada.
Pertanian adalah mata pencaharian dua pertiga tenaga kerja di negara-negara Sub-Sahara Afrika, dan pada tahun 2003, Uni Afrika telah mengibau negara-negara anggotanya untuk meningkatkan investasi mereka di sektor tersebut hingga mencapai 10% dari belanja pemerintah.
Hanya 13 negara yang memenuhi imbauan tersebut, namun investasi mereka – dalam bidang penelitian dan pengembangan, layanan yang membantu petani memanfaatkan temuan penelitian baru, kredit dan pembiayaan, pertukaran komoditas, dan upaya pemasaran lainnya – telah menuai manfaat.
Ketiga belas negara tersebut telah mengalami peningkatan produksi pertanian, per kapita PDB, dan juga peningkatan nutrisi.   
Investasi pemerintah membuka jalan bagi investasi dari swasta, dan hal ini bisa sangat mengubah kondisi para petani Afrika, yang telah terlalu lama melihat pertanian hanya sebagai cara bertahan hidup.
Hanya sekitar 6% dari rumah tangga di pedesaan Sub-Sahara Afrika menerima pinjaman dari institusi finansial.
Terlebih lagi, hampir dua pertiga dari lahan pertanian Afrika tidak mempunyai elemen nutrisi penting, dan para petani tidak mempunyai pengetahuan teknis dan sumber daya untuk mengembalikan kesuburan lahan pertanian mereka, sehingga mereka tidak bisa mendapatkan manfaat penuh dari teknologi termutakhir.
Para petani di Afrika yang menanam varietas tanaman baru hanya dapat meningkatkan panen sebesar 28%, hal ini berbeda dengan petani di Asia yang bisa mencapai hasil 88%. 
Orang tua Saya memastikan bahwa kelima anak mereka lulus kuliah.
Sama dengan para petani lainnya yang ingin memastikan bahwa anak-anak mereka bisa hidup sehat dan sukses; dan mereka menyadari pentingnya pendidikan.
Para petani yang pernah Saya temui di berbagai belahan dunia kebanyakan hanya ingin bisa menjual hasil panen yang cukup untuk membayar biaya kesehatan dan menyekolahkan anak-anak mereka.
Mereka memanfaatkan peluang yang muncul, dan memposisikan anak-anak mereka agar dapat mempunyai masa depan yang lebih baik. 
Saya berharap bahwa cerita kemajuan ekonomi Amerika, seperti yang dialami oleh keluarga Saya, akan menjadi cerita yang dialami juga oleh Afrika.
Dengan banyaknya inovasi yang ada, keluarga petani di Afrika memerlukan pemerintah untuk berinvestasi pada masa depan mereka.
Jika mereka melakukan hal ini, maka masa depan akan menjadi lebih baik dibandingkan dengan kondisi sekarang yang dilanda kemarau dan keputusasaan.              
Africa at Risk
ADDIS ABABA – Climate change will hit Africa – a continent that has contributed virtually nothing to bring it about – first and hardest.
Aside from Antarctica, Africa is the only continent that has not industrialized.
Indeed, since 1980’s the industrialization that had taken place in Africa has by and large been reversed.
Africa has thus contributed nothing to the historical accumulation of greenhouse gases through carbon-based industrialization.
Moreover, its current contribution is also negligible, practically all of it coming from deforestation and degradation of forests and farmland.
Yet climate change will hit Africa hardest, because it will cripple the continent’s vulnerable agricultural sector, on which 70% of the population depends.
All estimates of the possible impact of global warming suggest that a large part of the continent will become drier, and that the continent as a whole will experience greater climatic variability.
We know what the impact of periodic droughts have been on the lives of tens of millions of Africans.
We can therefore imagine what the impact of a drier climate on agriculture is likely to be.
Conditions in this vital economic sector will become even more precarious than they currently are.
Africa will not only be hit hardest, but it will be hit first.
Indeed, the long dreaded impact of climate change is already upon us.
The current drought covering much of East Africa – far more severe than past droughts – has been directly associated with climate change.
The upcoming climate negotiations ought to address the specific problems of Africa and similarly vulnerable poor parts of the world.
This requires, first and most importantly, reducing global warming to the apparently inevitable increase of two degrees Celsius, beyond which lies an environmental catastrophe that could be unmanageable for poor and vulnerable countries.
Second, adequate resources should be made available to poor and vulnerable regions and countries to enable them to adapt to climate change.
Climate change, which was largely brought about by the activities of developed countries, has made it difficult for poor and vulnerable countries to fight poverty.
It has created a more hostile environment for development. No amount of money will undo the damage done.
But adequate investment in mitigating the damage could partly resolve the problem.
Developed countries are thus morally obliged to pay partial compensation to poor and vulnerable countries and regions to cover part of the cost of the investments needed to adapt to climate change.
Various estimates have been made of the scale of investment required by those countries.
One conservative estimate – which has a reasonable chance of being accepted precisely because it is conservative – calls for $50 billion per year as of 2015, increasing to $100 billion by 2020 and beyond.
A transitional financing arrangement would be put in place for the period 2010-2015.
Some argue that developed countries cannot come up with such sums, particularly given their current economic challenges.
But no one has so far argued that the cost of damage caused to the development prospects of poor countries and regions is less than the amount of compensation being offered to cover adjustment costs.
The reason is obvious: the damage caused is many times higher than the compensation being requested.
Nonetheless, it is argued, whatever the real cost of the damage, developed countries currently cannot afford to provide that kind of money.
But we all know that these countries and their national banks were able to spend trillions of dollars in a few months to bail out their bankers, who earned super-profits when the going was good.
When the good times ended, taxpayers and governments were prepared to rescue them and to ensure that they continued to receive their extraordinary bonuses.
If the developed world is able to pay trillions of dollars to clean up its bankers’ mess, how is it possible that it cannot afford to pay billions of dollars to clean up a mess that it created, and that is threatening the survival of whole continents?
Clearly this is not about the availability of resources. It is about the inappropriate priorities in how resources are allocated.
It is about moral values that make it appropriate to rescue bankers, who expect everyone but themselves to pay for the mess they created, and inappropriate to compensate the world’s poorest people, whose survival is threatened precisely because of the mess created by developed countries.
I cannot believe that people in developed counties, when informed about the issues, would support rescuing bankers and oppose partial compensation for poor countries and regions.
I cannot believe that they will let such an injustice occur.
If they are not expressing their outrage over the injustice of it all, it can only be because they are inadequately informed.
Africa, Climate Change, and the G-8 Summit
British Prime Minister Tony Blair has declared that the two issues at the center of the G-8 Summit this July will be African poverty and global climate change.
These may seem to be distinct issues. In fact, they are linked.
A trip I took to a village in the Tigre region in northern Ethiopia shows why.
One morning, I was taken to a dry riverbed at the village’s edge.
Farmers were digging a pit in the riverbed, down to the water table approximately two meters below ground level.
They explained that until recently this was a perennial river – one that flows throughout the year – but now the river stops flowing during the dry season.
Only when the annual rains begin in the summer does water reappear in the river bed.
Until then, water-starved communities dig for water, if they can find it and if they can afford to pump it out.
In northern Ethiopia, as in much of Africa, the rain cycle has changed markedly in recent years.
Ethiopian village life has long depended on two crops, one during a short rain in March and April, and the main crop during the long rain in the summer months.
In recent years, the short rains have failed entirely, and long rains have been erratic.
Hunger is omnipresent.
Perhaps half of the children are severely underweight.
Much of arid sub-Saharan Africa, notably in the Sahel (the region just south of the Sahara desert), has experienced a pronounced drop in rainfall over the past quarter-century.
This decline coincided with a rise in the surface temperature of the neighboring Indian Ocean, a hint that the decline in rainfall is in fact part of the longer-term process of man-made global warming.
Failures of rainfall contribute not only to famines and chronic hunger, but also to the onset of violence when hungry people clash over scarce food and water.
When violence erupts in water-starved regions such as Darfur, Sudan, political leaders tend to view the problems in narrow political terms.
If they act at all, they mobilize peacekeepers, international sanctions, and humanitarian aid.
But Darfur, like Tigre, needs a development strategy to fight hunger and drought even more than it needs peacekeepers. Soldiers cannot keep peace among desperately hungry people.
One course of action must be to help impoverished African regions to “adapt” to climate change and to escape the poverty trap.
Water-stressed regions like Ethiopia and Sudan can adapt, at least in part, through improved technologies such as “drip irrigation,” rainwater harvesting, improved water storage facilities, deep wells, and agro-forestry techniques that make best use of scarce rainfall. Better land-management practices (the re-planting of degraded forests, for example) can recharge underground water aquifers.
Poor countries cannot afford these technologies on their own.
Nor should they have to.
Help for poor countries in Africa and elsewhere to adapt to climate change should not be described as charity or aid, but rather as compensation for damages being imposed on the poorest people on the planet.
Greater help for these countries to escape from extreme poverty has been promised for decades but has not been delivered.
In addition to adapting to climate change, the world must also reduce future risks to the planet by cutting back on emissions of greenhouse gases, which are the source of man-made climate change.
While adaptation to climate change is necessary – because it is already occurring – this is not enough.
If the world fails to mitigate future climate change, the effects of rising temperatures, increasing droughts, more numerous and severe tropical storms, rising sea levels, and a spread of tropical diseases will pose huge threats to the entire planet.
The famines in Ethiopia and the violence in Darfur suggest what can lie ahead.
The best way to reduce long-term climate change is to reduce carbon emissions.
There are at least three options: shift to non-carbon energy sources such as solar or nuclear energy; capture and dispose of the carbon dioxide emitted at carbon-based power plants; economize on energy use, for example by shifting to hybrid automobiles and trucks.
Most likely, all three of these methods will have to play a role.
The effort to reduce greenhouse gases will require decades of action, but, given the long lead times in overhauling the world’s energy systems, we must start now.
Rich countries need to lead the way.
It is ironic that the United States, which portrays itself as a friend of democracy and impoverished countries, gives the smallest share of its GNP in aid among the rich countries, and also refuses to participate in global efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
This is especially ironic because African countries like Ethiopia stand steadfastly and bravely with the US in the fight for freedom and against terrorism, even as they struggle with hunger, disease, and famine.
Moreover, countries like Ethiopia are making valiant, indeed remarkable, efforts to overcome their problems, despite the lack of adequate, and long-promised, help from the world’s richest countries.
Africans suffering from hunger and drought, and indeed poor people everywhere, have a right to ask much more of the US and other rich countries.
Tony Blair is right to call on his rich-country colleagues to follow through on their unfulfilled promises.
Africa’s Path from Poverty
BEIJING – All low-income countries have the potential for dynamic economic growth.
We know this because we have seen it happen repeatedly: a poor, agrarian economy transforms itself into a middle- or even high-income urban economy in one or two generations.
The key is to capture the window of opportunity for industrialization arising from the relocation of light manufacturing from higher-income countries.
That was true in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, and it remains true today.
Japan seized its opportunity in the years following World War II, using labor-intensive industries, such as textiles and simple electronics, to drive its economy until rising labor costs eroded its comparative advantage in those sectors.
That shift then allowed other low-income Asian economies – South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Singapore, and to some extent Malaysia and Thailand – to follow in Japan's footsteps.
China, of course, is the region's most recent traveler along this well-trodden path.
After more than three decades of breakneck economic growth, it has transformed itself from one of the poorest countries on earth to the world's largest economy.
And now that China, too, is beginning to lose its comparative advantage in labor-intensive industries, other developing countries – especially in Africa – are set to take its place.
Indeed, ever since the Industrial Revolution, the rise of light manufacturing has driven a dramatic rise in national income.
The United Kingdom's economic transformation started with textiles.
In Belgium, France, Sweden, Denmark, Italy, and Switzerland, light manufacturing led the way.
Similarly, in the United States, cities like Boston, Baltimore, and Philadelphia became centers for producing textiles, garments, and shoes.
Until recently, few believed that Africa, too, could become a center for modern manufacturing.
But, with the right policies, there is no reason why African countries could not follow a similar trajectory.
Consider land-locked Ethiopia, which only ten years ago seemed to be an especially bad bet.
But then the country built an industrial park near Addis Ababa and invited the Chinese shoemaker Huajian to open a factory there.
Huajian opened its doors in January 2012 with two production lines and some 600 workers.
By the end of the year, it had employed 2,000 Ethiopians and doubled the country's exports of leather shoes.
Today, the company has 3,500 workers in Ethiopia producing more than two million shoes a year.
In 2013, spurred by Huajian's success, the Ethiopian government created a new industrial park, with space for 22 factory units.
Within three months, all of them had been leased by export-oriented companies from Turkey, Korea, Taiwan, China, and elsewhere.
The World Bank has provided $250 million to support the continued construction of these industrial parks.
The Ethiopian success story is just the start.
As investors learn more about Africa, they will increasingly see what it has to offer.
Indeed, the cost of labor in Africa is competitive enough that Ethiopia could attract companies from countries as poor as Bangladesh.
Africa has a surplus of agricultural labor and too few other jobs.
As foreign firms launch operations in the labor-intensive sectors in which Africa has a comparative advantage, they will train the local workforce.
Some workers will become managers.
They will become familiar with the technology and learn how to maintain consistent quality in the production line.
They will establish contacts with international buyers and investors.
And, eventually, some of them will be able to raise capital and start firms of their own – export companies owned and operated by Africans.
Mauritius shows the path ahead.
In the 1970s, the government set up industrial parks to process textiles and garments for export.
At the time, most of the owners were from Taiwan or Hong Kong; today, more than 70% of the island's industrial companies are locally owned.
A carefully focused export strategy is crucial.
The international development community and many African governments want to work toward regional integration, linking the markets of 55 African countries.
This might have its advantages, but it should not be a priority.
Africa today accounts for just 1.9% of global GDP, compared to 21% for the United States and 23% for Europe.
Developing countries must use their limited resources in the most effective way, and there is no question where the most attractive opportunities in Africa are to be found.
For example, instead of investing heavily in the infrastructure needed for regional integration, a country like Ethiopia would be better off building industrial parks and linking them by road to ports in Djibouti.
With the right growth strategy, far-reaching change can come within a person's lifetime – sometimes more than once.
My native Taiwan is now a high-income economy.
But when I was born there, in 1952, the island was poorer than almost every country in Africa.
Then it happened to me again.
I moved to mainland China in 1979, when the country's per capita income was less than one-third of Sub-Saharan Africa's.
Today, China has become an upper-middle-income country, and it is on track to become a high-income country by 2020.
My hope is that I can witness a third economic transformation in my lifetime, this time in Ethiopia and other countries in Africa.
If they stay on the tried and tested path of those who have gone before, there is every chance that I will.
Manfaat dari Pelayanan Kesehatan Digital
BASEL – Afrika telah mengalami banyak perubahan menuju arah yang lebih baik jika dibandingkan dengan waktu Saya pertama kali bekerja sebagai dokter di Angola sekitar 20 tahun yang lalu.
Perubahan yang paling mencolok adalah perubahan dalam bidang penggunaan teknologi seluler di benua ini.
Masyarakat di Afrika – dan juga di semua negara-negara dengan pendapatan rendah dan menengah – menggunakan peluang yang didapat dari teknologi, dengan menggunakan telepon seluler untuk melakukan banyak hal, seperti melakukan pembayaran sampai menerbitkan akta kelahiran, hingga mengakses layanan kesehatan.
Keunggulan dari teknologi seluler terletak pada akses.
Hambatan seperti jarak dan sedikitnya sumber daya telah lama menghambat milyaran orang untuk mendapatkan layanan yang mereka butuhkan. Namun hal ini menjadi lebih mudah dilakukan di jaman digital ini.
Dan, tentunya ada banyak cara dimana teknologi dapat digunakan untuk meningkatkan akses dan pemberian layanan kesehatan.
Ini tentunya bukanlah hal yang baru, dan beberapa tahun belakangan telah banyak bermunculan sejumlah inisiatif kesehatan berbasis teknologi.
Namun hanya ada beberapa yang dikenal dan bisa mencapai kematangan dan mampu bertahan dalam jangka panjang; sejumlah besar proyek kesehatan ini bahkan masih belum melewati tahap uji coba.
Hal ini justru menimbulkan fragmentasi solusi digital untuk permasalahan kesehatan – yang dalam beberapa kasus, dapat mempersulit kondisi sistem layanan kesehatan yang telah ada.  
Langkah pertama untuk mengatasi masalah ini adalah dengan melakukan indetifikasi faktor-faktor yang menghasilkan kesuksesan – dan mana yang menghambat hal tersebut.
Sehubungan dengan hal ini, mungkin faktor yang terpenting adalah bagaimana solusi yang diberikan oleh aplikasi kesehatan itu dihubungkan dengan praktek yang ada di lapangan.
Bagaimanapun, teknologi berfungsi untuk memberikan inovasi terhadap penerapan layanan kesehatan, dan bukan layanan kesehatan itu sendiri.
Solusi yang fokus terhadap pengguna, baik pemberi atau penerima layanan kesehatan, mempunyai peluang untuk sukses.
Yang paling penting dalam hal ini adalah kesadaran bahwa yang pengguna butuhkan bukanlah teknologi yang paling canggih, melainkan solusi yang mudah digunakan dan diterapkan.
Dalam kenyataannya, teknologi yang terbilang lama seperti pesan suara maupun sms dapat menjadi alat yang lebih berguna dibandingkan dengan aplikasi atau teknologi paling canggih, seperti nanoteknologi.
Kita bisa mengambil contoh pada Proyek Penanganan Hipertensi berbasis masyarakat di Ghana, yang dilakukan oleh Yayasan Novartis, yang Saya pimpin, dan FHI 360.
Proyek ini membantu pengguna untuk mengatur jadwal mereka dengan mengingatkan mereka untuk minum obat melalui telepon seluler mereka serta memberikan saran untuk melakukan perubahan gaya hidup.
Pendekatan ini menuai kesuksesan karena fokus pada pasien dan menyampaikan informasi kepada pasien dengan menggunakan teknologi informasi (ICT) melalui alat yang mudah didapat serta telah banyak digunakan.
Di negara dengan penggunaan telepon seluler diatas 80% namun hanya sedikit yang mempunyai telepon pintar (smartphone), solusi sederhana bisa mempunyai dampak yang paling besar.  
Bagi pemberi layanan kesehatan, solusi digital dapat dilihat sebagai cara untuk meningkatkan efisiensi dibandingkan sebagai beban tambahan pada pekerjaan mereka yang sudah sangat berat.
Bekerja sama dengan orang-orang yang berpengalaman dalam memberikan layanan kesehatan dengan biaya yang kecil dapat membantu tercapainya solusi yang bisa dilakukan dalam skala besar.
Misalnya, Jaringan Telemedis yang dibuat oleh Yayasan Novartis dan para mitra kami bersama dengan Lembaga Pelayanan Kesehatan Ghana merupakan jawaban langsung dari kebutuhan di lapangan, sesuai dengan yang diungkapkan banyak pemberi layanan kesehatan, yaitu untuk meningkatkan jangkauan praktisi kesehatan.
Cukup dengan panggilan telepon, jaringan ini menghubungkan pekerja kesehatan yang berada di garis depan dengan pusat konsultasi di rumah sakit rujukan yang berjarak beberapa jam dari tempat mereka, dimana dokter umum dan spesialis bekerja 24 jam.
Dari awal, proyek ini merupakan jawaban dari kebutuhan yang telah diungkapkan untuk meningkatkan jangkauan praktisi kesehatan, dan dioperasikan penuh oleh staff Lembaga Layanan Kesehatan Ghana, yang menjadikan program ini bisa dilakukan secara berkesinambungan dalam skala yang besar.
Untuk mencapai potensi maksimal dari layanan kesehatan digital, hal ini perlu digabungkan kedalam sistem kesehatan nasional.
Hanya dengan cara ini teknologi digital bisa meningkatkan kemajuan menuju layanan kesehatan yang mencakup tingkat nasional dan mampu mengatasi kebutuhan kesehatan yang menjadi prioritas di Ghana.
Kolaborasi antara bidang kesehatan dan Teknologi Informasi dan Komunikasi (ICT), baik di sektor pemerintah maupun swasta, merupakan hal yang penting.
Kemitraan berbagai bidang yang disokong oleh kepemimpinan yang berkesinambungan dari pejabat tinggi di pemerintahan harus memandu perkembangan, yang dimulai dari tahap perencanaan.
Kolaborasi antar lembaga pemerintah, pendanaan yang secara khusus diperuntukkan bagi pengembangan solusi kesehatan digital, dan mekanisme pemerintah yang efektif juga merupakan faktor-faktor sangat penting untuk mencapai kesuksesan. 
Teknologi digital menawarkan peluang yang besar untuk meningkatkan pelayanan kesehatan.
Jika kita ingin berhasil memanfaatkan kesempatan ini, kita harus belajar dari pengalaman di masa lalu.
Dengan fokus pada kebutuhan pengguna dan pada prioritas layanan kesehatan, dibandingkan pada teknologi yang paling canggih, kita bisa mendapatkan manfaat dari pelayanan kesehatan digital.  
Africa Still Rising
JOHANNESBURG – Is the honeymoon over for African economies?
Less than a decade ago, it seemed that the continent’s economic dreams were beginning to come true, with many countries experiencing impressive GDP growth and development.
In fact, today’s high-growth countries – including Côte d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, Kenya, and Tanzania – have made substantial progress in reducing their dependence on commodity exports, in favor of trade, investment, and domestic consumption.
We believe that Africa can almost double its manufacturing output, to nearly $1 trillion, by 2025, with about 75% of that growth tied to production for local markets.
The question is whether manufacturers will manage to exploit the growth potential that lies in front of them.
African firms have not yet proved capable of meeting existing domestic demand.
Africa still imports about one-third of the food, beverages, and similar processed goods it consumes, whereas the Association of Southeast Asian Nations imports about 20%, and South America’s Mercosur trade bloc imports just 10%.
Africa even imports 15% of the cement it uses, despite having abundant raw materials to make it at home.
To be sure, African business has made great strides in recent years.
Today, 400 African companies have annual revenue of more than $1 billion, and 700 have annual revenue of more than $500 million.
On the whole, these large companies are growing faster – and generating higher profits – than their global peers.
But there is still a long way to go.
Large African (excluding South African) firms’ average annual revenue of $2 billion is half that of large firms in Brazil, India, Mexico, and Russia.
And Africa only has about 60% of the large firms it needs to put it at the same level as the emerging economies.
One key factor limiting firms’ growth is the fragmented nature of the African market, which currently comprises mostly small economies with only limited economic and political linkages.
There are eight partly overlapping regional trade zones, none of which includes more than half of Africa’s countries.
Only Egypt, Morocco, Nigeria, and South Africa rank in the top 100 of MGI’s Global Connectedness Index.
Beyond excessive trade barriers, Africa suffers from inadequate transport links and limits on the free movement of people.
Africans need visas to travel to more than half the countries on their own continent.
The recent launch of the African Union passport is a step in the right direction – but it is only one step.
A more integrated market would not only enable African companies to create the economies of scale they need to compete; it would also be far more appealing to institutional investors.
Building such a market must therefore be a top priority for African leaders, as they seek to unleash the continent’s economic potential.
Equally important, Africa’s leaders must work to improve the business environment.
Though some progress has been made on this front in the last two decades, non-tariff barriers remain high.
Indeed, regulatory issues are still cited as a serious deterrent to investment.
Many African businesses – nearly half of companies in Nigeria, and more than one-third in Angola and Egypt – highlight unreliable electricity supplies as a major challenge.
And almost 40% of firms surveyed by the World Bank lament the constraints imposed by competition from informal firms.
Some of these issues could be addressed relatively quickly.
Consider the strides Rwanda has made since 2007, when it established a development board to improve its business environment.
In less than a decade, that board has led the creation of a “one-stop center” to facilitate investment, has overseen streamlined issuance of construction permits, and has pressed successfully for a fixed fee for property registration, the extension of customs hours, and risk-based customs inspections.
As a result, Rwanda’s global ranking for the ease of doing business jumped from 143 in 2008 to 32 in 2014.
This success can surely be replicated elsewhere in Africa.
Despite the challenges some African countries face, the continent’s economic potential remains massive, thanks to favorable demographic dynamics, fast-growing cities, burgeoning domestic markets, and a digital revolution.
With the right policies, a relentless focus on execution, and a great deal of determination, Africa can still rise.
Menguji Vaksinasi di Afrika
BOSTON – Pada bulan Februari lalu di Addis Ababa, menteri kesehatan negara-negara di Afrika menandatangani sebuah deklarasi yang sangat diagungkan mengenai komitmen mereka untuk mempertahankan imunisasi sebagai upaya terdepan dalam menyelamatkan anak-anak Afrika dari kematian dan penyakit.
Pemenuhan komitmen ini tentu tidak akan mudah.
Imunisasi bukan sekedar isu kesehatan tapi merupakan tantangan ekonomi.
Argumentasi yang mendukung vaksinasi sangat kuat.
Secara global, sekitar 2-3 juta kematian anak dan 600.000 kematian dewasa dicegah setiap tahunnya melalui imunisasi.
Selain itu, imunisasi dianggap sebagai salah satu bentuk intervensi kesehatan masyarakat yang paling hemat biaya untuk menurunkan morbiditas, kematian, dan kecacatan pada anak.
Sebuah studi terbaru memperkirakan bahwa setiap 1 dolar yang dikeluarkan untuk biaya vaksinasi akan menghemat 16 dolar biaya-biaya akibat penyakit yang berhasil dikalahkan.
Dengan memperhitungkan nilai-nilai yang diprioritaskan individu pada kehidupan yang lebih sehat dan panjang, net return dalam investasi pada imunisasi bertambah menjadi 44 kali dibandingkan biayanya, dan net return ini melebihi pengeluaran untuk semua jenis vaksin.
Kemajuan yang signifikan sudah tercapai.
Pada tahun 2014, sekitar 86% anak-anak menerima imunisasi yang melindungi mereka dari penyakit difteri, tetanus, dan pertusis, dibandingkan angka di tahun 1974 yang kurang dari 5%.
Masih banyak lagi kemajuan besar dari segi jumlah dan vaksin yang tersedia.
Akan tetapi secara global sekitar 18.7 juta bayi belum terjangkau oleh layanan imunisasi yang rutin.
Permasalahannya tentunya adalah akses.
Analisis mendalam tentang imunisasi di negara-negara Afrika mengungkap kesenjangan yang besar baik di dalam negeri maupun antar negara.
Lebih dari 60% bayi yang belum mendapat imunisasi tinggal di sepuluh negara berikut: Kongo, Ethiopia, India, Indonesia, Irak, Nigeria, Pakistan, Filipina, Uganda, dan Afrika Selatan.
Cakupan imuninasi berkala masih relatif rendah terutama di Afrika, benar bahwa kondisi ini telah memburuk dalam tiga tahun terakhir dikarenakan sistem kesehatan yang lemah dan kekurangan sumber daya. sebagai akibatnya, satu dari lima anak-anak di Afrika belum mendapatkan vaksinasi yang sebetulnya bisa menyelamatkan hidup mereka.
Pada tahun 2014, sekitar 42% kematian secara global akibat penyakit campak terjadi di Afrika.
Sebagian besar anak-anak yang tidak mendapat imunisasi yang cukup hidup di Nigeria, Kongo, Sudan Selatan, Ethiopia, dan Guinea.
Penduduk miskin, masyarakat yang tinggal di pedesaaan, dan keluarga dengan tingkat pendidikan rendah adalah mayoritas warga yang belum dijangkau layanan imunisasi.
Tentu saja uang adalah faktor utama yang menentukan keluaran imunisasi.
Selain dari sistem kesehatan yang memiliki dana terbatas, sehingga sektor ini semakin lemah dan tidak efisien, terutama di wilayah pedesaan, negara-negara Afrika mengalami tantangan dalam hal pengadaan vaksin-vaksin baru yang lebih mahal.
Vaksin-vaksin baru harus memberdayakan kita untuk menyelamatkan lebih banyak jiwa.
Namun Médecins Sans Frontièresmemperkirakan bahwa pengenalan vaksin-vaksin baru di tahun 2014 menjadikan vaksinasi bagi seorang anak 68 kali lebih mahal di negara-negara Afrika dibandingkan tahun 2001.
Sebuah studi lain menunjukkan di tahun 2001, biaya total enam jenis vaksin pokok yang dianjurkan WHO adalah kurang dari satu dolar.
Pada tahun 2011, jumlah vaksin yang dianjurkan WHO bertambah menjadi 11 jenis dan biayanya mencapai $21 bagi anak laki-laki dan $35 bagi anak perempuan.
Tambahan biaya untuk pengiriman, kini sekitar $25 per anak, menjadikan total biaya untuk imunisasi lengkap bagi seorang enak sebanyak $50-60.
Studi yang sama menyimpulkan bahwa di banyak negara berpendapatan rendah dan menengah, anggaran imunisasi saat ini tidak cukup untuk mempertahankan keberlanjutan program imunisasi, apalagi untuk membiayai vaksin-vaksin baru yang lebih mahal.
Sebagaimana disepakati oleh sejumlah menteri kesehatan yang bertemu di Addis Ababa, harga vaksin yang tinggi memaksa pemerintah di negara-negara miskin untuk mengambil keputusan yang sulit sebab diharuskan memilih penyakit mematikan apa yang mampu dicegah berdasarkan kemampuan finansial mereka.
Bagi beberapa negara, situasi ini akan memburuk, seiring dengan penghentian bantuan yang diberikan Gavi, sebuah kelompok internasional yang membantu pembiayaan ekspansi vaksin-vaksin di tingkat global secara besar-besaran, terhadap negara-negara yang dianggap “lulus” dan tidak lagi layak menerima bantuan.
Tanpa kemudahan yang diberikan oleh Gavi bagi negara-negara ini untuk menerima harga yang lebih rendah, banyak diantara mereka tidak akan mampu menjangkau dan mengakses vaksin-vaksin terbaru.
Agar bisa mengatasi tantangan ini, beberapa pemimpin politik di Afrika telah berkomitmen untuk berinvestasi pada kapasitas pengembangan dan produksi vaksin mereka sendiri.
Namun ini merupakan strategi jangka panjang yang memerlukan perencanaan investasi regional yang terkoordinasi, pengembangan pasar, dan kemampuan mengatur yang lebih kuat.
Dalam jangka pendek dan menengah, negara-negara Afrika sebaiknya memanfaatkan kekuatan tawar-menawar global untuk mendapat kesepakatan yang lebih baik bagi sejumlah vaksin yang sangat dibutuhkan.
Meskipun negara-negara di Afrika bisa dan harus mengambil tindakan lebih untuk meningkatkan vaksinasi, komunitas global juga mempunyai tanggung jawab untuk melaksanakan upaya global demi menurunkan biaya vaksin.
Pengumuman terbaru tentang penurunan harga vaksin pneumococcal adalah salah satu langkah dalam jalur yang tepat namun tindakan ini saja tidak cukup.
Tanpa upaya gabungan, jaminan akan adanya akses kepada imunisasi yang mudah diakses dan berkelanjutan bagi Afrika tidak akan terpenuhi dan kita akan terus kehilangan nyawa anak-anak kita.
&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; “Where beautiful people
&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; Laugh and dance in harmony.
&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; Africa.
O Africa.”
And, indeed, these young people laughed and danced not only in harmony but with a joie de vivre that lit up their faces and filled us all with happiness.
Listening, it was hard to imagine that they could easily be dead – and would be, if not for this clinic.
Each of those splendid performers is living with HIV.
Some arrived at the clinic so ill that they could scarcely walk.
Others showed few symptoms but, having tested positive, came to be treated.
They were mothers and fathers, sisters and brothers, children and grandparents.
All were alive and healthy for one reason only: the Joint Clinical Research Center in Kampala, and the drugs that it provides them.
Uganda was the epicenter of the AIDS epidemic. There the scourge began in earnest; there (as elsewhere in Africa) it exacts its highest toll.
Yet Uganda is also a success story.
A decade ago, fewer than 10,000 people were taking the new generation of antiretroviral drugs that suppress the disease and offer the promise of a normal life.
Today, that figure is 200,000, thanks in large measure to generous support from the United States (under its PEPFAR program) and the Global Fund in Geneva.
We have seen similarly encouraging progress elsewhere.
Botswana, among others, has invested heavily to offer universal treatment, and now is well on its way to ensuring that no baby is born with HIV – a reality in developed countries, but not so in Africa, where 400,000 children are born with the disease each year.
South Africa, with the largest number of people living with HIV, has spent nearly $1 billion over the past year in an ambitious counseling and testing campaign to roll back the epidemic.
But there is a new and growing danger that these advances might not be sustained.
Peter Mugyenyi, who runs the Joint Clinical Research Center, told me that part of the problem is the sheer weight of numbers.
In Uganda, only about half of those with HIV/AIDS are being treated.
Meanwhile, money for treatment is drying up.
Because of the global recession, some international donors are threatening to cap their financial support.
Countries such as Malawi, Zimbabwe, and Kenya, as well as Uganda, are requesting assistance for emergency drug supplies.
In Kampala, Dr. Mugyenyi has begun placing new patients on a waiting list.
As many as seven million Africans who should be getting treatment for HIV are not.
Worldwide, the number is about 10 million.
Compounding the problem: donors have also been shifting their focus from AIDS to other diseases, because there is a sense that more lives can be saved more cheaply.
At a time when we should be scaling up to meet the AIDS challenge, we are dialing back.
In our global war on AIDS, the international community is on the verge of snatching defeat from the jaws of victory.
Those who rallied to the fight are alarmed. They fear that the impressive gains of the last decade will be lost.
“We are sitting on a time bomb,” Dr. Mugyenyi told me.
Every day, he is forced into moral choices that no one should have to make.
How do you choose to treat a young girl but not her little brother?
How do you turn away a pregnant mother, sitting with her children, crying for help?
Surely we can do better.
In Kampala, I promised my young friends that I would do everything I could to help.
Its inherent truth would be obvious, had you been there to see:&#160;
&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; We are still useful.
&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; To our countries, to our families.
&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; All we need is a way to live our days,
&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160; All we need is to survive in Africa.
Yes, times are hard.
That is all the more reason to act out of compassion and with generosity.
Africa’s Diaspora to the Rescue
DAKAR – There is something dismally familiar about the tide of news reports concerning Africa’s increased suffering – more poverty, malnutrition, civil strife, and death – in the face of the recent global financial crisis.
Almost everywhere, the media translates academic conclusions into graphic illustrations of brutality and despair in places such as Guinea and the Democratic Republic of Congo.
But there is another, woefully under-reported, side to the story.
African countries that were locked out of international capital markets for most of the past five decades have largely been spared the twin woes of financial turmoil and economic downturn.
The continent’s economies experienced a slowdown, but not a recession.
Indeed, according to McKinsey &amp; Company, Africa was the third-largest contributor to world economic growth in 2009, after China and India.
Moreover, several African countries have received ratings from credit agencies, which has opened up global financial centers to them.
In some cases, these ratings have proved equivalent to or higher than those of countries such as Turkey or Argentina.
Stock exchanges are being established across the continent.
Furthermore, countries such as China, India, and Brazil has provided a platform for increased exports and the inception of a model of cooperation based on trade, investment, and technology transfer, rather than “aid.”
China-Africa trade alone increased from $10 billion in 2000 to $107 billion in 2008, and billions of dollars are being invested in oil production, mining, transportation, electricity generation and transmission, telecommunications, and other infrastructure.
These developments have combined to improve African countries’ macroeconomic performance dramatically.
Inflation has been halved since the 1990’s, and foreign-exchange reserves have increased 30%.
Public finances showed a 2.8%-of-GDP surplus in 2008, compared to a 1.4%-of-GDP deficit in 2000-2005.
Savings rates are between 10% and 20%, and external debt has decreased from 110% of GDP in 2005 to 21% in 2008.
Since 2000, sub-Saharan African countries have achieved economic growth of 5-7%.
Many factors have contributed to this upturn.
Emerging-market demand has pushed up commodity prices.
Urbanization has given rise to a dynamic informal sector.
Improved governance, higher food production, increased inter-regional trade, debt cancellation, better use of official development assistance (ODA), and thriving telecommunications and housing markets have helped as well.
But transfers from the African diaspora stand out as the most significant contributing factor.
A study commissioned by the Rome-based International Fund for Agricultural Development indicates that more than 30 million individuals living outside their countries of origin contribute more than $40 billion annually in remittances to their families and communities back home.
For sub-Saharan African countries, remittances increased from $3.1 billion in 1995 to $18.5 billion in 2007, according to the World Bank, representing between 9% and 24% of GDP and 80-750% of ODA.
Migrants’ remittance behavior is essentially dictated by the regulatory environment and the quality – in terms of speed, cost, security, and accessibility – of products and services offered by banks, money-transfer companies, micro-finance institutions, and informal operators.
In this respect, there are three different strategies in place in Africa.
The Anglophone strategy focuses on freeing up the remittance market by encouraging competition, relaxing regulatory constraints for non-bank operators, offering financial incentives, encouraging technical and financial innovation, and stimulating collaboration among market players.
This approach, also adopted by Italy, contributes to reducing costs and increasing the overall volume of funds for beneficiaries.
The Hispanic approach emphasizes migrants’ involvement in banking by offering a range of banking services in both the country of origin and the host country, products of specific interest to migrants, and low commissions on foreign transfers.
This approach, widely developed by Morocco and the Portuguese-speaking world, is epitomized by the zero-commission policy initiated by the Spanish bank Santander and its Moroccan counterpart, Attijariwafa Bank.
Finally, the Francophone approach relies on two types of monopoly.
The first is enjoyed by Western Union, which controls up to 90% of the total formal transfer volume within Africa’s 16-member Franc Zone.
Western Union charges fees as high as 25% on transfers to these countries, compared to an average global benchmark of 5%, and has required that Franc-Zone countries sign exclusivity agreements, thereby preventing foreign-exchange bureaux, post offices, and micro-finance institutions from carrying out money transfers.
The second monopoly is exercised in the banking sector.
France has a veto within the boards of directors of the Franc Zone’s two central banks, while two French commercial banks, BNP-Paribas and Société Générale, exercise a quasi-monopoly on lending programs, mainly centered on short-term trade financing and the needs of governments, public and private companies, and the elite.
All other local banks have adopted the same approach, severely restricting access to financial services for households and entrepreneurs.
Despite the increasing importance of remittances from Italy, Spain, and the United States, the largest share in absolute terms still originates from France.
There is thus a real need in the Franc Zone for a financing institution that would convert migrant remittances into productive investments, thereby generating jobs and wealth, and that would broaden access to banking services, mortgages, insurance products, pension plans, and technical assistance.
Official statistics for 2009 are likely to show that migrants’ remittances fell sharply, as the global recession severely eroded job opportunities abroad.
That makes it all the more important that African countries, many of which have laid a strong groundwork for sustainable growth, have a financial system in place that can leverage remittances effectively as the global economy recovers.
Africa’s Dictator-Diplomat
BRUSSELS – The recent death in Brussels of Ethiopian Prime Minister Meles Zenawi finally brings to light what lay behind his mysterious two-month disappearance from public life.
Ethiopia’s government had strenuously denied rumors of serious ill health caused by liver cancer.
Now that the worst has, indeed, proven true, Ethiopia and all of East Africa will need to learn to live without the stabilizing influence of its great dictator-diplomat.
Meles was certainly both.
Ethiopia has undergone a remarkable transformation under his strongman rule since 1991, when his Tigrayan minority group from the country’s north came to power with the overthrow of the odious Communist Derg led by Mengistu Haile Mariam (still enjoying a comfortable retirement in Robert Mugabe’s Zimbabwe).
Initially serving as the president of the first post-Derg government, and then as Ethiopia’s prime minister from 1995 until his death, Meles (his nom de guerre in the revolution) oversaw 7.7% annual GDP growth in recent years.
Strong economic performance is somewhat surprising, given his party’s interventionist policy approach, but Meles showed himself to be a consummate pragmatist in attracting investment – particularly from China – to drive growth.
Meles’s own political provenance as the leader of the Tigrayan People’s Liberation Front was Marxist-Leninist.
But, when the Cold War ended, so, too, did his dogmatism.
To his credit, child mortality was reduced by 40% under his government; Ethiopia’s economy became more diversified, with new industries like car manufacturing, beverages, and floriculture; and major infrastructure projects, including Africa’s largest hydroelectric dam, were launched.
Once a basket-case associated in the world’s eyes only with famine and drought, Ethiopia has become one of Africa’s largest economies – and without the benefit of gold or oil.
Perhaps more important than Meles’s domestic achievements was his diplomatic record.
He was an indispensable ally of the West in the fight against Islamist terrorism, culminating in Ethiopia’s military operation in neighboring Somalia in 2006.
More recently, Meles coordinated efforts with Kenya to stage limited strikes against the al-Shabaab militia, which has waged an unrelenting war to turn Somalia into a fundamentalist Islamic theocracy.
At the same time, Meles courted China as both an investor and as a hedge against the West’s criticism of his human-rights record.
And yet he controversially but rightly held out a hand of friendship to the breakaway region of Somaliland, before it became fashionable, and went as far as he could short of formal re-recognition of that ray of democratic hope in the Horn of Africa.
Meles will be sorely missed in Hargeisa, as he planned to run a Chinese-financed gas pipeline through Somaliland territory from the Ogaden to the coast.
More important, Meles put Addis Ababa on the map as the home of the African Union, and as a capital where Africa’s worst problems could be discussed in a pragmatic manner, unburdened by colonial grudges.
Meles himself became a major diplomatic player, particularly over climate-change policy, and most recently was active in mediating border and natural-resource disputes between Sudan and the newly independent (and oil-rich) South Sudan.
He will be remembered for accepting the painful secession of Eritrea in 1993, rather than prolong the civil war, and for his efforts to reach an agreement with Egypt over the use of the Blue Nile waters.
The great stain on Meles’s record will always be his intolerance of dissent.
To be sure, his human-rights record was far better than the Derg’s.
For example, he allowed a private press to flourish, and in 2000 he became the first Ethiopian leader to hold multi-party parliamentary elections.
Moreover, compared to neighboring Eritrea under President Isaias Afewerki or Omar al-Bashir’s Sudan, his regime was by no means the worst offender in the region.
Nor was there much evidence of personal enrichment or widespread corruption.
Nevertheless, following a violently contested parliamentary election in 2005, in which more than 30 parties participated, Meles demonstrated open contempt for democratic pluralism and press freedom, jailing several journalists in recent years.
At the same time, he imposed increasingly strict central control on his ethnically and linguistically diverse country.
Although nominally governed by “ethnic federalism,” where this threatened secession, as in Oromia or the Ogaden, Meles was quick to ignore the constitutional set-up.
Although he strengthened religious freedom and peaceful coexistence between Muslims and Christians, the human-rights situation in Ethiopia remained poor.
For example, groups like Freedom House and Human Rights Watch have documented widespread official repression of the Oromo people.
And yet Meles is irreplaceable – unmatched intellectually as an African leader (he dropped out of medical school, but went on to teach himself impeccable English and obtain European university degrees by correspondence), and unmatched politically at home, with no obvious successor groomed to replace him.
In the Horn of Africa, there is no leader of his stature who could ensure the stability and strong governance that the region so desperately needs.
Hailemariam Desalegn, Meles’s foreign minister, will take over Ethiopia’s government.
But there will be considerable concern in the West about the danger of a power vacuum or struggle in a geopolitically vital but fractious country –&nbsp;and just when neighboring Somalia is supposed to be undergoing a transition to a new parliament and elected government.
For his admirers and critics alike, Meles leaves behind a potent political legacy.
He will be remembered as an African leader of major historical significance: visionary, despotic, and indispensable.
Africa’s Economic House Divided
DAKAR – The world economic downturn and financial-market tremors have strained budgets across Africa.
With the exception of Ghana, and a few other states, in 2009 most African countries’ fiscal balances deteriorated.
But, thanks to prudent management of public finances during previous periods of robust growth, a significant number of African countries have endured the current crisis in better fiscal shape than during past crises.
In 2009, aggregate GDP growth in Africa averaged 1.6%, down from about 5.7% during the 2002-2008 period – but growth all the same.
Moreover, several African countries continued to implement long-term reforms to improve their business and investment climate, despite the daunting challenges presented by the crisis.
Now that international trade and global industrial production are on the mend, sub-Saharan economies look set for more robust growth, as demand for and prices of oil and other minerals rebound and general economic activity resumes.
Of course, numerous downside risks – adverse weather shocks, military conflict, and political turmoil – still can undermine the hard-earned benefits of this social and economic record.
But it is the dichotomized nature of their economies and finances that represents Africa’s most intractable structural imbalance.
Frankly, two Africa’s are emerging: a modern economy and a cash-based economy.
Across Africa, almost all governments praise – some honestly, some not – economic modernization as the cornerstone of prosperity and the yardstick by which their effectiveness should be measured. Many boast of the modernity of the financial infrastructure of their economies, which is based on an entire set of legal, regulatory, accounting, credit reporting, and payment and settlement systems.
National payment systems operate electronic-based payment products and services.
A high-value inter-bank funds-transfer system settles transactions in real time, eliminates credit risk between system participants, increases circulation of funds, and enhances monetary-policy implementation.
Banks are provided with a facility to monitor their positions in real time and hence make cost-effective investment decisions.
So far, only a few registered financial institutions, primarily offshoots of Western commercial banks, have access to such payment-system facilities.
Non-banking financial institutions such as foreign exchange bureaus, post offices, and micro-finance lenders are not admitted, even when they are financially sound and sustainable.
The effects of banks’ hijacking of national payment systems to service only the modern economy are compounded by the exclusive agreements that banks and money-transfer companies such as Western Union have signed with most African countries.
These agreements lock out non-banking entities from the highly lucrative market for migrant remittances from the African diaspora, which remain a key engine of growth.
Yet rapid urbanization everywhere in Africa has given rise to a dynamic informal sector unconnected to the modern economy.
Although marginalized by African officials, this cash-based economy is a major contributor to the continent’s productive capacity.
It employs more than 90% of the workforce and is home to 75% of the retailers.
But, despite the pivotal economic role that the informal sector plays, it has no access to conventional bank loans.
Micro-finance institutions provide the only credit lines open to informal operators.
The micro-finance business model is based on lending that is guaranteed by the group.
This translates into a solidarity network and a support mechanism that mitigates credit risk and encourages payment discipline. Credit repayment in well-managed micro-finance institutions is around 95%. All studies undertaken in the area have also revealed that women are not only the most active among informal-sector entrepreneurs, but they are also quicker to meet their commitments.
African states must now recognize that modernizing their informal sectors by integrating them into the modern economy can be a major development tool. Yet only a few countries have started moving in that direction.
Nigeria has refrained from signing any exclusive agreements with Western Union and others, and its newly consolidated banking industry is making significant inroads across the region.
Rwanda, too, has enacted regulations that eliminate exclusive agreements, opening doors for micro-finance institutions to become payment-service providers.
The South African Reserve Bank has created a special platform within its national payment system for micro-finance institutions and non-banks.
Malawi’s national payments system is directly accessible to non-bank participants, including third-party service providers.
Giving micro-finance institutions access to national and regional payments systems and electronic retail facilities will go a long way toward meeting the requirements of the retail and business sector in terms of banking facilities.
It will also help facilitate access by the poorest to financial services, thus helping to reduce the high proportion of the un-banked population.
All of this will invariably spur development and integration of national financial systems and intra-regional trade.
This will be a welcome development, because a large proportion of intra-regional trade is carried out by informal operators and small and medium enterprises that do not have access to the banking system.
Moreover, economic integration and increased intra-regional trade are the best entry point into global markets for all countries.
When it comes to analyzing what ails Africa, it is customary to dwell at length on the continent’s traumatic past.
But it strains the imagination to link Africa’s colonial-era pains with the willingness of African leaders to spend a fortune to equip their countries with state-of-the-art settlement systems, and then proceed to exclude their citizens from using them.
Abraham Lincoln once said that a house divided cannot stand.
There is an economic corollary to this: an economic house divided cannot prosper.
Africa’s Hard Black Gold
LAGOS - Few infrastructure services in the developed world may be as taken for granted as electric power.
To consumers in industrialized countries, uninterrupted power supply is a given.
Not so in much of Africa, which experiences some of the world’s greatest power deficits, and where only two in ten people have access to electricity.
According to the International Monetary Fund’s most recent Regional Economic Outlook for Sub-Saharan Africa , in 2007 alone, nearly two-thirds of the countries in the region experienced an acute energy crisis marked by frequent and extended electricity outages.
There is no shortage of hydropower plants for electricity generation in Africa.
However, many of these plants are unable to keep up with rapid population growth and attendant increases in demand.
Furthermore, they are prone to frequent drought, which reduces their output significantly, leaving many as little more than decorative infrastructure landmarks.
Increasingly burgeoning populations in countries like Nigeria and Ghana imply a greater extraction of water resources for power generation.
Rapid expansion of agricultural activity is requiring more and more water all across the continent.
Other resources like fuel oil, diesel, light crude, solar, and gas are also available as means of electricity generation, but their costs are all quite prohibitive.
These factors make a good argument for coal as a cheap alternative source of Africa's power.
Coal has historically played a crucial role as a source of energy worldwide, and has several important advantages over other fossil fuels.  First is its relative abundance.
The current level of proven coal reserves worldwide stands at roughly 850 billion tons.
Africa has about 50 billion tons.
Coal is also much more widely distributed geographically than any other fossil fuel.
Worldwide energy demand has increased by more than 50% since 1980, and is expected to grow annually by 1.6% between now and 2030.
More than 70% of this new demand will come from developing countries, with fossil fuels projected to account for about 80% of total energy demand by the end of this period.
Coal is the world’s fastest growing fossil fuel, with annual production increasing by 6.4% since 2004.
It is already the dominant source of power generation in some very important energy-consuming nations.
Much of the future increases in coal-fired electricity generation will come from strategically important developing countries like China and India.
In 2006 alone, China added about 93,000 megawatts of coal- fired electricity generating capacity, and this trend is expected to continue as the country tries to meet its huge energy needs.
Even in many developed countries, coal still accounts for a large share of power generation.
Coal plants currently provide more than half of America’s electricity supply.
Denmark, which houses some of the most efficient coal-fired power plants in the world, equally relies on coal for half of its electricity production.
The same is true for Germany, which is home to some of the most efficient pulverized coal combustion units in Europe.
Poland uses coal for 98% of its electricity production, and South Africa uses coal for about 50% of its electricity production.
Against this picture then, it is hard not to expect developing countries to exploit their abundant coal resources to generate power for their own development, especially given that modern technology can help produce coal cleanly.
Some argue that gas might be a better alternative to hydro or coal, but for countries that must import much of their gas the benefits of a stable and reliable source of cheap fuel in the form of coal present a very strong counter-argument to the capital costs of a gas plant.
Unlike prices for coal, which is abundant and dispersed geographically, gas prices are subject to significant volatility, and the long-term trend in the face of fossil fuel depletion is uncertain.
In contrast, coal prices are more stable, and may remain that way for a long time.
Apart from electric-power generation, coal also has wide application in a number of industries.
It is pivotal in both steel and cement production.
Moreover, the use of wood by Africa’s growing population is causing increasingly rapid deforestation in many countries.
There is significant potential domestic demand for coal briquettes to replace wood for cooking and domestic and industrial heating.
The demand outlook thus appears favorable for the coal industry, creating significant investment opportunities.
Clearly, there are environmental drawbacks from the use of coal as an energy resource, and these concerns are far too important to overlook.
The massive reserves notwithstanding, coal is still a finite resource.
It must be mined with greater efficiency and with a view to mitigating the environmental impact.
Fortunately, much greater attention is paid today to mine safety and the management of the by-products of coal use.
With acid rain and other public-health hazards linked to coal combustion, more technologies are emerging for reducing harmful emissions from power plants.
Fueled by research, the past few years have witnessed the development of increasingly cleaner and more energy-efficient coal-fired generation plants and the retirement of older technologies, especially in the developed world.