World trade is already down sharply as a result of the economic crisis; introducing new tariffs would inevitably reduce trade further, causing the loss of additional jobs and leading to new frictions.
Over time, a failure to reduce greenhouse gas emissions would lead to additional climate change, which in turn would increase the severity of poverty, the scale of internal displacement and migration, the scarcity of water, the prevalence of disease, and the number and intensity of storms.
The result could be more failed states and more conflict between states.
Climate change is as much a matter of security as it is an economic and human concern.
So what should be done?
The most important step for those preparing for Copenhagen is to embrace national policies that increase energy efficiency and reduce greenhouse-gas emissions.
The US has at long last done some of this in adopting new and much higher standards for automobile fuel efficiency.
Regulatory policy can increase the efficiency of appliances, housing, and machinery.
Such reforms should appeal to rich and poor countries alike, as they would reduce spending on energy and dependence on oil imports.
Coordinated national actions are not the same as unilateralism.
There is no unilateral answer to what is a global challenge.
But to describe a challenge as global is not to argue that the remedy is to be found only in an ambitious, formal, and universal treaty.
Such an accord might well be desirable, but it is simply not an option for climate change any time soon.
The goal for the representatives of the nearly 200 countries who will meet in Copenhagen should not be a single sweeping agreement so much as a set of more modest agreements.
Coal is one place to begin, as it will continue to generate the lion’s share of the world’s electricity for decades to come.
Greater sharing of existing cleaner-coal technologies is needed, as is continued development of next-generation clean-coal plants.
Nuclear power is another area requiring attention.
So, too, are renewable forms of power, such as solar and wind.
Here, too, mechanisms are needed for sharing new technologies and helping poorer countries pay for them in exchange for adopting policies that reduce greenhouse-gas emissions.
Moreover, stopping the destruction of forests is essential, given how much carbon is trapped in them.
One objective for Copenhagen should be to create a well-endowed global fund to support policies that discourage the cutting and burning of trees, help countries such as Brazil and Indonesia protect their rain forests, and provide alternative livelihoods to those who currently benefit from destroying them.
Focusing on steps such as these would go a long way toward attaining the often-discussed goal of halving global carbon emissions by mid-century.
But reaching an accord that sets binding ceilings for what each country will be allowed to emit is not an option in Copenhagen. The consensus simply does not exist.
Smaller steps, however, can and should be taken.
Those who want to master the challenge of climate change now will reject such realism.
But, as is often the case, those who insist on getting everything risk getting nothing.            
A Green Alliance With Europe
SANTIAGO/SAO PAULO – In December, world leaders will meet in Paris for the United Nations Climate Change Conference, which is expected to produce a new agreement to tackle global warming.
But, in the run-up to the conference, heads of state and ministers will meet at various other related events.
Having attended countless summits, we can attest that, if these other meetings are correctly prepared, and heads of state engage meaningfully in them, the prospects of success in Paris could be improved.
One such meeting in particular could be decisive: the June 10-11 bi-annual summit in Brussels between the European Union and the Community of Latin America and the Caribbean States (CELAC).
Efforts by Europe and Latin America and the Caribbean have set the groundwork for the world’s strongest bi-regional partnership on climate change.
Leaders in both regions have declared their commitment to holding the rise in global temperature to below 2º Celsius and to achieving legally binding outcomes in Paris.
The EU and CELAC heads of state can – and should – forge a close alliance and capitalize on favorable political conditions to advance a progressive climate agenda, one that mandates their negotiators to push for a fair, equitable, and ambitious agreement in December.
Together, the two regions represent nearly a third of the 195 parties that have signed the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, and account for roughly 20% of global greenhouse-gas emissions.
Given soaring climate-related economic costs in Europe and Latin America, both sides have much to gain (and save) from a global regime that significantly reduces emissions and strengthens resilience to climate risks.
This common sense of purpose is reflected in our regions’ policies.
Latin America and the Caribbean are taking concerted action to help bringing down global emissions and could do much more with funding and technology transfers from developed countries.
Brazil, for example, has drastically reduced deforestation in the Amazon – a major contribution.
Chile is on track to reach its goal of producing 20% of its electricity from renewable sources by 2025.
And in 2012, Mexico enacted a climate-change law that aims to reduce emissions by 30% below their business-as-usual level by 2020, and by 50% by 2050.
For its part, the EU is offering the strongest pledge yet for the Paris agreement: a reduction in domestic greenhouse-gas emissions by at least 40%, relative to their level in 1990, by 2030.
This is in line with the EU’s long-term goal of reducing emissions by 80-95% (again, relative to the 1990 level) by 2050.
The EU-CELAC summit can also benefit from diplomatic efforts within CELAC, which includes all of the region’s 33 countries.
A regional effort led by Brazil and Chile is promoting dialogue among CELAC countries to build trust, with the goal of identifying common positions for the UN climate negotiations.
CELAC has emphasized that a new global climate-change deal should treat adaptation and mitigation in a balanced manner.
In keeping with its commitment to the 2º C cap on the rise in global temperature, CELAC not only supports a legally binding agreement, but also calls for wealthy countries to meet their promises to provide developing countries with $100 billion per year in climate finance by 2020.
Wealthy countries that have not complied with the emissions-reduction commitments enshrined in the 1997 Kyoto Protocol owe this debt to the planet.
CELAC seeks rules to ensure the transparency and verification of countries’ climate actions, and calls on developed countries to increase their technology transfer and capacity-building efforts to support its member countries.
Latin American and the Caribbean countries can also use the upcoming summit in Brussels to reassure the EU that it is a valued partner.
It can call on Europe to provide greater predictability of financial flows and alignment on climate and development objectives, especially to reduce inequality and poverty, boost clean energy, and build sustainable urban transport and other infrastructure.
Following the difficult climate negotiations in Copenhagen in 2009, we understand why some European leaders may be lowering expectations for the Paris talks.
They are understandably reluctant to expend too much political capital by calling for a far-reaching deal.
But, at a time when concern about global warming among citizens in both regions is growing, this is no time for indecisiveness.
European leaders should boldly show that they are committed to an ambitious outcome in Paris, and that Europe will enhance its support of CELAC climate actions.
The Inter-American Development Bank estimates that CELAC can more than meet its future energy needs through renewable energy sources, including solar, wind, and geothermal.
Indeed, such resources are sufficient to cover projected 2050 electricity needs 22 times over.
The EU can play a leading role in promoting renewable energy cooperation, in part by transferring technology that is adapted to our tropical conditions, which would support CELAC countries’ efforts to reduce emissions and pollution, increase their resilience to climate change, and create jobs.
This type of enhanced cooperation and diplomacy could pay large dividends.
Progress in Brussels next week would increase CELAC countries’ confidence, thereby encouraging them to offer the strongest-possible commitments – known technically as “intended nationally determined contributions” – in Paris.
More generally, a successful meeting in Brussels could help bring all sides closer together on thorny issues, such as the scale and scope of efforts that countries at different levels of development should make to address climate change.
By forming an ambitious alliance – which could be enlarged to include other groups, such as the Alliance of Small Island States and the Least-Developed Countries group – EU and CELAC heads of state can contribute to setting the course that the world must follow to create a low-carbon, sustainable, and resilient future.
We urge them to take the necessary steps in Brussels next week to achieve that goal.
Membangun Kepercayaan dalam Dana Iklim
WASHINGTON, DC – Dalam waktu kurang dari 80 hari, para pemimpin dunia akan memiliki kesempatan untuk mengesahkan perjanjian yang hanya muncul sekali dalam satu generasi demi perang melawan perubahan iklim.
Konferensi Perubahan Iklim PBB di Paris pada bulan Desember bisa menandai titik balik dalam sejarah dunia: pengakuan bulat atas kebutuhan untuk bertindak guna mencegah dampak yang paling berbahaya akibat pemanasan global.
Supaya kesepakatan ini berhasil dicapai, peserta konferensi harus mengatasi ketidakpercayaan yang telah menyebabkan polarisasi dan kelambanan selama beberapa perundingan sebelumnya.
Pertama-tama, pelaksanaan kesepakatan dengan pembatasan yang kuat pada emisi gas rumah kaca mengharuskan kepatuhan terhadap komitmen yang telah dibuat, termasuk janji oleh negara-negara maju untuk mengeluarkan $100 miliar per tahun pada tahun 2020 untuk membantu negara-negara berkembang mengurangi kontribusinya terhadap perubahan iklim dan beradaptasi dengan pemanasan dunia.
Mengingat besarnya skala tantangan dan kerugian yang ditimbulkan akibat kelambanan atau kurangnya tindakan terhadap kelompok penduduk yang paling rentan di dunia, lembaga keuangan pembangunan dan pihak lain yang berkepentingan harus menunjukkan komitmen mereka untuk mencegah dampak yang paling berbahaya akibat perubahan iklim.
Penerapan komitmen ini memerlukan dedikasi yang diperbarui dan bersifat transparan. 
Itu sebabnya Kelompok Bank Dunia sedang mengkaji upaya lain yang dapat dilakukan untuk membantu mengarahkan ekonomi pada jalur yang berkelanjutan.
Dengan menjaga penyerahan rencana aksi nasional dilakukan dengan tepat waktu sebelum pertemuan iklim di Paris, kita bisa merencanakan gambaran menyeluruh pekerjaan kami guna menemukan peluang untuk membantu negara-negara di bidang energi, transportasi, pertanian, kehutanan, manajemen perkotaan dll.
Memang benar, perang melawan perubahan iklim harus dilakukan di berbagai bidang.
Kenaikan suhu global dan iklim yang semakin tidak stabil akan mempengaruhi semua aspek pembangunan dan membahayakan investasi yang ada kecuali mitigasi dan adaptasi strategi yang memadai – juga penting bagi Tujuan Pembangunan Berkelanjutan (SDGs) hasil rumusan PBB yang akan diadopsi akhir bulan ini – mampu ditetapkan.
Bagian dari upaya untuk melawan  perubahan iklim harus melibatkan penanganan terhadap sumber-sumber ketidakefisienan ekonomi, seperti subsidi bahan bakar fosil dan penghitungan biaya polusi yang tidak memadai.
Kini terdapat tingginya pengakuan bahwa pembiayaan pembangunan dan pendanaan iklim dapat digunakan untuk mendorong dan mempercepat investasi dari sumber-sumber publik dan swasta.
Terutama sekali perjanjian iklim yang berhasil harus memuat langkah-langkah yang tepat dalam pengelolaan triliunan dolar yang perlu diinvestasikan dalam infrastruktur rendah karbon dan peningkatan ketahanan terhadap dampak berbahaya akibat kenaikan suhu global.
Tindakan ini harus dilakukan dalam cara yang terbuka dan transparan.
Sangat penting bahwa kami memastikan aliran pendanaan yang disalurkan dalam perang melawan perubahan iklim dapat dilacak, sehingga warga dapat menjaga pemerintah dan lembaga-lembaga di negaranya tetap bertanggung jawab.
Untuk mencapai sasaran tersebut, enam bank pembangunan multilateral besar dan Kelompok Pembiayaan Pembangunan Internasional (International Development Finance Club) – sebuah jaringan lembaga pembangunan nasional, regional, dan internasional – telah bersusah payah menyusun prinsip-prinsip umum untuk pelacakan pendanaan iklim.
Prinsip-prinsip ini harus diberlakukan dalam semua proyek yang dimaksudkan untuk membantu negara-negara beradaptasi atau mengurangi dampak perubahan iklim.
Dalam sebuah laporan yang diterbitkan pada bulan Juni, enam bank ini menguraikan bagaimana mereka telah mengeluarkan lebih dari $ 100 miliar untuk pendanaan iklim selama empat tahun sejak pelaporan bersama dimulai.
Pembiayaan dari Kelompok Bank Dunia juga dapat dilacak berdasarkan kebijakan akses kepada informasi.
Konferensi di Paris menawarkan kesempatan untuk membangun jalan yang jelas guna menghindari dampak yang paling berbahaya akibat perubahan iklim; para pemimpin dunia yang menghadiri pertemuan tersebut tidak boleh menyia-nyiakannya.
Dengan menghormati janji-janji mereka secara kredibel dan transparan, negara-negara maju dapat menunjukkan komitmen mereka untuk berusaha dan meningkatkan kemungkinan terwujudnya kesepakatan yang efektif.
Sekarang waktunya untuk berinvestasi dalam perang melawan perubahan iklim.
Tingkat misi kita sudah mengakibatkan dampak yang sangat merusak di seluruh dunia.
Seiring dengan meningkatnya ketidakstabilan dan ketidakpastian akibat perubahan iklim, kerugian yang ditimbulkan akibat kelambanan hanya akan semakin bertambah.
Keeping the Climate-Finance Promise
LONDON – In 2009, the world’s rich countries pledged to mobilize $100 billion a year by 2020 to help poor countries tackle climate change.
Since then, that promise has come to be regarded as a key test of the developed world’s resolve to do its part in the fight against global warming.
Reaching the $100 billion target is important.
Poor countries must believe that rich countries will honor their pledges.
Otherwise, the prospects for an effective international agreement at the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Paris in November and December could be at risk.
Fortunately, there are encouraging signs that the commitment will be honored.
But larger financial flows are needed, particularly from the private sector.
According to the OECD and the Climate Policy Initiative, developed countries collectively mobilized $52.2 billion in 2013 and $61.8 billion in 2014 to help poor countries reduce greenhouse-gas emissions and build resilience against the effects of climate change that can no longer be avoided.
While it is important to note that this figure is only an estimate, it represents a preliminary but credible indicator of climate finance, based on information provided by developed countries.
If one assumes greater leverage for private-sector investment, the number would be higher.
Similarly, conservative assumptions about how much “genuinely extra” money is being spent to fight climate change through overseas aid and the multilateral development banks might have produced a lower figure.
In reaching their estimate, the researchers took into account major investments by both the public and private sectors in a wide range of projects.
Examples include the funding of small-scale renewable energy projects in Uganda by the United Kingdom, Germany, Norway, and the European Union, as well as the African Risk Capacity – supported by the UK and Germany – which offers insurance to governments against drought and other natural disasters.
What the report reveals is the relatively low level of investment by the private sector in projects that will increase poor countries’ resilience (though the authors acknowledge that limited information might mean that the true amount is higher).
This is both a challenge and an opportunity; with the right incentives, a sharp rise in private investment that enhances resilience could go a long way toward meeting the $100 billion target.
Reaching that goal will require increased confidence in the policies and institutions of the countries in which the money is to be spent.
New processes for sharing and reducing risk will be necessary.
In this effort, development banks and bilateral aid institutions have much to offer.
It is crucial that this new climate finance be used to complement the even-larger investments in sustainable development that will be necessary over the next few decades.
A central aim for climate financing should be to establish and implement the policies, regulations, and frameworks that will create the appropriate incentives for investors.
This could provide very large “multipliers.”
According to the Global Commission on the Economy and Climate, some $90 trillion will need to be spent on infrastructure over the next 15 years, mostly in developing and emerging economies that are experiencing rapid growth and urbanization.
If that infrastructure locks in dependence on fossil fuels, it will be very difficult to reduce global emissions of greenhouse gases.
However, if countries invest wisely in the transition to a low-carbon economy, they will stimulate innovation and generate decades of sustainable growth.
Thus, it is important that climate finance be used to foster public and private investment in low-carbon infrastructure and technologies, particularly to lower the cost of capital, which is crucial to scale up projects and encourage renewable-energy adoption.
Furthermore, climate funding provided by rich countries should help improve resilience to climate change in the most vulnerable countries. It should also be used to avoid deforestation and to protect fragile resources, including oceans and biodiversity.
And it should boost innovation and break new ground for climate action, including novel ways for the public and private sectors to work together, such as projects on carbon capture and storage.
Some of the $100 billion will be channeled through the newly created Green Climate Fund; but the existing multilateral development banks should also play a central role, along with national aid agencies and departments.
Money spent on sustainable development and climate action should be mutually reinforcing.
And finance ministries in developing countries should reaffirm that, in addition to fostering growth and poverty reduction, wise action to mitigate climate change can lower levels of air pollution and raise energy efficiency.
Success will ultimately depend on rich countries’ willingness to live up to their promises.
Their leaders must recognize that financial support for action against climate change in developing countries is not only morally right; it is also in the interest of their constituencies and, indeed, the world community.
A Healthy, Climate-Friendly Diet
BERLIN – This December, world leaders will meet in Paris for the United Nations Climate Change Conference, where they will hammer out a comprehensive agreement to reduce carbon emissions and stem global warming.
In the run-up to that meeting, governments worldwide should note one critical, but often overlooked, fact: the single biggest driver of environmental degradation and resource stress today is our changing diet – a diet that is not particularly conducive to a healthy life, either.
In recent decades, rising incomes have catalyzed a major shift in people’s eating habits, with meat, in particular, becoming an increasingly important feature of people’s diets.
Given that livestock require much more food, land, water, and energy to raise and transport than plants, increased demand for meat depletes natural resources, places pressure on food-production systems, damages ecosystems, and fuels climate change.
Meat production is about ten times more water-intensive than plant-based calories and proteins, with one kilogram of beef, for example, requiring 15,415 liters of water.
It is also an inefficient way of generating food; up to 30 crop calories are needed to produce one meat calorie.
At any given time, the global livestock population amounts to more than 150 billion, compared to just 7.2 billion humans – meaning that livestock have a larger direct ecological footprint than we do.
Livestock production causes almost 14.5% of global greenhouse-gas emissions and contributes significantly to water pollution.
Moreover, livestock production consumes one-third of the total water resources used in agriculture (which accounts for 71% of the world’s water consumption), as well as more than 40% of the global output of wheat, rye, oats, and corn.
And livestock production uses 30% of the earth’s land surface that once was home to wildlife, thereby playing a critical role in biodiversity loss and species extinction.
It took more than a century for the European diet to reach the point at which meat is consumed at every meal, including breakfast.
But, in large parts of Asia, a similar shift has occurred in just one generation.
Meaty diets have created a global obesity problem, including, of all places, in China, whose expanding international clout is accompanied by expanding waistlines at home.
Americans consume the most meat per capita, after Luxembourgers.
Given the size of the US population, this is already a problem.
If the rest of the world caught up to the United States – where meat consumption averages 125.4 kilograms per person annually, compared with a measly 3.2 kilograms in India – the environmental consequences would be catastrophic.
Already, the signs are worrying.
The demand for meat is projected to increase by 50% from 2013 to 2025, with overall consumption still rising in the West and soaring in the developing world, especially Asia.
In order to meet this demand, meat producers have had to adopt an extremely problematic approach to raising livestock.
In order to ensure that their animals gain weight rapidly, meat producers feed them grain, rather than the grass that they would naturally consume – an approach that is a major source of pressure on grain production, natural resources, and the environment.
Making matters worse, the livestock are injected with large amounts of hormones and antibiotics.
In the US, 80% of all antibiotics sold are administered prophylactically to livestock.
Yet this has been inadequate to stem the spread of disease; in fact, with many of the new and emerging infectious diseases affecting humans originating in animals, veterinarians, microbiologists, and epidemiologists have been trying to understand the “ecology of disease” (how nature, and humanity’s impact on it, spreads disease).
Though the environmental and health costs of our changing diets have been widely documented, the message has gone largely unheard.
With the world facing a serious water crisis, rapidly increasing global temperatures, staggering population growth, and growing health problems like coronary disease, this must change – and fast.
For starters, to ease some of the resource pressure, livestock producers should switch to water-saving technologies, including drip irrigation.
At the same time, governments and civil-society groups should promote healthier diets that rely more on plant-based proteins and calories.
According to recent research, if the world stopped producing crops for animal feed or diverting them to biofuels, it could not only end global hunger, but also feed four billion extra people – more than the number of projected arrivals before the global population stabilizes.
Meat consumption actually leads to more greenhouse-gas emissions annually than the use of cars does.
This is not to say that everyone must become vegetarian.
But even a partial shift in meat-consumption habits – with consumers choosing options like chicken and seafood, instead of beef – could have a far-reaching impact.
Indeed, beef production requires, on average, 28 times more land and 11 times more water than the other livestock categories, while producing five times more greenhouse-gas emissions and six times more reactive nitrogen.
Adopting a balanced, largely plant-based diet, with minimal consumption of red and processed meat, would help conserve natural resources, contribute to the fight against human-induced global warming, and reduce people’s risk of diet-related chronic diseases and even cancer mortality.
Just as governments have used laws, regulations, and other tools with great success to discourage smoking, so must they encourage citizens to eat a balanced diet – for the sake of their health and that of our planet.
Climate Hysteria
You would have had to be stuck in deepest Mongolia to avoid hearing that the United Nations’ climate panel, the IPCC, issued a new report last week.
Perhaps even in the depths of Mongolia, you would have heard the dire warnings emitted by journalists.
You would have distilled from these agonized noises that the report concluded that global warming is worse than we had imagined, and that we need to take swift and strong action right now.
You would have been misinformed.
The IPCC has produced a good report – an attempt to summarize what the world’s scientists know about global warming.
Unlike the Bush administration, caught downplaying the science, the IPCC squarely tells us that mankind is largely responsible for the planet’s recent warming.
And, unlike Al Gore, who has travelled the world warning that our cities might soon be under the oceans, it refrains from scaremongering.
But lost among the hype is the unexciting fact that this report is actually no more dire than the IPCC’s last report, issued in 2001.
In two important ways, this year’s effort was actually less dire.
The report reflected the fact that since 2001, scientists have become more certain that humans are responsible for a large part of global warming.
Otherwise, though, this report had a definite sense of déjà vu .
Estimates of temperature increases, heat waves, and cold waves are all nearly identical to those produced six years ago.
The report did, however, contain two surprising facts.
Both went unmentioned in most reports.
First, the world’s scientists have re-jigged their estimates about how much sea levels will rise.
In the 1980’s, America’s Environmental Protection Agency expected oceans to rise by several metres by 2100.
By the 1990’s, the IPCC was expecting a 67-centimeter rise.
Six years ago, it anticipated ocean levels would be 48.5 centimeters higher than they are currently.
In this year’s report, the estimated rise is 38.5 centimeters on average.
This is especially interesting since it fundamentally rejects one of the most harrowing scenes from Al Gore’s movie An Inconvenient Truth .
In graphic detail, Gore demonstrated how a 20-foot rise in the sea level would inundate much of Florida, Shanghai, and Holland.
The IPCC report makes it clear that exaggerations of this magnitude have no basis in science – though clearly they frightened people and perhaps will win Gore an Academy Award.
The report also revealed the improbability of another Gore scenario: that global warming could make the Gulf Stream shut down, turning Europe into a new Siberia.
The IPCC simply and tersely tells us that this scenario – also vividly depicted in the Hollywood movie The Day After Tomorrow – is considered “very unlikely.”
Moreover, even if the Gulf Stream were to weaken over the century, this would be good , as there would be less net warming over land areas.
So why have we been left with a very different impression of the climate panel’s report?
The IPCC is by statute “politically neutral” – it is supposed to tell us just the facts and leave the rest to politicians and the people who elect them.
This is why the report is a careful and sensible document.
But scientists and journalists – acting as intermediaries between the report and the public – have engaged in greenhouse activism.
Elsewhere calling for immediate and substantial cuts in carbon emissions, the IPCC’s director even declared that he hoped the IPCC report would “shock people, governments into taking more serious action.”
It is inappropriate for somebody in such an important and apolitical role to engage in blatant activism.
Imagine if the director of the CIA published a new assessment of Iran, saying “I hope this report will shock people, governments into taking more serious action.”
Climate change is a real and serious problem.
But the problem with the recent media frenzy is that some seem to believe no new report or development is enough if it doesn’t reveal more serious consequences and more terrifying calamities than humanity has ever considered before.
Indeed, this media frenzy has little or no scientific backing.
One of England’s foremost climatologists, Mike Hulme, director of the Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research, points out that green militancy and megaphone journalism use “catastrophe and chaos as unguided weapons with which forlornly to threaten society into behavioral change.”
In his words, “we need to take a deep breath and pause.”
A 38.5 cm rise in the ocean’s levels is a problem, but by no means will it bring down civilization.
Last century sea levels rose by half that amount without most of us even noticing.
Good decisions come from careful consideration.
The IPCC report provides that.
But the cacophony of screaming that has accompanied it does not help.
Climate Justice
DURBAN – Before the Copenhagen climate-change summit two years ago, the two of us sat together in Cape Town to listen to five African farmers from different countries, four of whom were women, tell us how climate change was undermining their livelihoods.
Each explained how floods and drought, and the lack of regular seasons to sow and reap, were outside their normal experience.
Their fears are shared by subsistence farmers and indigenous people worldwide – the people bearing the brunt of climate shocks, though they played no part in causing them.
Now, two years later, we are in Durban, where South Africa is hosting this year’s climate-change conference, COP17, and the situation for poor people in Africa and elsewhere has deteriorated even further.
In its latest report, the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change concludes that it is virtually certain that, in global terms, hot days have become hotter and occur more often; indeed, they have increased in frequency by a factor of 10 in most regions of the world.
Moreover, the brutal paradox of climate change is that heavy precipitation is occurring more often as well, increasing the risk of flooding.
Since 2003, East Africa has had the eight warmest years on record, which is no doubt contributing to the severe famine that now afflicts 13 million people in the Horn of Africa.
These are the consequences that a mere one degree of warming above pre-industrial levels has wrought.
The UN Environment Program’s just published report Bridging the Emissions Gap shows that over the course of this century, warming will likely rise to four degrees unless we take stronger action to cut emissions.
Yet the latest evidence demonstrates that we are not acting – the International Energy Agency’s World Energy Report 2011 reveals that CO2 emissions have rebounded to a record high.
We are alarmed that expectations for COP17 are so low.
Where is the global leadership that must respond urgently?
We desperately need a global deal.
At the heart of this deal is the preservation of the Kyoto Protocol.
The Protocol is not a perfect instrument.
It does too little to cut global emissions, and it requires too few countries to cut their emissions growth.
But it is part of international law, and that is vital.&#160;
Climate change is a global problem: if countries are not confident that others are addressing it, they will not feel an imperative to act themselves.
So, having a legal framework with clear and common rules to which all countries are committed is critically important – and the only assurance we have that action will be taken to protect the most vulnerable.
The first commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol expires at the end of 2012.
So the European Union and the other Kyoto parties (the United States never ratified the agreement, and the Protocol’s terms asked little of China, India, and other emerging powers) must commit to a second commitment period, in order to ensure that this legal framework is maintained.
At the same time, all countries must acknowledge that extending the lifespan of the Kyoto Protocol will not solve the problem of climate change, and that a new or additional legal framework that covers all countries is needed.
The Durban meeting must agree to initiate negotiations towards this end – with a view to concluding a new legal instrument by 2015 at the latest.
All of this is not only possible, but also necessary, because the transition to a low-carbon, climate-resilient economy makes economic, social, and environmental sense.
The problem is that making it happen requires political will, which, unfortunately, seems in short supply.
Climate change is a matter of justice.
The richest countries caused the problem, but it is the world’s poorest who are already suffering from its effects.
In Durban, the international community must commit to righting that wrong.
Political leaders must think inter-generationally.
They need to imagine the world of 2050, with its nine billion people, and take the right decisions now to ensure that our children and grandchildren inherit a liveable world.
Respon Alam atas Risiko Perubahan Iklim
LONDON – Hampir setengah populasi dunia – sekitar 3,5 miliar orang – tinggal di daerah dekat pantai.
Ketika ancaman perubahan iklim memperburuk akibat bencana seperti badai, banjir, dan erosi, kehidupan dan mata pencaharian ratusan juta penduduk yang berisiko.
Faktanya, edisi terbaru laporan World Risk Assessment yang diterbitkan World Economic Forum menyatakan bahwa kegagalan beradaptasi dengan dampak perubahan iklim merupakan risiko terbesar, dari segi konsekuensinya, bagi masyarakat dan perekonomian di seluruh dunia.
Selain membahayakan kehidupan, badai yang semakin sering dan parah dapat menimbulkan kerugian miliaran dolar, yang diakibatkan dari kerusakan pada infrastruktur dan hilangnya pendapatan dari sektor pertanian, perikanan, dan pariwisata.
Sebagaimana baru-baru tertulis dalam Harvard Business Review, estimasi kerugian meningkat setiap kali ada studi baru.
Akan tetapi, komunitas internasional saat ini mengeluarkan biaya untuk mitigasi risiko yang jumlahnya bahkan kurang dari seperlima biaya yang disalurkan ketika tanggap bencana alam.
Bicara mengenai risiko perubahan iklim, mencegah lebih baik daripada mengobati.
Seperti yang dikatakan Rebecca Scheurer, Direktur Red Cross Global Disaster Preparedness Center, “Kita mengeluarkan jutaan dolar untuk tanggap bencana, tapi jika sumber daya tersebut lebih banyak disalurkan bagi pencegahan, nyawa yang diselamatkan akan lebih banyak.
Sesederhana itu saja.”
Dengan semakin besarnya perhatian yang dicurahkan pada aspek biaya/kerugian terhadap orang (human cost) dan kerugian finansial, sekarang waktunya mengalihkan sumber daya untuk pengurangan risiko.
Tindakan tersebut mengharuskan pemerintah, industri, lembaga bantuan, dan organisasi lainnya untuk memanfaatkan investasi mereka.
Beberapa solusi yang membawa hasil maksimal dan paling cost-effective sudah disediakan oleh alam.
Ekosistem pantai dan pesisir laut memiliki potensi besar untuk memitigasi akibat buruk badai dan risiko-risiko lainnya, terutama bila dipadukan dengan infrastruktur pada umumnya.
Misalnya, hutan bakau dengan ketebalan bakau minimal 100 meter bisa mengurangi tinggi gelombang sebanyak 66% dan menurunkan puncak tinggi muka air dalam kondisi banjir.
Terumbu karang yang sehat bisa menahan dan memecah energi gelombang sampai 97%, mengurangi dampak yang ditimbulkan badai dan mencegah erosi.
Bentuk-bentuk ekosistem pesisir ini merupakan garis pertahanan terdepan di banyak negara di seluruh dunia, dari Miami hingga Manila.  
Sebelumnya, solusi berbasis alam sering diabaikan.
Tapi pemimpin negara semakin menyadari betapa penting peran alam dan mulai mengambil tindakan, termasuk di tingkat internasional.
Perjanjian Paris mengenai perubahan iklim yang disepakati bulan Desember dan ditandatangani bulan ini, tidak hanya memuat konsensus tentang keutamaan pengendalian perubahan iklim, tapi juga secara eksplisit menegaskan bahwa ekosistem memainkan peran dalam menyerap gas-gas rumah kaca dan membantu komunitas beradaptasi terhadap dampak perubahan iklim.
Di tingkat nasional, beberapa negara kepulauan yang paling berisiko juga melakukan upaya-upaya penting.
Misalnya, tahun lalu, Seychelles mengumumkan program “debt for nature swap” (pertukaran utang dengan kegiatan lingkungan hidup) yang perdana, bekerja sama dengan sejumlah kreditor dari Paris Club dan The Nature Conservancy.
Pertukaran ini memungkinkan negara mengalihkan utang sebesar $21.6 juta ke dalam investasi melalui suatu pendekatan komprehensif dalam konservasi laut demi tujuan peningkatan ketahanan terhadap perubahan iklim.
Pemimpin dari sektor swasta, juga mulai mempertimbangkan solusi dari alam.
Perusahaan-perusahaan engineering seperti CH2M bekerja sama dengan komunitas pesisir di Teluk Meksiko dan sekitarnya untuk menemukan solusi-solusi hybrid yang memadukan pendekatan tradisional dan berbasis alam.
Bahkan industri asuransi – terdiri dari perusahaan-perusahaan di dunia yang paling enggan menanggung risiko (risk averter) – melihat potensi pada solusi-solusi alami.
Selama satu dekade terakhir, perusahaan asuransi mengeluarkan $300 miliar untuk membayarkan kerusakaan terkait dengan iklim, seringkali membangun kembali struktur yang sama rentannya.
Tentu tidak mengejutkan ketika perusahaan reasuransi (reinsurer) seperti Swiss Re melakukan studi-studi tentang pengendalian risiko-risiko badai siklon tropis yang mengancam komunitas pesisir.
Menurut salah satu studi Swiss Re, Barbados kehilangan sekitar 4% PDB-nya setiap tahun akibat kerugian yang terkait dengan badai siklon tropis.
Tapi setiap satu dolar yang dikeluarkan untuk melindungi bakau dan terumbu karang akan menghemat $20 kerugian akibat badai siklon tropis di masa mendatang.
Mengingat temuan ini, sangat mungkin bahwa ke depannya perusahaan asuransi ada cakupan asuransi bagi lahan basah dan struktur alami lainnya yang menyediakan perlindungan bagi komunitas dan perekonomian di daerah pesisir.
Alam juga bisa menunjang perlindungan atas mata pencaharian.
Sebuah proyek restorasi mangrove yang dipimpin Red Cross di Vietnam tidak hanya mengurangi kerusakan pada tanggul dan jenis bendungan lainnya, tapi juga menghasilkan budidaya akuakultur lebih banyak sehingga meningkatkan pendapatan penduduk setempat.
Sebuah proyek restorasi mangrove dan karang di Grenada – kerja sama antara Red Cross, Nature Conservancy, dan kelompok nelayan di komunitas Grenville di Grenada – juga menunjukkan potensi besar untuk meningkatkan ketahanan.
Sekitar 30 meter terumbu dan karang terbukti menambah populasi lobster, keong besar, gurita, dan landak laut.
Ketahanan dari bencana dan perubahan iklim adalah tantangan yang mempengaruhi berbagai sektor, sehingga solusi yang diajukan pun harus bersifat multi-sektoral.
Upaya-upaya kolaboratif sangat penting bagi pengembangan dan pelaksanaan strategi-strategi pencegahan yang lebih efektif.
Bank Dunia, Nature Conservancy, dan mitra peneliti (termasuk ahli ekologi, ekonom, dan insinyur) baru-baru ini menerbitkan sebuah laporan yang memuat usulan pedoman kerja sama tersebut.
Laporan ini secara khusus menyarankan penghitungan nilai ekosistem pesisir dalam hal modal dan infrastruktur yang dilindungi, berdasarkan pendekatan-pendekatan yang umum diterapkan oleh perusahaan asuransi dan engineering.
Ketika dihadapkan dengan besarnya risiko iklim dan bencana, investasi pada solusi-solusi berbasis alam dapat melindungi kehidupan dan menjaga kesejahteraan melalui cara yang cost-effective, sembari melindungi ekosistem alami di seluruh dunia yang terkena risiko.
Sekarang waktunya bagi pemerintah, pengusaha, dan organisasi masyarakat sipil untuk sadar dan mengakui bahwa demi melawan dampak buruk perubahan iklim dan melindungi komunitas di pesisir, konservasi dan restorasi alam adalah investasi terbaik yang patut dilakukan.
Climate Science or Climate Evangelism?
COPENHAGEN – As George W. Bush and Tony Blair learned the hard way, the public does not take kindly to being misled about the nature of potential threats.
The after-the-fact revelation that the reasons for invading Iraq were vastly exaggerated – and in some cases completely fabricated – produced an angry backlash that helped toss the Republicans out of power in the United States in 2008 and may do the same to Britain’s Labour Party later this year.
A similar shift in global public opinion is occurring with respect to climate change.
The process picked up momentum late last year, after hackers leaked thousands of e-mails from a top British research facility showing that some of the world’s most influential climatologists had been trying to disguise flaws in their work, blocking scrutiny, and plotting together to enforce what amounts to a party line on climate change.
More recently, the United Nations’ respected advisory group, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), has been deeply embarrassed by the revelation that some alarming predictions contained in an influential report that it released in 2007 have little or no scientific basis.
Although none of these lapses provides any reason to doubt that global warming is real, is man-made, and will create problems for us, these challenges to the IPCC are taking their toll.
Indeed, recent surveys show that the public is growing steadily less trusting of the scientific consensus on global warming.
The biggest headlines about IPCC errors concern a claim about melting Himalayan glaciers that it made in its 2007 report on the likely impacts of climate change.
“Glaciers in the Himalaya are receding faster than in any other part of the world,” the report noted, adding that “if the present rate continues, the likelihood of them disappearing by the year 2035 and perhaps sooner is very high.”
As it happens, this prediction was not based on any peer-reviewed scientific research but was lifted from a report by the World Wildlife Fund, which was repeating an unproven speculation by a single researcher.
This lack of scientific basis did not stop countless global-warming activists from citing the glacier prediction at every opportunity.
When the Indian government suggested last year that the Himalayan glaciers were in better shape than the IPCC claimed, the IPCC’s chairman, Rajendra Pachauri, dismissed India’s objections as being based on “voodoo science.”
Earlier this month, the Indian government reacted to the revelations about the baseless nature of the glacier claim by announcing plans to establish what amounts to its own “Indian IPCC” to assess the impact of global warming.
India’s environment minister, Jairam Ramesh, declared: “There is a fine line between climate science and climate evangelism.
I am for climate science.”
Climate evangelism is an apt description of what the IPCC has been up to, for it has exaggerated some of the ramifications of climate change in order to make politicians take note.
Murari Lal, the coordinating lead author of the section of the IPCC report that contained the Himalayan error, admitted that he and his colleagues knew that the dramatic glacier prediction was not based on any peer-reviewed science.
Nonetheless, he explained, “we thought that if we can highlight it, it will impact policy-makers and politicians and encourage them to take some concrete action.”
The concrete action that they had in mind was getting governments to mandate drastic cuts in carbon-dioxide emissions.
Activists have been pursuing this approach to tackling global warming without success for nearly 20 years, most recently at last December’s failed climate summit in Copenhagen.
The problem is that it is too expensive a solution for politicians and the public to swallow easily –which is why many well-meaning climate scientists have apparently concluded that instead of relying on reasoned discussion, they might as well try to scare us witless.
Consider what the IPCC had to say about extreme weather events such as intense hurricanes.
The cost of such events in terms of destroyed property and economic disruption has been rising steadily.
Every peer-reviewed study has shown that this is not because of rising temperatures, but because more people live in harm’s way.
Nonetheless, in the IPCC’s influential 2007 assessment of climate change, the panel’s Working Group II (charged with assessing the potential impact of global warming) chose to cite one, then-unpublished study that supposedly found that global warming had doubled damage costs over the past 35 years.
In fact, when this study was finally published, it stated categorically that there was “insufficient evidence” to link the increased losses to global warming.
In other words, what Working Group II reported was plain wrong.
Elsewhere in the 2007 assessment, Working Group II claimed that “up to 40% of the Amazonian forests” were at imminent risk of being destroyed by global warming.
The basis for this claim was a single report from the World Wildlife Fund that itself cited only one study, which didn’t even look at climate change, but rather at the impact of human activities like logging and burning.
In similar fashion, Working Group II claimed that “by 2020, in some [African] countries, yields from rain-fed agriculture could be reduced by up to 50%.”
Much quoted since, this alarming statistic turns out to have been based on a single, unreferenced bullet-point from a report by an environmental think tank.
There are numerous other examples of similar shenanigans by Working Group II.
Yet, aside from a grudging admission that its predictions about Himalayan glaciers were “poorly substantiated,” the IPCC has yet to acknowledge – much less apologize for – any of the lapses.
If the IPCC is to do to its job properly, it must own up to all of its missteps and clean house.
Nobody expects it to be infallible.
But neither should we tolerate its attempts to scare policy-makers rather than inform them.
America’s Race to the Ballot’s Bottom
WASHINGTON, DC – Hillary Clinton’s US presidential campaign has been torn between trying to secure the largest possible victory for the candidate herself and explicitly helping fellow Democratic gubernatorial and legislative candidates further down the ballot.
It’s an open question whether Clinton could do more for down-ballot candidates by winning decisively – so that the enthusiasm trickles down – or by expending time and money to help those candidates individually.
The Clinton camp has decided to pursue both strategies.
With just a week left before the election, the presidential candidates are crisscrossing the country: whereas Republican nominee Donald Trump is struggling to cobble together the 270 Electoral College votes needed to win, Clinton is trying to lock up as large a victory – in both the popular vote and the Electoral College – as possible.
Just a week ago, Clinton seemed to be heading toward an overwhelming victory.
But on October 28, FBI Director James Comey sent a letter to Congress announcing that he was reopening the investigation into Clinton’s use of a private email server when she was Secretary of State.
The reason?
Thousands of emails had been discovered on the laptop of the estranged husband of Clinton’s closest assistant, Huma Abedin, during a separate inquiry into his own activities.
(No, this isn’t a movie plot.)
Comey’s announcement triggered an uproar, but it hasn’t so far had a notable impact on the race.
The Clinton campaign has not given up even on winning states that have long been considered Republican strongholds, such as Arizona, Georgia, and Utah.
And Trump, despite feeling invigorated by the discovery, has continued to pursue states, such as New Mexico, that would do him little good in the Electoral College count.
But Trump, new to politics, fancies himself a great political strategist.
The Clinton campaign has poured money into several Senate, House of Representatives, gubernatorial, and even state-legislature races, and Clinton field workers and volunteers have been encouraged to help down-ballot candidates in contentious races.
Obama, for his part, recently recorded a series of video endorsements for Democrats running for the Senate, the House, and state legislatures.
Numerous pundits say that the FBI announcement will help Republicans down-ballot, but that’s pure speculation.
If Clinton wins the White House and many Republican incumbents are swept out of office, the US will have had a “wave” election.
But we likely won’t know if this is happening until the last minute.
In the 1980 wave election, when Ronald Reagan and the Republican ticket overwhelmed President Jimmy Carter and toppled several liberal Democrats in the Senate, the presidential race was nearly tied until the final weekend.
Even if the Democrats retake the Senate in a wave, the honeymoon won’t last long.
In two years, another third of the Senate will be up for reelection, and far more Democrats than Republicans will have to defend their seats – a reversal of the situation this year.
Of course, the Clinton campaign isn’t just being charitable by helping down-ballot candidates.
Her administration will be far better off with more Democrats in Congress.
The Democrats are still widely expected to retake the Senate, though not the House, where they would need to flip an unlikely 30 Republican seats.
(Most House seats are gerrymandered, with district boundaries manipulated to benefit the incumbent party.)
But even if the Democrats do regain a majority in the 100-member Senate, Republicans will still be able to hold the threat of a filibuster – which requires 60 votes to break – over Clinton’s legislative proposals and nominations to the executive branch and Supreme Court.
There’s another important reason for the Clinton campaign and its high-profile surrogates to help down-ballot Democrats. Both parties want to strengthen their hold on as many state-level offices as possible, because the party that controls a state’s governorship and at least one of its legislative chamber gets to oversee how congressional districts are drawn (which happens every ten years).
How districts are drawn affects the partisan makeup of the House, and therefore the fate of federal legislation.
(Only the Senate votes on presidential nominations.)
The states are also where the parties can build their bench of potential future federal officeholders.
The Republicans figured out the importance of state-level politics long before the Democrats, and they have built a much stronger foundation in the states than the Democrats have.
For example, even though Obama carried Ohio in the last two elections, its current congressional delegation is 75% Republican.
The US election is now a volatile affair.
No one knows what might pop up next to shake up the race, but it is sensible to assume that something will.
At the very least, the WikiLeaks disclosures will presumably continue, though, despite being somewhat embarrassing to the Clintons, they haven’t revealed corruption by the Clinton Foundation or improprieties in how Hillary Clinton conducted policy as Secretary of State.
By the time Comey sent his letter, several million Americans had already cast their ballots.
We cannot know how the various disclosures will affect turnout between now and Election Day.
What we do know is that, ultimately, nothing that has or might happen makes Trump better suited for the presidency than Clinton.
The Chimera of Stock-Market Short-Termism
CAMBRIDGE – An often-heard refrain, increasingly voiced in US politics, is that corporate America is excessively influenced by short-term stock-market considerations.
While the US presidential election is not particularly focused on policy at the moment, the campaign will soon end, at which point people will govern and policies will be adopted.
Given that both Republicans and Democrats have criticized short-termism, it is possible that some of those policies might aim to address it.
They are unlikely to make any difference.
Not only has the problem of short-termism been woefully exaggerated, but the policy proposals for addressing it are severely lacking.
Consider Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton’s proposal – which Vice President Joe Biden has endorsed – to use the capital gains tax to encourage shareowners to hold on to their stock for a longer time.
The idea is that when shareowners furiously trade their stock, corporate executives feel pressed to ensure high earnings every quarter, so that the share price does not fall.
Investment in, say, research and development, despite its long-term benefits, can induce shareowners to sell, punishing the company with a declining stock price.
Today, the lower capital gains rate is available on shareholder profits made when selling stock held for one year or more.
Clinton and her advisors hope, instead, to tax capital gains at ordinary rates for stock held for up to two years, after which the rate would decline by four percentage points per year until, after several years, it reached the current long-term rate, which tops out for wealthy investors at 20%.
If stockholders know that holding a company’s stock will eventually allow them to benefit from a lower tax rate, the argument goes, they will be more willing to withstand a drop in that company’s quarterly earnings.
With greater scope for longer-term thinking, executives would make decisions that have a long-term payoff, even if they are costly today.
The plan certainly sounds reasonable.
The problem is that a falling tax rate for capital gains will not stop most stockholders from trading; at most, it will impel some of them trade less often.
Executives will still have to worry about the price that traders accord to their stock.
Of course, curtailing the velocity of trading may have other effects, both good and bad.
If too many resources and too much brainpower are now devoted to finding slight underpricing or overpricing of stock, Clinton’s program might be a good thing, as it would help to reallocate those resources.
If, however, less trading makes markets more volatile and unpredictable, taxing short-termism could turn out to be a cure worse than the disease.
In any case, Clinton’s program will not achieve its stated goal of inducing those doing the trading, and thus setting stock prices, to take a longer-term perspective.
Nor will it make corporate executives less concerned about the next quarter’s results.
Prices will, after all, still be going up and down.
There is another reason the proposal will not be effective: many of the largest shareowners are institutions that don’t pay tax anyway, such as pension funds and foundations.
And many other stockholders buy and sell within a year, even though it means paying the full tax rate.
Their decision-making time horizon will not be affected by a long phase-in of the more advantageous tax rate.
But the fact that Clinton’s plan will not achieve its goal is not exactly the end of the world.
Contrary to widespead belief, stock-market-induced short-termism is probably not much of an economic handicap anyway. There is considerable (though not conclusive) evidence that it is not nearly as widespread – or as problematic – as many think.
Consider this: four of the ten biggest companies in the United States today, measured by stock-market capitalization, are Amazon, Apple, Alphabet (Google), and Microsoft. None of them can be accused of failing to invest in R&D or other long-term, sometimes even visionary, projects.
And the stock market supports all of them well.
If they can do it, others can – and surely do.
The good news here is that the plan is not particularly high on Clinton’s agenda, leaving a chance that she might not feel compelled to implement it when elected.
Clintonomics vs. Trumponomics
STANFORD – Little more than two months from America’s presidential election, Hillary Clinton leads Donald Trump by five points in opinion polls, nationally and in several important swing states.
But nothing is decided yet, especially given the Trump campaign’s staffing shakeup and major policy speeches, not to mention the email scandals that continue to plague the Clinton campaign, including recently released email correspondence between top staff from the Clinton Foundation and officials from the State Department under Clinton.
So far, the media and public have focused on immigration, terrorism, foreign policy, and each candidate’s potentially problematic personality traits, but far less has been said about economic policy.
This is a serious oversight, because there are substantial differences between the candidates’ economic-policy platforms.
First, consider government spending.
Clinton favors welfare-state expenditures such as expanded Social Security benefits (the unfunded liabilities of which already exceed the national debt), free tuition at public colleges and student-loan debt relief, as well as an added “public option” to the 2010 Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare.
She also says she will double down on President Barack Obama’s costly green-energy industrial policy, which favors some energy sources, and even specific companies, at the expense of others.
By contrast, Trump says he will leave Social Security as is, repeal and replace Obamacare, and make government spending more efficient and effective (though here he has not been specific).
On taxation, Clinton says she will make the US tax system more progressive, even though it is already the most progressive system among the advanced economies.
Specifically, Clinton calls for increases to the estate tax and the personal tax rate for the highest earners – which also affects small businesses – and caps on itemized deductions.
She shows little inclination to lower corporate taxes.
Trump is proposing lower tax rates for individuals and US companies.
The US currently has a federal corporate tax rate of 35%, the highest in the OECD.
Trump is calling for it to be lowered to a below-average 15%, with first-year business investments to be deductible in full.
On trade, Clinton has flip-flopped to oppose the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a multinational trade deal negotiated by the Obama administration and 11 other Pacific Rim countries.
Unlike her husband, who supported and signed free-trade agreements during his presidency, Clinton is inching closer to the protectionist wing of the Democratic Party.
Clinton’s trade position has little to recommend it, but Trump’s is even worse.
Among other things, Trump has threatened a trade war with China and Mexico, and says he would renegotiate America’s existing trade agreements.
Clinton and Trump are understandably giving voice to lower- and middle-class workers who have been left behind by globalization.
But the best policy response is not to embrace protectionism (which would leave many more people worse off), but to assist displaced workers better.
Lastly, Clinton and Trump differ on deficit spending and the national debt.
Clinton’s Social Security expansion and other spending, and her plans to entrench the Obamacare health-care system further, without reining in future entitlement costs – which are projected to soar – suggest that large deficits would only continue during her presidency.
That’s a far cry from her husband’s record: Bill Clinton worked with a Republican-controlled Congress to balance the budget in the final years of his presidency.
Trump recently reduced the budget cost of his proposed tax reductions to bring them more in line with Republican legislators’ own targets.
If properly scored to account for increased tax revenue from economic growth, he would still need to pair his tax cuts with controls on spending, and especially on entitlements.
Otherwise, a Trump presidency could also have serious debt problems.
One proposal the candidates agree on is massive infrastructure spending.
Unfortunately, while a portion of this is appropriate for the federal government, neither candidate has ensured that money wouldn’t be misspent through politicization or cronyism.
The United States does not need a repeat of the Obama administration’s “shovel-ready” stimulus-spending boondoggle.
All told, Clinton would prioritize redistribution above economic growth, while Trump is more growth-oriented.
American growth is a global concern because it fuels growth elsewhere through US consumer demand and trade.
But the two primary sources of growth, productivity gains and labor inputs (such as total man-hours worked), have both fallen off sharply in recent years.
The US economy grew at an average annual rate of 3% during the decades after World War II, but it has not had even three consecutive quarters of 3% growth during the past decade.
There are different explanations for slowing productivity growth.
Northwestern University economist Robert Gordon singles out technological innovation for contributing less to economic growth than did previous breakthroughs such as electricity, locomotion, aviation, and computing.
Harvard University economist Lawrence Summers points to “secular stagnation,” a term coined by the economist Alvin Hansen in the 1930s to describe long-term tepid demand and insufficient opportunity for profitable investment.
My own opinion is that poor economic policy has discouraged business investment, entrepreneurship, and work.
Polling shows that undecided voters deeply distrust both candidates.
To get elected and actually have the mandate to enact her agenda, Clinton will need to be more transparent and honest about past mistakes.
And on economic policy, she should move to the center, toward growth-focused measures, and away from leftist positions she adopted during her primary campaign against Vermont Senator Bernie Sanders.
Trump, for his part, will need to show some humility and inclusiveness, and be open to advice from others on issues where he lacks experience.
While the Republicans are in a tight battle with the Democrats to retain control over the Senate, they are likely to maintain a majority in the House of Representatives.
As a result, on many policy issues, all eyes will be on House Speaker Paul Ryan, who would likely operate either as a counterbalance – and occasional partner – to Clinton, or as a guide and more regular partner for Trump.
Clipping the Euro’s Wings
French President Nicolas Sarkozy’s call for the European Central Bank to intervene to curtail the soaring euro is commonly seen as a sign that he neither understands nor trusts markets.
Indeed, some now view Sarkozy as a traditional Gaullist who wants to help French producers by artificially devaluing the euro.
But could Sarkozy be right in believing that currency markets do not automatically drive exchange rates to levels consistent with the fundamentals of international trade?
So politicians like Sarkozy may have grounds to argue that central banks should intervene to limit such swings.
But economists, including many central bank staff, usually do not see things this way.
Despite wide and persistent swings in actual currency markets, their so-called “rational expectations models” predict that exchange rates should not deviate from parity in any lasting way.
Believing that they have found a way to model precisely how currency traders should think about the future, they see no need for intervention because, save for temporary deviations, markets always get currency values right. 
In contrast, “behavioral economists” acknowledge that currencies can depart from parity for a protracted period, but argue that this results not from traders’ attempts to interpret movements in macroeconomic fundamentals, but from market psychology and irrational trading.
For them, intervention is not so much unnecessary as it is impossible.
Faced with wide swings, central banks are helpless to counteract traders’ irrational zeal to bid a currency further away from historical benchmark levels.
After all, speculative flows account for more than 95% of the $2 trillion traded daily in currency markets.
But both the “rational expectations” and the “behavioral” models are fundamentally flawed for the purpose of assessing policy interventions.
As different as they might appear, they attempt to generate exact predictions of human behavior, whether “rational” or “irrational.”
Both disregard the fact that rationality depends as much on individuals’ imperfect understandings of history and society as on their motivation.
They also ignore the importance for market outcomes of individual creativity and unforeseeable socio-political change.
Once this “imperfect knowledge” is placed at the heart of economic analysis, the implications of our inherently limited ability to predict market outcomes become clear.
When it comes to currency markets, parity levels based on international trade are merely one of many factors that traders may consider.
In attempting to cope with imperfect knowledge, they are not irrational when they pay attention to other macroeconomic fundamentals and thereby bid an exchange rate away from its parity level. 
The euro’s recent rise against the dollar is a case in point: by most accounts, euro bulls have been reacting to the enormous US current account deficit, a surging euro-zone economy, and rising euro interest rates.
What is irrational about factoring in such fundamentals when trading a currency? 
Of course, persistent swings from parity do not last forever.
While movements in macroeconomic fundamentals may lead bulls to bid the value of a currency further above parity, they simultaneously become more concerned about a counter-movement back to parity – and thus capital losses – which moderates their desire to increase their long positions.
This concept of risk builds on a neglected insight of John Maynard Keynes, who was keenly aware of the centrality of imperfect knowledge for understanding price fluctuations in asset markets.
Moreover, relating the riskiness of holding an open position in a currency market to the exchange rate’s divergence from parity levels suggests a novel way to think about how central banks can influence the market to limit departures from parity.
Every month, the central bank should announce its estimate of a 
 range
 of parity values, backed by analysis, which, unlike a precise value, reflects the inherent imperfection of knowledge concerning a currency’s parity.
As the exchange rate moves away from this range, the central bank’s regular announcements would heighten the concern of currency traders that other traders will consider it increasingly risky to hold open positions.
This should moderate their willingness to do so, thereby limiting the magnitude of the currency swing.
This strategy does 
 not
 imply that central banks should attempt to confine the exchange rate to a pre-specified target zone.
Given the enormous size of daily volumes in currency markets, such attempts almost always fail, leading to currency crises.
Instead, the “
 limit-the-swings” 
 strategy proposed here implies that, as the exchange rate moves further away from parity, central banks should use their reserves to intervene at unpredictable moments in order to reinforce the effect of their regular announcements of the parity range on traders’ perception of increased risk of capital losses.
Our proposal to reduce ­­– but not eliminate – swings from parity recognizes that price fluctuations may be crucial for markets to ascertain the price of assets that promise an uncertain payoff.
But currency swings, if too wide and protracted, can impede real economic activity, which is why intervention is sometimes necessary.
Only by explicitly acknowledging the limits to economists’ and policymakers’ knowledge would such policies have a chance of succeeding.
Closing Asia’s Security Gap
TOKYO – There was little surprise in President Barack Obama’s announcement late last year that the United States will strengthen its position in East Asia while drawing down its forces in Europe.
After all, the security environment in East Asia is unpredictable and rapidly changing, unlike in Europe, where it is relatively stable.
Against this background, efforts now underway to establish a comprehensive multilateral framework for the region can learn from the recent history of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE).
The US is not alone in shifting its security focus to East Asia.
Russian President Vladimir Putin’s decision to host Russia’s first Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) meeting in Vladivostok in September reflects his country’s growing interest in the region.
And, like the US, Russia attended last November’s East Asia Summit (EAS).
The EAS, along with the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) ministerial meetings last July, made important contributions to improving the region’s security environment.
The ARF’s effort to build a more predictable and constructive pattern of relations for the Asia-Pacific region is based on three stages: confidence-building, preventive diplomacy, and conflict resolution.
At its 18th ministerial conference last year, ARF entered the second phase, preventive diplomacy, while continuing to strengthen confidence-building measures.
Maritime cooperation was a focus of attention at both the ARF ministerial meeting and at the EAS, not least because China’s activities in the South and East China Seas have generated fresh uncertainty in the region.
The ARF welcomed the adoption of “Guidelines for Implementation of the Declaration on the Conduct of Parties in the South China Sea.”
Likewise, the EAS focused on combating “sea piracy, search and rescue at sea, marine environment, maritime security, maritime connectivity, freedom of navigation, fisheries, and other areas of cooperation.”
Both meetings also focused on disaster management, with the ARF ministers reaching a common understanding on furthering regional cooperation.
The ASEAN Coordinating Center for Humanitarian Assistance in Jakarta is expected to play a central role in building a disaster-related information network across the region, and in developing concrete measures for disaster management.
Similarly, many of the countries attending the EAS stressed the need for response capabilities, such as emergency disaster relief.
Japanese Prime Minister Yoshihiko Noda announced his country’s readiness to host an international conference this summer on major disasters, giving Japan an opportunity to share lessons learned from the 2011 Great East Japan Earthquake and tsunami.
The aim must be to make the region more resilient to natural disasters as part of a broader framework for regional cooperation.
The rapid changes occurring in the Asia-Pacific region demand policies to maximize growth opportunities while minimizing risks.
That is why Koichiro Gemba, Japan’s foreign minister, has proposed new “open and multilayered networks” with other Asia-Pacific countries.
“Multilayered” means multinational cooperation on various activities that can be promoted through bilateral, trilateral, or multilateral mechanisms.
Work within the ARF and EAS frameworks is already aligned with this concept, and Japan is pursuing its own trilateral dialogues with China and the Republic of Korea, as well as with the US and Australia.
Japan believes that these networks must be open to all of the Asia-Pacific region’s countries, as their establishment requires China’s full participation.
But the rule needed to form the foundation of such a network must obviously adhere to international law, and the ARF meeting’s final declaration clearly reflected this concern.
This is where lessons from the OSCE’s experience are relevant to Asia’s budding efforts to establish a regional architecture.
In particular, despite the significant socioeconomic and political differences between the Asia-Pacific region and Europe, the OSCE’s confidence- and security-building measures are worthy of careful consideration.
Such measures aim to reduce the risk of conflict by increasing trust among participating OSCE states, and by contributing to greater transparency in the field of military planning and other activities.
The Vienna Document, which is the key to understanding these OSCE efforts, obliges annual exchanges of information on existing military forces, the structure of armed forces, and major weapons and defense systems. It also requires annual information exchanges on defense planning and budgets.
Adoption of such measures in the Asia-Pacific region would do much to promote confidence and trust among Asian countries.
A few steps in this direction have already been taken within the ARF framework, including the publication for more than a decade of an Annual Security Outlook based on contributions from ARF countries.
In 2010, ARF ministers widened the Outlook’s scope with the Simplified Standardized Format, which includes publication of national defense doctrines, defense expenditure, and the total number of personnel in a country’s armed forces.
There have been two main approaches to meeting modern regional-security challenges: traditional alliances of the NATO type, which prepare for any potential threat to members, and comprehensive multilateral frameworks of the OSCE type, which include all relevant players within a region.
As Europe’s post-1945 history clearly shows, traditional alliances and a comprehensive multilateral framework can be complementary, and are essential to maintaining regional peace and stability.
Now the Asia-Pacific region is witnessing efforts to establish a similar comprehensive and multilateral framework through the ARF and the EAS.
But, however successful such efforts may be, they will enhance, not lessen, the importance of existing bilateral relationships, such as the Japan-US alliance.
The Slow March to Gender Parity
BERKELEY – Christine Lagarde, the International Monetary Fund’s managing director, recently warned that the world risks a new “mediocre normal” of slower growth.
She is not alone in her concern.