The stakes are high, and failure would be costly to Americans, Israelis, and Palestinians.
If the talks collapse, US foreign policy in the Middle East would be further discredited, and nothing would remain to keep the parties from launching another round of conflict.
For Palestinians, this is likely to be Abbas’s last chance.
He is wagering his scant remaining authority on the talks’ success, and Palestinians will be counting down his days in office should he fail.
For Netanyahu, perhaps maintaining the status quo will be seen as a victory, at least in the short term.
But Israel’s margin for strategic error will shrink even further. 
Meanwhile, Hamas bides its time.
A failure of Palestinian-Israeli talks would only prove Hamas’s basic point: nothing moves forward without us.
The Harsh Lessons of 2009
NEW YORK – The best that can be said for 2009 is that it could have been worse, that we pulled back from the precipice on which we seemed to be perched in late 2008, and that 2010 will almost surely be better for most countries around the world.
The world has also learned some valuable lessons, though at great cost to both current and future prosperity – costs that were unnecessarily high given that we should already have learned them.
The first lesson is that markets are not self-correcting.
Indeed, without adequate regulation, they are prone to excess.
In 2009, we again see why Adam Smith’s invisible hand often appears invisible: it is not there.
The bankers’ pursuit of self-interest (greed) did not lead to the well-being of society; it did not even serve their shareholders and bondholders well. It certainly did not serve homeowners who are losing their homes, workers who have lost their jobs, retirees who have seen their retirement funds vanish, or taxpayers who paid hundreds of billions to bail out the banks.
Under the threat of a collapse of the entire system, the safety net– intended to help unfortunate individuals meet the exigencies of life – was generously extended to commercial banks, then to investment banks, insurance firms, auto companies, even car-loan companies.
Never has so much money been transferred from so many to so few.
We are accustomed to thinking of government transferring money from the well off to the poor.
Here it was the poor and average transferring money to the rich.
Already heavily burdened taxpayers saw their money – intended to help banks lend so that the economy could be revived – go to pay outsized bonuses and dividends.
Dividends are supposed to be a share of profits; here it was simply a share of government largesse.
The justification was that bailing out the banks, however messily, would enable a resumption of lending.
That has not happened.
All that happened was that average taxpayers gave money to the very institutions that had been gouging them for years – through predatory lending, usurious credit-card interest rates, and non-transparent fees.
The bailout exposed deep hypocrisy all around.
Those who had preached fiscal restraint when it came to small welfare programs for the poor now clamored for the world’s largest welfare program.
Those who had argued for the free market’s virtue of “transparency” ended up creating financial systems so opaque that banks could not make sense of their own balance sheets.
And then the government, too, was induced to engage in decreasingly transparent forms of bailout to cover up its largesse to the banks.
Those who had argued for “accountability” and “responsibility” now sought debt forgiveness for the financial sector.
The second important lesson involves understanding why markets often do not work the way they are meant to work.
There are many reasons for market failures.
In this case, too-big-to-fail financial institutions had perverse incentives: if they gambled and succeeded, they walked off with the profits; if they lost, the taxpayer would pay.
Moreover, when information is imperfect, markets often do not work well – and information imperfections are central in finance.
Externalities are pervasive: the failure of one bank imposed costs on others, and failures in the financial system imposed costs on taxpayers and workers all over the world.
The third lesson is that Keynesian policies do work.
Those countries, like Australia, that implemented large, well designed stimulus programs early emerged from the crisis faster.
Other countries succumbed to the old orthodoxy pushed by the financial wizards who got us into this mess.
Whenever an economy goes into recession, deficits appear, as tax revenues fall faster than expenditures.
The old orthodoxy held that one had to cut the deficit – raise taxes or cut expenditures – to “restore confidence.”
But those policies almost always reduced aggregate demand, pushed the economy into a deeper slump, and further undermined confidence – most recently when the International Monetary Fund insisted on them in East Asia in the 1990’s.
The fourth lesson is that there is more to monetary policy than just fighting inflation.
Excessive focus on inflation meant that some central banks ignored what was happening to their financial markets.
The costs of mild inflation are miniscule compared to the costs imposed on economies when central banks allow asset bubbles to grow unchecked.
The fifth lesson is that not all innovation leads to a more efficient and productive economy – let alone a better society.
Private incentives matter, and if they are not well aligned with social returns, the result can be excessive risk taking, excessively short-sighted behavior, and distorted innovation.
For example, while the benefits of many of the financial-engineering innovations of recent years are hard to prove, let alone quantify, the costs associated with them – both economic and social – are apparent and enormous.
Indeed, financial engineering did not create products that would help ordinary citizens manage the simple risk of home ownership – with the consequence that millions have lost their homes, and millions more are likely to do so.
Instead, innovation was directed at perfecting the exploitation of those who are less educated, and at circumventing the regulations and accounting standards that were designed to make markets more efficient and stable.
As a result, financial markets, which are supposed to manage risk and allocate capital efficiently, created risk and misallocated wildly.
We will soon find out whether we have learned the lessons of this crisis any better than we should have learned the same lessons from previous crises.
Regrettably, unless the United States and other advanced industrial countries make much greater progress on financial-sector reforms in 2010, we may find ourselves faced with another opportunity to learn them.
The Healing of Taiwan
BANGKOK – Last week, a Taiwanese court sentenced Chen Shui-bien, Taiwan’s president from 2000 until 2008, to life imprisonment for corruption.
Chen had been caught stealing millions of dollars of public funds.
He did not act alone. His wife (who also received a life sentence), children, and other relatives all helped to hide the stolen loot in overseas accounts.
Taiwan’s former first family turned out to be a den of common thieves.
Chen and his ruling Democratic Progressive Party camouflaged their personal and parochial financial interests behind the patriotic mask of ensuring the survival of a democratic Chinese society in an independent Taiwan.   For years, Chen was perceived as a brave David fighting the communist Goliath, and attracted many admirers around the world (including me at one point).
Presenting himself and his Party as champions of democracy, Chen sought to create the impression among Taiwan’s voters that their freedom would perish in the hands of the Kuomintang (KMT) or any party other than his own.
But in fact, it was the late President Chiang Ching-kuo, the son of Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek, who instituted the unprecedented democratic reforms that paved the way for the eventual electoral triumph of Chen’s formerly banned DPP.
Chen’s personal wealth grew conspicuously shortly after he assumed office, but no one could produce hard evidence of his corruption back then.
His political supporters initially brushed aside the mushrooming rumors of his self-enrichment as opposition KMT propaganda.
But, one by one, most of the DPP’s founding fathers all left the party, accusing Chen of corruption and autocratic behavior even within his own party – which Chen dismissed as sour grapes from people who wanted their share of the political spoils.
In fact, Chen was always more concerned with consolidating his own power than with defending Taiwan.
His most controversial political moves were aimed at his domestic opponents, not the Chinese government on the mainland.
He led a vicious campaign to portray all Taiwanese with mainland Chinese roots, even if born and bred in Taiwan, as untrustworthy carpetbaggers – wai shen ren , or “not native people” – as if they were aliens from a different culture.
This official effort to portray native “Taiwanese” as a separate ethnic group, with scant relation to Chinese culture, was extended to language, as Chen favored using the Fujian dialect in lieu of the Mandarin spoken by 1.3 billion Chinese and taught all over the world.
Meanwhile, the Ministry of Education sought to expunge all references to China in school textbooks.
So insistent was Chen’s campaign that it reminded some people of Mao’s Cultural Revolution, a time when Chinese were divided into “us” and “them.”
Indeed, under Chen’s policy, Taiwan nearly became a rigidly divided society, where “local” and “not native” Chinese lived as potential enemies.
Taiwan ’s sole aboriginal parliamentarian once provided the logical rebuttal to Chen and the DPP, delivering a speech to a packed Congress entirely in his native tongue, which nobody else in the chamber could understand.
The message was obvious: his was the only group with a legitimate claim to being native Taiwanese.
In the end, Chen’s effort was as futile as it was foolish.
The Chinese culture embodied in the daily lives of 23 million Taiwanese of whatever political beliefs was not so easily eliminated by decree.
Moreover, the attempt to do so angered the overwhelming majority of Taiwanese, who finally understood the stupidity of Chen’s policy, particularly how it led to economic stagnation at a time when mainland China was booming.
Indeed, Taiwanese capital and know-how built much of China’s hi-tech industries, and well over a half-million Taiwanese live and work near Shanghai in a virtual replica of Hsin Chu, Taiwan’s Silicon Valley.
But in Chen’s Taiwan, domestic squabbles took precedence over economic development.
Chen invariably blamed the KMT for blocking sensible economic plans, but even some of his moneyed supporters knew better.
When it was finally proved that power had turned Chen into a common criminal, the KMT was voted back into power.
But, while Chen’s legacy of lies and corruption has ended, the reborn KMT under President Ma Ying-jeou has much to do to convince a cynical public that Chen’s ways, reminiscent of KMT’s own darker past, have not become embedded in the system.
Chen’s jail sentence should also serve to remind the DPP that it must become a party for all Taiwanese, “local” or not if it is to have any chance at a revival.
Taiwan’s people know that they cannot prosper as a democracy if ethnic divisiveness is allowed to hold sway.
The Healthier Poor
Life expectancy in the world’s high-income countries is now 78 years, while it is only 51 years in the least-developed countries, and as low as 40 years in some AIDS-ridden African countries.
For every 1,000 children born in rich countries, seven die before their fifth birthday; for every 1,000 births in the poorest countries, 155 children die before their fifth birthday.
These deaths are not only human tragedies, but also calamities for economic development, systematically reducing economic growth and helping to keep the poorest countries trapped in poverty.
But a growing number of programs around the world are proving that the death and illness of the poor can be reduced sharply and rapidly with targeted investments in public health programs.
Big victories in recent years have come through the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria.
The Fund, established six years ago, has provided financing to more than 130 countries to scale up their programs against these three killer diseases.
Since then, Global Fund programs have helped roughly one million Africans to receive anti-retroviral medicines to treat AIDS, financed the distribution of around 30 million bed nets to combat malaria, and supported treatment of around two million people with TB.
Malaria can be brought under decisive control through bed nets, indoor spraying of insecticides, and making medicines freely available to poor people in malaria-prone villages.
In just two days last year, Kenya’s government distributed more than two million bed nets.
Similar mass distribution programs have been implemented in Ethiopia, Rwanda, Togo, Niger, Ghana, and other places.
The results are amazing.
The poor use the bed nets effectively, and the burden of malaria comes down rapidly.
Likewise, a campaign led by Rotary International and several partners has nearly eradicated polio.
The number of cases worldwide each year is now in the hundreds, compared to many tens of thousands when the campaign began.
Success is being achieved in even the most remote and difficult places, such as the poverty-stricken states of northern India.
Indeed, India is doing much more with its remarkable National Rural Health Mission (NRHM), which is the single largest mobilization of public health measures in the world.
An astounding half-million young woman have recently been hired as health workers to link impoverished households and public clinics and hospitals, which are being improved, and to increase women’s access to emergency obstetrical care in order to avoid tragic and unnecessary deaths in childbirth.
Another remarkable success in India is the safe home-care of newborn infants in the first few days of life.
Currently, an alarming number of newborns die because of infection, mothers’ failure to breastfeed during the first days, or other preventable causes.
By training community health workers, the NRHM has achieved a marked reduction in newborn deaths in Indian villages.
All these programs refute three widely held myths.
The first is that the burden of disease among the poor is somehow inevitable and unavoidable, as if the poor are bound to get sick and die prematurely.
In fact, the poor die of known and identifiable causes that are largely preventable and treatable at very low cost.
There is no excuse for millions of deaths from malaria, AIDS, TB, polio, measles, diarrhea, or respiratory infections, or for so many women and infants to die in or after childbirth.
The second myth is that aid from rich countries is inevitably wasted.
This fallacy is repeated so often by ignorant leaders in rich countries that it has become a major barrier to progress.
The rich like to blame the poor, partly because it lets them off the hook, and partly because it gives them a feeling of moral superiority.
But poor countries are capable of establishing effective public health programs rapidly when they are helped.
Recent success stories have been made possible through a combination of increased spending from poor countries’ budgets, supplemented by aid from rich-country donors.
The third myth is that saving the poor will worsen the population explosion.
But households in the least-developed countries have many children – an average of five per woman – partly because fear of high childhood death rates leads them to overcompensate with large families.
When childhood death rates come down, fertility rates tend to decline even more, since families are now confident that their children will survive.
The result is slower population growth.
It is time to make good on a basic global commitment – that everybody, poor and rich alike – should have access to basic health services.
If just 0.1% of rich-world income were devoted to life-saving health care for the poor, it would be possible to raise life expectancy, decrease child mortality, save mothers in childbirth, slow population growth, and spur economic development throughout the poor world.
The success stories in public health for the poor are multiplying.
With New York and London the centers of global finance, the United States and Britain have enormous profits at stake.
So it is convenient for them to downplay the likelihood that risks to the world’s financial system will be spread more evenly than the benefits.
German leaders, by contrast, must reckon with a populace that is deeply resistant to rapid change, particularly when it involves job cuts.
Many German workers believe, as one trade unionist recently lamented, that takeovers are being driven by a philosophy of “buy it, strip it, and flip it.”
To be sure, the profits currently being earned by the leading financial firms are dizzyingly high.
Goldman Sachs, the venerable Wall Street firm at the epicenter of financial globalization, paid more than $16 billion dollars in compensation to its 25,000 employees in 2006, and spun out another $9 billion for its shareholders – a total that is greater than the annual income of most African countries.
The spectacular profits on Wall Street and elsewhere in the financial industry also have a huge macroeconomic impact.
The US is running an $800 billion annual trade deficit in traditional goods and services.
Yet, because Americans consistently earn a higher return on their investments abroad than foreigners earn on their US investments, US debt is rising at perhaps only half the rate that it might otherwise.
Even we economists who believe that global financial innovation yields huge net benefits must admit that today’s hedge fund boom is becoming like the tech bubble.
My own recent experience is perhaps emblematic.
An “Eddie” in Los Angeles sent me an email asking if I wanted to serve on the advisory board to his new hedge fund.
Eddie’s accompanying flattery aside, I would normally trash such a letter, figuring it was a fraud or scam of some kind.
However, my curiosity was piqued when I noticed a missing attachment outlining the firm’s planned investment strategy.
The big question is whether this Wild West mentality poses broader risks to the global financial system, particularly given circumstances where a large number of firms are all collectively making the same bet.
If they lose, a long string of bankruptcies can cut deeply into banking systems that had generated huge profits by lending to these same hedge funds.
At the moment, the most glaring weakness is the so-called “yen carry trade.”
Hedge funds have borrowed hundreds of billions of dollars at ultra-low interest rate in Japan, and invested the proceeds in countries like Brazil and Turkey, where interest rates are high.
As long as the yen remains weak, this investment strategy will be a money machine.
But if the yen appreciates sharply, as it easily could given Japan’s huge current account surplus, some hedge funds will suffer huge capital losses and the yen carry trade will implode.
And, while today’s main risk is the yen, in a couple months it could be something completely different.
So pressure outside the US and Britain to put the hedge fund industry on a tighter regulatory leash is hardly surprising.
The Germans, for example, want to reduce risk by forcing hedge funds to adhere to stricter reporting requirements.
The funds respond to such proposals by arguing that if they are required to reveal their investment strategies, they will lose their incentive to innovate, and a recent US government report – a multi-agency effort headed by Treasury Secretary Hank Paulson (formerly of Goldman Sachs) – supports that position.
Greater regulation would be a mistake, the report argues, because the global economy’s best defense against systemic risk is the exercise of common sense and “due diligence” by each and every person who invests or interacts with hedge funds.
In other words, the US is telling investors to carry their own guns, because, as in the Wild West, there might not be a sheriff around to help.
But frankly, as we are reminded by recent events, it is hard to see how at least a small increase in transparency can hurt.
The Germans, in chairing the G8 this year, should not surrender on this issue.
No country wants to put itself at the mercy of the likes of Eddie.
The Hero of His Time
Boris Yeltsin was utterly unique.
Russia’s first democratically elected leader, he was also the first Russian leader to give up power voluntarily, and constitutionally, to a successor.
But he was also profoundly characteristic of Russian leaders.
Using various mixtures of charisma, statecraft, and terror, Peter the Great, Catherine the Great, Alexander II, Peter Stolypin (the last tsar’s prime minister), Lenin, and Stalin all sought to make Russia not only a great military power, but also an economic and cultural equal of the West.
Yeltsin aimed for the same goal. But he stands out from them in this respect: he understood that empire was incompatible with democracy, and so was willing to abandon the Soviet Union in order to try to build a democratic order at home.
At the height of Yeltsin’s career, many Russians identified with his bluntness, impulsiveness, sensitivity to personal slight, even with his weakness for alcohol.
And yet in the final years of his rule, his reputation plunged.
Only in the last few months of his second presidential term, after he launched the second war in Chechnya in September 1999, did he and his lieutenants regain some legitimacy in the eyes of the Russian public, while causing revulsion among any remaining Western admirers.
Despite his caprices, however, Yeltsin kept Russia on a course of broad strategic co-operation with America and its allies.
Although he opposed America’s use of force against Iraq and Serbia in the 1990’s, his government never formally abandoned the sanctions regime against either country.
Moreover, no nuclear weapons were unleashed, deliberately or accidentally, and no full-scale war of the kind that ravaged post-communist Yugoslavia broke out between Russia and any of its neighbors, although several of them were locked in internal or regional conflict in which Russia’s hand was visible.
The tasks that faced Yeltsin when he attained power in 1991 were monumental.
At several crucial moments, he established himself as the only person who could rise to the challenges of transforming Russia from a dictatorship into a democracy, from a planned economy into a free market, and from an empire into a medium-ranked power.
In 1992, as the emerging Russian Federation teetered on the brink of economic and monetary collapse, he opted for radical reform, prompting a backlash from vested interest groups.
In the years that followed, he would tilt toward liberal economics whenever he felt powerful enough to do so.
Yeltsin was quintessentially a product of the Soviet system, which makes his turn to democracy and the free market, though imperfect, even more miraculous.
The son of a poor building worker, he had a meteoric rise through communist ranks to become party boss in the industrial city of Sverdlovsk (now Yekaterinburg) in the Urals.
Unlike most other party leaders, he was good at talking to ordinary people, a skill that helped him win support and then power later, but he also showed no sign of questioning the Marxist-Leninist gobbledygook that he was required to recite at public events.
It was only after Mikhail Gorbachev summoned Yeltsin to Moscow in 1985 that he began to differentiate himself from dozens of other senior party apparatchiks.
Sensing the bitter frustration of Moscow’s middle class-in-waiting, Yeltsin quickly gained a reputation as a harsh, if not always coherent, critic of the party’s old guard.
Campaigners for democracy admired Yeltsin’s struggle against the conservatives in the politburo – especially after he was forced out of the party’s inner circle in November 1987.
Determined to outbid Gorbachev as a reformer, he persuaded liberals to overcome their distrust of his provincial manners.
They gave him lessons in democratic theory, while he gave them tactical advice.
As the Soviet Union steadily disintegrated, with virtually all of its 15 republics straining at the leash, Yeltsin gained the leadership of the largest – the Russian Federation – which placed him in a tactical alliance with independence campaigners in Ukraine, the Baltic states, and Georgia.
By June 1991, after quashing a series of challenges to his leadership, he became the first elected president of Russia; two months later, real power fell into his hands, after the failed putsch against Gorbachev of August 1991 by conservatives seeking to prevent the Soviet Union’s disintegration.
For most Westerners and many Russians, his finest hour came on August 19th that year, when he stood on a tank outside the Russian parliament and defied the hardliners who had seized power.
But Yeltsin himself never succeeded in fully throwing off the intellectual shackles of the past.
As president, he talked of economic performance as if it could be improved by decree.
Like most Russians, he wanted the material advantages of capitalism, but had little respect or understanding for the rule of law and dispersion of power, which makes capitalist institutions work.
Nevertheless, for most of his presidency, Yeltsin kept alive – albeit with many tactical retreats – the goal of economic reform.
At some level, he sensed that Russia’s potential could be unleashed only if the government either faced down, or bought off, the special interests – military, industrial, and agricultural – that stood in the way.
The economic orthodoxy pursued after the collapse of 1998 laid the groundwork for today’s sustained Russian boom.
Yeltsin’s tragedy, and Russia’s, was that, when the country needed a leader with vision and determination, it found an agile political operator instead.
By not permitting Russia to disintegrate into anarchy or leading it back to authoritarianism, Yeltsin kept the way open for such a leader to one day emerge.
Unfortunately, that man is not his handpicked successor, Vladimir Putin, who has only perpetuated the vicious cycles of Russian history.
The Hidden Purposes of High Finance
BERKELEY – No one questions the usefulness of “low” finance: the ability to use checks, banknotes, and credit cards rather than having to cart around chests of silver, scales, and reagents to assay purity, and needing armed guards to protect the silver – and more guards to watch the first set of guards – has obvious efficiencies.
So does the ability of households to borrow and lend in order not to be forced to match income and expenditure every day, week, month, or year.
But what use is “high” finance?
Economists’ conventional description depicts high finance as providing us with three types of utility.
First, it allows for many savers to pool their wealth to finance large enterprises that can achieve the efficiencies of scale possible from capital-intensive modern industry.
Second, high finance provides an arena to curb the worst abuses by managers of large corporations.
Shareholder democracy simply does not work, but managers’ fear that if the stock price drops too low they will be out on their ears provides a useful restraint.
Finally, high finance allows for portfolio diversification, so that individual investors can seek high expected returns without being forced to assume large, idiosyncratic risks of bankruptcy and poverty.
But these are the benefits of high finance as they apply to the ideal world of economists – that is, a world of rational utilitarian actors who are skilled calculators of expected utility under uncertainty, who are masters of dynamic programming, and who breathe stochastic calculus in their daily life.
We do not live in such a world.
Economists have spent their lives attempting to evolve theories that would account for how salient features of reality might emerge if we did live in their ideal world, but since we don’t, their theoretical enterprise is of doubtful utility.
It is like describing how one could bake a delicious wedding cake using only honey, bicarbonate of soda, and raw eggplant.
If we take the world as it really is, we quickly see that high finance performs two further tasks that advance our collective economic welfare.
It induces us to save, accumulate, and invest by promising us safe and liquid investments even in extraordinary times.
It also induces us to save and invest as a prerequisite to indulging our love of gambling, and as a byproduct of it.
It is a fact that we are much happier saving and accumulating, and that we are much more likely to do so when we think that the resources we have saved and accumulated are at hand.
It is also true that when we invest our wealth – in Pfizer’s intellectual property, factories in Shenzhen, worldwide distribution networks, or shopping malls in Atlanta – it is not , in fact, at hand.
Our invested wealth can only be made to appear liquid to any one of us, and only if there is no general shift in our collective desire for liquidity.
And it is also a fact that we are happier saving and accumulating if we receive positive and negative feedback on our decisions on a time scale that allows us to believe that we can do better next time by altering our strategy – hence marketwatch.com and CNN/Money.
Of course investors who believe that their wealth is securely liquid, and that they are adding value for themselves by buying and selling are suffering from a delusion.
Our financial wealth is not liquid in an emergency.
And when we buy and sell, we are enriching not ourselves, but the specialists and market makers.
But we benefit from these delusions.
Psychologically, we are naturally impatient, so it is good for us to believe that our wealth is safe and secure, and that we can add to it through skillful acts of investment, because that delusion makes us behave less impatiently.
And, collectively, that delusion boosts our savings, and thus our capital stock, which on turn boosts all of our wages and salaries as well.
It is for these reasons that we have seemed frozen for the past generation or two whenever we have contemplated reforming our system of financial regulation.
And it is why, even in the face of a severe financial crisis, we remain frozen today.
The High Cost of Cheap Fashion
OXFORD – I confess: I do it, too.
Like most Western women, I do it regularly, and it is a guilty pleasure every time.
It is hard to listen to one’s conscience when one is faced with so much incredible temptation.
I am talking, of course, about cheap trendy fashion.
I'll visit a Zara – or Hampamp;M, or, now that I am in the United Kingdom for the summer, the amazing Primark – and snap up items that are “cute,” effectively disposable, and so shockingly inexpensive that one does a double take.
I need to face my addiction – and so do all women like me.
Fashion has been transformed by the recent emergence of retail chains that hire good designers to make throwaway clothing and accessories that are right on trend.
This evolution has freed Western women from the tyranny of a fashion industry that in the bad old days would dictate a style, compelling women to invest heavily in updating their wardrobes, and then blithely declare their entire closets obsolete – again and again, with no end in sight.
Enter the mass-production style emporia, and Western women have the seemingly delicious and liberating option of getting this summer's must-have tiny floral retro eighties print sundress – which will look appallingly frumpy by next summer – for $12.
They – we – can invest in classic items that don’t age so fast, and absorb these low-cost trendy disposables as the mood hits.
These stores solve a psychological problem for us, too, since one can shop at length – a pleasure that may well be hard-wired in the female brain, owing to our evolutionary development as gatherers – without feeling sick about one’s overspending by the end of the exercise.
But what has been liberating for Western women is a system built literally on the backs of women in the developing world.
How do Primark and its competitors in the West’s shopping malls and High Streets keep that cute frock so cheap?
By starving and oppressing Bangladeshi, Chinese, Mexican, Haitian, and other women, that’s how.
We all know that cheap clothing is usually made in sweatshop conditions – and usually by women.
And we know – or should know – that women in sweatshops around the world report being locked in and forbidden to use bathrooms for long periods, as well as sexual harassment, violent union-busting, and other forms of coercion.
But, like any family secret that would cause us discomfort if faced directly, we Western women turn a blind eye to it.
Boycotts of sweated college t-shirts in the United States led to fairer manufacturing practices, and boycotts of coffee and produce, led mostly by women consumers, resulted in fair-trade purchases by major supermarkets.
And more affluent women do have a history of effective sweated labor boycotts in the past: in the Victorian era, impoverished women were going blind in the `needle trades', turning out elaborate embroideries for wealthy women, until revulsion on the part of these consumers forced conditions to better.
By contrast, today, there is no major movement led by developed-world women to stop this global exploitation by cut-rate manufacturers – even though our money is the one tool powerful enough to force manufacturers to change their ways.
The reason is simple: we like things the way they are.
But it will become increasingly difficult for us to maintain our “out of sight, out of mind” attitude.
To their credit, women in the developing world – some of the most exploited and coerced women on earth – are raising their voices.
For example, The Financial Times reported on June 23 that, “Hundreds of Bangladeshi garment factories supplying western buyers such as Marks and Spencer, Tesco, Walmart, and Hampamp;M gradually reopened under heavy police protection…after days of violent protests by tens of thousands of laborers demanding higher wages.”
A thousand riot police used rubber bullets and tear gas on the workers, and hundreds were injured, but they did not back down.
Most of the two million people working in Bangladesh’s garment industry are women, and they are the lowest-paid garment workers in the world, earning $25 a month.
But they are demanding that their monthly wage be almost tripled, to $70.
Their leaders make the point that, at current pay levels, workers cannot feed themselves or their families.
Economists predict that strikes and unrest will escalate in Bangladesh, and also in Vietnam, with even investment bankers quoted by The Financial Times calling wages for women garment workers in these countries “unsustainably low.”
The factories have reopened – for now. But Bangladesh’s government is considering an increase in the minimum wage.
If it happens, one of the world’s most oppressed legal workforces will have scored a major victory – largely symbolic for now, but one that will inspire other women garment workers around the world to rise up in protest.
Western women, we should challenge ourselves to follow this story and find ways to do what is right in changing our own consumption patterns.
That $3 pair of adorable lace-up sandals?
The price – given the human costs – really is too good to be true.
The High Stakes of Rio+20
NAIROBI – With just weeks to go before the Rio+20 Earth Summit, many are speculating about how many world leaders will show up and what kind of agreements they might reach on the key agenda items: creating a “green economy” and establishing an “international framework for sustainable development.” It is no coincidence that these two items appear side by side.
The term “green economy” was coined years ago – even prior to the first Earth Summit in 1992 –&nbsp;to provide a new lens through which to examine the links between economics and sustainability.
But it has gained a new impetus in a world where climate change is already a reality, commodity prices are rising, and basic resources such as clean air, arable land, and fresh water are increasingly scarce.
A growing body of science, including the United Nations Environment Program’s upcoming Global Environment Outlook-5, is confirming what was glimpsed at Rio 20 years ago.
Those who have invested in an economic model and production processes based on nineteenth- and twentieth-century models are perhaps understandably nervous about a paradigm shift.
But so are some segments of civil society, which are concerned that a transition to a green economy might negatively affect the poor and expose them to greater risks and vulnerabilities.
Others question the efficacy of market-based approaches to drive sustainability, because markets can never deliver optimal social and environmental outcomes.
Only strong institutions, including regulations and laws, can accomplish this.
We couldn’t agree more.
The systemic crises in food, fuel, and finance that came to a head in 2008 – and that are ongoing in many countries – have their roots in an economic paradigm that has not accounted for the value of nature and its array of life-supporting services.
As the recently released report “Towards a Green Economy: Pathways to Sustainable Development and Poverty Eradication” shows, the market economy as currently constituted has resulted in the misallocation of capital on an unprecedented scale.
Indeed, the deep and pervasive market failures – in carbon emissions, biodiversity, and ecosystem services – are accelerating environmental risks and ecological scarcities, and undermining human well-being and social equity.
That is why the link to governance and institutions at Rio+20 is just as important as the transition to a green economy: markets are human constructs that require rules and institutions to guide not only their direction, but also their boundaries.
One concern among critics is that a transition to a green economy will essentially monetize nature, exposing the world’s forests, fresh water, and fisheries to the profit-seeking behavior of bankers and traders, whose shortcomings helped to trigger the financial and economic turmoil of the past four years.
But is the question one of monetizing nature, or of valuing nature?
The fact is that nature is already being bought and sold, mined and marketed at knock-down prices that fail to capture its real worth, especially to the livelihoods of the poor.
In large part, this reflects unregulated or missing markets that fail to capture the values that nature provides to us every day – point emphasized in the G-8+5 project on the Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity, hosted by the UNEP.
In a very real sense, the future of the planet is at stake in Rio.
Without a real and lasting solution that recalibrates our current economic thinking at a systemic level, the scale and pace of change could soon push the planet past critical thresholds and make sustainable development everywhere an impossible dream.
Although multilateralism is a slow and often painful process of cultivating consensus, some issues are so large that they transcend any one country.
Why, for example, does the world pursue a paradigm of economic growth that rests upon eroding the very basis of earth’s life-support systems?
Can wealth be redefined and reframed to include access to basic goods and services, including those provided by nature free of cost, such as clean air, a stable climate, and fresh water?
Is it not time to give human development, environmental sustainability, and social equity an equal footing with GDP growth?
All around us, warning lights are flashing yellow, if not red.
But we know that new technology and innovation are driving changes in the way that energy is produced, how new markets for food and clean water are emerging, and how basic ecological services are now becoming scarce and valued.
Rio+20 is a moment for sharing knowledge and experience concerning successful transitions to greener and more resource-efficient economies. It is an opportunity to begin developing the capacity at all levels to transform our economies into engines of growth and jobs that do not deplete our resources or create new liabilities that will be a drag on growth and human health for years to come.
The challenge ahead will be to reconcile the emerging economic reality with the social values and ethics needed to produce a balanced and inclusive green economy.
That, in the words of UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, is a “future that we all want.”
It is a future that could unfold with defining and decisive leadership by world leaders at Rio+20.
The History at the End of History
Fifteen years ago in my book The End of History and the Last Man I argued that, if a society wanted to be modern, there was no alternative to a market economy and a democratic political system.
Not everyone wanted to be modern, of course, and not everyone could put in place the institutions and policies necessary to make democracy and capitalism work, but no alternative system would yield better results.
While the “ End of History ” thus was essentially an argument about modernization, some people have linked my thesis about the end of history to the foreign policy of President George W. Bush and American strategic hegemony.
But anyone who thinks that my ideas constitute the intellectual foundation for the Bush administration’s policies has not been paying attention to what I have been saying since 1992 about democracy and development.
President Bush initially justified intervention in Iraq on the grounds of Saddam’s programs to develop weapons of mass destruction, the regime’s alleged links to al-Qaida, as well as Iraq’s violation of human rights and lack of democracy.
As the first two justifications crumbled in the wake of the 2003 invasion, the administration increasingly emphasized the importance of democracy, both in Iraq and in the broader Middle East, as a rationale for what it was doing.
Bush argued that the desire for freedom and democracy were universal and not culture-bound, and that America would be dedicated to the support of democratic movements “with the ultimate goal of ending tyranny in our world.”
Supporters of the war saw their views confirmed in the ink-stained fingers of Iraqi voters who queued up to vote in the various elections held between January and December 2005, in the Cedar Revolution in Lebanon, and in the Afghan presidential and parliamentary elections.
Inspiring and hopeful as these events were, the road to liberal democracy in the Middle East is likely to be extremely disappointing in the near to medium term, and the Bush administration’s efforts to build a regional policy around it are heading toward abject failure.
To be sure, the desire to live in a modern society and to be free of tyranny is universal, or nearly so.
This is demonstrated by the efforts of millions of people each year to move from the developing to the developed world, where they hope to find the political stability, job opportunities, health care, and education that they lack at home.
But this is different from saying that there is a universal desire to live in a liberal society – that is, a political order characterized by a sphere of individual rights and the rule of law.
The desire to live in a liberal democracy is, indeed, something acquired over time, often as a byproduct of successful modernization.
Moreover, the desire to live in a modern liberal democracy does not translate necessarily into an ability to actually do so.
The Bush administration seems to have assumed in its approach to post-Saddam Iraq that both democracy and a market economy were default conditions to which societies would revert once oppressive tyranny was removed, rather than a series of complex, interdependent institutions that had to be painstakingly built over time.
Long before you have a liberal democracy, you have to have a functioning state (something that never disappeared in Germany or Japan after they were defeated in World War II).
This is something that cannot be taken for granted in countries like Iraq.
The End of History was never linked to a specifically American model of social or political organization.
Following Alexandre Kojève, the Russian-French philosopher who inspired my original argument, I believe that the European Union more accurately reflects what the world will look like at the end of history than the contemporary United States.
The EU’s attempt to transcend sovereignty and traditional power politics by establishing a transnational rule of law is much more in line with a “post-historical” world than the Americans’ continuing belief in God, national sovereignty, and their military.
Finally, I never linked the global emergence of democracy to American agency, and particularly not to the exercise of American military power.
Democratic transitions need to be driven by societies that want democracy, and since the latter requires institutions, it is usually a fairly long and drawn out process.
Outside powers like the US can often help in this process by the example they set as politically and economically successful societies.
They can also provide funding, advice, technical assistance, and yes, occasionally military force to help the process along.
But coercive regime change was never the key to democratic transition.
The History Man
President George W. Bush is not generally known for his firm grasp of history.
But this has not stopped him from using history to justify his policies.
In a recent speech to American war veterans in Kansas City, he defended his aim to “stay the course” in Iraq by pointing out the consequences of the American withdrawal from the war in Vietnam.
He also mentioned the post-1945 occupation of Japan and the Korean War as success stories in America’s efforts to bring freedom to Asia, and by extension, the world.
Historians, Democrats, and other Bush critics were quick to denounce his speech, particularly his reference to Vietnam, as self-serving, dishonest, and inaccurate.
Yet, for once, Bush actually hit upon a historical analogy that was true.
Of course, the Vietnam War was different in almost every respect from the war in Iraq.
Ho Chi Minh was not Saddam Hussein.
In Vietnam, the United States was not invading a country, but defending a corrupt authoritarian ally against an aggressive Communist regime.
But what Bush actually said was that the US withdrawal from Indochina was followed by a bloodbath in Cambodia, and brutal oppression in Vietnam.
A withdrawal from Iraq, he implied, would result in similar bloodshed, or worse.
That is almost certainly true.
However, what Bush did not say is that neither the mass murders in Southeast Asia, nor the potential mass murders in Iraq, would have occurred without the chaos caused by US intervention.
But what about the Asian success stories, in Japan, Korea, and other places under American protection?
Was Bush right to boast of America’s role in giving these countries their freedom?
As he put it to the Kansas City veterans: “Will today’s generation of Americans resist the allure of retreat, and will we do in the Middle East what the veterans in this room did in Asia?”
What exactly did the US do in Asia?
The first few years of the occupation of Japan were indeed a remarkable success for democracy.
Instead of helping Japanese of the old school restore an authoritarian system, General Douglas MacArthur’s administration helped Japanese liberals restore and improve their prewar democratic institutions.
Trade unions were given more clout.
Women got the vote.
Civil liberties were boosted. And the semi-divine Japanese Emperor was brought down to earth.
Much of the credit for this goes to the Japanese themselves and to the idealistic, left-leaning New Dealers in MacArthur’s government who supported them.
When China fell to Mao’s Communists, however, and North Korea got Chinese and Soviet backing for an invasion of the south, democratic idealism was stopped in its tracks.
In Japan, former war criminals were released from prison, “reds” were purged, and right-wing governments led by some of those same former war criminals got enthusiastic American backing.
Democracy, instead of being nurtured, was distorted, with active American encouragement, to make sure the right stayed in power and the left was kept at bay.
South Koreans certainly have much to thank the Americans for.
Without UN intervention in the Korean War, led by the US, the South would have been taken over by Kim Il Sung, the Great Leader, and their current freedom and prosperity would never have been possible.
But South Korean democracy was not something the US gave to the Koreans, or even always encouraged.
From the late 1940’s to the late 1980’s, the US played along with, and sometimes actively backed, anti-Communist authoritarian rulers, who grabbed and consolidated their powers through violent coups and the suppression of dissent.
The same was true in the Philippines, Taiwan, Indonesia, and Thailand, and, indeed, in the Middle East, where democracy is yet to take root.
As long as the Cold War lasted, US administrations consistently favored military strongmen and civilian dictators in the name of fighting Communism – anything to keep the left down, even the kind of left that would have been regarded as simply liberal in the democratic West.
True, for most people, life under right-wing Asian strongmen was, on the whole, preferable to life under Mao, Pol Pot, Kim Il Sung, or even Ho Chi Minh.
But to call the citizens under Park Chung Hee, Ferdinand Marcos, or General Suharto “free” is an abomination.
The happy fact that Koreans, Filipinos, Thais and Taiwanese did eventually become free, or at least freer, is not so much to the credit of the US as it is to the people who fought for their freedoms themselves.
It was only in the late 1980’s, when the Communist empire was crumbling, that US governments actively backed democratic politicians and demonstrators in Seoul, Taipei, or Manila.
But the heroes of democracy were Asian, not American.
Bush is right to claim that people in the Middle East would like to be as prosperous and free as the South Koreans, but his notion that the war in Iraq is simply a continuation of US policies in Asia could not be more mistaken.
In Asia, as in the Middle East, US strategy was to prop up dictators against Communism until their own people toppled them.
In the Middle East today, it is reckless and radical: invading a country, wrecking its institutions, and expecting that freedom will grow in the ensuing state of anarchy.
To confuse these different enterprises and pretend that they are the same is not only wrong, but dangerous, and deeply disappointing to those of us who still regard the US as a force for good.
The Hollow Heart of Medical Science
Why are neuroscientists, molecular biologists, geneticists, and developmental biologists – men and women whose discoveries have forever changed the way we understand ourselves – so uneasy about their futures?
The crisis in morale among today’s medical scientists stems not from money problems, nor from the stage of development of their fields, nor from the level of research that is being conducted, but from these scientists’ failure to form themselves into proper, humane communities.
Low morale results from too little kindness and decency; it is a failure of custom and manners, a loss of social purpose, a diminution of the ability or the will to distinguish right from wrong and then to act rightly.
At root, low morale is just a consequence of the indifference of medical scientists, busy in their labs, allowing the social and emotional foundations of their field to rot away beneath them.
The vulnerability of the sciences that focus on the human body and mind lies in the obligation all scientists have to observe their systems with dispassion.
In these fields, dispassion requires that the medical scientist ignore his or her own vulnerability of mind and body.
The strain of trying to meet this impossible standard of cool curiosity about one’s own fate imposes an unbearable distance between the scientist of the body and mind, and the body and mind of the scientist.
Under this strain, medical research scientists are susceptible to the dream that their instruments and procedures have somehow freed them from the limitations of their minds and bodies.
The conscious expression of this dream is an obsessive response to the certainty of biological death: the belief that a big enough win in the game of science will beat death itself by conferring a form of immortality on the winner.
Nothing but the thinnest membrane of denial separates the notion of scientific immortality through priority of discovery from this deeper, older, and wholly non-scientific dream of escaping one’s own inevitable death.
But these promises are not sustainable.
A humane version of the biomedical sciences would, for instance, acknowledge that it is not about to transcend the limits of the human body, and so it would no longer make promises that it cannot keep.
Beyond that, a science that acknowledges an unconscious component in its operations, if not in its methodology, will best serve its practitioners as human beings, as well as being most likely to generate lasting value for the rest of us.
“To profess” has a spectrum of meanings: to affirm openly; declare or claim; to make a pretense of; pretend; to claim skill in or knowledge of; to affirm belief in; to receive into a religious order or congregation; to make an open affirmation; or to take the vows of a religious order or congregation.
Rather than choose among all these current meanings, we might begin by returning to the word from which they all evolved, the Middle English “professen,” to take vows.
Professors do not deserve the title unless they are willing to take the time and make the effort to openly affirm something beyond their data.
Affirmations and vows are not data-dependent; they are matters of the heart.
To be a professor, it seems to me, one must first have something of importance to oneself that needs affirming, and then one must affirm it.
Morale among professors in science will remain low until they decide that their strongest feelings, as well as their best data, should determine professional behavior and professional status.
The Hothouse of US-China Relations
As Hu Jintao, China’s Communist Party Secretary General and President, prepares to visit the US on April 20, myriad unresolved issues are disturbing Sino-US relations.
Debates rage over the bilateral trade balance and revaluation of the renminbi, the status of Taiwan and Tibet, human rights violations, and intellectual property theft.
China’s role in restraining North Korea’s nuclear ambitions and its tense relations with Japan are an additional burden on ties.
There is even disagreement about whether Hu’s trip to Washington is an official “state visit.”
These issues will dominate the headlines, but they pale in comparison to another problem that is on neither side’s agenda: global warming.
That is a pity, because as British Prime Minister Tony Blair recently observed, over the long term, “there is no issue more important than climate change,” and there can be no agreement to reduce it “that doesn’t involve China, America and India.”
Moreover, climate change is no longer such a long-term problem, and only the lunatic fringe remains in doubt about whether the escalating use of carbon-based fuels is responsible for global warming.
Indeed, recent assessments by the British Antarctic Survey suggest that temperatures over the Antarctic have increased 3.6 degrees since the early 1970’s, and that warming is taking place far faster than researchers had hitherto believed.
Similarly, the journal Science reports that new studies show that ocean levels may rise much more rapidly and precipitously than anticipated.
Although the US and China are the world’s two primary producers of greenhouse gases – the US being the largest – neither has signed the Kyoto Protocol, which commits countries to cut carbon emissions 5% below 1990 levels by 2008-12.
With China and the US out of the picture, the problem will likely get far worse before it gets better.
The increasing climate-change danger is mainly due to developments in China.
The country derives almost 76% of its energy needs from coal, burning almost 2.2 billion tons of it in 2005, with consumption set to rise to 2.6 billion tons by 2010.
Unlike George W. Bush’s administration, which remains cavalier in its disregard for the warning signs of climate danger both at home and globally, Hu Jintao’s leadership has begun to evince a hopeful assertiveness, at least in domestic environmental policy.
There is a paradox here: while China’s central government is trying to provide national environmental leadership, local governments have often resisted.
In the US, it is the federal government that has been weak – even retrograde – in providing environmental leadership, while states such as California have led the way with higher standards.
While US Vice President Dick Cheney denigrates the idea of energy conservation, China’s leaders have adopted a new five-year plan that commits the country to cut energy use by one-fifth, industrial pollution by one-tenth, and industrial water consumption by one-third.
A 12% tax increase has been imposed on gas-guzzling cars, along with reductions for cars with small-engines, and a new 5% tax is being levied on wooden flooring and even chopsticks, which are estimated to use two million cubic meters of timber each year.
Nevertheless, because both Hu and Bush fear the economic effects of reducing their country’s carbon emissions, each has hidden behind the non-participation of the other to justify absence from international efforts and failure to assume a global leadership role.
Having awakened to the environmental threat, the next challenge for Hu is to begin translating some of China’s new awareness and boldness into its foreign policy – exactly what the US has failed to do.
It would be a pity if China, the new industrial hub of the world, overlooked the benefits of capitalizing economically on the multinational effort to control carbon emissions that is inevitable if the global environment is to remain hospitable.
Indeed, any national leadership that anticipates the new research, development, manufacturing, and trade possibilities that will grow out of this new imperative may find itself positioned for exactly the kind of sustained economic growth that every country seeks.
If the US and China were to team up to address the challenge of climate change, the results might not only be a more congenial climate and a better Sino-US relationship, but also new and vibrant economic sectors in both countries.
If climate change were on the agenda for Hu’s upcoming trip, the meeting, whether or not it is designated a “state visit,” could be one of historic consequence.
The Hour of the Technocrats
CAMBRIDGE – Greece and Italy, desperate after their gridlocked political systems left them mired in debt and crisis, have both chosen technocratic economists – Lucas Papademos and Mario Monti, respectively – rather than politicians to lead new governments.
Both can be described as professors: Monti has been president of Milan’s Bocconi University as well as a European Commissioner, and Papademos has been my colleague at Harvard’s Kennedy School of Government in the year since he finished his term as Deputy Governor of the European Central Bank.
Not long from now, both men will most likely provoke headlines such as the following: “Professors Earn ‘A’ in Economics, but Flunk Politics.”
That will be unfair.
It is not a lack of political ability which will stymie them, but rather a lack of political power.
Monti, despite strong popular support for his technocratic government, does not have a parliamentary majority upon which he can rely.
Meanwhile, former Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi has made it clear that he will not set aside his personal political interests for the good of the country.
Papademos has been dealt an even weaker hand.
Despite his best efforts to insist on a term longer than three months and the ability to appoint some members of his cabinet as conditions for accepting the premiership, in the end he won neither demand.
The elevation of these two outstanding civil servants comes after a period when other professors have been squeezed out by the political process.
In June, several well-qualified economists from emerging-market countries were passed over in the selection of a successor to Dominique Strauss-Kahn as Managing Director of the International Monetary Fund.
In Germany, Axel Weber resigned as President of the Bundesbank and member of the Governing Council of the ECB last January, reportedly because his statements opposing the Banks’ purchases of troubled eurozone countries’ bonds reflected his political naivety.
The press could not imagine that a technocrat might voluntarily relinquish a sure shot at a position of great power – successor to Jean-Claude Trichet as ECB President – on a matter of principle.
But that is precisely what Weber did.
The willingness to give up power if necessary is one of the advantages that professors bring to such positions.
(The ECB presidency then went to another economist and technocrat, Mario Draghi, who is, in fact, the perfect man for the job.)
It is a mistake to conflate technocratic elites (those with PhDs or other advanced economics degrees) with other kinds of elites (those with money or power, especially if they inherited one or the other).
Most economists understood the downside risks of European monetary union.
It was the politicians who underestimated the technical difficulties when they opted for monetary integration.
It goes without saying that academic or technical expertise is neither necessary nor sufficient to ensure government officials’ success.
Indeed, many of my Harvard colleagues would make terrible policymakers, owing to a lack of leadership, managerial, or other interpersonal skills.
And many excellent political leaders – for example, George Washington and Dwight Eisenhower, among US presidents – have not been intellectuals.
Technocrats can play a useful role as honest brokers when traditional politicians have become discredited or parties are deadlocked.
Moreover, they have the credibility that comes with a lack of desire to be re-elected, either because their term in office has been limited in advance or because they are known to prefer a quiet academic life.
Their most obvious advantage is apparent when a country faces problems – for example, proposing economic reforms or negotiating loan terms – that are largely technical.
A good precedent in Italy is Carlo Ciampi, who took the reins of government in 1993, after Italy was forced to drop out of the European Exchange Rate Mechanism, and managed to repeal the scala mobile (the wage-indexation system), beat down inflation, and re-board the train of European monetary integration.
Among some technocrats’ obvious disadvantages are lack of managerial experience, lack of perceived legitimacy, and lack of a domestic power base.
Monti and Papademos both have managerial experience and, for now, legitimacy.
They will be limited, however, by their inability to command the stable support of a political bloc.
Several current heads of state could be considered technocrats: President Felipe Calderónof Mexico, President Sebastián Piñera of Chile, and President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf of Liberia, among others.
Nobody could accuse them of having led sheltered lives, or of being unaccustomed to making difficult decisions.
At the same time, all three received academic training at Harvard.
(Calderóntook three courses from me; unfortunately, dealing with violent drug lords was not on my syllabus.)
Having good international credentials is not always an advantage.
When Sirleaf received the Nobel Peace Prize in 2011, there was speculation that her good image abroad could hurt her campaign for re-election at home.
Analogously, both Papademos and Monti are certified European Union and eurozone elites, which will help them to obtain support for their countries abroad, but will leave them vulnerable to domestic charges that they are lackeys of foreign powers.
It is fitting that Rome and Athens, the two seats of classical Western civilization, have turned to these two urbane, erudite men for leadership.
But neither Papademos nor Monti can work any technocratic magic if they are not given the political tools to get the right policies enacted.
The Human Face of Climate Change
A clever new gadget was described in a newspaper a few weeks ago. It pulls water out of the atmosphere and delivers you a glass of clean, chilled H2O.
It’s wonderful what technology can offer for the wealthy.
But there is no such luck for millions of Africans who face disruption to the rainfall on which their crops, livestock, and families depend.
For them, climate change can be expected to bring more erratic and uncertain storms, with no guarantee of water in the well, bucket, and field.
Water lies at the heart of life, whether for drinking and washing, irrigating crops, watering cattle, or generating power.
Those of us who live with wet weather tend to curse it, but if we faced week after week of blistering sun with no prospect of clouds in sight, we would be in real trouble.
Nearly a billion people on the planet manage their lives with serious water shortages, and their circumstances are only likely to worsen with climate change and rapid urbanization.
Governments are currently gathered in Poznan, Poland, to reach agreement on how to address the major challenges that stem from global warming.
We need a deal by the end of 2009 in order to institute more ambitious cuts to greenhouse gas emissions.
But the main dealmakers are those nations with the highest emissions, since they are the ones with something to trade.
Most African countries have no voice or bargaining power in the climate change talks and must accept whatever deal is made.
Yet many of the highest costs of adapting to changing weather patterns will fall on them.
Where is the justice in this?
How can it be right that those least responsible for global warming will be the worst hit and the least able to affect the global deal that we need?
The last few years have shown how everything is interconnected, wherever you are on this planet.
Biofuel targets set in the European Union, the United States, and China generate a land grab in Mozambique, Colombia, and Cambodia.
Hot money moves out of the sub-prime market into food and other commodities, and suddenly poor city dwellers in the Philippines, Peru, and Cote d‘Ivoire are faced with terrible hunger.
Today, no one is immune from climate change.
The expectation that life will continue along familiar lines is being overtaken by anxiety that the shifts underway will mean huge shocks and difficult adjustments in many parts of the world.
Experts predict that parts of Southern Africa will suffer hotter, drier weather patterns, as will the northern Maghreb region.
Harvests may halve and rivers on which irrigation and hydropower depend may become a mere trickle.
On the other hand, too much rainfall can be as bad as too little, especially when it comes out of season.
Parts of East and West Africa are expected to get wetter, with rain falling in heavy, intense storms that not only bring greater risks of erosion, flooding, and crop damage, but also leave people more exposed to malaria and cattle herds to decimation by outbreaks of diseases like Rift Valley fever.
Sometimes the climate change debate looks very complicated – people risk drowning in an acronym soup, technical fixes proliferate, and experts argue about the right price of carbon and appropriate discount rates.
Yet, within the complexity, there is a very simple truth: for a decade or more, we have known that it was risky to go on emitting greenhouse gases, yet we have utterly failed to take credible steps to stop.
We have sidestepped our duties both to our descendants and to the large number of people alive here and now in other parts of the world who are suffering the consequences of our myopia.
Western governments are ready to argue with the Chinese and Indians about whether and when the burden of cuts will be spread to emerging economies, but are silent on the much bigger injustice wrought on the world’s poorest people.
The human right to water is just one of the rights at risk in a climate-constrained world.
Are we happy to live in a world where the rich can rely on ever more clever technical tricks, while we ignore the right of poor countries and communities to the basic requirements of survival?
The Humble Nobility of Elie Wiesel
PARIS – It begins in a world now gone, lying at the borders of Ruthenia, Bukovina, and Galicia, forgotten places that were the glory of the Habsburg Empire and of European Judaism.
Seventy years later, all that remains of this world are ruined palaces, empty Baroque churches, and synagogues leveled and never rebuilt.
And now it has lost one of its last witnesses: Elie Wiesel.
Wiesel survived the obliteration of this world, and from it fashioned a second birth, devoting his life, in fear and trembling, to resurrecting those who perished.
That, for me, is what stands out in the life of the author of Night and Messengers of God.
In the years after 1945, Wiesel rubbed elbows with the greatest of the great.
He garnered the same vast, worldwide, enduring admiration as Yehudi Menuhin.
But he never stopped being that yehudi, that ordinary Jew, that survivor whose heart would pound as he passed through customs in New York or Paris.
Wiesel set himself one task, at once impossible and categorical: to become the living tomb, the cenotaph, of the beggars of Sighet, of the comically clumsy ghetto Hasidim, and of the countless campmates who had, in the face of God’s silence, chanted the Kaddish for their own passing.
For this, he had only his tongue, and not even his native tongue, but the French that he learned in an orphanage for deported children at age 15 – and later turned into his violin.
Without Wiesel, there would have remained no trace of countless lives reduced to ash and smoke.
I do not know if Wiesel was a “great” writer.
But I am convinced that he, like Benny Lévy, another friend, believed that a Jew of his type does not come into the world to pursue literature as a profession.
Wiesel’s work has neither the inaccessible sublimity of Kafka, nor the paradoxically lofty power of Proust.
It perhaps lacks the laconic grace of Paul Celan, who wrote that, in the country they shared, one finds nothing but books and men.
But he is one of the few to have spoken the unspeakable about the camps.
He shares with Primo Levi and Imre Kertész – how many others? – the terrible privilege of having felt six million shadows pressing against his frail silhouette, in an effort to gain their almost imperceptible place in the great book of the dead.
His other great virtue, perhaps, is having ensured, through his work and henceforth in the minds of those inspired by it, that the dark memory of that exception that was the Holocaust will not exclude – indeed, that the Holocaust requires – ardent solidarity with the victims of all other genocides.
I picture Wiesel in 1979 on the Cambodian border, where I met him for the first time, his familiar mop of hair a jet-black wing hovering over his lean, handsome head.
He was the first person I heard theorize on the sad imbecility of those who engage in competitive victimhood, those who insist that we have to choose our own dead – Jews or Khmer, the martyrs of this genocide or that.
I picture him seven years later in Oslo, where I accompanied him to receive the Nobel Prize that he wanted so much.
At one point his face suddenly darkened as if overtaken by an unexplained anxiety.
In his expression – which could change in a moment from joy, gaiety, and mischievous intelligence to the infinite sadness of one who will never recover from having seen the worst that humans can do – the sadness clearly seemed to have won.
“The Nobel Prize,” he mused, “from now on I’ll be a Nobel prizewinner, but there is only one title that matters, which is Rebbe (teacher), and I know that I am not one.
I know that I am and will always be no more than the Rebbe’s student.”
Then there was Wiesel’s last meeting with François Mitterrand, the Sphinx, the Machiavelli of the Élysée Palace.
In their previous encounters, the villager from Sighet and the bourgeois from the Charentes had engaged, icon to icon, in long and deep exchanges that, I believe, may have kindled some mutual affection.
Wiesel had the feeling of rediscovering, under the president’s power, something of the priestly concern of Mitterrand’s namesake, François Mauriac, who had taken Wiesel under his wing on his return from Auschwitz and with whom he felt he had helped to mitigate the thousand-year-old strains between Jews and Christians.
But, then, in this last meeting, Wiesel learned, bit by bit, that Mitterrand the Marist prince had blithely gone off to play golf the day his loyal lieutenant, Pierre Bérégovoy, committed suicide, and that Mitterrand had continued, to the very last, to defend René Bousquet, head of the Vichy police and denouncer of Jews.
Had Wiesel been deceived or co-opted?
He had known court Jews.
And now he had been consecrated as an official Jew, seeming to have forgotten the chilling maxim from Pirkei Avot (“Ethics of the Fathers”): “Seek not undue intimacy with the ruling power.”
The fathers knew that the temptation of such consecration is a delusion and a trap.
Wiesel’s greatness was to have remained, under all circumstances, one of those humble Jews whom he considered the crown of humanity.
His nobility consisted in never forgetting the lesson of the Rebbe of Vizhnitz, even after he had donned the robe of the man of letters, that he bore the burden of those, adorned in caftan and fur hat, who had wanted to be as elegant as the Polish nobles who led the pogroms against them.
And I believe that not a day passed in Wiesel’s long life as a celebrated intellectual, honored by great universities and consulted by presidents, without spending at least an hour before a page of the Talmud or the Zohar knowing that initially he would understand nothing of what he read, but that this was the price of the only true celebration.
This was just what his people had done in Sighet, believing that one day the Messiah would come.
And it is what we do today when we grasp that neither Cambodia, nor Darfur, nor the massacres in Syria, nor the need, anywhere on the planet, to drive out the beast that sleeps in man should divert us from the sacred task of saving what we can of memory, meaning, and hope.
That is the lesson of Elie Wiesel.
May it guide us through a time haunted, more than ever, by crime, distraction, and forgetfulness.
The Humiliation of Britain