Economic interdependence and the vulnerability associated with it is an inescapable fact of contemporary life.
But economic dependence on others is not the only international reality with which governments must contend.
It is equally difficult – if not impossible – for countries to isolate themselves from terrorism, weapons, pandemic disease, or climate change.
After all, borders are not impermeable.
On the contrary, globalization – the immense flow across borders of people, ideas, greenhouse gases, goods, services, currencies, commodities, television and radio signals, drugs, weapons, emails, viruses (computer and biological), and a good deal else – is a defining reality of our time.
Few of the challenges that it raises can be met unilaterally; more often than not, cooperation, compromise, and a degree of multilateralism are essential.
A second universal challenge is technology.
George Orwell’s vision of 1984 could hardly have been more wrong, because the hallmark of modern technology is not Big Brother, but decentralization.
More computing power can now be held on a desktop or in a person’s hand than could be gathered in a room only a generation ago.&nbsp;
As a result, people everywhere now have more access to more sources of information than ever before. making it increasingly difficult for governments to control, much less monopolize, the flow of knowledge.
Citizens also have a growing ability through mobile phones and social networking to communicate directly and discreetly with one another.&nbsp;
One consequence of this trend is that authoritarian governments can no longer wield control over their citizens as easily as they once did.
Technology is, no doubt, one explanation for the uprisings that we are seeing in much of the Arab world.
But modern technology also has implications for well-established democracies.
It is far more difficult to generate social consensus and to govern in a world in which citizens can choose what they read, watch, and listen to, and with whom they talk.
A third widespread challenge that awaits emerging leaders is the inescapable reality that citizens’ demands increasingly overwhelm the capacity to satisfy them.
This was always true in the so-called developing (and often relatively poor) world.
But now it is also the case in the relatively well-off mature democracies, as well as among those countries that have been growing fastest.
Economic growth is slower in many cases than the historic norm.
This is readily apparent for much of Europe, Japan, and the US.
But growth is also slowing in China and India, which together account for more than one-third of the world’s population.
Unemployment rates are high, especially in the US and Western Europe, and especially among the young and those nearing the end of their careers (but who are still expected to live for decades).
More worrying still, much of this will translate into long-term unemployment.
The net result of these economic and demographic shifts is that a growing share of national income is now being directed to provide health, pensions, and other forms of basic support, while a declining percentage of citizens in nearly every society is now working to support a growing number of fellow citizens.
This rising dependency ratio is made worse by widening economic inequality; as more wealth is concentrated in fewer hands, the promise of ever-improving standards of living for most people may not be fulfilled.
Together, these three trends – a loss of economic and physical autonomy, the diffusion of information technology, and slower growth against a backdrop of larger and older populations – will create enormous political challenges in virtually every country.
Demands are mounting at the same time as the ability of governments to satisfy them is diminishing.
The leaders who will take power after this year’s transitions will confront this fundamental reality.
Leaders will also have to confront the byproducts of increased nationalism, populism, and, in some cases, extremism.
Hostility to immigration and economic protectionism, already visible, can be projected to increase.
These developments within countries will make more difficult the challenge of generating global consensus on how to meet threats beyond borders: as governing successfully at home becomes more difficult, so will governing abroad.
For citizens and leaders alike, tough times lie ahead.
Toward a Genuine Economic and Monetary Union?
FRANKFURT – Since Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) was created, no progress toward political unification has been made – or even really attempted.
Now that Europe’s current crisis has convinced many that existing institutional arrangements are unsustainable, this may be about to change.
But should it?
According to the presidents of the European Commission, the Euro Summit, the Eurogroup, the European Central Bank, and the European Parliament, the answer is yes.
Indeed, in a recent report, they call for progress toward a “deep, genuine, and fair” EMU; economic, financial, and fiscal union; and a political union that provides the foundation for the rest “through genuine democratic accountability, legitimacy, and institutional strengthening.”
The report echoes similar proposals by academics, journalists, and other public officials, including, most notably, French President François Hollande.
In my view, however, the report, like the proposal to establish a European finance minister, is fundamentally flawed.
While the report contains a number of important observations, its underlying assumption – that steps toward all of its goals should be taken in parallel, with a genuine political union emerging at the end of the process – is problematic.
After all, establishing a political union would require amendments to national constitutions and, in most countries, referendums.
But voters are far from enthusiastic about the prospect of ceding more authority to Europe.
Initially, monetary union was supposed to propel Europe toward political union.
But the euro is no longer a strong common currency that reinforces a shared European identity.
On the contrary, it is now a source of deep resentment among European peoples – resentment that, 70 years after the end of World War II, was supposed to have been eliminated.
To be sure, many have suggested that the current crisis represents a vital opportunity to overcome these tensions and build an ever-closer union, citing the belief of Jean Monnet, one of the European Union’s main architects, that crises are critical to spur progress toward integration.
But can this approach work at a time when there is so little trust among member countries?
Or would pushing forward under such circumstances create even more resistance?
The five presidents recommend launching their proposed agenda to reinvigorate integration only after 2017.
It seems likely that this timing reflects the fear that voters in the biggest countries, where elections will be held in the next two years, will react negatively to the proposal.
This is not a sign of great confidence in the suggested procedure.
The reality is that a European political union is unlikely to be established anytime soon.
And without true political unification, efforts to pursue the rest of the presidents’ plan, including the transfer of fiscal competencies to the European level, would carry serious risks.
Fiscal integration is high on the five presidents’ agenda.
Although the Stability and Growth Pact has lost more and more respect (indeed, it is now to be applied, according to the European Commission, purely according to national leaders’ discretion), it would remain the anchor for fiscal stability and confidence.
The report also specifies that a genuine fiscal union would require “more joint decision-making on fiscal policy.”
The presidents insist that this “would not mean centralization of all aspects of revenue and expenditure policy,” with member states continuing to decide on taxation and the allocation of budgetary expenditures.
But “as the euro area evolves towards a genuine EMU,” they explain, “decisions will increasingly need to be made collectively,” perhaps through a eurozone treasury.
Limited or not, this is a transfer of fiscal responsibility to the European level.
And it is difficult to imagine how the report’s call for “democratic accountability and legitimacy” in the decision-making process can be met without a full-fledged political union.
There is a fundamental conflict between the call to give priority to European needs and the dictates of member states’ constitutions, which cannot be resolved by gradually shifting competences de facto from the national to the European level, or by expanding the EU budget.
Within the existing institutional framework, political responsibility for higher transfer payments among countries must remain with the national governments, controlled by national parliaments and electorates.
Political union may remain possible in the distant future.
It cannot, however, be achieved through the back door, by eroding members’ fiscal-policy sovereignty.
Attempting to compel transfer payments would generate moral hazard on the part of the recipients and resistance from the donors, with the resulting increase in tensions possibly jeopardizing the integration that has been achieved so far.
Given this, for a considerable period of time, Europe’s monetary union will have to exist without political union.
In other words, the EMU will remain an institutional arrangement among individual countries that retain their fiscal sovereignty.
The key to making such a system work is to ensure that national governments are held accountable for their economic policies.
All treaties and commitments – including, crucially, the Maastricht Treaty’s “no bailout” clause – must be respected without exception.
Pacta sunt servanda – agreements must be honored.
If this principle is permanently violated, how can one expect a prosperous future based on a new set of treaties that are even more demanding than the existing ones?
Toward a Peaceful Pacific
MELBOURNE – The Western Pacific is currently facing a difficult problem – how to accommodate China’s rising aspirations in a region where the United States has held primacy since the Cold War’s end.
Is the US determined to maintain dominance in the Asia-Pacific region?
Or is it willing to operate through multilateral forums that allow all involved parties to help set the rules?
The way this issue plays out will determine whether peace continues to prevail across the Pacific.
It is difficult to see the stationing of 2,500 US Marines in Darwin, Australia – a decision announced by US President Barack Obama on his recent tour of Asia – as anything more than a symbolic gesture, a provocative reminder that the US is determined to stay in the region.
America’s purpose, however, remains unclear.
Across the Asia-Pacific region, China’s rise is viewed as a welcome development, but one that requires China to play within internationally accepted rules.
That dictum, of course, should apply to everyone.
But tensions will inevitably arise if China has no say in the creation of these rules.
It is difficult to predict how America role in the region will evolve.
China’s economic and military power is rising.
The US, on the other hand, continues to dominate militarily, while its economic influence is waning.
In any case, China will invariably respond harshly to US efforts to step up its military presence in the region.
Containing China is not the answer to Asia’s security questions.
The Korean peninsula, Taiwan, and the South China Sea’s islands and sea lanes are all issues of potential dispute between the US and China.
But, while these issues are important, both sides should pursue diplomatic efforts to minimize Sino-American rivalry over them – and thus avoid embarking on a new cold war.
Under current conditions, responding to China’s rise with military force would be unwelcome.
China is modernizing its military and intends to become a significant sea power, prompting many China observers to call for greater transparency.
But it is doubtful that the US offers China much transparency about its own military capabilities.
To put the issue in perspective, the US defense budget constitutes 43% of all military spending worldwide, whereas China’s expenditure represents a little over 7%.
No country will talk openly about its military capacity in anything but the broadest terms.
Too many observers forget that China’s nuclear force is a deterrent only – far too small to be a first-strike force.
And China is among the first countries prepared to make a no-first-use pledge, provided other nuclear powers reciprocate.
China has demonstrated no interest in emulating either the nineteenth-century European imperial powers, or Japan’s imperial efforts in the first half of the twentieth century.
Anxiety about such ambitions ignores China’s history.
The Chinese remember all too painfully the unequal treaties imposed by the Western powers on China and Japan in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
An alliance between the US, Japan, Australia, and possibly India designed to contain China would be greeted by the Chinese with that history firmly in mind.
China will most likely regard the cooperation agreement recently announced by the Japanese and Indian defense ministers as a response to US pressure.
Its leaders will again suggest that a policy of containment is being pursued, and that this Cold War strategic concept is inimical to peaceful development in the Western Pacific.
While the historical background is important, the West’s strategic position depends on today’s actions.
For example, China has helped – maybe not enough – with the problems presented by North Korea.
To reduce tensions in the region, perhaps the US should initiate long-avoided direct talks with North Korea, which could help to resolve the security issues posed by that country’s regime.
Furthermore, the Spratly Islands dispute should be resolved through international adjudication.
The islands, claimed by China, Taiwan, Vietnam, the Philippines, Malaysia, and Brunei, are valuable because of their oil reserves and commercial fishing industry.
It is critical that the countries claiming sovereignty over the islands abide by international law and commit to keeping the area’s sea-lanes open.
Diplomacy, not force of arms, is the best way to pursue these objectives.
Of course, diplomacy needs to be backed by strength, but the US has plenty without militarizing the Asia-Pacific region more than it already has.
Peaceful resolution of these conflicts requires giving China a role in the decision-making process, which implies that the US and China alike relinquish any desire for regional primacy.
During the first Taiwan Straits crisis in 1954, China began shelling the offshore islands Quemoy and Matsu, threatening to “liberate” Taiwan.
As the US contemplated a possible nuclear attack on China, Australian Prime Minister Robert Menzies quietly told US President Dwight Eisenhower, “If there is a war over Taiwan, it is your affair and not ours.”
Menzies was right.
He understood the distinction between US objectives and Australia’s national interests.
The US will never place a large land army on the Asian mainland again.
Wars cannot be won from the air alone, and the US will not start a nuclear contest.
The stationing of US Marines in northern Australia thus appears pointless: these troops have no conceivable reason to be there.
In addition, they have divided Australian public opinion unnecessarily on the vital issue of the country’s security.
Asia today presents a completely new and unique set of circumstances.
The dilemmas arising from these circumstances demand new solutions, not obsolete Cold War-era concepts.
Towards an Asia-Europe Partnership
BERLIN amp#45;amp#45; Asia’s rise as an economic and political player exemplifies what globalization is all about.
By the decade’s end, China’s economy will be larger than Germany’s.
By 2040 three of the world’s five largest economies – China, India, and Japan – will be in Asia.
That is one side of the Asian picture.
The other side is persistent poverty, lack of development, massive environmental degradation, a widespread rural-urban divide, demographic problems, and troubled banking systems.
The picture is further complicated by security risks such as nuclear arms proliferation, fundamentalism, and weak or failing governance.
The sweeping changes underway in Asia are not just economic, but have also created new political realities that cannot be ignored.
Asian countries now act with much greater self-assurance than in the past.
Their military budgets are expanding, and there are regional rivalries.
Thus, along with tremendous opportunities implied by globalization, political risks must also be addressed.
German and European policymakers must make clear what Europe has to offer Asia, and can do so at this month’s EU/ASEAN and EU/China summits.
The “soft power” of Europe’s political and social model is well known.
As an Asian leader once told me, Europeans have what many Asian societies aspire to: democratic government, advanced infrastructure, civil rights, world-class companies, high educational and social standards, and a rich cultural heritage.
This gives us considerable standing.
It is crucial to ensure that our European model, with its emphasis on a fair deal for everyone, remains competitive.
Nevertheless, Germany stands to lose more than any other country from any protectionist-minded retreat from globalization.
In the first six months of 2007 alone, the value of German exports nearly passed €500 billion.
But free trade is a two-way street.
Artificially low exchange rates, restrictions on capital flows, and excessively large currency reserves all create global imbalances.
Any strategic partnership between Europe and Asia must encourage global economic responsibility based on cooperation and transparency.
Europe and Asia must jointly commit to an agenda underscoring global resources and sustainability.
Environmental, climate, and energy issues concern everyone.
China is already a top carbon dioxide emitter.
Environmental degradation in Asia not only harms its population’s health, but will become an impediment to growth.
Growth is important to us in Europe, and it is even more important to Asia‘s emerging economies.
But, as European experience shows, it is often worth sacrificing short-term benefits for the sake of longer-term gain.
The history of European integration suggests that regional cooperation, give and take, the pursuit of shared goals, and even in some areas the transfer of sovereignty are the best ways to overcome tensions and promote peaceful problem-solving.
Certain elements of this European path may be relevant to Asia’s own regional cooperation.
Indeed, Asian trade and commodity flows are increasingly interlinked.
ASEAN members conduct almost 50% of their trade within Asia.
Economic relations between major players such as China and Japan are increasingly close – owing not only to booming trade, but also to direct investment and regional production networks.
Economic links pave the way for political rapprochement and closer ties.
ASEAN, together with its affiliated bodies such as the ASEAN Regional Forum and the East Asia Summit, is the driving force behind the intensification of Asian cooperation, in which security, too, is a factor.
ASEAN is working with its partners to tackle global issues such as security, energy, and climate change, and its plans for a charter on enhanced cooperation is an encouraging first step toward creating a political architecture.
This year, the EU’s contacts with ASEAN and its members have become much closer.
The foreign ministers’ meeting held during Germany’s EU Council presidency produced the Nuremberg Declaration, which established a framework for closer EU-ASEAN partnership.
Europe must become a stakeholder in Asia if both sides are to gain maximum benefit from cooperation and help shape the world of the future.
In Asia, people increasingly realize that sharing in global prosperity also means sharing responsibility for global peace and development.
We see this in the higher profile that China has taken in defusing the North Korean nuclear crisis and in drafting the recent Security Council resolution on Darfur.
With Japan’s upcoming G-8 presidency and the Beijing Olympic Games next year, Asia will be under a spotlight as never before.
In the light of developments such as in Myanmar, ASEAN must state clearly where it stands.
This recalibration of global responsibility will have to be a step-by-step process fostering dialogue and stability.
Here, too, it would be wrong to take an all-or-nothing approach.
Europe must take Asian views on global governance seriously.
By the same token, the new Asian players must take into account the progress achieved in this regard in the latter half of the twentieth century.
The challenge for twenty-first century statecraft will be to devise joint solutions to common problems.
This was what inspired the Heiligendamm Process launched at this year’s G-8 Summit, which for the first time brought G-8 leaders together with leaders of the world’s major emerging economies, including China, India, Brazil, Mexico, and South Africa.
There is no inevitable contradiction between European values, on the one hand, and what are deemed Asian values, on the other.
Where interests conflict and opportunities coexist with tensions, a readiness and capacity for dialogue is the only way forward.
We have mutually enriching Euro-Asian traditions that could serve as a basis for such a dialogue.
It is in this context that Europe’s commitment to internal reform, human rights, international law, and responsible governance should be seen.
Global values are a cause that Europe intends to promote worldwide.
Obviously, that means meeting the standards that we expect of others.
In this progressive transformation of the international system, German and European foreign policy will play an active role.
What is needed is not rhetoric, but levelheaded efforts to find practical and forward-looking solutions to key issues on which regional and international cooperation is urgently required.
Toxic Tests
CAMBRIDGE – The United States government is now permitting ten of America’s biggest banks to repay about $70 billion of the capital injected into them last fall.
This decision followed the banks having passed the so-called “stress tests” of their financial viability, which the US Treasury demanded, and the success of some of them in raising the additional capital that the tests suggested they needed.
Many people have inferred from this sequence of events that US banks – which are critical to both the American and world economies – are now out of trouble.
But that inference is seriously mistaken.
In fact, the US stress tests didn’t attempt to estimate the losses that banks have suffered on many of the “toxic assets” that have been at the heart of the financial crisis.
Nevertheless, the US model is catching on.
In a meeting this month, finance ministers of G-8 countries agreed to follow the US and perform stress tests on their banks.
But, if the results of such tests are to be reliable, they should avoid the US tests’ fundamental flaw.
Until recently, much of the US government’s focus has been on the toxic assets clogging banks’ balance sheets.
Although accounting rules often permit banks to price these assets at face value, it is generally believed that the fundamental value of many toxic assets has fallen significantly below face value.
The Obama administration came out with a plan to spend up to $1 trillion dollars to buy banks’ toxic assets, but the plan has been put on hold.
It might have been hoped that the bank supervisors who stress-tested the banks would try to estimate the size of the banks’ losses on toxic assets.
Instead, supervisors estimated only losses that banks can be expected to incur on loans (and other assets) that will come to maturity by the end of 2010.
They chose to ignore any losses that banks will suffer on loans that will mature after 2010.
Thus, the tests did not take into account a big part of the economic damage that the crisis imposed on banks.
Although we don’t yet have an estimate of the economic losses the stress tests have chosen to ignore, they may be substantial.
According to a recent report by Deutsche Bank, for example, borrowers will have difficulty refinancing hundreds of billions of dollars of commercial real estate loans that will mature after 2010.
Rather than estimate the economic value of banks’ assets – what the assets would fetch in a well-functioning market – and the extent to which they exceed liabilities, the stress tests merely sought to verify that the banks’ accounting losses over the next two years will not exhaust their capital as recorded in their books.
As long as banks are permitted to operate this way, the banks’ supervisors are betting on the banks’ ability to earn their way out of their current problems – even if the value of their assets doesn’t now significantly exceed their liabilities.
But doesn’t the banks’ ability to raise new equity capital indicate that, regardless of whether the stress tests are reliable, investors believe that their assets’ value does significantly exceed their liabilities?
Not at all.
Consider a bank with liabilities of $1 billion. Suppose that the bank has assets with long maturity and a face value of $1.2 billion but whose current economic value is only $1 billion.
Although the value of the bank’s assets doesn’t exceed its liabilities, depositors won’t flee as long as the government backs the bank by guaranteeing its deposits.
If in two years the bank’s assets have a 50-50 chance of appreciating to $1.2 billion or declining to $0.8 billion, the bank will be able to raise new equity capital: new investors will be willing to pay for the prospect of sharing in the excess of the value of assets over obligations if things turn out well.
To get a good picture of banks’ financial health, estimating the value of their toxic assets is unavoidable.
Regulators could encourage each bank to sell part of its toxic portfolio and extrapolate the portfolio’s value from the price obtained in such a sale, or they could attempt to estimate the portfolio’s value as well as they can on their own.
Either way, the true value of banks’ toxic assets must be estimated before concluding that banks are armed with sufficient capital to carry out their critical roles.
The kind of stress tests that the US conducted, and that other countries are being urged to emulate – and the ability of banks to raise additional equity capital – cannot provide a basis for such a conclusion.
The Trade Numbers Game
CAMBRIDGE – The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) – a mega trade deal covering 12 countries that together account for more than one-third of global GDP and a quarter of world exports – is the latest battleground in the decades-long confrontation between proponents and opponents of trade agreements.
As usual, the pact’s advocates have marshaled quantitative models that make the agreement look like a no-brainer.
Their favorite model predicts increases in real incomes after 15 years that range from 0.5% for the United States to 8% in Vietnam.
Moreover, this model – developed by Peter Petri and Michael Plummer, from Brandeis and Johns Hopkins Universities, respectively, building on a long line of similar frameworks by them and others – foresees relatively insignificant cost to employment in affected industries.
The TPP’s opponents have latched on to a competing model, which generates very different projections.
Produced by Jeronim Capaldo of Tufts University and Alex Izurieta of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (along with Jomo Kwame Sundaram, a former UN Assistant Secretary-General), this model predicts lower wages and higher unemployment all around, as well as income declines in two key countries, the US and Japan.
There is no disagreement between the models on the trade effects.
In fact, Capaldo and his collaborators take as their starting point the trade predictions from an earlier version of the Petri-Plummer study.
The differences arise largely from contrasting assumptions about how economies respond to changes in trade volumes sparked by liberalization.
Petri and Plummer assume that labor markets are sufficiently flexible that job losses in adversely affected parts of the economy are necessarily offset by job gains elsewhere.
Unemployment is ruled out from the start – a built-in outcome of the model that TPP proponents often fudge.
The Peterson Institute for International Economics, which published the pro-TPP study, inexplicably states in its brief: “The agreement will raise US wages but is not projected to change US employment levels…” The result on wages is a conclusion of the study, whereas the employment “projection” could have been made before the computer crunched a single number.
Capaldo and his collaborators offer a starkly different outlook: a competitive race to the bottom in labor markets, with a decline in wages and government spending keeping a lid on aggregate demand and employment.
Unfortunately, however, their paper does a poor job of explaining how their model works, and the particulars of their simulation are somewhat murky.
The Petri-Plummer model is squarely rooted in decades of academic trade modeling, which makes a sharp distinction between microeconomic effects (shaping resource allocation across sectors) and macroeconomic effects (related to overall levels of demand and employment).
In this tradition, trade liberalization is a microeconomic “shock” that affects the composition of employment, but not its overall level.
Economists tend to analyze trade agreements in such terms, rendering the Petri-Plummer model more congenial to them.
By contrast, the Capaldo framework lacks sectoral and country detail; its behavioral assumptions remain opaque; and its extreme Keynesian assumptions sit uneasily with its medium-term perspective.
The trouble is that the real world has not lined up so neatly with trade economists’ assumptions.
Critics of trade agreements have marshaled countless anecdotes about the adverse effects of imports on wages and employment in affected communities.
Recent empirical work by three academic economists – David Autor (MIT), David Dorn (University of Zurich), and Gordon Hanson (UC-San Diego) – shows that the critics have a point (and then some).
Autor, Dorn, and Hanson document that the expansion of Chinese exports has produced “substantial adjustment costs and distributional consequences” in the US.
In regions with industries hit hard by competition from Chinese imports, wages have remained depressed and unemployment levels elevated for more than a decade.
Falling employment in such industries was expected; the surprise was the absence of offsetting employment gains in other industries.
Advocates of trade agreements have long maintained that deindustrialization and the loss of low-skill jobs in advanced economies have little to do with international trade; they are the product of new technologies.
In the current TPP debate, many prominent proponents still cling to this line.
In light of the new empirical findings, such nonchalance toward trade has become untenable.
(The Petri-Plummer model does indicate that the TPP will accelerate the movement of jobs from manufacturing to services, a result that the pact’s advocates do not trumpet.)
Economists do not fully understand why expanded trade has produced the negative consequences for wages and employment that it has.
We do not yet have a good alternative framework to the kind that trade advocates use.
But we should not act as if reality has not severely tarnished our cherished standard model.
It would be far better to consider the full range of possibilities highlighted by the models on offer, instead of putting all the weight on a single one.
The uncertainties do not end with macroeconomic interactions.
The Petri-Plummer study predicts that the bulk of the economic benefits of the TPP will come from reductions in non-tariff barriers (such as regulatory barriers on imported services) and lower obstacles to foreign investment.
But the modeling of these effects is an order of magnitude more difficult than in the case of tariff reductions.
The assumptions needed to do so are not standard and require many arbitrary short cuts.
The bottom line is that neither side’s models generate numbers reliable enough on which a case for or against the TPP can be made.
Just about the only thing we can say with some certainty is that there will be winners and losers.
Perhaps the agreement will galvanize investment and knowledge flows across the Pacific, giving the world economy a much-needed boost.
Perhaps not.
But those who believe that this trade agreement, like previous ones, will provide lopsided benefits have ample reason to be concerned.
The Fraught Politics of the TPP
TOKYO – This month, 12 countries on both sides of the Pacific finalized the historic Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement.
The scope of the TPP is vast.
If ratified and implemented, it will have a monumental impact on trade and capital flows along the Pacific Rim.
Indeed, it will contribute to the ongoing transformation of the international order.
Unfortunately, whether this will happen remains uncertain.
The economics of trade and finance that form the TPP’s foundations are rather simple, and have been known since the British political economist David Ricardo described them in the nineteenth century.
By enabling countries to make the most of their comparative advantages, the liberalization of trade and investment provides net economic benefits, although it may hurt particular groups that previously benefitted from tariff protections.
But the politics of trade liberalization – that is, the way in which countries proceed to accept free trade – is much more complex, largely because of those particular groups it hurts.
For them, the overall economic benefits of trade liberalization matter little, if their own narrow interests are being undercut.
Even if these groups are relatively small, the discipline and unity with which they fight trade liberalization can amplify their political influence considerably – especially if a powerful political figure takes up their cause.
That is what is now happening in the United States.
Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton undoubtedly understands the economics of the TPP, which she once called the “gold standard” in trade agreements.
But now that she is on the presidential campaign trail, she has changed her tune.
The reason is apparent: she has judged that she cannot afford to lose the support of American trade unions such as the United Automobile Workers, whose members fear a reduction in tariffs on car and trucks.
This shift may make sense politically, but it is abysmal economics.
In reality, the TPP is a great bargain for the US.
The concessions it contains on manufactured products like automobiles are much smaller than those on, say, agricultural products, which will involve profound sacrifices from other TPP countries, such as Japan.
After all, existing tariff levels on manufactured goods are already much lower than those on agriculture or dairy products.
In short, with the TPP, the US is catching a big fish with small bait.
But the increased trade and investment flows brought about by the TPP’s ratification and implementation will benefit even the countries that must make larger sacrifices.
Japan, for example, will find that the TPP enhances “Abenomics,” the three-pronged economic-revitalization strategy introduced by Prime Minister Shinzo Abe in 2012.
The third component, or “arrow,” of Abenomics – structural reforms – aims to restore growth by raising productivity.
But increasing efficiency in a wide variety of sectors, as Japan must do, can be a long, difficult, and piecemeal process, as it involves the upgrading of virtually every technology and process.
By connecting Japan’s industries more closely with those of other countries, the TPP can accelerate this process considerably.
Moreover, it can spur faster administrative reform.
Simply put, the TPP will amount to a powerful tailwind for Abenomics.
It should be noted that liberalization does involve some economic tradeoffs, as protection can, in some areas, serve an important purpose.
As the economist Jagdish Bhagwati points out, maintaining increased protections for, say, intellectual property may encourage research and innovation.
At the same time, however, excessive IP protections can deter the proliferation of existing knowledge and the development of high-tech products.
In the case of pharmaceuticals, for example, this tradeoff can be difficult to navigate.
Nonetheless, Bhagwati maintains, when it comes to overall trade and capital movements, freer is better.
Given all of this, one hopes that opposition from political figures like Clinton amounts to naught – an entirely plausible outcome, in Clinton’s case, because the TPP should be enacted before the presidential election in November 2016.
This would, to some extent, be in line with the TPP negotiation process, in which the political challenges associated with trade liberalization have been handled remarkably well.
It seems that involving so many sectors in so many countries actually made it easier to overcome resistance, as it diffused the opposition and prevented any single specific interest from getting the upper hand.
Of course, that does not mean that the negotiations were easy.
On the contrary, trade representatives had to display impressive endurance and patience – for more than five years, for some countries.
To enable progress, confidentiality was vital (despite US negotiators’ claims that the discussions were wholly transparent).
Failure to ratify the TPP in all 12 countries would be a major disappointment, not just because of the tremendous amount of effort that has gone into it, but also – and more important – because of the vast economic benefits it would bring to all countries involved.
In Japan, as long as most of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party stands firm in supporting the TPP, it should be ratified.
But the situation in the US Congress is more dubious.
One hopes that America’s leaders do not miss a golden opportunity to give US businesses – and thus the US economy – a significant boost.
Japan’s TPP Transformation
TOKYO – On October 5, after years of exhausting – and exhaustive – haggling, a dozen Pacific Rim countries finally signed up to the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), an agreement that promises everything from more trade to a cleaner environment.
The negotiations were such that the hair of Akira Amari, Japan’s economic and fiscal policy minister, turned completely grey.
His solace, however, is that the TPP will prove to be a key foundation stone of the “Asian Century.”
The TPP’s origins, pre-dating Amari’s involvement, go back to a 2006 trade agreement among only Singapore, New Zealand, Chile, and Brunei – the so-called “Pacific 4.”
The United States, Australia, Peru, and Vietnam, seeing the prospect of a rules-based international order in Asia, joined the talks in March 2010, and in an instant the P-4’s small boat became a great ocean liner.
And then it became a convoy, as Malaysia, Mexico, Canada, and finally – in 2013 – Japan joined the negotiations.
Combined, the TPP economies account for some 40% of world GDP, outstripping the largest existing free-trade area, the European Union.
Once the TPP enters into effect, its impact on the global economy will undoubtedly be monumental – even without the participation of China, which on a purchasing-power-parity basis is now the world’s biggest economy.
China’s exclusion was no accident.
Its huge and complex economy would have injected insuperable problems into the talks.
In response, China has launched its “Silk Road” initiative to create an economic zone that will favor its own priorities.
It is also seeking greater trade cooperation with European countries.
One example is President Xi Jinping’s recent visit to the United Kingdom – which in essence is also an attempt to weaken Britain’s “special relationship” with the US by creating a cat’s cradle of trade, financial, and investment ties with Britain.
It is worth noting that Xi had already lured the UK into supporting – against American advice – the new, China-led Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank.
But, as Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s recent call for talks with China on the issue confirm, the TPP is not off-limits to China – or to other Asian economies.
South Korea is warming to the idea of the TPP, as is Indonesia, following President Joko Widodo’s recent visit to Washington, DC.
For Japan, the TPP is vital to achieve economic liberalization – the third arrow of “Abenomics,” the government’s program to revitalize the country’s ailing economy.
The legislation to enact the TPP will simply push aside the lobbies and vested interests that have been so effective in slowing down or diverting piecemeal reforms.
The promise of greater exchange of goods, services, and capital across the Pacific, as well as the creation of international standards (for example, for intellectual-property rights), is simply too appealing to ignore.
When Japan and other Asian countries weigh the risk of implementing the TPP against the risk of not participating, the risk of not participating is overwhelmingly higher.
Japan’s political challenge will be to sell the TPP to its voters, especially the farm lobby.
The customs duty on beef imports, for example, is currently 38.5%.
It will be 27.5% in the first year after the TPP takes effect, and will then be gradually lowered to 9% in the agreement’s 16th year.
That should surely provide more than enough time for Japanese beef ranchers to prepare themselves for foreign competition (of the 870,000 tons of beef imported annually, 520,000 tons come from Australia, the US, and New Zealand).
And it will certainly be a boon for consumers, as the price of their beef-noodle soup and sukiyaki falls dramatically.
Japan’s ranchers do need time to adjust.
Because they deal with animals, shortcuts cannot be taken, and there are limits to mechanization, particularly in creating the type of beef that Japanese consumers demand.
Whereas ranchers in Australia and the US have huge herds of cattle, Japanese ranchers raise each individual cow on beer and massages.
As a result, they will never be able to compete on price, and thus will need to emphasize quality, most likely through much improved branding and marketing.
The same applies to rice.
Rumor has it that when the wife of a certain Chinese leader visited Japan, she bought a delicious variety of Japanese rice by the ton.
Taking advantage of the worldwide sushi boom, Japan needs to emphasize that “real sushi requires Japanese rice,” branding it an exclusive product.
Skeptics should note that Italy has already succeeded in this, with top-tier restaurants around the world advertising that they use genuine Italian pasta.
In fact, regardless of whether or not the TPP is implemented, Japan’s farmers must pursue this approach to secure their futures, rather than hoping that protective subsidies continue ad infinitum.
Under the logic of the TPP, the terraced rice fields that make up Japan’s beautiful landscape cannot be protected.
So why not protect our landscape as a resource for tourism – and even as a way of combating climate change?
But now comes the truly hard part.
The TPP has been signed – but it will not be implemented unless and until it is ratified by the legislatures of countries such as the US and Canada.
That process could well be enough to turn Amari’s gray hair white.
The TPP’s Missing Ingredient
WASHINGTON, DC – Looking for ways to stimulate economic growth and create jobs, US President Barack Obama’s administration is seeking to press ahead with the mega-regional free-trade deal known as the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP).
But is the US going about it the right way?
The TPP’s initial scope was relatively modest, involving the United States and a range of trading partners (Australia, Brunei Darussalam, Canada, Chile, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore, and Vietnam).
But now Japan is on board, South Korea is watching closely, and there is potential for engaging with China through this or a similar framework in the foreseeable future.
The typical approach when seeking to finalize an agreement aimed at reducing trade barriers – while attempting to protect labor and environmental standards – is to ask for less, not more, from those on the other side of the table.
But at this stage, the TPP is different: the odds of success would be much greater if the US attached the additional requirement that participating countries do not engage in currency manipulation.
One of the major shortcomings of the global trading system in recent decades has been the absence of an effective constraint on countries that intervene heavily in order to keep their currencies undervalued.
A significantly undervalued currency implies a potentially large trade surplus.
Ordinarily, a large surplus puts upward pressure on the country’s currency – making its exports less competitive and boosting demand for imported goods and services.
But a country’s authorities can prevent appreciation for a prolonged period of time by buying up foreign currency.
Such intervention results in the accumulation of foreign-exchange reserves – much of which is held in the form of US government debt.
In one way, this benefits the US by helping to keep interest rates lower than they would be otherwise.
But currency manipulation is also an unfair way to gain a trading advantage, with excessive negative effects on trading partners.
The International Monetary Fund was founded, in part, to prevent precisely this type of beggar-thy-neighbor economic strategy, which resulted in “competitive devaluations” during the 1930s.
Unfortunately, the IMF in recent years has proved unable or unwilling to do so.
Similarly, the US Treasury is legally required to determine if a country is intervening to an unfair and unreasonable extent.
In practice, however, the Treasury’s reports on this issue are generally toothless and lead to no real consequences.
Fred Bergsten and Joseph Gagnon, my colleagues at the Peterson Institute, have proposed including a currency clause in any TPP deal.
In essence, this would amount to the signatories agreeing not to manipulate their currencies.
Such a clause could come with stronger or weaker teeth.
The important thing is to shift norms and expectations.
Some US officials are supportive of this approach to the TPP; others are resisting it.
But the skeptics should think hard about the likely dynamics in the US Congress when the TPP comes up for a vote.
There is strong support on Capitol Hill, from both Democrats and Republicans, for finding some way to limit currency manipulation.
Even people who are very much in favor of freer trade – and even of some version of the TPP, like Bergsten and Gagnon – believe that some Asian countries have overstepped the boundaries of reasonable behavior.
With the level of intervention by major countries currently limited (China) or non-existent (Japan), this is an ideal moment to include a currency clause in the TPP, as most countries are less likely to become defensive.
Participating countries could allow their currencies to float, or they could operate a fixed exchange rate.
In the latter case, however, they must commit not to run large current-account surpluses and accumulate excess foreign-exchange reserves.
Any blatant and repeated violation of this commitment would – and should – result in the loss of the special privileges granted under the TPP.
Of course, how the politics plays out will depend on what happens in the US mid-term congressional elections in November, as well as how key figures position themselves for the presidential election in 2016.
But both parties are generally interested in supporting free trade, along responsible lines – and recognize legitimate concerns.
Currency manipulation has become a little too ugly in recent years – with associated adverse effects on sectors and communities in the US – for elected representatives to ignore.
It is to be hoped that the other TPP countries also come to understand that the agreement is more likely to work if it strongly discourages currency manipulation.
Getting the Trans-Pacific Partnership Right
WASHINGTON, DC – The United States Congress has now given President Barack Obama so-called fast-track negotiating authority to conclude the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), the proposed mega-regional free-trade agreement among the US and 11 other countries.
But Obama’s victory was not an easy one: Members of his own Democratic Party overwhelmingly opposed fast-track authority, which limits Congress to a single up-or-down vote on finished trade agreements, thereby ruling out amendments.
The fast-track measure, officially known as Trade Promotion Authority, passed only because Obama was able to rely on rare backing from the Republican majority in both the House of Representatives and the Senate.
But the Democrats have a point.
They want the Obama administration to ensure that the TPP includes core international labor standards for all participants, a high level of environmental protection, and access to affordable medicines, among other measures.
If the administration takes these entirely reasonable demands on board, the resulting agreement would have considerable bipartisan support.
If it chooses to ignore such demands, the final agreement would be much more polarizing – and would be approved by Congress with very little Democratic support.
Though Obama has promised that the TPP will be the most progressive trade agreement in history, which is achievable, the shroud of secrecy that surrounds almost all details of the negotiations has made it difficult to evaluate claims and counterclaims on this point.
But once the agreement is concluded, it will be published in full, leaving no possibility of obfuscation.
And the markers that have been laid down by congressional Democrats are very clear, quite specific, and well thought-out.
In fact, in an agreement between House Democrats and former President George W. Bush’s administration in May 2007, almost all of the key principles were already spelled out in considerable detail.
In 2005, only 15 House Democrats voted for the Central American Free Trade Agreement, precisely because its terms on labor standards and the environment were so weak.
In 2007, by contrast, 109 House Democrats voted in favor of the US-Peru Trade Promotion Agreement, precisely because its terms had been adjusted as requested and in line with the May agreement.
And, in October 2011, the House approved the much-debated US-Korea Free Trade Agreement with 59 Democrats in favor.
The extent of congressional Democratic support depends directly on what exactly is in any trade agreement.
The main principles in the May 2007 agreement are straightforward and difficult to oppose.
Workers should be allowed to form trade unions.
Child labor should be abolished.
All forms of forced or compulsory labor – including human trafficking – should be prohibited.
Vague promises on these issues are not acceptable; countries must enter into compliance before a trade agreement takes effect.
Moreover, the agreement calls for the inclusion of existing international environmental standards in free-trade agreements, including rules concerning pollution and endangered animals.
Likewise, such agreements should support fair access to pharmaceutical patents and to the data used to prove the safety of medical treatments.
And the May 2007 agreement makes it clear that “foreign investors in the US will not be accorded greater substantive rights with respect to investment protections than US investors in the US.”
In a paper issued in January 2015, and again in a major speech in May, Sander Levin, the ranking Democrat on the House Ways and Means Committee, applied these principles to all of the outstanding issues regarding the TPP.
It would not be difficult for the administration to give Levin and his colleagues what they want.
Some participants in the TPP may indeed balk at being required to raise labor or environmental standards; in such case, however, policymakers need to ask whether these countries should get easier access to the US market.
Similarly, access to affordable medicines is something other countries desperately need; it is large pharmaceutical companies that are not entirely enthusiastic.
The most difficult challenge for the Obama administration may be the issue of currency manipulation.
Democrats are pushing for provisions to prohibit or limit currency-market intervention by central banks that is intended to give a country’s exporters a competitive edge.
This is also a huge potential problem with the TPP, because competitive devaluations can swamp any other gains from trade by an order of magnitude, with substantial negative effects on US jobs.
The administration urgently needs to take this point on board.
“Free trade” has always been something of a misnomer.
Yes, the logic of market-based global commerce is very strong.
But every market exists within a specific set of rules, which are not random and are not handed down from the heavens.
The TPP represents an important opportunity to write better rules for international trade and investment.
But we are not there yet.
Will the TPP Help Latin America?
SANTIAGO – With the International Monetary Fund having just cut its forecasts for economic growth in Latin America for the fifth year in a row, the region’s countries are casting about for ways to reignite investment and boost productivity.
They should look to fast-growing Asia, argue advocates of the Transpacific Trade Partnership (TPP), the proposed mega-regional trade accord that would bind together 12 Pacific Rim countries.
But should they?
If done right, the TPP could help Mexico, Peru, and Chile – the accord’s Latin American members – make the leap to high-productivity exports based on innovation.
But that would require the TPP to foster, not impede, the flow of knowledge around the Pacific Rim.
Regrettably, the United States is insisting on a series of intellectual-property provisions that serve the interests of US-based firms, but do little to create a sound environment for innovation elsewhere.
That needs to change – and soon – so that years of talks can be concluded successfully.
The growth challenges for the three Latin American TPP countries are very different.
In the last two decades, Mexico has managed to diversify its export base and is now a major supplier of industrial goods to the US and Canada.
The bad news is that Mexico’s growth prospects have become inextricably tied to those of its huge neighbor to the north.
The good news is that the US is growing faster than any other major industrialized economy, so Mexico can look forward – according to the IMF – to a couple of years of accelerating economic expansion.
Peru and Chile, by contrast, are natural-resource exporters that derived huge benefits from the China-driven commodity boom of the last decade.
Today commodity prices are down, and so is growth.
Because it is difficult to become ever-more efficient at producing a ton of copper or a pound of fruit (and, in Chile’s case, the grade of copper ore is fast declining), further growth has to come from diversification: moving capital and labor to new sectors, where productivity is higher.
That is where Pacific Rim trade and the TPP come in.
A firm in Thailand, the Philippines, or Vietnam can develop a new product line by plugging into the huge East Asian value chain and producing, for example, a tiny component which, along with myriad other components, will be assembled into a smartphone at a factory in China.
Firms in Chile or Peru – or Colombia or Uruguay, for that matter – enjoy no such opportunities.
South America is outside the world’s main value chains. Innovative firms face the uphill challenge of developing entire new products and selling them in geographically and economically distant markets.
The TPP could help change this by easing trade in intermediate inputs and helping build Pacific-wide value chains.
Particularly valuable would be straightening out the spaghetti bowl of “rules of origin” – the regulations dictating when inputs produced in other countries can be used in products that will qualify for free-trade benefits.
So far so good.
Optimists can envision a new generation of trans-Pacific flows of trade, investment, and knowledge, with benefits for all.
But then the TPP’s boosters have to contend with the obstinacy of Japanese rice farmers (Prime Minister Shinzo Abe is vowing to address that) and of US patent and copyright holders.
Intellectual property has become one of the most contentious issues in the TPP negotiations, and it is not hard to see why.
The US is pushing for longer copyright protection for published works, music, and films.
It also wants technical changes that would effectively mean much longer patent terms for pharmaceuticals, make the approval process lengthier for generic drug makers, and extend protections for biologic medicines.
The list of controversial US demands is long.
One that has particularly enraged online activists would classify cache copies of websites resulting from Internet searches as temporary copies, so that users would potentially be subject to fines for copyright infringement.
There are also concerns about limits to freedom of expression if materials are taken down for alleged copyright violations.
Many of these provisions are absent from international agreements currently in force – such as the World Trade Organization’s TRIPS accord – and from the bilateral free-trade agreements that the US itself has negotiated with a host of countries.
In other cases, protection periods would rise considerably.
For copyrights, the US is demanding 95 years of protection after publication, or 120 years after creation, whereas TRIPS provides for 50 years and US agreements with Australia, Chile, Korea and Peru specify 70 years.
No one disagrees with the need for strong intellectual-property protection.
If inventors cannot expect to be rewarded for their achievements, they will stop inventing or investors will stop funding their ventures.
But most economists agree that such incentives must be balanced against the need to accelerate knowledge dissemination and absorption, and that the optimum is somewhere in the middle.
In this sense, the US demand for longer terms of patent and copyright protection is arbitrary, because they are not founded on a clear-cut case for enhanced economic efficiency.
The politics of the issue is tricky for the TPP’s Latin American members.
All three have negotiated intellectual-property agreements with the US, achieving what seemed like mutually agreeable levels of protection.
Why should that change now?
The conundrum is especially vexing for Chile, a country that already has bilateral trade agreements with every potential member of the TPP.
If Chile is unlikely to gain substantial new market access, ask critics, why should Chile make trade concessions at all?
That is going too far.
Precisely because of the urgent need to diversify their exports, Chile, Peru, and other middle-income countries could benefit tremendously from agreements like the TPP.
But that potential will be realized only if more knowledge, not less, flows across member countries’ borders.
The US itself would benefit from having trade partners that can innovate, instead of serving only as passive buyers for American movies and songs.
The sooner US trade negotiators understand that, the better for everyone.
The Case for the TPP
STANFORD – Following the conclusion of the Trans-Pacific Partnership by 12 Pacific Rim countries, debates about the costs and benefits of trade liberalization are intensifying.
The early leaders in the United States’ presidential campaign, both the Republican Donald Trump and the Democrat Hillary Clinton, have expressed opposition to the TPP, though as Secretary of State, Clinton called it the “the gold standard of trade deals.”
The right level of trade openness is not a new debate.
Historically, trade systems have ranged from rather open to severely restricted by rules, tariffs, or non-tariff barriers, driven by shifts in the relative strength of liberalizing or protectionist economic and political forces.
But even in closed systems, however severe the penalties they impose on trade, black markets usually develop, owing to the “gains from trade” generated by natural economic forces.
The desire to trade arises whenever the domestic benefits of importing a good (whether a finished product or component) exceed the price paid – for example, if the imported good cannot be produced domestically, or only at a higher cost.
As the British economist David Ricardo demonstrated two centuries ago, it can even be better for a country to import goods that it can produce more cheaply, if doing so enables the production of other goods that are still cheaper to produce.
Additional gains from trade include increased variety and the economies of scale implied by producing for global markets.
Of course, there are potential downsides to trade.
Alexander Hamilton, the first US treasury secretary, argued that allowing lower-cost imports would impede the development of domestic “infant” industry, which needed time to scale up enough to reduce costs to a competitive level.
In recent decades, the anti-trade argument has focused largely on “unfair” competition and economic dislocation.
But the reality is that, if two sides willingly trade, it can be assumed that both are better off; otherwise, one of them would refuse to trade.
So, while trade liberalization may entail some (smaller) losses for certain groups, these can – and should – be addressed through domestic relocation and assistance schemes, such as America’s Trade Adjustment Assistance program, and transition rules for affected industries, firms, and workers.
Past experience reinforces the view that, ultimately, voluntary trade is a good thing.
Extreme protectionism in the early 1930s, following an era of relatively free international trade, had devastating consequences, ultimately setting the stage for World War II.
As the MIT economist Charles Kindleberger showed, America’s Smoot-Hawley Tariff, in particular, helped to turn a deep recession into a global depression.
Even before the war was over, major powers convened in Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, to establish a new international trade and finance regime, including the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Through a succession of lengthy and difficult global negotiations – the so-called “GATT rounds” – tariffs were steadily lowered for an increasing variety of goods.
As a result, global trade grew faster than world GDP for most of the post-war period.
Virtually all economists agree that this shift toward freer trade greatly benefited the world’s citizens and enhanced global growth.
The economists Jeffrey Frankel and David Romer estimate that, in general, trade has a sizeable positive effect on growth.
At a time when growth is failing to meet expectations almost everywhere, the TPP thus seems like a good move.
To be sure, because tariffs in the TPP member countries are already low (with some exceptions, such as Canada’s tariffs on dairy products and Japan’s on beef), the net benefit of eliminating them would be modest (except for a few items that are very sensitive to small price changes).
But the TPP is also expected to reduce non-tariff barriers (such as red tape and protection of state enterprises); harmonize policies and procedures; and include dispute-settlement mechanisms.
Though the TPP’s precise provisions have not been made public, political leaders in the member countries predict that the deal, once ratified and implemented, will add hundreds of billions of dollars to their economies and bolster employment.
Smaller and developing economies will probably gain the most, relative to size, but everyone will benefit overall.
Other important outcomes are not included in these calculations.
The alternative to liberalizing trade is not the status quo; it is a consistent move away from openness.
This can occur in a number of ways, such as the erection of non-tariff barriers that favor domestic incumbents at the expense of lower-priced potential imports that would benefit consumers.
Moreover, it is much easier to build mutually beneficial trade relationships than it is to resolve military and geopolitical issues, such as combating the Islamic State or resolving tensions in the South China Sea.
But strong trade relationships have the potential to encourage cooperation – or, at least, discourage escalation of conflict – in other, more contentious areas.
Still, there are some legitimate concerns about the TPP.
Some worry that it could divert trade from non-member countries or undermine the moribund Doha round of multilateral trade negotiations (though 20 years ago, the North American Free Trade Agreement had the opposite effect, kick-starting the Uruguay round).
Given all of this – not to mention renewed attention to national borders, owing to contentious immigration issues, such as the influx of Middle Eastern refugees in Europe – the TPP’s ratification is far from certain, especially in the US.
The concentrated interests that oppose the agreement may turn out to be more influential than the diffuse interests of all consumers.
That would be a major loss.
Allowing existing protectionist trade barriers to remain in place – or worsen – would not only deprive citizens in TPP countries of higher incomes; it would also deal a damaging blow to international cooperation.
Robots and Refugees
DAVOS – The theme of this year’s World Economic Forum (WEF) meeting in Davos was the Fourth Industrial Revolution.
It is ushering in a world in which virtual and physical systems are intertwined in manufacturing, services, and the human body itself.
The WEF’s programs featured panels on robotics, biotechnology, nanotechnology, and space travel.
The Victoria and Albert Museum in London created an interactive exhibit called “This Time Tomorrow.”
It featured six scenarios of possible futures, including a world in which full three-dimensional casts of human faces can be created from a single strand of DNA; buildings are covered with a skin capable of photosynthesis, taking in carbon dioxide and releasing oxygen; and death can be beaten by bringing back those who choose to be cryogenically preserved.
Other exhibits, however, focused on urgent current problems.
It was possible to experience being a refugee through a virtual reality headset, – or through the actual experience of donning a headscarf and spending 75 minutes being treated like a refugee and facing heart-wrenching choices in a simulation created by the Crossroads Foundation.
Many of the real refugees are living in a world that is barely through the Second Industrial Revolution.
They cram into leaky rafts and place themselves at the mercy of the waves, and sleep on the floors of railroad stations.
Yet the majority of the million refugees flooding into Europe this past summer – primarily from Syria – had access to that “ubiquitous and mobile Internet” that is part of the Fourth Industrial Revolution.
Many received real-time guidance via social media that they accessed on their smartphones.
Michel Bauwens, founder of the Peer-to-Peer Foundation, describes 2015 as the year in which millions of refugees “were organized by social media (specifically through secret Facebook groups) and in which scores of citizens organized themselves through peer-to-peer networks to assist them.”
These “Facebook refugees,” as the press quickly dubbed them, used the platform not only to coordinate with smugglers, but also to help one another.