But this is precisely the point.
It is not the women at the top who have changed the scene.
Rather, it is a more general trend, helped along by open-minded leaders of both sexes, that has changed the political climate in countries.
No one, man or woman, can today aspire to setting the tone of public discourse without recognizing that politics is no longer only a man’s game.
In other words, normalization by equal opportunity is itself the change.
Whatever the particular values of leading candidates, this is undoubtedly progress.
The Myth of the Women’s Vote
WASHINGTON, DC – Among the clichés that deserve to be thrown out after the recent presidential election in the United States is the idea of a “women’s vote.”
It may seem surprising that only 54% of the female electorate voted for Hillary Clinton, the first woman nominated for president by a major party.
But while gender is a strong marker for how Americans think about certain issues, it is not the best predictor of how they will vote.
It turns out that female candidates do not face a single gender gap, but rather multiple gender gaps.
To be sure, a superficial look at past election results reveals an enormous and persistent difference between men and women voters overall.
According to Pew Research, the last presidential election in which men and women voted the same was the 1976 contest between Jimmy Carter and Gerald Ford.
In this year’s election, women favored Clinton by 12 percentage points, and men favored Trump by the same margin.
Men favored George W. Bush by 11 points in 2000, and women favored Obama by 13 points and 11 points in 2008 and 2012, respectively; but until now we have never seen double-digit gaps in both directions simultaneously.
But this still does not mean that the gender gap tells us much as a first-order factor, especially if we consider other gaps among demographic groups.
If we sort by race or ethnicity, we find that white Americans favored Trump by 21 points, while Hispanics and African-Americans favored Clinton by 36 points and 80 points, respectively.
Meanwhile, voters with different education levels were further apart than in any election since 1980.
College-educated voters backed Clinton by a nine-point margin, while people without a college degree backed Trump by an eight-point margin.
A New York Times analysis of exit polls found that voters with annual incomes below $50,000 backed Clinton by about a ten-point margin, while voters with incomes above that level split evenly between the two candidates.
This indicates that, at least in this year’s election, ethnicity and education were much more predictive than income.
As it happens, they were also more predictive than gender.
Ninety-three percent of African-American women and 80% of African-American men voted for Clinton.
But 53% of white women and 63% of white men voted for Trump, while only 43% of white women and 31% of white men voted for Clinton.
Similarly, Clinton won the support of white, college-educated women by six points; but she lost white non-college-educated women by 28 points and white non-college-educated men by 49 points.
And if we look just at Republican voters, the gender gap vanishes almost entirely: 91% of Republican women and 92% of Republican men voted for Trump.
This all points not to a single gender dynamic, but to one refracted through multiple social and economic lenses.
For example, as CBS News noted, Clinton’s failure to match President Barack Obama’s performance with African-American voters was “entirely due to black men” not voting for her – though why this was the case remains unexplained.
And, despite her candidacy’s historic significance, Clinton’s performance with white women voters was no better than Obama’s performance in 2012.
We know that Republican women voted according to their party affiliation and not their gender.
But Trump also seems to have reached white women not affiliated with a political party, perhaps owing to his campaign’s strategy of hyping women’s anxiety.
This strategy’s success indicates one way that gender can play a role in voter decision-making.
Voter data going back 50 years suggests that women, more than men, are moved by the anxiety of changing circumstances and external threats.
For example, in the 1964 presidential election, Lyndon B. Johnson’s campaign aired the now-famous “Daisy” advertisement that suggested that his opponent, Barry Goldwater, would pull the US into a nuclear war; a week later, polls found that 45% of men, but 53% of women, shared that concern.
Similarly, George W. Bush performed 30% better with women voters in his 2004 re-election campaign than he did in his 2000 campaign, which many political analysts attribute to anxieties among white middle-class “security moms” in the aftermath of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.
Still more recently, in the 2014 US midterm elections, Republicans emphasized the US’s vulnerabilities, and aired advertisements hinting that the Islamic State was directing Ebola-infected agents to kill Americans.
Experts ridiculed these claims, but polling suggests that the advertisements were nevertheless effective, and a number of Democratic incumbents, and women in particular, lost elections that year.
The Democrats’ focus on reproductive rights had done little to sway women who were already worrying about the Islamic State and Ebola.
As I warned at the time, the 2014 election was a trial run for a 2016 strategy to defeat a woman candidate.
Many political observers assumed that this strategy could not possibly work for a Republican candidate who had suggested that a debate moderator was menstruating, joked about dating his daughter, was caught on tape boasting about groping women, and was publicly accused by several women of sexual harassment and assault.
But, just as in the 2014 election, Republican-leaning voters in 2016 were far more concerned about terrorism, crime, illegal immigration, and economic security than they were about issues such as sexism, racism, and inequality.
Where does this leave American women?
A female US presidential candidate has now won a majority of women’s votes, and more total votes than her male opponent, and yet her strategy failed to deliver enough votes to secure a victory.
In America’s polarized political culture, appeals to one group simply alienate other groups.
As long as female candidates are forced to meet multiple, contradictory gender expectations, the US will never close the most prominent gap of all: that between America and the many countries that have already chosen a woman to lead them.
While the government is determined to keep news of all disturbances out of the media--or at least downplay their size and disruptiveness--it has been possible to collect information on nearly 200 separate events occurring between 1994 and 2004, some from news sources in Hong Kong, some from the Western media, and a few from Chinese publications.
What is sparking so much unrest in a country usually depicted as daily growing more affluent?
Generally the causes are these: unpaid wages and pensions; sudden and massive job terminations; and management corruption held responsible for the bankruptcy of industrial enterprises--where discharged workers were secure, enjoying privileges and benefits, since the 1950s.
Job losses in the range of 60 million have suddenly rendered nearly an eighth of the urban populace indigent. Often without a dependable channel for airing their grievances, hordes of laid-off workers and retired folk have filled the avenues over the past decade or so.
Doesn't the government mind if so much of its urban populace is sinking into poverty and becoming disaffected? Why is this stability-obsessed regime allowing so much instability?
In fact, the leaders are terribly uneasy about the situation and discuss it frequently. Some of the response has been coldly coercive.
But there is also a compensatory effort that has absorbed much of the energy of the bureaucracies for labor and social security, and for civil affairs.
These policies mitigate the pain of job loss for their recipients.
Promotion of the law also aims at alleviating anger. As workers' consciousness of their rights increases, they are gradually more and more apt to appeal grievances to the courts: from 1995 to 2001, adjudicated labor disputes rose from 28,000 to 101,000.
Offering workers legal redress has turned their attention temporarily from the streets to mediation and may well have reduced the number of street demonstrations.
Other initiatives are a program of allowances, training and placement for the laid-off; unemployment insurance (which, unfortunately, depends on the economic health of the firm to which a worker was once attached); and pension reform--having similar problems.
There is also a scheme to supply a "minimum livelihood guarantee" to the desperately poor.
Recipients numbered over 20 million as of early 2004, when 15 billion yuan was budgeted for the program (with the central government contributing a full 60%). These programs are noticed at the grassroots, with the indigent feeling grateful for them.
Protest in China has spun upward dramatically in recent years, in numbers, scale, and organization.
But by the means listed above the regime has become adept at suppressing opposition.
Its power to intimidate and punish may trump all its other moves to stay ahead of the discontent.
But overall, increasing responsiveness--if clearly not in a democratic mode--has managed to maintain the instability that does exist at a level and within a scope that marks a game of unwritten rules -- one of complainants confining their choler within understood bounds and of the government watchful over an ever-simmering stew.
Workers’ Paradise?
CAMBRIDGE &#45;&#45; Will the political resurgence of labor unions throw a wrench into the wheels of globalization?
Or will their growing strength serve to make globalization more sustainable by fostering great equality and fairness?
After decades of vilification by economists for raising unemployment and strangling growth, the union movement is now receiving backing from thought leaders such as Paul Krugman, who argues that stronger unions are needed to counter globalization’s worst excesses.
The sudden emergence of unions as a political force is particularly surprising in the United States, where private-sector union membership has fallen from 25% in 1975 to 8% today.
From high-tech Google to mass retailer Wal-Mart, US companies have found ways to keep their shops union-free.
Only the public sector, where the membership rate is 35%, has remained a union bastion.
One of my best friends from childhood married a union organizer who found it so difficult to land a job in the US that he eventually moved his family to strike-happy Canada.
Today, US political leaders such as Congressman Barney Frank want to bring back unions.
But there is good reason to be skeptical.
For a relatively poor country like China, real unions could help balance employers’ power, bringing quality-of-life benefits that outweigh the growth costs.
Factory conditions in parts of China are all too reminiscent of the early twentieth-century, pre-union US.
Thousands of Chinese workers die each year in coal mines that sometimes lack basic safety precautions.
But, for the US and rich countries in Europe, the argument that stronger unions would bring more benefits than costs is far more dubious.
Nowadays, most workers already have legal and statutory rights that cover the basic protections that unions originally fought for a century ago.
Instead, union influence today all too often serves to promulgate inflexible work practices and flat salary structures that do not adequately reward work effort and skill.
It is no surprise that the public sector, where productivity is low and fiscal constraints soft, typically has the greatest union concentration.
Teachers’ unions, especially, are a catastrophe, blocking any rationalization or improvement of many countries’ education systems.
Before the modern globalization era, unions could thrive by organizing on a national scale, giving them enormous bargaining power vis-à-vis both employers and consumers.
Now, after the explosive post-war expansion of global trade, most unions have seen their monopoly power eroded, if not shattered.
That is why unions throughout much of the developed world have been fighting so hard to block free-trade negotiations that might erode their position further.
Some of the issues that unions are promoting, such as human rights and environmental quality, are unassailable.
When they try to connect these issues with trade, however, their motives become questionable.
A case in point is union lobbying against the US-Colombia free-trade agreement, ratification of which would greatly advance US-Latin American relations.
Legitimate questions about how the Colombian government conducted its epic civil war with drug-financed rebels do not trump broader issues.
So anti-pact activists have complained that Colombia is anti-union because it does not protect union members from rebel violence.
Yet the Colombian government notes that all Colombians suffer from rebel violence – union members actually experience less of it than the rest of the population.
Unfortunately, this play is being re-enacted across a host of trade issues, including many involving China.
For rich countries, income redistribution is much better handled through taxes and benefits system, rather than by government edicts to strengthen unions.
The rich today pay so little in taxes in many countries, that it would be a big improvement simply to move to a flat tax, with a very high exemption level so that lower-income families pay nothing.
For middle-income countries, it is a tougher call.
But here, too, increasing workers’ legal and statutory rights, while allowing most unions to fade away, seems like the right approach.
Unfortunately, we are far more likely to see unions’ growing political influence become a major destabilizing force in trade and growth, with highly uncertain consequences.
When we see political leaders in many rich countries pander to unions by bashing each other on free trade and immigration, there is every reason to worry about trouble ahead.
That is why unions will be one of the main economic wild cards in 2008.
The Evolution of Work
CAMBRIDGE – In mid-December, the United Nations will launch the latest of its annual landmark Human Development Reports.
This year’s report focuses on the nature of work: how the way we earn a living is being transformed by economic globalization, new technologies, and innovations in social organization.
The outlook for developing countries, in particular, is decidedly mixed.
For most people most of the time, work is mostly unpleasant.
Historically, doing lots of backbreaking work is how countries have become rich.
And being rich is how some people get the chance to do more pleasant work.
Thanks to the Industrial Revolution, new technologies in cotton textiles, iron and steel, and transportation delivered steadily rising levels of labor productivity for the first time in history.
First in Britain in the mid-eighteenth century, and then in Western Europe and North America, men and women flocked from the countryside to towns to satisfy factories’ growing demand for labor.
But, for decades, workers gained few of the benefits of rising productivity.
They worked long hours in stifling conditions, lived in overcrowded and unsanitary housing, and experienced little growth in earnings.
Some indicators, such as workers’ average height, suggest that standards of living may have even declined for a while.
Eventually, capitalism transformed itself and its gains began to be shared more widely.
This was partly because wages naturally began to rise as the surplus of rural workers dried up.
But, equally important, workers organized themselves to defend their interests.
Fearing revolution, the industrialists compromised.
Civil and political rights were extended to the working class.
Democracy, in turn, tamed capitalism further.
Employment conditions improved as state-mandated or negotiated arrangements led to reduced working hours, greater safety, and family, health, and other benefits.
Public investment in education and training made workers both more productive and freer to exercise choice.
As a result, labor’s share of the enterprise surplus rose.
While factory jobs never became pleasant, blue-collar occupations now enabled a middle-class standard of living, with all its consumption possibilities and lifestyle opportunities.
Eventually, technological progress undermined industrial capitalism.
Labor productivity in manufacturing industries rose much faster than in the rest of the economy: The same or higher quantity of steel, cars, and electronics could be produced with far fewer workers.
So the “excess” workers moved to service industries – education, health, finance, entertainment, and public administration, for example.
Thus was born the post-industrial economy.
Work became more pleasant for some, but not for all.
For those with the skills, capital, and savvy to prosper in the post-industrial age, services offered inordinate opportunities.
Bankers, consultants, and engineers earned much higher wages than their industrial-age forebears.
Equally important, office work allowed a degree of freedom and personal autonomy that factory work never provided.
Notwithstanding long hours (perhaps longer than in factory jobs), service professionals enjoyed much greater control over their daily lives and workplace decisions.
Teachers, nurses, and waiters were not paid nearly as well, but they, too, were released from the humdrum mechanical drudgery of the shop floor.
For less skilled workers, however, service-sector jobs meant giving up the negotiated benefits of industrial capitalism.
The transition to a service economy often went hand in hand with the decline of unions, employment protections, and norms of pay equity, greatly weakening workers’ bargaining power and job security.
So the post-industrial economy opened up a new chasm in the labor market, between those with stable, high-paid, and fulfilling services jobs and those with fleeting, low-paid, and unsatisfying jobs.
Two factors determined the share of each type of job – and thus the extent of inequality produced by the post-industrial transition: the education and skill level of the workforce, and the degree of institutionalization of labor markets in services (in addition to manufacturing).
Inequality, exclusion, and duality became more marked in countries where skills were poorly distributed and many services approximated the textbook “ideal” of spot markets.
The United States, where many workers are forced to hold multiple jobs in order to make an adequate living, remains the canonical example of this model.
The vast majority of workers still live in low- and middle-income countries and have yet to go through these transformations.
There are two reasons to believe that their future path will (or need) not unfold in quite the same way.
First, there is no reason that safe working conditions, freedom of association, and collective bargaining cannot be introduced at earlier stages of development than has occurred historically.
Just as political democracy need not wait for incomes to rise, strong labor standards need not lag behind economic development.
Workers in low-income countries should not be deprived of fundamental rights for the sake of industrial development and export performance.
Second, the forces of globalization and technological progress have combined to alter the nature of manufacturing work in a way that makes it very difficult, if not impossible, for newcomers to emulate the industrialization experience of the Four Asian Tigers, or the European and North American economies before them.
Many (if not most) developing countries are becoming service economies without having developed a large manufacturing sector – a process I have called “premature de-industrialization.”
Could premature de-industrialization be a blessing in disguise, enabling workers in the developing world to bypass the drudgery of manufacturing?
If so, how such a future could be constructed is not at all clear.
A society in which most workers are self-proprietors – shopkeepers, independent professionals, or artists – and set their own terms of employment while making an adequate living is feasible only when economy-wide productivity is already very high.
High-productivity services – such as IT or finance – require well-trained workers, not the unskilled kind that poor countries have in abundance.
So there is both good and bad news for the future of work in developing countries.
Thanks to social policy and labor rights, workers can become full stakeholders in the economy much earlier in the process of development.
At the same time, the traditional engine of economic development – industrialization – is likely to operate at much lower capacity.
The resulting combination of high public expectations and low income-producing capacity will be a major challenge for developing economies everywhere.
The Unfinished Business of Gender Parity
DAVOS – When it comes to the importance of gender equality in the workplace, the message has clearly gotten through to those at the top.
Surveys – including those conducted by my own organization – consistently show that business leaders understand the need for equal treatment of men and women in the workforce.
Indeed, my own conversations with senior businesspeople around the world confirm that progress clearly is being made.
The vast majority recognize the issue as imperative to their companies’ success and have implemented measures to promote gender parity in their organizations.
And yet, for all the fine words, much more remains to be done before gender parity is actually achieved.
The facts speak for themselves.
There is still a pay gap in every country in the world, with men earning more than women for similar jobs.
Likewise, the percentage of seats on corporate boards occupied by women appears to have stalled at just over 17%.
This bias has not gone unnoticed – especially among female employees.
In a 2015 PwC global survey of female millennials born between 1980 and 1995, half of those working in financial services said they believed that men received more favorable treatment when it came to promotions.
More than 70% said that as much as their organizations talk about diversity, in reality, opportunities remain unequal.
Interestingly, other studies conclude that when women are provided with the opportunity to perform on an equal footing with men, they more often than not come out on top.
A recent ten-year analysis of 300 start-up investments backed by venture capitalists in the United States showed that companies with a female founder performed 63% better than those with all-male founding teams.
And another of PwC’s research programs, examining the changing faces of billionaires worldwide, discovered what we called the “Athena Factor.”
The increase in the number of female billionaires significantly outpaces that among men, with Asia registering the fastest growth in the ranks of self-made female billionaires.
Where women have the opportunity to capitalize on their talents, they are doing so successfully and with gusto.
Meanwhile, there is growing recognition of the positive contribution that greater workforce diversity makes to business performance.
And yet, as reflected in the stubborn persistence of the pay gap, barriers to women’s progress remain.
What is now needed is a genuine and permanent shift in attitudes and behavior.
Many of the biases holding women back are unconscious; and, by their very nature, these blind spots cannot be tackled by statements of intent alone.
Tackling gender inequality will require us to identify where, how, and why these biases materialize, and to develop systematic strategies and interventions to root them out.
In order to accomplish this, businesses must actively challenge men to help advance women in the workforce.
That is why I am proud to be a founding Corporate Impact Champion of the UN Women’s HeForShe movement.
Creating real and lasting change will require helping men and women work together.
The business case for doing so is incontrovertible.
Not only do women make up half the global population; the same skills needed to work through differences in gender – open-mindedness, humility, empathy – can be used to work across other types of differences, be they cultural, physical, or personal.
It is important, of course, to reassure male skeptics who view gender parity as a threat.
In June 2015, I hosted a HeForShe chat on Twitter , and while the conversation was overwhelmingly positive, an obvious concern surfaced: Why should men help promote women to positions for which they themselves are aiming?
Addressing such concerns will require us to show that we are not promoting some people at the expense of others; gender parity must be win-win, not zero-sum.
At PwC, this is being addressed by hosting conversations in which men and women discuss gender issues collaboratively and respectfully, and by working with both genders to challenge double standards and acknowledge potential blind spots.
Recent research suggests that, at the current rate of progress, it will take another 80 years to reach gender parity.
That is not good enough.
Let us all commit to achieving it in our lifetimes – for the benefit of everyone.
Di Balik Angka Kemiskinan
ASUNCIÓN – Apa yang dimaksud dengan kemiskinan?
Selama bertahun-tahun kita mendefinisikannya dengan angka, salah satunya menurut ukuran Bank Dunia adalah pendapatan pribadi lebih rendah dari $1,90 per hari.
Namun angka saja tidak mampu menangkap seluruh kerumitan yang ada dalam isu kemiskinan.
Mengukur lebih dari sekedar pendapatan sangat penting untuk memahami kebutuhan penduduk miskin dan memberikan bantuan yang optimal.
Ketika Bank Dunia menyelenggarakan Spring Meetings di Washington, DC pekan depan, kita berpeluang menetapkan ukuran kemiskinan yang mencakup dimensi sosial dan lingkungan hidup.
Bank Dunia sudah mengakui bahwa standar lain di luar pendapatan harus dipertimbangkan dan baru-baru ini membentuk Komisi Pengentasan Kemiskinan Global untuk merumuskan rekomendasi beberapa metrik tambahan.
Meskipun beberapa lembaga publik dan swasta telah mengumpulkan data tentang berbagai isu yang mempengaruhi masyarakat miskin seperti gizi, kesehatan ibu, atau akses kepada pendidikan, informasi tersebut sebagian besar belum dimanfaatkan dan jarang dibagi ke lembaga lain.
Namun masih ada harapan, termasuk Indeks Kemajuan Sosial, yang menyediakan kerangka kerja untuk mempelajari beberapa gejala kemiskinan suatu negara dan melengkapi ukuran yang lama yakni berbasiskan pendapatan.
Saat kita bergantung pada standar tunggal untuk mengukur kemiskinan, kita akan salah mendiagnosa kebutuhan masyarakat miskin.
Di negara asal saya, Paraguay, saya bekerja dengan salah satu social enterprise terbesar, Fundación Paraguaya, yang menyalurkan kredit mikro dan menyediakan pendidikan dan pelatihan kepada ribuan warga miskin.
Kami mempelajari 50 metrik dari enam ukuran kemiskinan, termasuk pendapatan, perumahan, pendidikan, dan infrastruktur.
Salah satu klien kami, Doña Mercedes, sekarang menjadi pengusaha mikro yang sukses dari salah satu pedesaan tidak jauh dari ibu kota di Asunción.  Ketika pertama kali bergabung dengan Fundación Paraguaya, ia hidup di rumah dengan satu kamar tidur bersama 16 anggota keluarganya dan menggunakan tungku api kecil di lantai yang beralaskan tanah.
Sekarang ia memiliki lantai bersemen, rumah lapis bata merah, dapur tersendiri, dan tabungan berjumlah $500.
Melalui evaluasi diri tentang kemiskinan yang diterapkan Fundación Paraguaya, ia bisa memahami kebutuhan pribadinya secara lebih baik dan mengatasinya satu demi satu.
Pendekatan tradisional umumnya berfokus pada memperkirakan sumber pengeluaran dan pendapatan rumah tangga, perangkat evaluasi diri milik Fundación Paraguaya membantu Doña Mercedes memisahkan kebutuhannya ke dalam 50 bidang yang berbeda yang dapat diperbaiki satu per satu dan dimonitor dari waktu ke waktu.
Misalnya, ia sendiri mengevaluasi kondisi kamar mandi dan dapurnya, kualitas makanan yang dikonsumsi, kesehatan gigi keluarganya, jumlah kamar tidur di rumah, dan bahkan tingkat kepercayaan diri dan kemampuan pengambilan keputusannya.
Sebuah peta kemiskinan membantu melacak kemajuan yang dicapai dengan menggunakan tiga warna lampu lalu lintas, merah, kuning, dan hijau, dan menyoroti bidang-bidang prioritas.
Ke depannya ia berniat menambah dua kamar tidur dan memperluas usahanya.
Fundación Paraguaya telah meniru keberhasilan ini di negara-negara lain.
Di Tanzania, tempat saya bekerja selama tiga tahun dengan masyarakat pedesaan, kami membantu beberapa desa di dataran tinggi bagian selatan menggunakan indikator-indikator kemiskinan yang kami rumuskan sesuai konteks lokal untuk memenuhi kebutuhan air bersih, sanitasi, dan listrik.
Upaya serupa tengah dikembangkan di Afrika Selatan, Nigeria, Uganda, Cina, dan lain-lain.
Kita bisa mencapai kemajuan lebih besar dengan dukungan sektor publik.
Fundación Paraguaya mengumpulkan rich datadari beberapa dimensi, melacak lebih dari 8.700 keluarga setiap tahunnya di Paraguay saja.
Jika informasi ini bisa menjangkau pemerintah Paraguay – yang memiliki metode pengumpulan data sendiri – kita bisa mengidentifikasi kelompok-kelompok masyarakat miskin lebih cepat dan merancang program khusus untuk membantu masing-masing keluarga.
Oleh karena informasi ini diperoleh dari pelaporan mandiri, kerja sama semacam ini dapat menghasilkan bantuan yang tepat sasaran dan menyoroti layanan publik tertentu yang diperlukan.
Selain itu, apabila Komisi Pengentasan Kemiskinan Global di bawah Bank Dunia mengadopsi langkah-langkah pengentasan kemiskinan yang bersifat multidimensional, ini akan memicu organisasi-organisasi lain untuk menghasilkan dan berbagi data tentang kemiskinan yang lebih rinci.
Upaya ini dapat menciptakan peta kemiskinan dunia yang lebih komprehensif bagi pekerja sosial dan membantu peningkatan efektivitas upaya penanggulangan kemiskinan di banyak negara.
Tentu tidak mudah memilih ukuran apa yang harus dimasukkan atau bahkan cara menetapkan tolak ukur yang universal; tapi mengadopsi beberapa ukuran dasar pun akan memicu perbaikan.
Sudah terlalu lama ukuran dengan dimensi tunggal seperti pendapatan $1,90 per hari mengakibatkan diagnosa yang salah terhadap permasalahan warga miskin – terlebih lagi, akar penyebabnya.
Kami mengetahui bahwa standar $1,90 per hari tidak bisa menggambarkan secara menyeluruh pergulatan kaum miskin di negara-negara seperti Paraguay.
Untungnya, Bank Dunia kini mengakui keterbatasan indikator berdasarkan pendapatan.
Memastikan bahwa jenis bantuan yang tepat akan diterima oleh mereka yang paling membutuhkannya secara tepat waktu dan efektif akan tercipta ketika pembuat kebijakan di bidang pembangunan bisa memanfaatkan data kemiskinan yang multidimensional seperti yang dikumpulkan oleh lembaga penyalur bantuan seperti Fundación Paraguaya.
Perekonomian Dunia Tanpa Cina
NEW HAVEN – Apakah perekonomian Cina akan meledak?
Dijerat beban utang yang terlampau besar (debt overhang) dan gelembung pasar perumahan (property bubble), ditambah dengan badan usaha milik negara yang ibarat mayat hidup dan perbankan yang sekarat, Cina sering digambarkan sebagai calon bencana di tengah dunia yang rentan krisis.
Saya masih yakin bahwa ketakutan tersebut berlebihan, sebab Cina memiliki strategi, kemampuan, dan komitmen untuk mewujudkan perubahan struktural besar-besaran menjadi masyarakat konsumen yang berbasis jasa, sembari sukses menghindari cyclical headwinds yang menghantui.
Tetapi saya menyadari bahwa pandangan ini hanya diterima segelintir orang.
Misalnya, Menteri Keuangan Amerika Serikat Jacob J. Lew berulang kali menyatakan opini yang agak membingungkan bahwa Amerika Serikat “tidak bisa menjadi satu-satu mesin perekonomian dunia.”
Sebetulnya ya memang tidak: kontribusi ekonomi Cina terhadap pertumbuhan global diperkirakan setara dengan empat kali kontribusi AS tahun ini.
Barangkali Jacob Lew mengira-ngira skenario terburuk bagi Cina menurut penilaiannya atas perekonomian dunia.
Lalu bagaimana jika para skeptis benar?
Apa yang akan terjadi jika ekonomi Cina betul-betul kolaps, laju pertumbuhannya merosot ke satu digit, atau bahkan negative territory, seperti yang umumnya menimpa negara-negara yang dilanda krisis?
Tentu saja Cina akan menderita, begitu pula ekonomi global yang sekarang pun sudah goyah.
Ketika semua mata tertuju ke Cina, hipotesis ini patut ditelaah.
Pertama, tanpa Cina, ekonomi dunia diperkirakan sudah mengalami resesi.
Laju pertumbuhan Cina tahun ini diproyeksikan mencapai 6,7% – jauh melebihi estimasi awal.
Menurut Dana Moneter Internasional atau IMF, ekonomi Cina menyumbangkan 17,3% PDB global (basis PPP/ purchasing-power-parity).
Negara-negara yang dikenal sebagai resource economies – seperti Australia, Selandia Baru, Kanada, Rusia, dan Brasil – akan terkena dampak paling parah.
Sebagai raksasa pertumbuhan yang padat sumber daya, Cina mengalahkan kontribusi dari negara dengan perekonomian besar lainnya, yang seluruhnya menyumbangkan 9% PDB dunia.
Meski negara-negara tersebut di atas mengklaim negaranya memiliki struktur ekonomi diversifikasi yang tidak sepenuhnya bergantung pada permintaan komoditas Cina, pasar mata uang berpendapat lain: ketika proyeksi pertumbuhan Cina direvisi – naik atau turun – nilai tukarnya pun ikut bergerak.
IMF saat ini memperkirakan lima negara di atas akan melemah 0,7% di tahun 2016, mencerminkan resesi sekarang di Rusia dan Brasil serta kondisi modest growth di tiga negara lainnya.
Dengan demikian, jika ekonomi Cina meledak, perkiraan baseline ini harus dipangkas habis.
Sama halnya dengan mitra dagang Cina di Asia – mayoritas adalah negara-negara yang bergantung pada ekspor dan mengandalkan pasar Cina sebagai sumber permintaan eksternal.
Ini tidak akan menimpa negara-negara berkembang di Asia seperti Indonesia, Filipinam dan Thailand, tapi juga negara-negara besar dan maju seperti Jepang, Korea, dan Taiwan.
Bila digabungkan, enam negara tersebut setara dengan 11% PDB dunia.
Ledakan di Cina bisa dengan mudahnya mengurangi setidaknya 1 poin persentase dari laju pertumbuhan kolektif.
Amerika Serikat pun patut waspada.
Cina adalah pasar ekspor ketiga terbesar bagi AS dan paling cepat tumbuh.
Jika ekonomi Cina meledak, permintaan ekspor akan hilang – mengurangi sekitar 0,2-0.3 poin persentase dari pertumbuhan ekonomi AS yang sudah di bawah rata-rata yakni 1,6% di tahun 2016.
Terakhir, nasib Eropa.
Pertumbuhan di Jerman, satu-satunya harapan perekonomian Eropa Kontinental yang meredup, masih sangat mengandalkan ekspor.
Ini diakibatkan oleh semakin besarnya pengaruh Cina – kini pasar ekspor ketiga terbesar bagi Jerman, persis di bawah Uni Eropa dan Amerika Serikat.
Ledakan di Cina akan melemahkan pertumbuhan ekonomi Jerman, juga berdampak buruk pada negara-negara Eropa lain yang didominasi Jerman.
Menariknya, dalam update terbaru World Economic Outlook terbitan bulan Oktober, IMF mengabadikan satu bab khusus analisis efek spillover Cina – asesmen berbasis model atas dampak global dari kemunduran ekonomi Cina.
Sejalan dengan argumen di atas, IMF berfokus pada kaitan pada eksportir komoditas, eksportir asal Asia, dan negara-negara yang disebut “systemic advanced economies” (Jerman, Jepang, dan AS) yang paling rentan terhadap jatuhnya ekonomi Cina.
Menurut perkiraan IMF juga, efek terparah akan dirasakan Asia, setelah itu negara-negara yang ekonominya berorientasi pada sumber daya; sensivitas pada tiga negara maju diperkirakan sekitar setengah yang dialami mitra dagang Cina di luar Jepang.
Walaupun itu jauh dari rekor kontraksi ekonomi pada tahun 2009 yaitu 0,1%, tetap saja selisihnya tidak besar dibandingkan dua resesi global sebelumnya di tahun 1975 (pertumbuhan 1%) dan tahun 1982 (0,75%).
Mungkin cuma saya disini yang optimis dengan Cina.
Walaupun saya masih berharap dengan prospek ekonomi global, saya pikir kita menghadapi masalah-masalah lebih besar daripada ekonomi Cina yang kendur.
Namun ya saya setuju bahwa perekonomian dunia pasca krisis tanpa kehadiran Cina akan mengalami banyak kesulitan.
Siap-siap saja untuk menanggung akibatnya.
The Return of Currency Wars
NEW YORK – The recent decision by the Bank of Japan to increase the scope of its quantitative easing is a signal that another round of currency wars may be under way.
The BOJ’s effort to weaken the yen is a beggar-thy-neighbor approach that is inducing policy reactions throughout Asia and around the world.
Central banks in China, South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, and Thailand, fearful of losing competitiveness relative to Japan, are easing their own monetary policies – or will soon ease more.
The European Central Bank and the central banks of Switzerland, Sweden, Norway, and a few Central European countries are likely to embrace quantitative easing or use other unconventional policies to prevent their currencies from appreciating.
All of this will lead to a strengthening of the US dollar, as growth in the United States is picking up and the Federal Reserve has signaled that it will begin raising interest rates next year.
But, if global growth remains weak and the dollar becomes too strong, even the Fed may decide to raise interest rates later and more slowly to avoid excessive dollar appreciation.
The cause of the latest currency turmoil is clear: In an environment of private and public deleveraging from high debts, monetary policy has become the only available tool to boost demand and growth.
Fiscal austerity has exacerbated the impact of deleveraging by exerting a direct and indirect drag on growth.
Lower public spending reduces aggregate demand, while declining transfers and higher taxes reduce disposable income and thus private consumption.
In the eurozone, a sudden stop of capital flows to the periphery and the fiscal restraints imposed, with Germany’s backing, by the European Union, the International Monetary Fund, and the ECB have been a massive impediment to growth.
In Japan, an excessively front-loaded consumption-tax increase killed the recovery achieved this year.
In the US, a budget sequester and other tax and spending policies led to a sharp fiscal drag in 2012-2014.
And in the United Kingdom, self-imposed fiscal consolidation weakened growth until this year.
Globally, the asymmetric adjustment of creditor and debtor economies has exacerbated this recessionary and deflationary spiral.
Countries that were overspending, under-saving, and running current-account deficits have been forced by markets to spend less and save more.
Not surprisingly, their trade deficits have been shrinking.
But most countries that were over-saving and under-spending have not saved less and spent more; their current-account surpluses have been growing, aggravating the weakness of global demand and thus undermining growth.
As fiscal austerity and asymmetric adjustment have taken their toll on economic performance, monetary policy has borne the burden of supporting faltering growth via weaker currencies and higher net exports.
But the resulting currency wars are partly a zero-sum game: If one currency is weaker, another currency must be stronger; and if one country’s trade balance improves, another’s must worsen.
Of course, monetary easing is not purely zero-sum.
Easing can boost growth by lifting asset prices (equities and housing), reducing private and public borrowing costs, and limiting the risk of a fall in actual and expected inflation.
Given fiscal drag and private deleveraging, lack of sufficient monetary easing in recent years would have led to double and triple dip recession (as occurred, for example, in the eurozone).
But the overall policy mix has been sub-optimal, with too much front-loaded fiscal consolidation and too much unconventional monetary policy (which has become less effective over time).
A better approach in advanced economies would have comprised less fiscal consolidation in the short run and more investment in productive infrastructure, combined with a more credible commitment to medium- and long-term fiscal adjustment – and less aggressive monetary easing.
You can lead a horse to liquidity, but you can’t make it drink.
In a world where private aggregate demand is weak and unconventional monetary policy eventually becomes like pushing on a string, the case for slower fiscal consolidation and productive public infrastructure spending is compelling.
Such spending offers returns that are certainly higher than the low interest rates that most advanced economies face today, and infrastructure needs are massive in both advanced and emerging economies (with the exception of China, which has overinvested in infrastructure).
Moreover, public investment works on both the demand and supply sides.
It not only boosts aggregate demand directly; it also expands potential output by increasing the stock of productivity-boosting capital.
Unfortunately, the political economy of austerity has led to sub-optimal outcomes.
In a fiscal crunch, the first spending cuts hit productive public investments, because governments prefer to protect current – and often inefficient – spending on public-sector jobs and transfer payments to the private sector.
As a result, the global recovery remains anemic in most advanced economies (with the partial exception of the US and the UK) and now also in the major emerging countries, where growth has slowed sharply in the last two years.
The right policies – less fiscal austerity in the short run, more public investment spending, and less reliance on monetary easing – are the opposite of those that have been pursued by the world’s major economies.
No wonder global growth keeps on disappointing.
In a sense, we are all Japanese now.
A Tipping Point Missed
WASHINGTON, DC – Before America and the world settle in firmly to the new Donald Trump-based reality, let’s take a little trip down the road not taken.
Suppose we had woken up last Wednesday morning to a President-elect Hillary Clinton.
And let’s say that, instead of former Portuguese Prime Minister António Guterres, New Zealand’s Helen Clark or Bulgaria’s Kristalina Georgieva had been picked to succeed Ban Ki-moon as United Nations Secretary-General.
Clinton would have joined the United Kingdom’s Theresa May and German Chancellor Angela Merkel, helping achieve critical mass in the G7.
And a female UN Secretary-General would have placed women at the helm of two of the world’s three biggest international organizations (France’s Christine Lagarde already runs the International Monetary Fund).
With so many female leaders, we would have begun to answer the question: what happens when women run the world?
Would the world be better for women?
Would it even be different?
According to sociologists, female leaders are of two schools: Queen Bees, who are less likely to help other women advance, and Righteous Women, who make the advancement of other women a priority.
Most early pioneers, such as the UK’s Margaret Thatcher, India’s Indira Gandhi, and Israel’s Golda Meir, were Queen Bees; all of them eschewed feminism.
More recently, Righteous Women have prevailed.
Leaders like Argentina’s Cristina Kirchner, Brazil’s Dilma Rousseff, and Iceland’s Jóhanna Sigurðardóttir have all sought, in one way or another, to empower women and help them advance in their countries.
Merkel and May have tended to be more like Queen Bees, while Clinton, Lagarde, Clark, and Georgieva are more like Righteous Women.
To be fair, the first woman leader in a male-dominated culture must often outman the men.
Seeking to advance other women can highlight her own womanhood and thereby weaken her.
Clinton, for example, was the third woman US Secretary of State but the first who felt secure enough to be able to champion the cause of women and girls worldwide.
As President, she pledged, half her cabinet would be women, and she would further the State Department initiatives launched during her tenure.
Yes, she also would have been careful to avoid being defined as a woman president.
Still, just the presence of a plurality of women has an impact.
For example, studies of US courts with multiple judges show that male judges are more willing to hear bias cases when one woman is on the bench, and significantly more willing when a second woman is added.
“Each of us,” noted Sandra Day O’Connor, the first female member of the US Supreme Court, who was renowned for not wanting to be perceived as a “female” justice, “brings to our job, whatever it is, our lifetime of experience and our values.”
In other words, women bring a fresh perspective, heard clearly only when a critical mass of them is present in any institution.
Consider a woman’s perspective on conflict.
Evidence does not support the stereotype that women are more pacifist than men – the peacemakers and settlers of male disputes.
Women can be Amazons; recall Thatcher’s prosecution of the Falklands War and her admonition to George H.W. Bush not to “go wobbly” in the run-up to the first Gulf War.
On the other hand, when men see wars, they naturally imagine the world of the warriors, whereas women see themselves in the women who must try to shelter their families from forces they cannot control.
That is precisely the diversity of perspective that is vital to decision-making.
And indeed, the Institute for Inclusive Security at Harvard’s Kennedy School has tracked the differences women make as part of peace negotiations.
An acute awareness of the magnitude of civilian suffering in conflicts such as the Syrian civil war or the ongoing horrors in the Congo Basin, and an appreciation of how cycles of violence perpetuate themselves over generations, can actually make women much more likely to urge the use of force in interventions.
Former US Secretary of State Madeleine Albright famously chided Colin Powell for his reluctance to involve the US military in the Balkans in the 1990s, in part because of her own family’s experience as Czech refugees from Communism.
Overall, a woman leader’s decisions are no more predictable than a male leader’s.
Women are not monolithic: they have various ideological backgrounds and diverse governing styles.
But when the world finally reaches the point when women are not a rarity at the tables of power, when their numbers reach a tipping point, their voices will be heard differently, and their opinions will hold more weight with the men around them.
Women came closer in 2016 than in any other era to reaching that tipping point.
But we may still have to wait decades to find out what will happen when we finally do.
Homesick Politics
MADRID – World order – or the lack thereof – is a hot topic these days.
Our fixation with the future of global structures and systems is evident everywhere – in the news and at conferences, on bestseller lists, even in popular television shows.
People are anxious.
The world seems to be undergoing fundamental change: new actors are emerging on the world stage, previously sacrosanct rules of international behavior are being openly defied, and a new wave of technological progress is disrupting entire industries and economic sectors.
In our quest for structure and predictability – a natural impulse in times of rapid change – we are desperate for hints about how the world, and our role in it, will develop.
It is of course vital in such situations that we identify the best, or at least the most feasible, way forward; predictability provides a foundation for cost-benefit analysis and strategic thinking.
The problem arises when our yearning for certainty overwhelms rational thinking, taking our ideas and actions in an unproductive – or even dangerous – direction.
The current trend toward rose-colored retrospection is a case in point.
Faced with political, economic, geostrategic, and social uncertainty, policymakers have increasingly succumbed to the allure of nostalgia, promising a return to what they portray as the familiar and complete rules and practices of the past.
In Russia, President Vladimir Putin has been operating according to a nineteenth-century worldview, in which great powers dominate their spheres of influence unchallenged.
As he noted at last October’s meeting of the Valdai Discussion Club, “The bear will not even bother to ask permission.
Here, we consider it the master of the taiga.”
The Islamic State is attempting to return to an even more distant past.
Its adherents espouse a medieval ninth-century doctrine to justify their effort to reestablish the caliphate, in which “the legality of all emirates, groups, states, and organizations becomes null” and summary execution and slavery are mandatory.
The West, too, has fallen into the trap of nostalgia, clinging to a late-twentieth-century conception of order in which it makes the rules and can choose whether to follow them.
The latest example of this anachronistic perspective is America’s ham-fisted (not to mention failed) attempt to stem support for the China-led Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, after repeatedly refusing to provide a greater voice for the world’s emerging powers in the Bretton Woods institutions.
Nostalgia has also emerged as a major factor in many countries’ domestic affairs.
Throughout Europe, populist parties – from the right-wing United Kingdom Independence Party to the far-left Syriza in Greece – seek a return to the ostensibly simpler and happier times of national control and closed borders.
In the US, a prominent strain of jurisprudence defends the “original intent” of the Constitution’s framers, while Republicans are shifting toward isolationism and Democrats are denouncing free-trade agreements.
But nostalgia offers no solutions – only a dream of escape.
Looking backward gets us no closer to what we want; on the contrary, it is a surefire way to miss the challenges – and miss out on the opportunities – that lie before us.
Trying to advance one’s interests based on the rules of the past is like trying to solve today’s crossword puzzle using yesterday’s clues.
Let’s face it: the halcyon world to which many people are so eager to return – before, say, the European Union or the United Nations or even the nation-state – never really existed.
As Marcel Proust noted: “Remembrance of things past is not necessarily the remembrance of things as they were.”
The past is being abridged and sugarcoated in order to portray it as superior to the widespread tumult and misery of today.
Over time, nostalgia has come to have a benign connotation.
But the word – a combination of the Greek nostos (homecoming) and algos (pain) – was coined to describe the disease of “acute homesickness.”
Perhaps it would be beneficial to return to that definition of nostalgia, at least in its political manifestation, as something more akin to an illness: a condition that distorts reality and impedes the formulation of effective solutions for real-world challenges.
No worldview rooted in the nineteenth century – much less in the ninth century – is adequate to the complexities of today’s globalized world.
Likewise, the rise of new powers and non-state actors means that rule making (and breaking) can no longer be restricted to a small Western club.
And the intensity of global competition means that European countries cannot hope to thrive independently of one another.
Flimsy ideas thrive in the absence of a viable alternative.
That is why a period of reflection on world order is so important.
But, rather than allowing ourselves to be swept up in the regressive tide of nostalgia, we need to engage one another in a constructive conversation about the challenges that we actually face and propose new ideas for addressing them.
Managing a World of Great Powers
MADRID – Today, great-power competition is a fact: The United States now competes with an increasingly active Russia and a rising China.
The Middle East, the South China Sea, and Ukraine are just three theaters where this new reality is playing out.
Upon rereading former US Deputy Secretary of State Strobe Talbott’s book The Great Experiment, I was left with the impression that the seeds of some of the dynamics at play today were sown some time ago.
The book describes a conversation that took place in December 2000 between President Bill Clinton and President-elect George W. Bush.
Clinton says that, judging by Bush’s electoral campaign, the security issues that seemed to concern him most were Saddam Hussein and the construction of a large-scale antimissile defense system.
“That’s absolutely right,” Bush responds.
These issues were put on hold when tragedy unexpectedly struck, in the form of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks in the US, which brought a period of international cooperation during which solidarity against terrorism reigned.
It was a time when we were all Americans, and when Bush described Putin as “very straightforward and trustworthy.”
The winds began to change that December, when the US announced that it was withdrawing from the Antiballistic Missile Treaty, in order to build an antimissile defense system to protect itself from a potentially nuclearized Iran.
This did not go unnoticed in Russia.
The US at the time did not seem to understand that a multipolar world order was emerging – one that would make it very difficult to pursue, without serious consequences, the policies that Bush and Clinton had discussed in 2000.
In a 2007 speech at the Munich Security Conference, Russian President Vladimir Putin made this plain, vehemently rejecting the intervention in Iraq and especially US plans to expand antimissile defense systems to Europe, calling this an act of aggression toward Russia and a breach of common European security.
In the summer of 2008, three events placed the new multipolar order in stark relief.
China dazzled the world as host of the Olympic Games, reinforcing its status as a significant international player.
Russia’s military actions in Georgia – in the midst of the Games – showed the world that the concept of spheres of influence was still alive and well in the Kremlin.
And the collapse the following month of the US investment bank Lehman Brothers, which unleashed a global financial crisis from which the world economy has yet to recover fully, underscored the advanced economies’ vulnerabilities, while largely sparing China.
With a new sense of confidence in its great-power status, China seemed to qualify the concept of a “peaceful rise” that its leaders have invoked since the era of Deng Xiaoping, adopting a more muscular foreign-policy approach within its neighborhood.
Drawing on alleged historical rights, China began to expand its territorial claims, along with its military presence, in the South and East China Seas.
In 2013, tensions peaked when China unilaterally declared an Air Defense Identification Zone (ADIZ) covering territories in the East China Sea that it claims, but Japan controls.
Many of the countries affected by China’s actions in the South and East China Seas have security treaties with the US, which has been the major maritime power in the Pacific region since World War II.
China’s ADIZ declaration was therefore viewed by the US as a provocation.
By expanding its sovereignty claims, China was actually expanding its claims to influence.
It has taken the international institutions some time to catch up to the changing world order.
The 2010 G-20 summit in Seoul produced an agreement to increase the emerging countries’ quotas in the International Monetary Fund by 2014.
But the US Congress refused to ratify the changes, so nothing came of the agreement.
China then took matters into its own hands, spearheading the creation of the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank.
Fragmentation of the international institutions seemed imminent – that is, until European countries decided to join the AIIB.
Though the US resisted at first, and has still refused to join, that decision was lent some nuance in a later conversation between Chinese President Xi Jinping and US President Barack Obama.
Meanwhile, Russia was exposing its own renewed foreign-policy ambitions in Ukraine.
By violating the Helsinki Final Act in the spring of 2014, Putin placed Russian foreign policy in direct opposition to that of the US and Europe.
This position was reaffirmed in September, when Putin decided to intervene in the Syrian conflict, securing for Russia a role in any attempt to bring peace to the country.
Today, the world is very different from what some might have imagined at the end of the last century, a decade after the Berlin Wall came down.
Historically speaking, 15 years can seem long or short, depending on the intensity of change.
During the last 15 years of mounting great-power competition and renewed instability in the Middle East – including the Arab Spring, the rise of the brutal Islamic State, Sunni-Shia proxy wars, and unspeakable human suffering – change has been very intense, to say the least.
But confrontation is not the whole story.
Promising steps have been made in two critical areas: nuclear non-proliferation, especially through the nuclear deal with Iran, and the fight against climate change, exemplified in the encouraging preparations for the current climate summit in Paris.
If there is one lesson to be learned from all of this, it is that well-executed, tenacious diplomacy still holds extraordinary power to resolve conflicts.
It remains the best instrument to produce those cooperative outcomes that confrontation effectively impedes.
Worlds Apart
Macroeconomic policies, financial globalization, and changes in labor market institutions have exacerbated inequality in recent decades, not only in income and wealth, but also in access to education, healthcare, social protection, as well as in political participation and influence.
Even within countries experiencing rapid economic growth, an array of factors, exacerbated by tremendous demographic changes, has conspired to transmit inequality of knowledge, social responsibility, and life chances from one generation to the next.
As surveyed in the United Nations report The Inequality Predicament, few countries, rich or poor, have proved immune to the global trend of rising inequality, or to its consequences for education, health, and social welfare.
Of course, there is no simple causal relationship linking poverty and inequality to violence.
But inequality and a sense of deprivation do contribute to resentment and social instability, threatening security.
Excluded and facing bleak life prospects, young people, in particular, often experience anomie and may turn to anti-social behavior, including violence.
Nor is there a simple explanation of what causes poverty.
Clearly, however, poverty arises from various complex conditions, and its amelioration requires a multidimensional approach.
It is hard to imagine, for example, how to “make poverty history” without also generating enough decent work, educational opportunities, and healthcare for all.
To be sure, the world has seen progress on some fronts in recent decades.
Access to education for girls has improved, and some gender gaps have been reduced.
Despite AIDS and the resurgence of malaria and tuberculosis, life expectancy has increased in much of the world due to improved public health systems.
Overall, however, the inequality gaps are large and, in many cases, growing.
The most important determinant of income inequality today is wealth inequality, with the increasing concentration of asset ownership in recent years principally responsible for greater income inequality in most countries.
Meanwhile, growing unemployment, widening skill and productivity gaps, and the “informalization” or “casualization” of labor markets have exacerbated income inequalities worldwide, as the number of “working poor” and the incidence of “jobless growth” has spread.
Nor have stabilization and structural adjustment programs, imposed since the 1980’s, delivered on their promise of achieving higher economic growth.
Growth in much of the world during the past quarter-century has been slower than in the previous 25 years, despite more rapid growth in East Asia, India, and a few other countries.
Such growth differences suggest that overall global inequality may not have increased unequivocally.
But inequalities at the national level have deepened in most countries in recent years, largely due to economic liberalization at both the national and international levels.
Indeed, in much of the world, such economic reforms have actually undermined growth rates as well as the progressive role of government, while otherwise increasing overall inequalities.
The few exceptions have been due largely to continued or new progressive government interventions.
But they are exceptions: the cumulative impact of these reforms over the past 25 years has been greater inequality in most developed and developing countries, with rising unemployment, greater earnings disparities, reduced social protection, and environmental degradation.
International financial liberalization, for example, has undermined the use of more inclusive and targeted developmental credit to promote desired economic activities.
In addition, contrary to the promises of its proponents, financial liberalization has actually resulted in net capital flows from the capital-poor to the capital-rich over the long term, while increasing financial volatility and weakening economic activity.
Meanwhile, free-trade negotiations seem to ignore historical trends.
Developing countries’ international terms of trade have worsened: prices of primary commodities have declined in relation to manufactures, as have tropical agriculture prices against temperate agriculture, and prices of generic manufactures have fallen relative to output protected by intellectual property rights.
As a result, trade liberalization of manufactures has resulted in de-industrialization and greater unemployment in much of the world, as in the case of garments this year.
And, while agricultural trade liberalization may enhance export earnings for some poor countries, the main beneficiaries will be the more well-to-do agricultural exporters.
Countries that import currently subsidized food will be worse off.
The “retreat of the state” in much of the developing world in recent decades has involved a generally reduced role for government, including the capacity to lead and sustain development, as well as its progressive social interventions in areas such as public education, health, housing, and utilities.
The economic liberalization carried out in much of the world in the last 25 years was a flawed policy from the start, and its consequences have become glaringly obvious.
Unless the world refocuses economic policies to address the adverse impact of economic inequality on growth and poverty reduction, the poor and the privileged will continue to live worlds apart.
Putin on Parade
NEW YORK – This May’s parade in Moscow to commemorate the 70th anniversary of the end of World War II promises to be the greatest Victory Day celebration since the Soviet Union’s collapse.
Some 16,000 soldiers, 200 armored vehicles, and 150 planes and helicopters are set to pass through and over Red Square.
It will be a scene that would easily have been familiar to Soviet leaders like Leonid Brezhnev and Nikita Khrushchev, taking the salute atop Lenin’s tomb.
Yet, though Russia’s WWII allies were from Europe and North America, no Western leaders will attend the commemoration – a reflection of the West’s disapproval of Putin’s invasion of Ukraine and annexation of Crimea.
Instead, Russian President Vladimir Putin’s high-profile guests will include the leaders of China, India, and North Korea, underscoring just how few friends Russia has these days.
The surreal nature of this gathering reflects the increasingly bizarre nature of Putin’s regime.
Indeed, watching Russia nowadays is like watching the last installment of the X-Men film franchise, “Days of Future Past.”
Just as the X-Men in that film join forces with their younger selves to save mankind’s future, today’s Kremlin is harking back to Russia’s Soviet past in what it sees as a contemporary fight for the country’s survival.
Critical to this strategy is propaganda conflating the West today with the Germans who invaded Russia in 1941, while painting Ukrainian government officials as “fascists” and “neo-Nazis.”
The Kremlin has relied on such claims, together with the supposed need to defend Russians abroad, to justify its aggression against Ukraine.
In Putin’s speech following the annexation of Crimea, he charged that the West’s refusal “to engage in dialogue” left Russia with no choice.
“We are constantly proposing cooperation on all key issues,” he declared.
“We want to strengthen our level of trust and for our relations to be equal, open, and fair.
But we saw no reciprocal steps.”
A month later, Putin reinforced this image of Russians as the morally superior victims of a cruel and uncompromising West.
“We are less pragmatic than other people, less calculating,” he asserted, before adding that Russia’s “greatness” and “vast size” means “we have a more generous heart.”
It is not difficult to see the parallels between Putin’s approach and that of Joseph Stalin, who declared at the start of WWII that the “enemy” aims to “destroy” Russia’s “national culture,” to “Germanize” its people, and “convert them into slaves.”
The difference, of course, is that the Nazi Wehrmacht actually invaded the Soviet Union, whereas Ukraine simply wanted to decide its own future.
Without defending Stalin, one must recognize the immense Soviet contribution – including the lives of 26 million citizens – to the Allied victory in WWII.
At the time, the military parade in Red Square – featuring almost 35,000 troops, up to 1,900 pieces of military equipment, and a 1,400-man orchestra – was a well-deserved pageant.
The Soviet leadership spared no cost in staging its military displays, which, in the absence of an external military threat, became an important vehicle for rallying national unity.
After the Soviet Union’s collapse, Russia, no longer a superpower, put its military spectacles on ice.
But in 2005, to commemorate the 60th anniversary of the end of WWII, Putin held a major parade – one that Western leaders, believing that Russia might have a European future, did attend.
The tone of this year’s Victory Day commemorations is far less anticipatory.
How can one celebrate the end of a war at a time when the descendants of those who fought it (undoubtedly driven by the hope that future generations would live in peace) are killing one another in a brutal little war in eastern Ukraine?
What is the point of grandiose fireworks displays amid the firing of real howitzers and rockets?
The historian Robert Paxton believed that one could tell much about a country by its parades.
His 1966 book Parades and Politics at Vichy describes how Philippe Pétain, as Chief of State of Vichy France, used pageantry, reactionary politics, and, of course, a partnership with Adolf Hitler to dupe his defeated country into believing that it still mattered in the world.
The Vichy state’s brand of authoritarian traditionalism lionized family and fatherland, with Pétain, a former military commander, serving as a kind of military king, exalted on the tribune.
The parallels with Putin’s Russia are clear.
Putin views himself as a new czar.
His KGB background dictates his leadership style, which includes the abolition of free and fair elections, the persecution of opponents, and the promotion of conservative values that he, like Pétain before him, juxtaposes with the corrupting influence of an “immoral” and “decadent” West.
Relying on this approach, Putin has built alliances with the likes of Syria’s President Bashar al-Assad and Egypt’s military ruler Abdel Fattah el-Sisi.
China, the world’s second largest economy, is a useful addition to this collection of friendly anti-democratic states, as it has its own strategic grievances with the West.
Unlike China, however, Russia is not a rising superpower.
Putin may try to portray his actions in Ukraine as a fight against fascism.
But it is really a fight for relevance – a fight he will never win.
No matter how grand the parade, he cannot hide the truth: Russia’s days as a superpower are in the past.
Putin’s patriotism, like Pétain’s, is that of the vanquished.
China’s Dream World
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA – Ruling elites almost everywhere – whether in democracies or in authoritarian regimes – believe that clever sloganeering can inspire their people and legitimize their power.
There are, of course, crucial differences.
In functioning democracies, government leaders can be held accountable for their promises: the press can scrutinize their policies, opposition parties are motivated to show that the party in power lies and cheats.
As a result, incumbents are frequently forced to carry out at least some of their promises.
Autocratic rulers, by contrast, face no such pressures.
Press censorship, repression of dissent, and the absence of organized opposition allow rulers the luxury of promising whatever they want, with no political consequences for failing to deliver.
The result is government of the sloganeers, by the sloganeers, and for the sloganeers.
China appears to have perfected this form of government over the last decade.
The ruling Chinese Communist Party (CCP), in response to rising public demand for social justice, has devised numerous slogans, such as “governing for the people,” “building a harmonious society,” “balanced development,” “scientific development,” and so on.
Whenever the top leadership in Beijing uttered such slogans, they became the rallying cry of the bureaucracy.
The party’s massive propaganda machine went into overdrive and blanketed the country with a publicity blitz that would make the most extravagant Madison Avenue advertising campaign look like child’s play.
But government by slogan, whether in China or in other autocracies, seldom achieves its declared goals.
In the last decade, GDP growth soared, but most indices of social justice, governance performance, and public welfare deteriorated.
Macroeconomic imbalances worsened as economic growth became excessively dependent on investment and exports.
Inequality worsened.
Official corruption escalated.
Social mobility declined.
Environmental degradation reached a crisis point.
Today, it is the responsibility of China’s new leadership, headed by President Xi Jinping, to avert another decade of missed opportunities.
Without missing a beat, Xi, like his predecessors, rolled out a new slogan to inspire popular confidence in his leadership.
As a catchphrase for his administration’s objective, “the great renaissance of the Chinese nation” is bit long, but it has lately morphed into the simpler “China Dream.”
The substance of the China Dream remains difficult to determine.
When Xi first unveiled his slogan after being selected as the CCP’s new general secretary, he defined it in simple, accessible, but nonetheless generic terms: The “Chinese people dream of living the same good life as all other people in the world.”
Xi has said little about the China Dream since – and his silence has caused considerable trouble.