Some countries, especially in the Balkans and the Commonwealth of Independent States, are far from completing the transition and have gone through repeated cycles of hope and crisis.
As elsewhere in the world, growth in the region has slowed sharply since the global financial crisis erupted in 2008.
The pace of reform has slowed in many countries – and reversed in a few.
Geopolitical considerations have complicated matters further, as the conflict in Ukraine demonstrates.
Looking ahead, one can envision two broad scenarios.
In the first, the region risks a cycle of weak growth, retreat from market-oriented policies, and increasing disillusionment.
As a result, convergence with Western Europe could slow, with many countries lagging far behind – a far different outcome from that envisioned during the boom of the mid-2000s, when convergence within a generation seemed almost like a birthright.
In the second, brighter scenario, rapid convergence to advanced-economy income levels continues, supported by a focus on two priorities, detailed in a new IMF report.
A renewed commitment to macroeconomic and financial stability allows governments to rein in persistent deficits and growing debts and address their economies’ increasing volume of bad loans.
Meanwhile, deeper structural reforms improve the business and investment climate, strengthen corporate governance, expand access to credit, free up labor markets, control public expenditure, and bolster tax administration – all of which puts their economies on track for sustained rapid growth.
The IMF, for its part, has been a committed partner to Central and Eastern Europe and its transformation throughout the past 25 years.
It stands ready to help countries in the region make the next quarter-century just as impressive.
Central Asia’s Other Turkmenbashis
A dictator’s sudden death almost always triggers political instability.
But it is doubly dangerous when it poses a risk of region-wide destabilization and a scramble for influence among the world’s greatest military powers – the United States, Russia, and China.
The sudden death in late December of Saparmurat Niyazov, Turkmenistan’s authoritarian president-for-life who declared himself “Turkmenbashi” (Leader of all Turkmens), jeopardizes stability in a country that is an increasingly important supplier of energy to Europe.
Worse, given the absence of a clearly designated successor and the weakness of civil society and other political institutions, his death could have repercussions across Central Asia.
Indeed, Niyazov’s demise highlights the broader problems of Central Asia’s post-Soviet regimes, which, with the exception of Kyrgyzstan, are run by Soviet-era bosses who, while not nearly as eccentric or egomaniacal as Niyazov, tolerate little dissent or opposition.
Most of them are old, some of them are unwell.
So, in the next few years, Central Asia will face leadership change on many fronts, with security apparatuses – which, as in Turkmenistan, have been crucial to buttressing these countries’ regimes – likely to be important players.
How these transitions turn out will matter for several reasons.
First, Central Asia is an important source of energy.
The Caspian region accounts for 2% to 3% of the world’s known oil resources – about equal to that of North Sea oil.
While far smaller than the deposits in Saudi Arabia or Iran, Caspian oil could prove important if oil production falls or is reduced for political reasons elsewhere.
Much of this Caspian oil is in Kazakhstan, giving that country a critical role in the regional energy market.
Moreover, Kazakhstan’s strategic importance has increased as a result of recent revelations that the country’s Kashagan oil field will produce 25% more than initially expected at peak production.
Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan are also major exporters of natural gas.
Russia depends heavily on Turkmen gas for domestic consumption and export abroad, which could prove vital as demand rises over the next decade.
Second, Central Asia’s leadership transitions could tempt outside powers to exploit the resulting instability and spark a struggle for influence.
Because the region was part of both the Soviet Union and the Russian empire, President Vladimir Putin’s Kremlin regards it as part of Russia’s natural sphere of influence.
Putin’s efforts to transform Russia into a major energy power and use energy as a tool of Russian foreign policy make the region all the more strategically significant.
Moreover, China has sought to improve trade and transit ties with Central Asia over the last decade, reflecting its growing interests there.
Not only is the region important for meeting China’s growing energy needs, but the Chinese authorities also are concerned about separatist pressures among the Uighur population in Xinjiang province and the impact of ties with Uighurs in neighboring Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan.
Like Russia, China wants a reduction of the US military presence in Central Asia.
Both powers have sought to use the Shanghai Cooperation Organization – a regional grouping that includes Russia, China, Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan – as a vehicle to pressure the US to withdraw its military forces from the region.
However, this cooperation represents a short-term, tactical marriage of convenience rather than a budding new strategic alliance.
In the long run, Russia and China are likely to be rivals for power and influence in Central Asia.
Iran could also view the transitions in Central Asia as an opportunity to expand its regional influence, particularly given its close ethnic and cultural ties with Tajikistan and its long border with Turkmenistan.
And, like China and Russia, Iran has no desire to see the US fill any security vacuum that could emerge as a result of leadership changes in Central Asia.
Pakistan and India – especially the latter – will also watch carefully how the transitions play out.
Both countries have growing strategic interests in the region.
Like China, India views Central Asia as an important future energy supplier.
As a result, India has quietly begun to strengthen its military ties to countries in the region, particularly Tajikistan, where it has a small base.
Finally, the transitions in Central Asia could have a strong impact on US interests.
As long as the US remains involved militarily in Afghanistan, access to facilities in Central Asia will remain important.
With the loss of the use of the base at Karshi-Khanabad in Uzbekistan, access to Manas airfield in Kyrgyzstan has become the main means of re-supplying US troops in Afghanistan from Central Asia.
However, the political situation in Kyrgyzstan is far from stable.
Discontent with President Kurmanbek Bakiyev’s rule is rising.
A leadership change or increased Russian and Chinese pressure on Kyrgyz leaders could precipitate calls for a renegotiation of the agreement regarding access to Manas – or even demands for its termination altogether.
In the nineteenth century, the struggle for mastery in Central Asia between the Russian and British empires was called “The Great Game.”
Today, there are many more players involved, and the stakes – energy security, above all – are far higher now.
America, India, Europe, and Japan will face increasing tension between their short-term military needs in the region and their long-term goal of promoting political reform in order to create more stable and reliable partners.
Indeed, the key challenge in the years ahead will be to find the proper balance between these two objectives.
Given the prospect of further leadership changes and increasing instability, meeting that challenge has never been more important.
Central Banks and the Bottom Line
MUNICH – Around the world, central banks' balance sheets are becoming an increasingly serious concern – most notably for monetary policymakers themselves.
When the Swiss National Bank (SNB) abandoned its exchange-rate peg last month, causing the franc to soar by a nosebleed-inducing 20%, it seemed to be acting out of fear that it would suffer balance-sheet losses if it kept purchasing euros and other foreign currencies.
Similarly, critics of the decision to embark on quantitative easing in the eurozone worry that the European Central Bank is dangerously exposed to losses on the southern eurozone members' government bonds.
This prompted the ECB Council to leave 80% of those bond purchases on the balance sheets of national central banks, where they will be the responsibility of national governments.
In the United States, meanwhile, the "Audit the Fed" movement is back.
Motivated by growth in the Federal Reserve's assets and liabilities, Republicans are introducing bills in both chambers of Congress to require the Fed to reveal more information about its monetary and financial operations.
But should central banks really worry so much about balance-sheet profits and losses?
The answer, to put it bluntly, is no.
To be sure, central bankers, like other bankers, do not like losses.
But central banks are not like other banks.
They are not profit-oriented businesses.
Rather, they are agencies for pursuing the public good.
Their first responsibility is hitting their inflation target.
Their second responsibility is to help close the output gap.
Their third responsibility is to ensure financial stability.
Balance-sheet considerations rank, at best, a distant fourth on the list of worthy monetary-policy goals.
Equally important, central banks have limited tools with which to pursue these objectives.
It follows that a consideration that ranks only fourth in terms of priorities should not be allowed to dictate policy.
Indeed, a clear understanding of their priorities has often led central banks to incur losses when doing so is the price of avoiding deflation or preventing the exchange rate from becoming dangerously overvalued.
The Chilean, Czech, and Israeli central banks, for example, have operated with negative net capital for extended periods without damaging their policies.
The reason why adverse consequences need not follow is that the central bank can simply ask the government to replenish its capital, much like when a government covers the losses of its national post office.
Everyone is happier when transfers flow the other way.
But the role of the central bank is not to be a profit center, especially when those profits come at the cost of other, more important policy objectives.
All of this makes it hard to fathom what the SNB was thinking.
The sharp appreciation of the franc threatens to plunge the Swiss economy into deflation and recession.
The risk of balance-sheet losses for the SNB, with its euro-heavy portfolio, may be greater now that the ECB has embarked on quantitative easing.
But this is no justification for abandoning its mandate to pursue price and financial stability.
The SNB's motive, it appears, was entirely political.
Last year, the SNB was dragged into the highly charged debate surrounding a referendum on a “gold initiative" that would have required it to increase its gold reserves to 20%, and limited its ability to conduct monetary policy.
One rationale for the initiative was to bullet-proof the SNB's balance sheet against losses.
This goal was especially dear to the cantons, the states of the Swiss Confederation, which rely on transfers from the SNB for a significant share of their budgets.
The “gold initiative" was voted down, but the political debate was traumatic.
In January, with the accelerating depreciation of the euro, the debate flared up again.
The fear was that the SNB's balance-sheet losses might anger cantonal leaders to such a degree that the central bank's independence would be threatened.
Whether true or not, the political salience of the issue underscores the dangers of an arrangement that precludes the SNB from focusing fully on economic and price stability.
The obvious solution is not to abandon the franc's euro peg, but to change the cantonal financing mechanism.
And, to those who are concerned for the SNB's independence, one might ask a fundamental question: What is independence for if not to ignore those who complain that the central bank is insufficiently profit-oriented?
The same criticism applies to the loss-sharing arrangements that the ECB attached to its quantitative easing.
The ECB's priority should be to avoid deflation, not shield its shareholders from losses.
The 80/20 loss-sharing arrangement with the national central banks may have made quantitative easing more palatable in Germany, but it casts doubt on the unity of the eurozone's monetary policy.
In a context in which the ECB is seeking to “do whatever it takes" to vanquish deflation, this is an unhelpful complication.
Central bankers are praised softly when they make profits and criticized loudly when they incur losses.
They should have the good sense to ignore both the criticism and the praise.
Particularly now, the world's monetary policymakers have far more important problems to address.
Celebrity Central Bankers
CAMBRIDGE – Why do the comments of major economies’ central bankers command outsize attention nowadays?
It is not as if they change interest rates all of the time. Nor have they developed new, more robust models for analyzing the economy.
On the contrary, major central banks’ growth and inflation forecasts in the years since the financial crisis have consistently overestimated both growth and inflation – and by wide margins.
There are many good reasons for the attention lavished on monetary policymakers, including the rise of central-bank independence, public acceptance of the need to appoint highly competent technocrats to oversee the money supply, and the deepening of financial markets.
And many central bankers have been rightly lauded for their role in preventing a global meltdown during the financial crisis.
Even so, given the numerous uncertainties surrounding macroeconomic forecasts and the effects of policy instruments (not least quantitative easing), many academics find it puzzling that central bankers’ speeches and statements generate so much fanfare.
And for all of their heroics during the financial crisis, many central bankers have been far too inflexible in the aftermath, worrying too much about overshooting inflation targets, and too little about deflationary dynamics.
Moreover, central bankers bear a share of the blame for the crisis in the first place, mainly owing to lax regulatory policy.
Many central bankers portray former US Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan (who served from August 1987 until January 2006) as the culprit, saying that he projected an image of central-bank omnipotence that is not warranted in theory or practice.
But this critique is overblown: Greenspan is long gone, but the focus on central-bank pronouncements is greater than ever.
What, then, is going on?
I would argue that, in addition to all of the factors listed above, three further considerations should be noted.
For starters, the public perception that central bankers are omniscient makes them an attractive whipping boy for politicians.
Moreover, the digital revolution in media has elevated the role of business news, one of the few profit centers for print and broadcast journalism in many countries.
Central bankers’ pronouncements are of interest to businesspeople – especially in the financial sector – and businesspeople are of interest to advertisers.
Finally, and perhaps least appreciated, is the fact that central-bank policy pronouncements are almost unique in having clear and predictable effects on financial markets, at least in the very short run (which can be a day or less).
If Fed officials surprise markets by making more “hawkish” statements (suggesting an upward bias to policy interest rates) than investors were expecting, the dollar will usually appreciate; long-term dollar interest rates will usually rise; and the stock market typically will decline.
True, these effects may be small and transitory.
But, unlike most of the reams of macroeconomic information with which we are bombarded every day, central bankers’ speeches and opinions have relatively foreseeable effects, especially when the bank’s chair, president, or governor speaks, or other officials speak in concert.
And, with trillions of dollars swirling around global financial markets, this predictability creates a fat target, with investors willing to make massive bets when they are pretty sure they are right, even if the profit per dollar is small.
If you think I am exaggerating, consider the coverage of other economic news, say, unemployment, GDP, or the trade balance.
Virtually every story quickly shifts its focus to what the data mean for monetary policy.
Some economic indicators, such as unemployment or inflation data, are indeed immediately important for central banks, because they may directly concern their mandates, and therefore have rather predictable effects.
But much information is simply noise.
This makes policy opinions that come straight from the horse’s mouth almost uniquely valuable.
In short, there are many good reasons why central bankers receive so much media focus, including their relative independence and generally solid performance.
But there are also other reasons having to do with politicians’ need for scapegoats, the media’s struggle to reinvent itself in the Internet age, and central-bank pronouncements’ predictable short-term effects on financial markets.
These other factors have combined to create a bubble around central-bank pronouncements and decisions that grossly exaggerates their economic significance.
Is this a bubble that central bankers should worry about?
The answer is clearly yes.
The news bubble is of particular concern, because it reinforces the idea that central bankers somehow care disproportionately about financial markets, which is generally not the case.
Most central bankers really are targeting growth, inflation, and financial stability, if not necessarily in that order.
The political bubble is an inevitable product of central-bank independence, and preventing monetary policy from becoming a target for elected officials requires constant effort.
The predictability bubble is perhaps the trickiest to navigate, though my instinct is that less would be more.
Exaggerated importance is one kind of bubble that central bankers should always be eager to burst.
The Trouble With Financial Bubbles
LONDON – Very soon after the magnitude of the 2008 financial crisis became clear, a lively debate began about whether central banks and regulators could – and should – have done more to head it off.
The traditional view, notably shared by former US Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan, is that any attempt to prick financial bubbles in advance is doomed to failure.
The most central banks can do is to clean up the mess.
Bubble-pricking may indeed choke off growth unnecessarily – and at high social cost. But there is a counter-argument.
Economists at the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) have maintained that the costs of the crisis were so large, and the cleanup so long, that we should surely now look for ways to act pre-emptively when we again see a dangerous build-up of liquidity and credit.
Hence the fierce (albeit arcane and polite) dispute between the two sides at the International Monetary Fund’s recent meeting in Lima, Peru.
For the literary-minded, it was reminiscent of Jonathan Swift’s Gulliver’s Travels.
Gulliver finds himself caught in a war between two tribes, one of which believes that a boiled egg should always be opened at the narrow end, while the other is fervent in its view that a spoon fits better into the bigger, rounded end.
It is fair to say that the debate has moved on a little since 2008.
Most important, macroprudential regulation has been added to policymakers’ toolkit: simply put, it makes sense to vary banks’ capital requirements according to the financial cycle.
When credit expansion is rapid, it may be appropriate to increase banks’ capital requirements as a hedge against the heightened risk of a subsequent contraction.
This increase would be above what microprudential supervision – assessing the risks to individual institutions – might dictate. In this way, the new Basel rules allow for requiring banks to maintain a so-called countercyclical buffer of extra capital.
But if the idea of the countercyclical buffer is now generally accepted, what of the “nuclear option” to prick a bubble: Is it justifiable to increase interest rates in response to a credit boom, even though the inflation rate might still be below target?
And should central banks be given a specific financial-stability objective, separate from an inflation target?
Jaime Caruana, the General Manager of the BIS, and a former Governor of the Bank of Spain, answers yes to both questions.
In Lima, he argued that the so-called “separation principle,” whereby monetary and financial stability are addressed differently and tasked to separate agencies, no longer makes sense.
The two sets of policies are, of course, bound to interact; but Caruana argues that it is wrong to say that we know too little about financial instability to be able to act in a preemptive way.
We know as much about bubbles as we do about inflation, Caruana argues, and central banks’ need to move interest rates for reasons other than the short-term control of consumer-price trends should be explicitly recognized.
At the Lima meeting, the traditionalist counterview came from Benoît Cœuré of the European Central Bank.
Nemat Shafik, a deputy governor of the Bank of England, tried to position herself between these opposing positions. She proposed relying on three lines of defense against financial instability.
Microprudential regulation, she argued, is the first line of defense: if all banks are lending prudently, the chances of collective excesses are lower.
But the second line of defense is macroprudential manipulation of capital requirements, to be applied across the board or to selected market segments, such as mortgages.
And, if all else fails to achieve financial stability, central banks could change interest rates.
Because British law assigns capital regulation and interest-rate policy to two separate committees – with different members – within the Bank of England, the Shafik strategy would require some clever political and bureaucratic maneuvering.
Industrial quantities of research, analysis, and debate have been devoted to the causes of the 2008 crisis and its consequences; so it seems odd that senior central bankers are still so sharply divided on the central issue of financial stability.
All those days spent in secret conclave in Basel, drinking through the BIS’s legendary wine cellar, have apparently led to no consensus.
My view is that Caruana had the best of the arguments in Lima, and Cœuré the worst.
Sticking to a simple objective in the interests of a quiet life, even if you know it to be imperfect, is an inelegant posture at best.
We need our central bankers to make complex decisions and to be able to balance potentially conflicting objectives.
We accept that they will not always be right. However, it is surely incumbent on them to learn from the biggest financial meltdown of the last 80 years, rather than to press on, regardless, with policy approaches that so signally failed.
Central Bankers under Siege
CHICAGO – Poor Ben Bernanke!
As Chairman of the United States Federal Reserve Board, he has gone further than any other central banker in recent times in attempting to stimulate the economy through monetary policy.
He has cut short-term interest rates to the bone.
He has adopted innovative new methods of monetary easing.
Again and again, he has repeated that, so long as inflationary pressure remains contained, his main concern is the high level of US unemployment.
Yet progressive economists chastise him for not doing enough.
What more could they possibly want?
Raise the inflation target, they say, and all will be well.
Of course, this would be a radical departure for the Fed, which has worked hard to convince the public that it will keep inflation around 2%.
That credibility has allowed the Fed to be aggressive: it is difficult to imagine that it could have expanded its balance sheet to the extent that it has if the public thought that it could not be trusted on inflation.
So why do these economists want the Fed to sacrifice its hard-won gains?
The answer lies in their view of the root cause of continued high unemployment: excessively high real interest rates.
Their logic is simple.
Before the financial crisis erupted in 2008, consumers buoyed US demand by borrowing heavily against their rising house prices.
Now these heavily indebted households cannot borrow and spend any more.
An important source of aggregate demand has evaporated.
As consumers stopped buying, real (inflation-adjusted) interest rates should have fallen to encourage thrifty households to spend.
But real interest rates did not fall enough, because nominal interest rates cannot go below zero.
By increasing inflation, the Fed would turn real interest rates seriously negative, thereby coercing thrifty households into spending instead of saving.
With rising demand, firms would hire, and all would be well.
This is a different logic from the one that calls for inflation as a way of reducing long-term debt (at the expense of investors), but it has equally serious weaknesses.
First, while low rates might encourage spending if credit were easy, it is not at all clear that traditional savers today would go out and spend.
Think of the soon-to-retire office worker.
She saved because she wanted enough money to retire.
Given the terrible returns on savings since 2007, the prospect of continuing low interest rates might make her put even more money aside.
Alternatively, low interest rates could push her (or her pension fund) to buy risky long-maturity bonds.
Given that these bonds are already aggressively priced, such a move might thus set her up for a fall when interest rates eventually rise.
Indeed, America may well be in the process of adding a pension crisis to the unemployment problem.
Second, household over-indebtedness in the US, as well as the fall in demand, is localized, as my colleague Amir Sufi and his co-author, Atif Mian, have shown.
Hairdressers in Las Vegas lost their jobs partly because households there have too much debt stemming from the housing boom, and partly because many local construction workers and real-estate brokers were laid off.
Even if we can coerce traditional debt-free savers to spend, it is unlikely that there are enough of them in Las Vegas.
If these debt-free savers are in New York City, which did not experience as much of a boom and a bust, cutting real interest rates will encourage spending on haircuts in New York City, which already has plenty of demand, but not in Las Vegas, which has too little.
Put differently, real interest rates are too blunt a stimulus tool, even if they work.
Third, we have little idea about how the public forms expectations about the central bank’s future actions.
If the Fed announces that it will tolerate 4% inflation, could the public think that the Fed is bluffing, or that, if an implicit inflation target can be broken once, it can be broken again?
Would expectations shift to a much higher inflation rate?
How would the added risk premium affect long-term interest rates?
What kind of recession would the US have to endure to bring inflation back to comfortable levels?
The answer to all of these questions is: We really don’t know.
Given the dubious benefits of still lower real interest rates, placing central-bank credibility at risk would be irresponsible.
Finally, it is not even clear that the zero lower bound is primarily responsible for high US unemployment.
Traditional Keynesian frictions like the difficulty of reducing wages and benefits in some industries, as well as non-traditional frictions like the difficulty of moving when one cannot sell (or buy) a house, may share blame.
We cannot ignore high unemployment.
Clearly, improving indebted households’ ability to refinance at low current interest rates could help to reduce their debt burden, as would writing off some mortgage debt in cases where falling house prices have left borrowers deep underwater (that is, the outstanding mortgage exceeds the house’s value).
More could be done here.
The good news is that household debt is coming down through a combination of repayments and write-offs.
But it is also important to recognize that the path to a sustainable recovery does not lie in restoring irresponsible and unaffordable pre-crisis spending, which had the collateral effect of creating unsustainable jobs in construction and finance.
With a savings rate of barely 4% of GDP, the average US household is unlikely to be over-saving.
Sensible policy lies in improving the capabilities of the workforce across the country, so that they can get sustainable jobs with steady incomes.
That takes time, but it might be the best option left.
Central Banks and the Revenge of Politics
FRANKFURT – The reputation of central banks has always had its ups and downs.
For years, central banks’ prestige has been almost unprecedentedly high. But a correction now seems inevitable, with central-bank independence becoming a key casualty.
Central banks’ reputation reached a peak before and at the turn of the century, thanks to the so-called Great Moderation.
Low and stable inflation, sustained growth, and high employment led many to view central banks as a kind of master of the universe, able – and expected – to manage the economy for the benefit of all.
The depiction of US Federal Reserve Chair Alan Greenspan as “Maestro” exemplified this perception.
The 2008 global financial crisis initially bolstered central banks’ reputation further.
With resolute action, monetary authorities made a major contribution to preventing a repeat of the Great Depression.
They were, yet again, lauded as saviors of the world economy.
But central banks’ successes fueled excessively high expectations, which encouraged most policymakers to leave their monetary counterparts largely responsible for macroeconomic management.
Such “expectational” and, in turn, “operational” overburdening has exposed monetary policy’s true limitations.
In other words, central banks’ good reputation now seems to be backfiring.
And “personality overburdening” – when trust in the success of monetary policy is concentrated on the person at the helm of the institution – means that individual leaders’ reputations are likely to suffer as well.
Yet central banks cannot simply abandon their new operational burdens, particularly with regard to financial stability, which, as the 2008 crisis starkly demonstrated, cannot be maintained by price stability alone.
On the contrary, a period of low and stable interest rates may even foster financial fragility, leading to a “Minsky moment,” when asset values suddenly collapse, bringing down the whole system.
The limits of inflation targeting are now clear, and the strategy should be discarded.
Central banks now have to reconcile the need to maintain price stability with the responsibility – regardless of whether it is legally mandated – to reduce financial vulnerability.
This will not be easy, not least because of another new operational burden that has been placed on many central banks: macro-prudential and micro-prudential supervision.
Micro-prudential supervision, in particular, implies the risk of political pressure, interference with central banks’ independence, and policy conflicts, all of which could influence the behavior of financial intermediaries, by encouraging them to assume greater risk.
They know that their supervisor has powerful tools at its disposal – for example, it can lower borrowing costs, thereby protecting banks (at least for a while) – and a strong interest in protecting its reputation.
But, given the overburdening of central banks, reputational defense may be beyond their capacity.
While this is a global phenomenon, the European Central Bank is exceptionally weighed down.
As the central bank of the 19 member states of the European Monetary Union (EMU), the ECB also faces “extra-institutional overburdening.”
This became apparent in May 2010, when the ECB assumed the responsibility of purchasing the government bonds of countries that otherwise would have experienced substantial increases in long-term interest rates.
That intervention was a lose-lose proposition for the ECB.
It was essentially driven by politics: the ECB was picking up the slack for policymakers who were unwilling to fulfill their obligations.
But if the ECB had refused to intervene, financial markets could have faced substantial turmoil, for which, rightly or wrongly, it would have been blamed.
From that moment on, however, the ECB took on the political role of guaranteeing not only the survival of the euro, but also the continued inclusion of every EMU member country.
In 2012, ECB President Mario Draghi cemented this responsibility, pledging to do “whatever it takes” to preserve the euro.
“And believe me,” he asserted, “it will be enough.”
This stance led many to accuse the ECB of exceeding its mandate and violating European treaties.
But the European Court of Justice and the German Constitutional Court have, all in all, rejected that view.
Nonetheless, further litigation regarding the ECB’s unconventional monetary-policy measures is underway.
Against this background, it is perhaps unsurprising that central-bank independence – de jure or de facto – is once again up for debate.
The purpose of central-bank independence has always been to enable monetary policy to focus on maintaining price stability, without being subject to political pressure.
While this approach has always been controversial, given that it implies handing substantial control over the economy to unelected technocrats, past inflationary episodes have fostered broad acceptance of central-bank independence.
When central-bank mandates exceed price stability, however, their independence may seem increasingly out of place in a democratic society.
This is particularly true for the ECB: the stronger the perceived link between the extension of the ECB’s mandate and politics becomes, the more criticism its independent status will confront.
The failure of elected politicians to act appropriately – particularly in some eurozone countries – has turned central banks into the “only game in town.”
And this is turning out to be less a boon to their prestige than a threat to their independence.
The ECB, especially, is set to face growing pushback against its independent status, regardless of whether it manages to “save” the EMU.
After all, it would have to be quite powerful to succeed – too powerful for any democracy to abide.
Central Banking Deflowered
FLORENCE – After the European Central Bank announced on May 9 that it would buy the government bonds of Mediterranean countries experiencing severe fiscal strains, critics complained that the Bank had “lost its virginity.” The actions looked like a clear contravention of Article 21 of the ECB’s Statute, which forbids credit facilities to governments or to European Union institutions.
Similar comments were made about the US Federal Reserve in 2008, after it began large-scale purchases of non-conventional assets, including agency debt and mortgage-backed securities, in order to support the collapsing US housing market.
Former Fed Chairman Paul Volcker, for example, complained that the institution was operating at the bounds of legality.
In both cases, the central bank looked as if it was doing something other than traditional monetary policy.
In the past 30 years, a remarkable degree of consensus had been established that the primary, if not sole, responsibility of central banks was to ensure price stability.
Increasingly, since the early 1990’s, it had become fashionable to define price stability more precisely through the use of inflation targets.
Keeping prices roughly constant was a very different mission from the historical role of central banks.
In the original vision of central banking, price stability was not at all an obvious purpose, since the value of money was cast in terms of specific weights of precious metals.
Instead, central banks were established for two major purposes. First, they were to manage the state’s credit, almost inevitably in the wake of costly major wars.
This was how the oldest central banks, the Swedish Riksbank (1668) and the Bank of England (1694), came into being. Likewise, another wave of central banks was founded in the early nineteenth century, with the Norwegian and Finnish banks following the example of the Banque de France (1800).
In each case, the new bank was closely tied to the interests and influence of a narrow political elite.
The banks looked as if they were devices to harness financial power to an existing but controversial and threatened political order.
More democratic regimes were, consequently, rather suspicious of the political implications of institutional innovation.
It was suspicion of the politics behind a designated state-oriented central bank that led to the non-renewal of the charters, and the demise, of the First and Second Bank of the United States. Resistance to the process of political capture led in some countries (such as Switzerland) to opposition to establishing any central bank at all.
The ECB is the first and purest example of a modern central bank that is concerned only with the issuance of money and price stability.
It absorbed much of the political inheritance of Germany’s Bundesbank, whose establishment after World War II reflected Allied insistence on breaking with German central banking’s past traditions, in which political subservience and close ties to the financial establishment undermined monetary stability, leading to inflation and the destruction of the currency.
There had been a prior attempt to create an institution that would deal with short-term support mechanisms for member states: the European Monetary Cooperation Fund, launched in 1973 and governed by a board of central bank governors.
Designated as a European Community institution, it was regarded as being dangerously political.
The ECB was also unlike older central banks in that it was not seen as a source of support for an integrated but potentially vulnerable banking system.
In the late 1980’s and early 1990’s, there were debates about whether the ECB should be responsible for banking supervision and regulation.
The answer was no – a decision that, in the wake of the 2007-2008 credit crisis, appears to have been a fundamental mistake.
In other words, in the face of the crisis, the ECB needs to behave much more like the older central banks.
In the first place, it is becoming an institution concerned with state debt, particularly with its term structure, and with ensuring that the market for that debt continues to operate smoothly, without episodes of breakdown and panic.
Second, it has become clear that, whether they like it or not, central banks bear major responsibility for financial-sector stability.
There are obvious risks: non-conventional monetary policy might be considered a sort of fiscal policy, in which the central bank is allocating or redistributing resources to a particular constituency: the housing market in the case of the US, or recipients of government largesse in the European case.
The transition to the new stance will involve a broader and much more political role for the central bank.
Hence there will inevitably be a demand for greater accountability, and even for the involvement of political authorities in the process of setting central-bank policies.
Permanent virginity is a recipe for permanent sterility.
The choice for European central banking is now open: should it play around with multiple political partners, or should it settle down to stable marital bliss with a well-defined mechanism for responsibility and accountability?
Central Bankers Gone Wild?
PRAGUE – Sweeping criticisms of developed-country central banks have lately become all the rage.
The main line of attack goes something like this: monetary policymakers have been far too activist since 2008, overstepping their mandates and damaging the economy.
This narrative – which, bizarrely, is equally popular among otherwise irreconcilable ideological adversaries, such as libertarians and neo-Marxists – is patently wrong.
What the critics fail to understand is that modern central banks are responsible not just for fighting inflation, but for maintaining long-term price stability.
Like a person’s body temperature, price levels can go neither too high nor too low without causing serious complications.
Central banks must be as “activist” when combating deflation caused by weak demand as they are when fighting high inflation driven by excessively strong demand.
Though the battle is completely symmetric, the public assessment of it is bafflingly lopsided, especially in countries with financially conservative populations.
This includes my own country, the Czech Republic, a nation of small savers where the loan-to-deposit ratio remains well below 100%.
Czechs fear inflation, even though it hit a 13-year low last year and the Czech National Bank, of which I am Vice-Governor, has been fighting to avert the risk of deflation since 2013.
Another common complaint about developed-country central banks’ policies since 2008 is that they have redistributive effects.
They certainly do, but so what?
Any and all monetary-policy actions redistribute wealth.
An interest-rate hike pleases savers, whereas a rate cut is a boon to borrowers.
Importers prefer a strong exchange rate; exporters prefer a weak one.
To make any sense at all, monetary policy must have different effects on different groups at different times.
That is no mistake; it is the essence of monetary policy.
Some critics add that central banks are failing to hit their inflation targets anyway, so their activism is not only unwarranted, but also ineffective.
Sometimes they even manage to fit these contradictory criticisms in the same sentence, as though they were accusing someone of firing blanks, but somehow leaving people dead and wounded.
The reality is that central banks in the developed world have – in a truly fascinating way – succeeded in maintaining price stability and the purchasing power of money during and after the global financial crisis.
Had they not intervened, their economies would have faced catastrophic deflation, major asset-price slumps, and a complete meltdown of the financial and real sectors.
Clearly, strong action was the right response to the crisis (the extent to which central banks might have contributed to its outbreak is another matter).
In a system of elastic money with no intrinsic value, the quantity of money has to change over time if the purchasing power of money is to stay broadly constant.
So price stability, not the quantity of money, is what matters.
Central banks’ ballooning balance sheets reflect the depth of the problems that many economies faced after 2008.
In that context, central banks did what was necessary to maintain purchasing power and price stability.
There was no “activism” on their part; there was only a permanent mandate to fulfill.
If that sounds arrogant, let me offer some evidence.
People vote with their wallets.
If the purchasing power of their money had been dealt a blow after 2008, they would naturally have sought substitutes for their home currencies (other currencies, precious metals, or alternative forms of saving).
This rarely happened in the developed world.
Of course, it is true that central banks in many countries are now undershooting their inflation targets.
(Central bankers usually define the ideal “temperature” of the economy as annual inflation of about 2%.)
But while that is unpleasant, it is not disastrous, especially given that the decline in prices is partly a result of a supply – not demand – shock, in the form of very low oil prices.
That shock is benefiting consumers and poses no threat to price stability, at least in countries that are net oil importers.
Consider this scenario.
A firm plans to increase sales by 2%, but manages to achieve only 1% growth for two years in a row.
Would you consider the firm a failure?
Hardly.
After all, the planned and actual profits and turnovers of private companies can easily differ by 10% or more.
Most firms operate in a simpler environment with fewer variables than central banks.
So how can one expect central banks always to meet precise inflation targets, regardless of the economic circumstances?
To be clear, I am not saying that central banks should not be working hard to get closer to their targets.
They obviously should.
Moreover, they should certainly not allow inflation expectations to be destabilized.
But, when judging central banks, people need to maintain a proper sense of proportion.
And they really need to stop saying things that are untrue – for example, that central banks’ policy arsenal is not just exhaustible, but also nearly exhausted.
Monetary policymakers have plenty of weapons and an endless supply of ammunition at their disposal.
Those weapons have various calibers and different degrees of effectiveness at different times.
Not every weapon is right for every occasion or every economy.
But central banks’ ability to create and destroy money is theoretically unlimited.
Central bankers should say “enough” to the ignorant criticism we face.
None of our critics has been able to explain with any clarity or credibility why price stability is the wrong goal, which key objectives central banks should pursue instead, or what we could have done radically differently after 2008.
There is a simple reason for that: The approach taken by developed-country central banks since the crisis was the right one.
Indeed, it brought our economies back from the brink.
You’re welcome.
Central Banking Goes Negative
NEW HAVEN – In what could well be a final act of desperation, central banks are abdicating effective control of the economies they have been entrusted to manage.
First came zero interest rates, then quantitative easing, and now negative interest rates – one futile attempt begetting another.
Just as the first two gambits failed to gain meaningful economic traction in chronically weak recoveries, the shift to negative rates will only compound the risks of financial instability and set the stage for the next crisis.
The adoption of negative interest rates – initially launched in Europe in 2014 and now embraced in Japan – represents a major turning point for central banking.
Previously, emphasis had been placed on boosting aggregate demand – primarily by lowering the cost of borrowing, but also by spurring wealth effects from appreciating financial assets.
But now, by imposing penalties on excess reserves left on deposit with central banks, negative interest rates drive stimulus through the supply side of the credit equation – in effect, urging banks to make new loans regardless of the demand for such funds.
This misses the essence of what is ailing a post-crisis world.
As Nomura economist Richard Koo has argued about Japan, the focus should be on the demand side of crisis-battered economies, where growth is impaired by a debt-rejection syndrome that invariably takes hold in the aftermath of a “balance sheet recession.”
Such impairment is global in scope.
It’s not just Japan, where the purportedly powerful impetus of Abenomics has failed to dislodge a struggling economy from 24 years of 0.8% inflation-adjusted GDP growth.
It’s also the US, where consumer demand – the epicenter of America’s Great Recession – remains stuck in an eight-year quagmire of just 1.5% average real growth.
Even worse is the eurozone, where real GDP growth has averaged just 0.1% over the 2008-2015 period.
All of this speaks to the impotence of central banks to jump-start aggregate demand in balance-sheet-constrained economies that have fallen into 1930s-style “liquidity traps.”
As Paul Krugman noted nearly 20 years ago, Japan exemplifies the modern-day incarnation of this dilemma.
When its equity and property bubbles burst in the early 1990s, the keiretsu system – “main banks” and their tightly connected nonbank corporates – imploded under the deadweight of excess leverage.
But the same was true for over-extended, saving-short American consumers – to say nothing of a eurozone that was basically a levered play on overly-inflated growth expectations in its peripheral economies – Portugal, Italy, Ireland, Greece, and Spain.
In all of these cases, balance-sheet repair preempted a resurgence of aggregate demand, and monetary stimulus was largely ineffective in sparking classic cyclical rebounds.
This could be the greatest failure of modern central banking.
Yet denial runs deep.
Former Federal Reserve Chair Alan Greenspan’s “mission accomplished” speech in early 2004 is an important case in point.
Greenspan took credit for using super-easy monetary policy to clean up the mess after the dot-com bubble burst in 2000, while insisting that the Fed should feel vindicated for not leaning against the speculative madness of the late 1990s.
That left Greenspan’s successor on a very slippery slope.
Quickly out of ammunition when the Great Crisis hit in late 2008, former Fed Chair Ben Bernanke embraced the new miracle drug of quantitative easing – a powerful antidote for markets in distress but ultimately an ineffective tool to plug the hole in consumer balance sheets and spark meaningful revival in aggregate demand.
European Central Bank President Mario Draghi’s famous 2012 promise to do “whatever it takes” to defend the euro took the ECB down the same path – first zero interest rates, then quantitative easing, now negative policy rates.
Similarly, Bank of Japan Governor Haruhiko Kuroda insists that so-called QQE (quantitative and qualitative easing) has ended a corrosive deflation – even though he has now opted for negative rates and pushed back the BOJ’s 2% inflation target to mid-2017.
It remains to be seen whether the Fed will resist the temptation of negative interest rates.
But most major central banks are clinging to the false belief that there is no difference between the efficacy of the conventional tactics of monetary policy – driven by adjustments in policy rates above the zero bound – and unconventional tools such as quantitative easing and negative interest rates.
Therein lies the problem.
In the era of conventional monetary policy, transmission channels were largely confined to borrowing costs and their associated impacts on credit-sensitive sectors of real economies, such as homebuilding, motor vehicles, and business capital spending.
As those sectors rose and fell in response to shifts in benchmark interest rates, repercussions throughout the system (so-called multiplier effects) were often reinforced by real and psychological gains in asset markets (wealth effects).
That was then.
In the brave new era of unconventional monetary policy, the transmission channel runs mainly through wealth effects from asset markets.
Two serious complications have arisen from this approach.
The first is that central banks have ignored the risks of financial instability.
Drawing false comfort from low inflation, overly accommodative monetary policies have led to massive bubbles in asset and credit markets, resulting in major distortions in real economies.
When the bubbles burst and pushed unbalanced economies into balance-sheet recessions, inflation-targeting central banks were already low on ammunition – taking them quickly into the murky realm of zero policy rates and the liquidity injections of quantitative easing.
Second, politicians, drawing false comfort from frothy asset markets, were less inclined to opt for fiscal stimulus – effectively closing off the only realistic escape route from a liquidity trap.
Lacking fiscal stimulus, central bankers keep upping the ante by injecting more liquidity into bubble-prone financial markets – failing to recognize that they are doing nothing more than “pushing on a string” as they did in the 1930s.
The shift to negative interest rates is all the more problematic.
Given persistent sluggish aggregate demand worldwide, a new set of risks is introduced by penalizing banks for not making new loans.
This is the functional equivalent of promoting another surge of “zombie lending” – the uneconomic loans made to insolvent Japanese borrowers in the 1990s.
Central banking, having lost its way, is in crisis.
Can the world economy be far behind?
Central Europe’s Digital Freedom Struggle
PRAGUE – A quarter-century ago, when the Berlin Wall fell and the Iron Curtain rose, the people of Central Europe chose capitalism over communism and democracy over dictatorship.
Today, however, citizens of the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, and Slovakia – the region's four ex-communist countries – are turning in a disappointingly mixed performance when it comes to promoting and protecting Internet freedom.
A recent study in these four countries by our organizations shows that all of them can – and should – play a powerful role in promoting the free flow of information.
But much needs to be improved.
The Czech Republic has a strong record of supporting free expression, curbing surveillance, and promoting transparency, but Hungary persecutes bloggers and publishers with heavy fines and other sanctions.
Poland and Slovakia fall somewhere in between.
The four countries are poised to benefit greatly from the new digital world.
Each has the prerequisites for open and lively online communities: decent Internet penetration and democratic, plural political systems.
The region's “high level of mathematical education, low overheads, and a globalized, westernized young generation makes for a heady and successful mix," the Financial Times recently reported.
Indeed, the FT's “New Europe 100" list of innovators from Central and Eastern Europe includes many examples of Internet success stories.
There is “a Hungarian doctor who has created a medical advice website driven by social media, a team of Polish students who have built an award-winning robot that could operate on Mars, and a Slovak inventor of a flying car."
And yet, despite their own experiences under communism and the outcry within their borders over Edward Snowden's revelations of Internet snooping, the governments of Central Europe have not taken a strong stand to rein in their own authorities.
The police file thousands of requests each year to monitor Internet use, and local courts almost always grant them.
Users are rarely notified of such requests, and the basis on which they are made is often unclear.
Too often, laws ensuring Internet freedom are ignored or bent.
Debates rage over whether content should be blocked and which copyright protections apply to Internet publications.
Bureaucrats drag their feet on requirements to make information accessible online, and the courts are over-eager to initiate cases that should be settled with notice-and-takedown procedures specifically devised for online content.
In all four countries, the legal framework is badly in need of reform to clarify the boundaries of freedom of expression for bloggers and journalists.
Legislation must to be modernized to reflect developments in the online world and to recognize the enormous shift in personal communication and news delivery.
In Slovakia, online journalists do not enjoy the same legal protection as print journalists.
Court rulings on Internet content have favored politicians over the press.
In Poland, judges demand quick removal of offensive online content; defamation is subject to criminal prosecution.
Transparency needs to be increased throughout Central Europe.
Current legislation is vague enough to allow government agencies to refuse freedom-of-information requests on the basis of claims of commercial confidentiality or privacy concerns.
Hungary is the region's single worst performer.
In 2010, its right-wing government adopted media legislation that requires all news organizations to register with the state and stipulates that the stories they report should be “balanced," of “relevance to the citizens of Hungary," and “respect[ful of] human dignity."
The law also weakened the protection of journalists' sources.
Penalties for violating the rules include fines, suspension, or shutdowns.
The European Commission, the Council of Europe, and press watchdog groups were unanimous in criticizing the legislation, but the Hungarian government persists in its media crackdown.
A new criminal code leaves room for abuse of authority, including the possibility of filtering online content.
Last fall, the government attempted to introduce an “Internet tax" of €0.50 euros ($0.60) per gigabyte, the moral equivalent of a tax on reading a book or conversing with a friend.
After more than 100,000 protesters gathered in Budapest, the proposal was withdrawn – at least for now.
These ex-communist countries have a unique opportunity to become global leaders in Internet freedom.
At the International Telecommunications Union summit in Dubai in December 2012, Michał Boni, a former Polish minister of administration and digitization, played an important role in blocking efforts to impose government controls on Internet use.
And yet, in the meantime, Poland's foreign ministry has not made Internet freedom a priority.
Unlike the Czech Republic, for example, Poland still has not joined the Freedom Online Coalition.
Two decades ago, the people of Central Europe rose up to bring down secretive, authoritarian governments.
Today, the region's ex-communist countries have made considerable progress.
But much hard work remains to be done.
A good place to start would be to lead the fight for Internet freedom.
Central Europe’s Misguided War on Drugs
WARSAW – It was two decades ago this summer that communist rule began to implode from Tallinn in the Baltic to Tirana in the Adriatic, ushering in free elections, market reforms, and expanded civil liberties.
Since then, the countries of Central and Eastern Europe have come a long way.
Many are now members of the European Union.
My homeland, Poland, has a steady economy and a thriving media.
Yet Poland, like many of the other new democracies in our region, remains stuck in the past when it comes to the humane treatment of drug users.
Indeed, throughout the former Soviet bloc, there is a disturbing trend in using outdated, conservative, and heavy-handed policies to address drug abuse.
For example, Gdansk – the birthplace of the Solidarity movement – does not have a single methadone treatment center.
People must travel for three hours to get the medicine that is proven to control cravings and reduce the harms of drug use.
And they are the lucky ones.
Only 5% of opiate users in Poland have access to methadone at all, compared to 40% in Germany.
Instead of focusing on treatment that works, the Polish government chooses to give priority to long-term rehabilitation centers located in the depths of the countryside that have little, if anything, to do with evidence-based medicine.
Poland also chooses to treat possession of even the smallest quantities of drugs as criminal, as evidenced by the fact that 60% of people sentenced for drug possession in Poland are marijuana smokers.
Addressing drug use through criminalization and rehabilitation centers does nothing to curb demand, however, and usage rates have failed to decline.
By driving users underground, criminalization contributes to a deepening public-health crisis.
This pattern persists across Central and Eastern Europe, where governments have also opted to imprison drug users.
In Hungary, for example, the penal code calls for two years imprisonment for personal possession by a drug-dependent person.
In neighboring Slovakia, the penalty for personal possession is, as in Poland, up to three years.
This approach is not only inhumane, but also economically untenable: leaders in these countries should be encouraged to redirect scarce law enforcement, court, and prison resources towards more pressing causes.
Simply put, governments can no longer afford to drain precious time and money that could be better spent elsewhere by locking up people for drug-related offenses.
If Poland and its neighbors are to chart a new way forward, at least three things must happen.  First, these countries should look West for alternative, and more humane, drug policies.
A report released recently by the United Kingdom’s Drug Policy Commission correctly calls for a “smarter” drug policy that focuses on addressing associated violence rather than simply making arrests.
Officials in Central and Eastern Europe should pay heed to recent comments by the UK’s Home Office, which said that “harm reduction underpins every element of our approach to tackling this complex issue.”
Portugal recently went a step further in voting to decriminalize recreational drugs, including heroin and cocaine – a move that has led to a significant decline in drug-related deaths and a fall in new HIV infections.
Second, law-makers should listen to their constituents: a recent public awareness campaign by Gazeta Wyborcza , a leading Polish daily newspaper, collected more than 23,000 signatures in five days for a petition calling for changes to the current drug law.
The changes, modeled after Germany’s progressive policies, would stop punishing people for possessing small amounts of drugs for their own use, impose stricter penalties for dealers and provide more effective treatment for drug-dependent people.
In a step forward, a debate in the Polish parliament on the proposed drug law is set to start in September.
Young people should not start their working lives with criminal records because of personal possession.
Finally, at the European level, EU policymakers can help by encouraging member states to decriminalize possession of small amounts of drugs.
By freeing up resources devoted to enforcing policies against low-level users, countries can better tackle serious drug-supply issues and provide people with the effective treatment that they need and deserve.
Central Europe’s Unsentimental Education
BUDAPEST – This month marks the 20th anniversary of the reburial of Imre Nagy, the leader of Hungary’s failed anti-Soviet revolution of 1956.
The reinternment, organized by Hungary’s anti-communist opposition on the 31st anniversary of his execution, drew more than 100,000 attendees, heralding the beginning of the end of the country’s sclerotic regime.
We Hungarians, and Central Europe in general, have come far since those heady times, but the past 20 years have also given us much cause to question the path we took.
Hungary played a special role in the collapse of Communism, accelerating the process by opening its borders for East German refugees.
But democratic transformation in Hungary required an opposition strategy throughout the 1980’s: revolution wouldn’t work, as the Soviet invasion in 1956 showed.
Nor would internal reforms work, because the Soviets would intervene to save the system, as they did in 1968 in Czechoslovakia.
Instead, the new strategy was to sideline the issue of political power. Rather than attacking Communist rule directly, we would create small islands of freedom, inter-connected social circles and associations, which, when the moment came, could all be connected in order to change the system.
In Hungary, several youth organizations existed and were aware of each other, so the political community that took part in the political changes in Hungary in 1989 was organized on this basis.
History also played a part in the success of the Hungarian transition.
The 1956 revolution was a real one, with barricades. In no other Central European country did Communists experience the possibility of paying with their own lives for the suffering and oppression that they inflicted on others.
This historical experience was good for reform capability.
A new generation was also needed.
It appeared symbolically on June 16, 1989, when I had the opportunity to speak on behalf of the young generation.
A whole generation felt that the moment had come when Hungarians could at last determine their own future.
So, what kind of future did they determine?
The past 20 years can be divided into three phases.
First, a market economy was created, the rule of law established, and democratic institutions built.
Next, we applied for admission to NATO and prepared for European Union membership, with all of the institutional reforms that these goals implied.
The third phase was one of economic catch-up, which, unlike the first two phases, has not really been successful in Hungary, which today may even be falling back.
But, for Central Europe as a whole, the past 20 years have been the best since the Peace of Westphalia, with Slovakia and Slovenia even joining the euro zone.
Nevertheless, the 20th anniversary of the collapse of communism is overshadowed by the global financial and economic crisis.
And it is now clear that the biggest winners of globalization are no longer the Europeans or the Americans, but the Asians.
The world market is being re-divided – peacefully, because territories and markets are separated, so that no power occupies another power’s territory.
But Europe must nonetheless recognize the need to distinguish clearly between partners, competitors, and opponents, and to formulate a more sophisticated and articulated policy towards Russia, in particular.
For example, we Central Europeans are opponents when we do not accept Russia’s policy of renewing “spheres of interest” and “security zones.”
Moreover, after all that has happened in the past six months, Central Europeans can no longer look up to old countries representing the moral values of Western civilization. This crisis was not caused by bad luck or some professional misunderstanding, but by character problems, especially in the United States and later Western Europe.
Money was stolen, not merely “mismanaged.”
Investments were not simply bad, but unacceptably risky.
The moral state of business leaders caused this crisis, and you cannot find Central Europeans among those leaders.
Central Europe has found itself in a completely new situation. Crisis management measures undertaken in the Western world are practically cutting our countries off from the EU market.
In this situation, Central European countries must cooperate to defend their own interests, as well as their dream of a common Europe.
The question for the European elite is whether we believe in the work of the past 20 years, whether we believe in an integrated European market and an ever-widening European Community.
If not, then first the biggest and the strongest countries, and then the Central Europeans, will turn away from the European dream.
Those of us who believe that the past 20 years made sense, and that we are on the right track, are still the majority in Hungary.
Everyone in Europe and the world needs a unified, robust Europe.
If our faith is strong enough, we can survive this crisis without destroying what we have built together by opening our borders, destroying the Wall, unifying Germany, and completing our democratic transitions.
Stopping Women’s Next Biggest Killer
GENEVA – For women, the act of bringing life into this world has historically meant risking their own lives, with the real prospect of death during childbirth.
But, though great strides are being made in reducing maternal deaths in poor countries, those gains could be undone by a growing threat to women’s health.