Hard questions are being asked: Is capitalism as we know it doomed?
Is the market no longer able to generate prosperity?
Is China’s brand of state capitalism an alternative and potentially victorious paradigm?
The pervasive soul-searching prompted by such questions has nurtured a growing recognition that capitalism’s success depends not only on macroeconomic policy or economic indicators.
It rests on a bedrock of good governance and the rule of law – in other words, a well-performing state.
The West overlooked the fundamental importance of this while it was fighting communism.
The standard bearers of the Cold War were not just the United States and the Soviet Union, but, in ideological terms, the individual and the collectivity.
When competing in newly independent or developing countries, this ideological opposition became Manichean, fostering a fierce suspicion, if not outright rejection, of rival principles.
As a result, strengthening state institutions was too often seen in the West as communist subterfuge, while the Soviet bloc viewed the slightest notion of individual freedom and responsibility as a stalking horse for capitalist counter-revolution.
Leading economists have long argued that the West’s greater reliance on markets resulted in faster and more robust economic growth.
But viewing the state and the market in terms of their inherent conflict no longer reflects reality (if it ever did).
Indeed, it is increasingly obvious that the threat to capitalism today emanates not from the state’s presence, but rather from its absence or inadequate performance.
Consider recent events in Argentina, which is facing certain economic losses as anxious investors have second thoughts about the country in the aftermath of the government’s nationalization of energy giant YPF.
That response is only logical, as investors seek the security of a well-functioning legal system to protect them from capricious political decisions.
Mexico provides further proof that the market alone is not enough.
An efficient judiciary and effective policing are necessary for capitalism to thrive.
In Brazil, the government is daring, for the first time, to address the lawlessness of the overcrowded favelas that ring the country’s large cities.
Or consider Ghana’s prosperity and how, like Brazil’s, it is going hand in hand with improved governance.
At the opposite extreme, Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez’s undermining of his country’s institutions, prodding it onto a narco-state trajectory, places Venezuela alongside Haiti as an exception to Latin America’s recent economic success.
More generally, the world’s thriving countries are those with strong and effective institutions, backed by legal frameworks that guarantee the rule of law.
Latin America and Africa are not the only examples that prove the point.
The European Union’s internal problems, and its ongoing sovereign-debt crisis, are clearly linked to the weakness of its institutions, and, on Europe’s periphery, it still confronts feckless democracies.
Indeed, on Europe’s doorstep, the show trial and imprisonment of former Ukrainian Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko is jeopardizing her country’s international economic standing.
In particular, President Viktor Yanukovych’s contempt for the rule of law has put Ukraine’s relations with the European Union in cold storage, with a comprehensive free-trade and association agreement on hold pending the release of Tymoshenko and other political prisoners.
Meanwhile, political trials in Egypt are attracting international attention and deterring foreign investment.
In Asia, China is exposing the fallacy of looking at state capitalism as a competing alternative to liberal capitalism.
Approaching them as alternatives is, in fact, little more than an intellectual remnant of the Cold War, much like the concept of “state capitalism” itself.
With its remarkable ability to adapt, China is making strides to accommodate the rising power of its markets and people.
In the process, officials are acknowledging the importance of good governance, as demonstrated by recent efforts to justify the purge and investigation of Bo Xilai as an example of the Communist Party “safeguarding the rule of law.”
Adam Smith, that icon of market theory, argued that wealth is created when public institutions enable the “invisible hand” of the market to align interests.
The Cold War distorted that wisdom.
In a world free of that era’s ideological constraints, it is time to say loud and clear that the future of capitalism is linked to effective governance and the rule of law, and thus to the consolidation of well-functioning states.
Giving Till it Heals
In my new book The End of Poverty , I show how extreme poverty can be ended by 2025, but only if the rich world follows through on its promise to help the poorest countries.
In order to thrive, and to foster the private-sector investment needed for long-term growth, an economy requires functioning health and education systems, investments in soil nutrients and water management, and basic infrastructure such as electricity and motorized transport.
Yet the poorest countries, even well governed ones, lack the resources to finance these investments.
Lack of adequate foreign assistance is one of the greatest disgraces on our planet, and the United States has been the biggest laggard of all.
It is urgent that the US wake up to global realities, and that it follow through on its commitments.
The most famous single promise by the rich countries has been to provide aid to the poorest countries equal to at least 0.7% of their GNP.
The commitment began 44 years ago, in 1961, when the United Nations General Assembly adopted the objective that foreign assistance should increase significantly, “so as to reach as soon as possible approximately 1% of the combined national incomes of the economically advanced countries.”
At the time, foreign assistance was about 0.5% of rich-country income.
Despite the promises, aid continued to decline.
To implement these commitments, world leaders, including US President George W. Bush, met again in Monterrey, Mexico, to adopt the Monterrey Consensus on how to achieve the breakthrough from poverty.
The personal presence of Bush is notable, because the rich countries once again adopted the target of 0.7% of GNP, with the US being a signatory.
The US government often declares these days that it is not bound by any “arbitrary” numerical target such as 0.7% of GNP.
Top officials even declare that the US never signed on to such a goal.
Yet the US and other countries did sign the Monterrey Consensus urging “developed countries that have not done so to make concrete efforts towards the target of 0.7% of Gross National Product as official development assistance.”
It could hardly be more clear.
Alas, the US has shown absolutely no “concrete efforts” towards keeping this commitment.
In fact, US official development assistance amounts to just 0.15% of America’s GNP, which is less than one-fourth the global target.
This contrasts with the 4% of GNP that the US spends on its military, roughly $500 billion this year.
So the US spends around thirty times more on the military than it does on peaceful development aid for the poorest countries.
From a global point of view, there are currently five countries that have reached 0.7% of GNP in aid: Denmark, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, and Sweden.
Six more countries, all in Europe, have recently set a timetable to reach 0.7% of GNP by the year 2015.
They are Belgium, Finland, France, Ireland, Spain, and the United Kingdom.
UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan, in his report in advance of the UN summit of world leaders in September 2005, has called on all donor countries to reach at least 0.5% of GNP in aid by 2009, and 0.7% by 2015.
He also noted that countries like Germany and Japan that aspire to permanent UN Security Council membership have a particular responsibility of global stewardship in reaching the target.
Sadly, the ideological mouthpieces for the super-rich in the US, especially the editorial page of The Wall Street Journal , remain bitterly opposed to foreign aid, even if it’s just 70 cents per hundred dollars of income!
In criticizing my book, a Wall Street Journal review said that I was calling for “Giving Till it Hurts.”
But there is a limit to greed.
I am quite sure that The Wall Street Journal does not really represent the interests or views of many or even most of American rich people, including the millionaires and billionaires whose contributions to aid could make a huge difference for the lives of millions of people.
Many remarkable philanthropists, such as Bill Gates, are already leading the way.
I believe that few wealthy people would refuse to contribute a small portion of their huge wealth for the chance to save the lives of millions of people each year and help the poorest countries get the first foot on the ladder of economic development.
They will know that they would not only save lives, but also contribute to a much safer and more prosperous world.
Instead of worrying that 70 cents per $100 is giving till it hurts, our slogan in the rich countries should be “Giving Till it Heals.”
Global Action for Global Recovery
WASHINGTON, DC – The global economy has entered a dangerous new phase.
There is a path to sustained recovery, but it is narrowing.
To navigate it, we need strong political will around the world – leadership over brinksmanship, cooperation over competition, and action over reaction.
One of the main problems today is too much debt in the global financial system – among sovereigns, banks, and households, and especially among the advanced economies.
This is denting confidence and holding back spending, investment, and job creation.
These countries face a weak and bumpy recovery, with unacceptably high unemployment.
The eurozone debt crisis has worsened, and financial strains are rising.
Political indecision in some quarters is making matters worse.
Social tensions bubbling beneath the surface could well add fuel to the crisis of confidence.
In these circumstances, we need collective action for global recovery along four main policy lines: repair, reform, rebalancing, and rebuilding.
First, repair.
Before doing anything else, we must relieve some of the balance-sheet pressures – on sovereigns, households, and banks – that risk smothering the recovery.
Advanced countries need credible medium-term plans to stabilize and reduce public debt.
But consolidating too quickly can hurt the recovery and worsen job prospects.
There is a solution.
Credible measures that deliver and anchor savings in the medium term will help create space to accommodate growth today – by allowing a slower pace of consolidation.
Of course, the precise path is different for each country, as some are under market pressure and have no choice, while others have more space.
It is also important to relieve pressure on household and banks.
With respect to the United States, I welcome President Barack Obama’s recent proposals to address growth and employment; actions like more aggressive principal-reduction programs or helping homeowners to take advantage of low-interest rates would also help.
And, in Europe, the sovereigns must address firmly their financing problems through credible fiscal consolidation.
In addition, to support growth, banks must have sufficient capital buffers.
The second issue is reform, with the financial sector a high priority.
On the positive side, we have broad agreement on higher-quality capital and liquidity standards with appropriate phase-in arrangements.
But substantial gaps remain and must be addressed through international cooperation in order to avoid regulatory arbitrage.
I would also include the social dimension under the reform banner – particularly the need to identify and nurture sources of growth capable of generating sufficient jobs.
This is especially important for the young.
The third target of collective action, rebalancing, has two meanings.
First, it means shifting demand back to the private sector when it is strong enough to carry the load.
That hasn’t happened yet.
Rebalancing also involves a global demand switch from external-deficit countries to those running large current-account surpluses.
With lower spending and higher savings in the advanced economies, key emerging markets must take up the slack and start providing the demand needed to power the global recovery.
But this rebalancing, too, has not happened sufficiently, and if the advanced economies succumb to recession, nobody will escape.
The fourth policy imperative is rebuilding.
Many countries, including those with low income levels, need to rebuild their economic defenses – for example, by strengthening their budget positions – to protect themselves against future storms.
This will also help to provide the space for growth-enhancing public investment and important social safety nets.
In these circumstances, the International Monetary Fund – with its 187 member countries – is uniquely positioned to foster collective action.
Our policy advice can help shine a light on the pressing issues of the day – growth, core vulnerabilities, and interconnectedness.
Our lending can provide breathing space for countries in difficulty.
And, looking beyond the crisis horizon, the IMF can also help construct a safer and more stable international financial system.
This is no time for half-measures or muddling through.
If we seize the moment, we can navigate our way out of this crisis and restore strong, sustainable, and balanced global growth.
But we need to act quickly – and together.
Do We Want Powerful Leaders?
CAMBRIDGE – A trend toward greater authoritarianism seems to be spreading worldwide.
Vladimir Putin has successfully used nationalism to tighten his control over Russia and seems to enjoy great popularity.
Xi Jinping is regarded as China’s most powerful leader since Mao Zedong, presiding over a growing number of crucial decision-making committees.
Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, recently replaced his prime minister with one more compliant with his drive to concentrate executive power.
And some commentators fear that if Donald Trump wins the US presidency in November, he could turn out to be an “American Mussolini.”
Abuse of power is as old as human history.
The Bible reminds us that after David defeated Goliath and later became king, he seduced Bathsheba and deliberately sent her husband to certain death in battle.
Leadership involves the use of power, and, as Lord Acton famously warned, power corrupts.
And yet leaders without power – the ability to cause others to do what we want – cannot lead.
The Harvard psychologist David C. McClelland once distinguished three groups of people by their motivations.
Those who care most about doing something better have a “need for achievement.”
Those who think most about friendly relations with others have a “need for affiliation.”
And those who care most about having an impact on others show a “need for power.”
This third group turned out to be the most effective leaders, which brings us back to Acton.
But power is not good or bad per se.
Like calories in a diet, too little produces emaciation, and too much leads to obesity.
Emotional maturity and training are important means of limiting a narcissistic lust for power, and appropriate institutions are essential to getting the balance right.
Ethics and power can be mutually reinforcing.
But ethics can also be used instrumentally to increase power.
Machiavelli addressed the importance of ethics for leaders, but primarily in terms of the impression that visible displays of virtue made upon followers.
The appearance of virtue is an important source of a leader’s soft power or the ability to get what one wants by attraction rather than coercion or payment.
Indeed, for Machiavelli, a prince’s virtues should only be apparent, never real.
“I will even venture to affirm that if he has and invariably practices them all, they are hurtful, while the appearance of having them is useful.”
Machiavelli also stressed the importance of the hard power of coercion and payment when a leader faces a tradeoff with the soft power of attraction, “since being loved depends upon his subjects, while his being feared depends upon himself.”
Machiavelli believed that when one must choose, it is better to be feared than to be loved.
But he also understood that fear and love are not opposites, and that the opposite of love – hatred – is particularly dangerous for leaders.
The anarchic world of Italian Renaissance city-states was more violent and dangerous than that of today’s democracies, but elements of Machiavelli’s advice remain relevant to modern leaders.
In addition to the courage of the lion, Machiavelli also extolled the strategic deceptiveness of the fox.
Idealism without realism rarely reshapes the world, but as we judge our modern democratic leaders, we should keep both Machiavelli and Acton in mind.
We should look for and support leaders who possess an ethical element of self-restraint and a need for achievement and affiliation as well as for power.
But there is another aspect of Acton’s dilemma besides the ethics of leaders: the demands of followers.
Leadership is a combination of leaders’ traits, followers’ demands, and the context in which they interact.
A Russian public anxious about its status; a Chinese people concerned about rampant corruption; a Turkish population divided over ethnicity and religion: All create enabling environments for leaders who feel a psychological need for power.
Similarly, to satisfy his narcissistic need for power, Trump magnifies the discontent of a part of the population through clever manipulation of television news programs and social media.
This is where institutions play a crucial role.
In the early United States, James Madison and the new country’s other founders saw that neither leaders nor followers would be angels, and that institutions must be designed to reinforce restraints.
They concluded from their study of the ancient Roman Republic that what was needed to prevent the rise of an overweening leader like Julius Caesar was an institutional framework of separation of powers, whereby faction would balance faction.
Madison’s answer to the possibility of an “American Mussolini” was a system of institutional checks and balances ensuring that the US would never resemble Italy in 1922 – or Russia, China, or Turkey today.
The American founders wrestled with the dilemma of how powerful we want our leaders to be.
Their answer was designed to preserve liberty, not maximize government efficiency.
Many commentators have complained about institutional decay, while others point to changes – such as the advent of reality television and social media – that have coarsened the quality of public discourse.
Later this year, we may find out how resilient the American founders’ framework for power and leadership really is.
The Threat To Global Banking Standards
LONDON – The financial crisis of 2008 gave a big boost to the global standard-setters.
Suddenly, the Basel Committee (which sets the standards for international banking supervision) was leading the financial news.
Dinner parties in Manhattan and Kensington were consumed with the finer points of Basel II and the evils of procyclical capital requirements.
Governments that had been suspicious of international interference were eager for tougher global rules to prevent banking crises from spilling across borders and infecting others, like bouts of Asian flu.
The concrete consequences of this enthusiasm were the creation of the Financial Stability Board (FSB), born out of the ashes of the Financial Stability Forum, at the G20’s London summit in April 2009, and inclusion of representatives of all G20 members among the key rule makers in Basel and elsewhere.
The G7’s domination gave way to the hope that broader membership would produce more comprehensive buy-in and stronger political support for increasing the banking system’s capital.
All this change has worked, up to a point.
The Basel III regulations, for example, more than doubled the capital an individual bank should hold, and enhanced the quality of that capital.
The system looks somewhat safer as a result.
But now there are dangerous signs that the commitment to stronger global standards – indeed, to any common standards – may be on the wane.
Many predicted this trend, but for the wrong reason.
Skeptics warned that it would be far harder to reach agreement among 20 or more countries than it had been among the dozen pre-crisis Basel Committee members (mainly European countries, with only the US, Canada, and Japan representing the world beyond).
In practice, that has not turned out to be a major problem.
Basel III was agreed far more quickly than Basel II was.
Political pressure from finance ministers, expressed through the FSB, proved effective.
In fact, recent tensions have been more old-fashioned, pitting the US against the eurozone, with the UK and others stuck in between.
The US has been pressing for tighter controls on banks’ internal models, and for a limit on how much a bank’s models can reduce its assets on a risk-weighted basis.
Agreement on these so-called output floors has so far proved impossible.
The Europeans argue that their banks’ corporate lending is inherently less risky. After all, EU banks lend more to higher-rated large companies, which access US capital markets, rather than borrowing from banks.
They also hold more low-risk mortgages on their balance sheets, in the absence of a European equivalent of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac (America’s two quasi-public mortgage banks), which hoovered up securitized US mortgages.
At its meeting in Santiago, Chile, in November, the Basel Committee conspicuously failed to agree on a solution, and kicked the issue upstairs to the committee of Governors and Heads of Supervision, which will try again in January.
They will probably find a way to thread this particular needle.
But the future for global standards looks more uncertain than it has for some time.
Since the 2008 crisis, many countries, while ostensibly supporting the development of tighter global rules, have been taking other measures to protect their own financial systems.
The collapse of Lehman Brothers and others showed, in former Bank of England Governor Mervyn King’s memorable phrase, that big banks are “global in life, but national in death.”
In other words, when a global bank crashes, the host-country regulators must pick up the local pieces.
That’s why requirements to establish local subsidiaries, with local capital, have been adopted.
Gone are the days when banks could set up branches all over the planet, with support from the parent’s balance sheet.
Subsidiarization is now the rule.
And, looking ahead, we can see that the two biggest players in the FSB and Basel have other preoccupations.
Donald Trump’s incoming US administration has already signaled its suspicion of foreign entanglements and international commitments.
Making America great again is not likely to involve new enthusiasm for more intrusive rules made in Basel.
Those who advocate rolling back much of the 2010 Dodd-Frank financial-reform legislation, in favor of a higher leverage ratio, as promoted in a bill advanced by Representative Jeb Hensarling, envisage a “Made in the USA” version of banking regulation.
But, while the idea has some merit, it would not sit easily within the current Basel framework.
Europe faces other worries.
Regulators there are now keenly focused on the implications of Brexit, which will require complex arrangements to manage a new relationship between London and the eurozone.
The top priority for the European Central Bank must be to preserve the integrity of the EU banking union, which is under pressure from both Brexit and the crisis gripping Italy’s banks.
Against this background, it will be a challenge to retain the primacy of global standards and to secure continued buy-in to the Basel process.
The Bank for International Settlements’ new general manager, Agustín Carstens, a former governor of Mexico’s central bank, will have a key role to play, as will whoever replaces Mark Carney (the current Governor of the Bank of England) next year as Chairman of the FSB.
It is likely, too, that there will soon be a new Chair of the Basel Committee itself.
Stefan Ingves of Sweden is due to step down next June.
These three new leaders will need all of their diplomatic skills to navigate treacherous political waters.
The stakes are high.
If the commitment to global standards wanes, everyone will suffer in the long run.
Countries will impose incompatible local requirements, which will reduce the efficiency of capital utilization and make the system less robust in the event of renewed financial instability.
Putting Public Health on the Map
SEATTLE – Twenty-five years ago, the state of public health for large populations was like that of a doctor trying to treat a patient without a proper diagnosis.
The diseases and injuries that cut lives short and caused widespread suffering were not rigorously tracked.
Back then, well-meaning advocates for different diseases published death tolls that helped them make the case for funding and attention.
But when all the claims were added up, the total was many times greater than the number of people who actually died in a given year.
And even when policymakers had accurate data, it usually included only causes of death, not the illnesses that afflicted the living.
To address this problem, Alan Lopez and I launched the Global Burden of Disease project (GBD) in 1990.
Decision-makers need information about the world’s biggest health threats and how they have changed over time, across age groups, and by sex, so they can ensure that everyone has the opportunity to live the longest, healthiest life possible.
By ensuring that each death is counted just once, and by providing comprehensive statistics on the causes of ill health, the GBD can compare the impact of cancer to that of lower back pain or depression.
It also enables comparison of health-care performance among countries.
GBD’s 1990 study and subsequent revisions raised the bar for population health measurement, providing decision-makers with more reliable and useful information.
It also opened the international development community’s eyes to the importance of overlooked afflictions, such as mental illness and road injuries.
Donors such as the World Bank and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation use GBD data to guide their investments, and more than 30 countries have conducted their own burden-of-disease studies.
Countries such as Australia, Botswana, China, Mexico, Norway, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, and the United Kingdom are using GBD findings to inform health policies.
In China, the results of the GBD project, launched at a policy summit in 2013, raised awareness about the deadly impact of air pollution on the country’s population.
Those findings helped shape the Chinese government’s efforts to curb the negative effects of pollution on health, and Chinese researchers are now key members of the global collaborative effort.
In Rwanda, when the GBD study revealed that indoor air pollution from cooking with solid fuel was a leading cause of death, the government launched a program to distribute one million clean stoves to the most vulnerable households.
Rwandan scientists and officials from the Ministry of Health – including the minister herself – are important contributors to the GBD.
Today, the GBD is constantly improving, thanks to the efforts of more than 1,300 collaborators in 114 countries.
These collaborators improve the models on which the project is built, vet the study results, contribute new data sets, and communicate the results to media outlets, educational institutions, and decision-makers.
The latest GBD study revealed that another disease seldom discussed in international development circles, lower back and neck pain, is the fourth largest cause of health loss globally.
It also highlighted the rapid pace of epidemiological transition in middle-income countries and the persistence of communicable, maternal, newborn, and nutritional disorders in Sub-Saharan Africa.
But the GBD could do more to inform policy debates and spur action to improve health if it were able to provide more detailed breakdowns of data.
Policymakers are accountable, first and foremost, to their constituents, whose unique needs they must meet.
Estimates of local disease burdens will be essential for combating afflictions like Ebola, checking the rising toll of non-communicable diseases in middle-income countries, and meeting the Sustainable Development Goals relating to maternal and child health in Sub-Saharan Africa.
To help decision-makers make better use of their data, the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, which I head, is creating geospatial maps of disease burdens with a groundbreaking level of resolution.
Creating these maps is possible thanks to methods developed by the Malaria Atlas Project, which has produced a better spatial understanding of malaria than we have for any pathogen.
Geospatial maps can pinpoint areas that are making outstanding progress, allowing us to identify communities that have done things differently from their neighbors.
These case studies can empower communities to replicate one another’s successes.
One example is Cali, Colombia, which drove down homicide rates in the 1990s after the city’s mayor, Rodrigo Guerrero, tightened alcohol restrictions, introduced community-development programs in the most impoverished neighborhoods, and imposed temporary gun bans in public places.
The mayor of Colombia’s capital, Bogota, learned about the program in Cali and implemented similar measures, which have helped reduce homicides steadily in the city.
Since then, Guerrero has worked with the Inter-American Development Bank to develop programs that help other Latin American countries reduce violence in their communities.
In 2014, Guerrero won the Roux Prize for his use of data to improve health, further elevating awareness of his work.
Geospatial mapping will help us identify more Rodrigo Guerreros and champion their achievements.
As the international community comes together to agree on the tools needed to finance and monitor progress toward the MDGs’ successor framework, the Sustainable Development Goals, geospatial mapping will be critical for tracking progress and indicating where course corrections might be needed.
We are far beyond where we were in 1990 in terms of health measurement.
With focused effort and further innovation, we can make even more progress in the next 25 years to help the world make the most of our collective health investments.
Making Climate Promises Count
OTTAWA – This year will be one of the warmest on record.
Over the last decade, greenhouse-gas emissions have accelerated, and the atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide has increased in the past year at the fastest rate in nearly three decades, reaching a level that is 15% higher than in 1990.
As the latest report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) emphasizes, the disconnect between an intensifying climate crisis and stalled international negotiations has never been greater.
Needless to say, a lot is riding on next year’s United Nations Climate Change Conference&nbsp;in Paris, which could shape strategies to reduce global greenhouse-gas emissions until 2050.
But the summit is unlikely to deliver the global agreement that is so badly needed, unless world leaders broaden their focus to include not only emissions reduction, but also carbon pricing.
A growing number of experts – including those at the International Monetary Fund, the OECD, and the World Bank – agree that no climate plan can be successful without an effective and efficient carbon-pricing system.
The IPCC has concluded that if a single global carbon price is not established soon, it will be virtually impossible to prevent global warming from surpassing 2ºC above preindustrial levels – the threshold beyond which the most devastating effects of climate change would become unavoidable.
The one-dimensional approach based exclusively on emissions-reduction targets is preventing even the regions that have been most active on climate change, such as the European Union, from making sufficient progress.
Yet, in late October, EU member states agreed on a new policy framework for climate and energy for 2030 – one that, like the EU’s 2020 climate and energy package, lacks a solid foundation.
The EU’s established goal of reducing greenhouse-gas emissions by 40% by 2030 is supported only by non-binding energy-efficiency and renewable-energy targets.
Devoid of true carbon-pricing reform, the deal depends on the EU’s derelict Emissions Trading System.
The result is a set of impressive-sounding commitments without instruments for effective implementation.
The same can be said of the widely touted new bilateral agreement between the United States and China, the world’s two largest carbon emitters.
Given the deadlock that previously prevailed, the deal represents welcome progress; but it, too, lacks adequate instruments to support its ambitions.
The Paris summit next year needs to produce a more substantial agreement, with national emissions-reduction targets underpinned by adequate and coordinated tools for implementation, including a trial global carbon price.
On an issue as urgent as climate change, there simply is no room for ambiguity.
The first step toward creating such an agreement is to initiate a debate, supported by academic research and scientific evidence, aimed at determining a desirable global carbon price and outlining the linkages between current and future prices, taking into account equity, efficiency, and effectiveness.
Such a debate – not emissions-reduction targets guaranteed only by states’ “political will” – will be the mark of a successful summit.
In fact, no outcome would be worse than a “feel-good” agreement composed of vague, unenforceable targets.
The US government’s recent statements in favor of a “political” agreement rather than a “legally binding” accord is yet another indication that official declarations alone will produce precisely such a result.
In the longer term, a constructive debate in Paris on an appropriate global carbon price could pave the way for the development of a new, polycentric approach to climate governance that would value territorial and local initiatives, in addition to national efforts.
At that point, discrete carbon prices could gradually converge toward a single price, as has occurred with prices for commodities like oil.
EU leaders often boast to their global partners of their commitment to mitigating climate change.
And they may be right.
But, so far, the EU has stood out more because the rest of the world is lagging than because it has designed a truly effective strategy to address the problem; its recently concluded agreement could actually serve as a counter-model for next year’s summit.
The price of carbon effectively amounts to the price of human wellbeing on this planet.
If Europe truly wants to lead the fight against climate change, it should bring the issue of a harmonized carbon-pricing system to the negotiating table in Paris.
In doing so, it would launch a critical shift toward a comprehensive and, for the first time, effective climate agreement.
Plan B for the Global Economy
HONG KONG – In March, meetings of the G-20, the Chinese National People’s Congress, and multiple think tanks all reflected a growing awareness of the risks to the global economy posed by deflation and intensifying financial instability.
In mitigating these risks, the path that China takes will be particularly important.
But avoiding a hard landing in China is a necessary but insufficient condition for global recovery.
Contrary to the advice of many Chinese economists, the country’s policymakers have opted not to follow the conventional Western approach of using flexible exchange rates as the main shock absorber for volatile capital flows and thereby freeing monetary policy to provide liquidity for domestic structural adjustments.
This satisfied both Western economists and global financial markets, which breathed a collective sigh of relief when Chinese leaders reaffirmed their commitment to maintaining a stable renminbi.
The fear was that, if China sought a weaker exchange rate to escape deflation, the result would be another round of global competitive devaluations and even more deflation.
Fortunately, China’s leaders recognize that, if the world remains mired in a balance-sheet recession, the lack of aggregate demand, by continuing to weaken trade, will drag down their own country’s growth.
But, of course, China still needs to find a way to cope with capital outflows, while pursuing the structural reforms that are needed to place its economy on a sustainable long-term growth path.
As we recently argued, the key will be to maintain an annual growth rate of roughly 6.5%, while pursuing a multifaceted short-term stabilization plan that aims to stimulate job creation to offset the losses from restructuring inefficient industries and eliminating excess capacity.
Meanwhile, the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) would face the unenviable task of both maintaining exchange-rate stability and combating deflation, by ensuring that the liquidity needed to support the shift away from manufacturing toward services and consumption is available at reasonable rates.
Given how much of its official reserves China has already spent stimulating the economy and stabilizing the exchange rate, as well as the size of capital outflows – equivalent to three times the current-account surplus last year – tactics like reducing reserve requirements would be key here.
The PBOC would, of course, have to tighten controls on foreign exchange.
But it is also contemplating other macro-prudential instruments, such as a kind of Tobin tax, the levy on financial transactions first suggested in 1972 by the Nobel laureate economist James Tobin, in order to discourage volatile capital flows.
All of this amounts to Plan A – an unavoidable strategy for stopping deflation in China.
But, in today’s multipolar global system, no single country can save the global economy from debt deflation.
That is why the world must also consider implementing a shared strategy; call it Plan B.
Of course, collective action will not be easy – not least because some measures, such as a global monetary or fiscal policy, were ruled out at the 1944 Bretton Woods conference, where world leaders created the international economic and financial architecture that prevails today.
But, in the face of unprecedented threats to global economic stability, it may be time to convene another Bretton Woods-type conference to determine what collective measures are possible.
There is plenty of incentive for action.
With the advanced economies facing rapid population aging, large public-debt burdens, overstretched monetary policies, and fractious politics, the global economy’s capacity to escape its current rut depends largely on the emerging economies.
After all, while these economies are facing challenges of their own, they enjoy more favorable demographics and are experiencing rapid urbanization.
As a result, they have huge potential for productivity gains, which would strengthen global economic growth, and massive demand for sustainable infrastructure to reduce resource depletion and address global warming.
The main constraint on realizing the emerging economies’ potential is financial, with the Bretton Woods institutions unable to provide the needed capital.
If the world is to escape the debt-deflation trap – not to mention address rising income and wealth inequality – this must change.
The recent panic over the renminbi’s depreciation highlights another compelling reason for collective action.
In today’s world, nobody is safe from large and volatile capital flows – not even countries that have built up huge amounts of self-insurance in the form of foreign-exchange reserves.
In 2007-2009, the advanced economies managed to escape a liquidity crisis, largely because the US Federal Reserve was willing to engage in liquidity swaps with key central banks, mostly those of US allies.
Only with a global liquidity-insurance system – underpinned by multilateral currency-swap arrangements – can countries pursue much-needed reflation, without excessive fear of capital flight and/or exchange-rate devaluation.
Finally, collective action is needed to make unconventional monetary policy more effective.
Thus far, such policies have failed to revive the global economy largely because commercial banks and other lenders retained the liquidity they received from their central banks, instead of channeling it to the real economy by providing credit to small and medium-size enterprises and investing in long-term infrastructure projects.
It is no coincidence that from 2010 to 2014, the largest banks, firms, and investment funds increased their cash holdings by $3 trillion – roughly the amount by which central banks in reserve-currency countries expanded their balance sheets over the same period.
By enabling countries to eliminate excess capacity, reduce leverage, and balance tax policies – all while reducing geopolitical uncertainty – collective action to escape deflation and boost growth would mitigate financial institutions’ risk aversion, thereby improving the transmission mechanisms of unconventional monetary policies.
Reaching global consensus is always difficult. But, in today’s context, there is no avoiding it.
If countries continue to try to go it alone, the entire world will suffer.
The Crisis of Our Crises
PRINCETON – At first glance, today’s major international crises seem to have little in common.
Some, such as Greece’s debt drama, are economic disasters; others, like Syria’s implosion, are characterized by brutality and political chaos; and still others, most notably Ukraine’s predicament, fall somewhere in between.
But, despite what policymakers might like to believe, these events are not unrelated.
On the contrary, they reflect a deeper crisis of international integration and cooperation.
Over the last 60 years, the world experienced unprecedented peace and prosperity for a simple reason: countries voluntarily integrated themselves into an international community underpinned by shared rules and norms.
But this trend has given way to piecemeal crisis responses, whether austerity or localized damage control, that are based on the unreasonable assumption that problems like those in Greece, Syria, and Ukraine will eventually correct themselves.
In relying on stopgap measures to address crises, global leaders seem to have forgotten how interdependent the world has become.
Upheaval or stagnation in one part of a complex system can have outsize consequences elsewhere, in the form of, say, a refugee crisis or an uptick in inequality.
For example, Europe’s malaise – which has persisted partly because its leaders have insisted on muddling through, rather than seeking comprehensive solutions – has had serious consequences for Ukraine, a country teetering on the edge of a meltdown.
By the end of this year, Ukraine’s economy is expected to be 15% smaller than it was 2013, and its debt-to-GDP ratio may be near 200%, exceeding Greece’s at its worst.
And the security situation in the eastern part of the country is deteriorating.
Creditors cannot be expected to be any more lenient with Ukraine than they have been with Greece, a member of the eurozone.
But a hard stance on Ukraine while it fights a war with Russia could threaten Europe’s strategic buffer from the Baltic to the Balkans.
The economist Albert O. Hirschman once said that a crisis can be either disintegrative or integrative.
Individuals and organizations, confronted with adversity and lacking faith in policymakers, can either “exit” from the institutions and societies that bind them, or rally together to revitalize them.
Unfortunately, today’s crises so far have seemed largely disintegrative.
Consider capital flight, which forced Greece to impose controls.
Of course, exit mechanisms like capital flight can have a positive impact.
In the eighteenth century, capital flight kept predatory rulers in check.
Adam Smith viewed the rise of movable capital as a force that would encourage enlightened public policies that serve the general interest.
But, in today’s interconnected world, capital can move much more quickly and to many more destinations, crossing borders with the click of a mouse.
Moreover, the global financial industry is largely autonomous, driven by self-interest, rather than a desire to advance the common good.
As we have seen in Europe since 2010, as well as in Ukraine and Puerto Rico more recently, the ability to rush for the exit at any time removes investors’ incentive to compromise.
As policymakers struggle to create a consensus around a reform agenda, the prospects of rejuvenating the pacts and policies underlying integration and cooperation deteriorate.
But the world order is by no means fated to devolve into chaos.
Today’s crisis of international integration can become the catalyst for the creation of a new or revitalized global system.
This has happened before.
Indeed, the current world order arose from the major crises of the Great Depression and World War II, with countries building the social pacts and economic institutions that would underpin peace and prosperity for the next several decades.
To ensure that a crisis produces such a constructive integrative response, policymakers must change their mindset.
Instead of seeing only problems that need to be contained, they should view crises as an opportunity for progress.
Today, some important integrative policies lie within reach.
On the economic front, policymakers should stop pouring public money into bailouts that benefit private creditors at the expense of taxpayers, and they should end austerity programs that kill growth prospects and do not address debt overhang.
They must also reform tax systems and improve cooperation to reduce tax evasion, using the added revenues to invest in physical infrastructure and education.
Such measures will create jobs today, and secure prosperity for tomorrow.
Political measures are also needed.
Europe needs a more democratic framework that keeps financiers at the negotiating table.
Similarly, with the possibility of admitting Ukraine to NATO a dead letter, the West should take steps to ease tensions with Russia, in order to ensure its continued participation in international efforts to address key threats (as it did when negotiating the recent agreement to rein in Iran’s nuclear program).
Muddling through can lead to only one outcome: disintegration.
Only when world leaders recognize the common source and the interconnectedness of current international crises will they be in a position to address them effectively.
Is It Time for Global Money?
NEW YORK – Today’s world is more economically and financially integrated than at any time since the latter half of the nineteenth century.
But policymaking – particularly central banking – remains anachronistically national and parochial.
Isn’t it time to re-think the global monetary (non)system?
In particular, wouldn’t a single global central bank and a world currency make more sense than our confusing, inefficient, and outdated assemblage of national monetary policies and currencies?
Technology is now reaching the point where a common digital currency, enabled by near-universal mobile phone adoption, certainly makes this possible.
And however farfetched a global currency may sound, recall that before World War I, ditching the gold standard seemed equally implausible.
The current system is both risky and inefficient.
Different monies are not only a nuisance for tourists who arrive home with pockets full of unspendable foreign coins.
Global firms waste time and resources on largely futile efforts to hedge currency risk (benefiting only the banks that act as middlemen).
The benefits of ridding the world of national currencies would be enormous.
In one fell swoop, the risk of currency wars, and the harm they can inflict on the world economy, would be eliminated.
Pricing would be more transparent, and consumers could spot anomalies (from their phones) and shop for the best deals.
And, by eliminating foreign-exchange transactions and hedging costs, a single currency would reinvigorate stalled world trade and improve the efficiency of global capital allocation.
In short, the current state of affairs is the by-product of the superseded era of the nation-state.
Globalization has shrunk the dimensions of the world economy, and the time for a world central bank has arrived.
Dream on.
A single world currency is in fact neither likely nor desirable.
Central banks, while ideally independent from political influence, are nonetheless accountable to the body politic.
They owe their legitimacy to the political process that created them, rooted in the will of the citizenry they were established to serve (and from which they derive their authority).
The history of central banking, though comparatively brief, suggests that democratically derived legitimacy is possible only at the level of the nation-state.
At the supra-national level, legitimacy remains highly questionable, as the experience of the eurozone amply demonstrates.
Only if the European Union’s sovereignty eclipses, by democratic choice, that of the nation-states that comprise it will the European Central Bank have the legitimacy it requires to remain the eurozone’s sole monetary authority.
But the same political legitimacy cannot be imagined for any transatlantic or trans-Pacific monetary authority, much less a global one.
Treaties between countries can harmonize rules governing commerce and other areas.
But they cannot transfer sovereignty over an institution as powerful as a central bank or a symbol as compelling as paper money.
Central banks’ legitimacy matters most when the stakes are highest.
Everyday monetary-policy decisions are, to put it mildly, unlikely to excite the passions of the masses.
The same cannot be said of the less frequent need (one hopes) for the monetary authority to act as lender of last resort to commercial banks and even to the government.
As we have witnessed in recent years, such interventions can be the difference between financial chaos and collapse and mere retrenchment and recession.
And only central banks, with their ability to create freely their own liabilities, can play this role.
Yet the tough decisions that central banks must make in such circumstances – preventing destabilizing runs versus encouraging moral hazard – are simultaneously technocratic and political.
Above all, the legitimacy of their decisions is rooted in law, which itself is the expression of democratic will.
Bail out one bank and not another?
Purchase sovereign debt but not state or commonwealth (for example, Puerto Rican) debt?
Though deciding such questions at a supranational level is not theoretically impossible, it is utterly impractical in the modern era.
Legitimacy, not technology, is the currency of central banks.
But the fact that a single global central bank and currency would fail spectacularly (regardless of how strong the economic case for it may be) does not absolve policymakers of their responsibility to address the challenges posed by a fragmented global monetary system.
And that means bolstering global multilateral institutions.
The International Monetary Fund’s role as independent arbiter of sound macroeconomic policy and guardian against competitive currency devaluation ought to be strengthened.
Finance ministers and central bankers in large economies should underscore, in a common protocol, their commitment to market-determined exchange rates.
And, as Raghuram Rajan, the governor of the Reserve Bank of India, recently suggested, the IMF should backstop emerging economies that might face liquidity crises as a result of the normalization of US monetary policy.
Likewise, a more globalized world requires a commitment from all actors to improve infrastructure, in order to ensure the efficient flow of resources throughout the world economy.
To this end, the World Bank’s capital base in its International Bank for Reconstruction and Development should be increased along the lines of the requested $253 billion, to help fund emerging economies’ investments in highways, airports, and much else.
Multilateral support for infrastructure investment is not the only way global trade can be revived under the current monetary arrangements.
As was amply demonstrated in the last seven decades, reducing tariffs and non-tariff barriers would also help – above all in agriculture and services, as envisaged by the Doha Round.
Global financial stability, too, can be strengthened within the existing framework.
All that is required is harmonized, transparent, and easy-to-understand regulation and supervision.
For today’s international monetary system, the perfect – an unattainable single central bank and currency – should not be made the enemy of the good.
Working within our existing means, it is surely possible to improve our policy tools and boost global growth and prosperity.
The Debt Dilemma
LONDON/WASHINGTON, DC – Greece’s divisive negotiations with the EU have placed debt back at the center of debates about economic growth and stability.
But Greece is not the only country struggling to repay its existing debt, much less dampen borrowing.
Its fraught negotiations with its creditors should spur other countries to take action to address their own debt overhangs.
Since the global financial crisis erupted in 2008, the world’s debt has risen by $57 trillion, exceeding GDP growth.
Government debt has increased by $25 trillion, with the advanced economies accounting for $19 trillion – a direct result of severe recession, fiscal-stimulus programs, and bank bailouts.
While American households have reduced their debt considerably (mainly through mortgage defaults), household debt in many other countries has continued to grow rapidly.
In all major economies, the debt-to-GDP ratio (including both public and private debt) is higher today than it was in 2007.
Much of this debt accumulation was driven by efforts to support economic growth in the face of deflationary headwinds after the 2008 crisis.
That was especially so in China, which, together with other developing economies, accounts for nearly half of the debt incurred since 2008.
To be sure, debt itself is not bad.
But excessive reliance on debt creates the risk of financial crises, which undermine growth.
Given this, the world needs to find both less credit-intensive routes to growth and ways to eliminate existing debt burdens.
To help limit future debt accumulation, countries have three options.
First, they can employ countercyclical macroprudential measures to dampen credit cycles and prevent excessive borrowing.
For example, stricter loan-to-value-ratio limits and higher capital requirements for banks could slow credit growth when housing or commercial real-estate markets are overheating.
Yet precisely the opposite approach is now being taken in the United States, where some first-time homebuyers have now been given access to 97% loan-to-value mortgages.
A second strategy for curbing the buildup of debt could be to introduce mortgage contracts that enable more risk sharing between borrowers and lenders, essentially acting as debt/equity hybrids.
As the Great Recession grimly illustrated, when a period of soaring real-estate valuations and rising household debt is followed by a period of falling prices, and households attempt to deleverage, the results can be catastrophic.
The talent for financial innovation that produced harmful new home-mortgage options before the crash should now be harnessed to develop more flexible mortgages that help borrowers avoid default.
One example is “shared responsibility” mortgages, in which payments are reduced under certain circumstances, such as when home prices dip below the borrower’s purchase price.
In exchange for this flexibility, the lender receives a share of any capital gain that is realized when the home is sold.
Similarly, the continuous-workout mortgage adjusts payments and terms in specific cases, such as job loss.
A third option for limiting debt accumulation is to reconsider tax rules that favor debt.
In many countries, interest accrued on a mortgage remains tax deductible.
Though phasing out this policy is politically contentious, some countries – such as the United Kingdom in the 1980s – have managed to do so.
Similarly, it would be difficult – but not impossible – to reduce the incentives, created by almost all countries’ tax regimes, for corporate leverage.
Governments must also work to reduce existing debt – and the deficient global demand to which it contributes.
It is simply not feasible for the most highly leveraged governments to grow their way out of debt.
Nor can austerity alone suffice, as it would require countries to make such large fiscal adjustments – 5% of GDP, in Spain’s case – that citizens would likely resist them, as the Greeks have done.
A more effective approach would employ a broader range of tools, including debt restructuring.
In some countries, sales of public assets and the levying of one-off wealth taxes would also be helpful.
Investors, analysts, and other commentators, for their part, must take a more nuanced view of governments’ true debt liabilities.
Much of the sovereign-debt accumulation of recent years has been enabled by quantitative easing, with central banks making large-scale purchases of government bonds.
The US Federal Reserve, the Bank of England, and the Bank of Japan now own 16%, 24%, and 22%, respectively, of all bonds outstanding.
Given that central banks are owned by the government, and that interest paid on outstanding bonds is remitted back to the national treasury, these government bonds are fundamentally different from those owned by other creditors.
Focusing on “net” government debt (which excludes intra-government debt holdings, such as the bonds owned by central banks) is a more effective approach to assessing and ensuring the sustainability of public debt.
The global economic crisis laid bare the challenge of debt reduction – and the risks that excessive indebtedness raises.
Yet the crisis also intensified government and household dependence on leverage, causing debt levels to continue to rise – a trend that, left unchecked, will lead to more crises in the future.
It is time to redirect financial innovation toward developing new tools and approaches to address these challenges.
Only then can the world economy move onto a sustainable growth path.
Global Disaster Recovery
PALO ALTO – With the global economy mired in recession and financial crisis, policymakers everywhere have launched a series of monetary, financial, and fiscal responses.
Nevertheless, economies continue to contract, unemployment to rise, and wealth to decline.
Countries’ policy responses have ranged from modest to immense.
China has undertaken a 6%-of-GDP stimulus package aimed (mostly) at infrastructure; the United States has enacted a two-year $800 billion spending and tax rebate package.
The Federal Reserve and the Bank of England lowered short-term interest-rate targets to near zero and are adopting “quantitative easing” – i.e., continuous infusions of money.
Despite all this, massive excess bank reserves remain unlent.
During Japan’s “lost decade,” the Bank of Japan mostly bought Japanese government bonds, whereas the Fed is trying to reopen secondary markets for securitized private lending (which in the US is as important as bank lending), buying mortgage-backed securities and consumer and business loans, as well as U.S. Treasury bonds.
The Bank of England is buying UK government bonds (“gilts”).
The European Central Bank, reflecting a strong inflation concern, has responded more slowly.
The US government is now insuring, lending or spending over $10 trillion from guaranteeing money market funds to the AIG bailout to the Fed’s swap lines supporting foreign central banks.
Analogous guarantees and bank bailouts have occurred in the other major economies (the ECB does not play this role for Europe; national governments do).
The fiscal response – tax cuts and spending increases – has varied considerably, being somewhat more tepid in debt-averse Europe than in the US and China.
The US is hectoring Europe for more fiscal stimulus, while the Europeans pressure the US for greater and more globally coordinated financial regulation.
Will near-zero interest rates, financial-sector bailouts, and fiscal stimulus work?
What else could be done?
As for fiscal measures, the empirical evidence suggests that three-quarters of consumption is based on longer-term economic prospects, not short-run disposable income.
Thus, temporary tax rebates are mostly saved, not spent.
Targeting liquidity-constrained people, especially the unemployed, is a bit more effective, as well as humane. 
Some claim that infrastructure spending creates a big Keynesian “multiplier,” a bigger increase in incomes than the initial spending (estimates range up to about 1.5 times the initial increase in spending).
But infrastructure spending is usually slow – and almost always driven heavily by parochial political considerations.
Japan’s annual 15-20 trillion yen infrastructure-intensive stimulus didn’t prevent its lost decade.
Nor did American government spending end the Great Depression (unemployment was still over 15% in 1939, a decade after the depression’s onset).
A more effective stimulus would speed up spending that needs to be done anyway.  Or cut taxes to change the marginal calculus of firms on layoffs and consumers on spending – for example, by suspending the payroll tax on firms and workers for a year or suspending part or all of the sales tax or national value-added tax.
Better yet would be permanent rate reductions and controls on future spending.
But governments should be wary of expensive fiscal stimulus.
It is likely to yield little cushion for employment and income per dollar spent, while servicing the large debt accumulation will impede long-run growth, either by forcing substantial future tax increases or spending cuts, or by forcing central banks to inflate.
Indeed, China frets over the safety of the US Treasury bonds that it holds.
In theory, enough quantitative easing implies future inflation, motivating people to buy big-ticket items, like cars and appliances, now to avoid the run-up in prices later.
(In practice, it is an experiment.)
High and rising inflation creates great costs and is difficult to reverse.
After mitigating the downturn, central bankers must withdraw the immense infusion of liquidity before inflation takes off, a tricky maneuver.
The bottom line, though, is that better policies can at best mitigate the economic consequences of this horrible recession.
We will not get out of this mess completely any time soon.
Sometimes, strong recoveries follow recessions, but recovery following financial crises is always immensely painful, time-consuming, and traumatic.
The economists Ken Rogoff and Carmen Reinhart have argued that the major financial crises of the last century typically lasted a half-decade or longer.
In many of the previous banking crises, it was a country or a region that was hit hard (Argentina, Japan, etc.).
This time, virtually every economy is suffering substantially and the banking crisis is global.
Policymakers will continue to throw whatever ammunition they can find at the problem, but it will take time for the deleveraging from the boom to run its course.
At times of serious economic distress, policymakers thrash about seeking solutions, and some people lose confidence in the economic system itself.
Indeed, in the Great Depression of the 1930’s, it was common for Western intellectuals to turn to communism and central planning as a hoped-for panacea.
Some never returned from that intellectual journey, despite the collapse of communism.
There is, of course, no case for going back to socialism and central planning.
Once off government lifelines, we will need a better-regulated financial system.
Any financial institution that is too big or too interconnected to fail, or could quickly become so, must be closely regulated and monitored for risk and capital adequacy in real time, or be broken up into smaller firms.
In the meantime, let’s hope that Messrs. Bernanke, King, Trichet, and the world’s other central bank governors get monetary policy roughly right, and that our politicians don’t waste vast sums on ineffective fiscal stimulus.
A Global Strategy for Disaster Risk
SENDAI – Current disaster-risk levels are alarming.
The cost of damage to commercial and residential buildings worldwide is averaging $314 billion each year, with the private sector bearing as much as 85% of that price tag.
At the same time, a new United Nations report shows that annual investments in disaster-risk reduction of $6 billion can result in savings of up to $360 billion.
Hundreds of business executives, aware of the dramatic costs – and potential benefits – at stake, are now preparing to attend a UN conference on disaster-risk reduction in Sendai, Japan.
A decade ago, when the last such gathering was held, the private sector was scarcely represented.
This time, companies and entrepreneurs will be there in full force to explore a range of valuable opportunities.
The Tohoku region of Japan, where the meeting will take place, is a vivid reminder of how a disaster's economic impact reverberates far beyond its epicenter.
Devastated four years ago by the Great East Japan Earthquake and tsunami, Japan's automobile production was cut by nearly half.
The financial damage did not stop at the country's borders; as a direct result of the slowdown in Japan, automobile production dropped by some 20% in Thailand, 50% in China, and 70% in India.
The risks inherent in globalized production carry great rewards for those who know how to manage them properly.
That is why major businesses such as PricewaterHouseCoopers, Hindustan Construction Corporation, AbzeSolar, Swiss Re, AECOM, AXA Group, IBM, and others – spanning many sectors and encompassing all regions – are engaging with UN experts to improve global strategies for disaster-risk management and reduction.
This level of business engagement bodes well for pioneering a new planet-friendly and people-sensitive approach to global prosperity.
Indeed, the disaster-risk reduction conference in Sendai is the first in a series of major international gatherings this year.
Beyond Sendai, world leaders will convene in Addis Ababa in July to discuss financing for development, in New York in September to adopt a new development agenda, and in Paris in December to reach a meaningful climate-change agreement.
Taken together, these meetings promise to generate transformative action that can set the world on a safer, more prosperous, and more sustainable path.
Sustainability starts in Sendai for three major reasons.
First, by its very nature, disaster-risk reduction requires forward planning.
Second, investment in this area advances both sustainable development and climate action.
And, third, helping those who are most vulnerable to disasters is the ideal starting point for the effort to aid all people by establishing universal targets for development and climate change.
Over the last 12 months, thousands of lives were saved in India, the Philippines, and elsewhere by improved weather forecasting, early-warning systems, and evacuation plans.
Advances in risk reduction that safeguard development gains and business investments must match this progress in disaster preparedness, and we must make wise choices that create greater opportunities in the future.
For example, experts estimate that 60% of the land that will be urbanized by 2030 has not yet been developed.
Enterprises that factor disaster risk into their construction plans will avert the much higher costs of retrofitting later.
More broadly, over the next 15 years, the world will make major investments in urban infrastructure, energy, and agriculture.