STANFORD – Like many others, I first met the Nobel laureate economist Gary Becker, who died earlier this month, by reading his seminal works Human Capital and The Economics of Discrimination.
Several dozen outstanding economists have won the Nobel Prize in Economics since Sweden’s central bank began awarding it in 1969, but Becker is among the handful who have fundamentally transformed how economists (and social scientists more generally) think about a wide array of important economic issues.
Becker was remarkable for applying his penetrating insights, especially concerning economic incentives, to issues that had been mostly underexplored by economic analysis. This included viewing education as an investment, asking who gained and lost from discrimination, examining how families allocated their time, and explaining women’s fertility decisions.
His research on any one or two of these issues might well have won him a Nobel Prize on its own; to develop important insights into such a wide range of questions is truly remarkable.
He amply deserved the rare accolade accorded to him by his long-time mentor and friend, the late Milton Friedman (himself a Nobel laureate who, like Becker, transformed economists’ thinking in many areas).
Becker, declared Friedman, was “the greatest social scientist who has lived and worked in the last half-century.”
Becker’s constant focus was on the main forces driving human behavior and people’s interaction both in markets and in non-market activities.
Early in his career, his work was often criticized for being overly dependent on economic analysis in dealing with big social problems, sometimes touching raw nerves on very sensitive issues.
For example, the notion of modeling children as a durable good seemed crass to some but led Becker to analyze the allocation of parental time and financial resources.
He showed how this insight could predict trends in female labor-force participation and birth rates, and led to the policy conclusion that the best way to lower high birth rates in poor countries was to educate women.
Better education would raise women’s wages, making staying at home more costly, and would lead to higher female labor-force participation and a voluntary decline in birth rates.
This analysis reflected Becker’s deep belief in the power of incentives to lead people, in pursuit of their own interest and interacting within and outside markets, to achieve great things with minimal government input.
In this sense, he was very much in the tradition of the great eighteenth-century Scottish economist Adam Smith, whose writings Becker regarded as one of the greatest influences on his career.
Equally off-putting to some was the notion that education was an investment – that an important reason to pursue post-secondary schooling, for example, was to raise one’s future earnings.
The education establishment recoiled at what it considered a less-than-noble reason to seek higher education.
And the idea that one could model the economics of racial discrimination as rational, if deplorable, behavior and trace out the implications was sometimes misconstrued as paying insufficient attention to the character and behavior flaws of those who discriminate.
Truth will out, as Shakespeare reminds us, and eventually even Becker’s harshest early critics came around to appreciating his deep insights and conclusions.
For example, the education industry now touts the economic value of a college degree.
And governments around the world conduct vast surveys of households’ time use.
Few economists today work on these and related problems without building on Becker’s foundations or laboring under his strong influence.
On a personal note, some of my early research on the best way to tax families and on the effects of taxes on human-capital investment built on Becker’s insights.
Becker was a rarity among economists in recent decades.
He often looked at broad, long-range trends and data, comparing things like family structure, number of children, and women’s roles in the home and the market across many decades and even from one century to the next, or across very different societies.
Cumulatively, his work yielded powerful conclusions, not only explaining trends in birth rates, but also showing that preferences for discrimination led to a tradeoff with profits.
Workers who did not face discrimination in sectors where animus was rife would win, while the losers would include not just those directly being discriminated against, but also workers forced to compete when those workers sought employment elsewhere.
Becker relied on rigorous standards in evaluating government policy.
He knew, and documented, that government solutions to market failures could themselves fail, with the cure turning out to be worse than the disease.
He sought to compare what was likely to be the actual government program, tax, or regulation to the problem it purported to solve, not to the idealized textbook solution academics favor but that is rarely adopted.
The basic economic analysis that Becker developed was applicable everywhere, for everyone, and for all time.
Conditions in the US in the nineteenth and late twentieth centuries – or in North America and Europe and developing Asia, Africa, or Latin America – might differ; but the same economic models could be used to understand changing events and circumstances.
In this sense, Becker was a great economist and a truly remarkable social scientist.
His work stands as a testament to the power of deep thinking and the courage to follow it to its logical conclusions.
That seems especially relevant in today’s world, in which technology tempts us merely to scratch the surface of so many issues.
He was a tremendous colleague at the Hoover Institution, a true and supportive friend, and admirably humble despite his incredible intellectual influence.
He will be sorely missed.
Coming Together and Falling Apart
STANFORD – Millions of people worldwide watched the athletic achievements at the Sochi Olympics and the opening and closing ceremonies’ majestic portrayals of Russian history and culture.
But the cost was immense, the alleged corruption dispiriting, and the contrast with the political situation in nearby Ukraine alarming.
After lining up for an Association Agreement with the European Union, former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych instead opted for closer ties with Russia, following immense pressure from the Kremlin, as well as a promise of $15 billion in financing.
Three months of protests and riots ensued.
A parliamentary vote stripped the high-living Yanukovych of power, and he fled to Russia.
The situation remains tense and fluid.
Russian troops have occupied Crimea, and European and American leaders are threatening to impose stiff sanctions on Russia if it does not respect Ukraine’s sovereignty.
But Ukraine’s disunity is obvious.
Eastern Ukraine has close linguistic, cultural, and economic ties to Russia, while western Ukraine leans more toward continental Europe.
Some of Ukraine’s regions have historically been a part of Russia, Poland, or the Ottoman Empire.
Peter the Great, whose eighteenth-century Westernization of Russia was portrayed in Sochi, fought the Crimean Tatars, many of whose descendants were dispersed by Stalin to other parts of the former Soviet Union.
Some fear that Ukraine could break apart.
An EU Association Agreement could be a huge boon to the Ukrainian economy.
When smaller economies gain access to a much larger market, trade volumes expand and wages rise, with a small part of the trade expansion diverted from other countries (one of Russia’s concerns).
But, beyond the direct gains from trade, such a pact holds the promise of opening up and accelerating the transformation of Ukraine’s economy and polity.
Competing for the EU’s more discriminating consumers would force Ukrainian producers to improve their competitiveness by raising productivity, quality control, and marketing and logistical capabilities.
Over time, Ukrainian producers would become part of an integrated supply chain alongside EU producers.
Canada and Mexico were transformed in this way by the 1987 US-Canada Free Trade Agreement and the 1994 North American Free Trade Agreement.
On average, 40% of Mexican exports to the United States now have US content.
But free-trade agreements presuppose the existence of established political borders, and Ukraine is not the only country that might come apart.
The United Kingdom, Canada, Spain, Iraq – and even the US state of California – among others, face a similar possibility, albeit more or less remote.
What all of these situations have in common is a wide diversity of cultural, ethnic, and economic interests.
Scotland, for example, has much local authority, yet will vote on independence in September.
The secessionists hark back to eighteenth-century English brutality and claim that Scotland will be able to keep all of its North Sea oil and shed its share of the UK’s debt.
In fact, both are likely to be shared.
Those who prefer to remain in the UK cite a loss of markets, possible loss of the pound sterling, and reduced significance on the European and world stage.
The betting is that the Scots will vote to remain.
In Spain, some Catalonians have episodically demanded independence, as have some Flemish in Belgium and some Québécois in Canada.
Iraq periodically verges on splitting into Sunni, Shia, and Kurdish states (the Kurds already have considerable autonomy).
In California, every decade or two, proposals surface to split the state into a North and South California.
The more arid and populous south has traditionally been more politically conservative than the north (Los Angeles is an exception).
Water diversion in a difficult drought year, along with Governor Jerry Brown’s proposal for massive new infrastructure to send water south, has heightened tensions.
A prominent venture capitalist, Tim Draper, wants to put a proposition on the ballot to split California into six separate states.
(California often makes big decisions – from limiting property taxes to formulaic restrictions on state spending – by ballot initiative.)
Even if Draper’s proposed initiative qualifies and passes, it would require approval by the US Congress, which is unlikely.
Which responsibilities should be left primarily to individuals acting within markets, families, and communities, and which fall to government?
And at what level of government – federal, regional, municipal, or supranational – are the latter responsibilities best exercised?
These are timeless questions; but, in an era of increased and instantaneous communication, centralized, big-government bureaucracies are creaking or worse.
People want more effective and more affordable government that responds to their concerns, and are demanding that decisions be decentralized.
We may be in the early stages of reversing the trend toward increases in the size, scope, and centralization of government, with authority devolving on more localized environments, closer to where people live and work.
More and more people seem to be increasingly unwilling to live by current government decision-making processes.
Even with democratic majority rule, minorities believe that their interests and rights – economic, cultural, or religious – are not being protected.
The proliferation of calls for devolution, secession, and independence is but one manifestation of this tectonic shift.
Europe’s Options
STANFORD – Many Europeans have come to believe that they have weathered the economic and financial storm.
In the last two years, deficits and debt have stabilized.
Yields on the sovereign debt of the eurozone periphery’s weak economies have fallen sharply.
Portugal and Ireland have exited their bailout programs.
Talk of Greece leaving the euro has subsided.
All of that is true, but there is a big catch: economic growth in the European Union remains anemic.
GDP in Holland and Italy shrank in the last quarter, and France’s barely budged.
Forecasters are revising down their estimates for 2014 eurozone growth to just 1% year on year.
Unemployment remains at a staggering 11.6% in the eurozone as a whole, compared to 10% in the United States at the worst of America’s Great Recession.
It is above 25% in Greece and Spain – and even higher among the young.
Europe’s economy remains shackled by three problems – sovereign debt, the euro, and wobbly banks – despite several new policy backstops: the European Stability Mechanism (ESM); the European Central Bank’s easy-money policies and holdings of sovereign debt; and the ECB’s takeover in November of supervision of the 130 or so largest pan-eurozone banks.
None of these reforms has been sufficient to restore the stronger growth that Europe desperately needs.
Widespread economic discontent is reflected in recent political instability.
The European Parliament election in May shocked Europe’s elites, as parties of the far right, assorted euroskeptics, and even leftists made strong gains in many countries, fueled in part by popular frustration with the European Commission’s concentration of power.
Great Britain may be headed for a referendum on EU membership in 2017 unless certain terms of its membership are revised.
Elected leaders face a daunting task: enacting difficult structural reforms of labor markets, pension systems, and taxes.
All were long overdue prior to the crisis, and they remain in the very early stages, at best, in most countries, while the high-debt countries’ fiscal condition has improved only modestly.
And Italy and France demand relief from the eurozone’s budget deficit and debt rules.
Europe has three broad options.
The first is the status quo – which would entail cobbling together responses to future mini-crises as they arise, following the pattern of the past few years.
Given the divergent interests and problems facing different countries within the eurozone and the EU, together with cumbersome governance structures and the difficulty of treaty changes, this is the path of least resistance for elected leaders – and thus the one most likely to be followed.
The second option is serious, concerted structural reform.
This would include, at a minimum, reforms of labor rules, pension systems, and anti-growth provisions of tax codes.
It would also include an aggressive attempt to reduce the sovereign-debt overhang that remains a major impediment to growth and continues to threaten some European banks.
Existing debt agreements are not sufficient without a decade of strong growth, which appears unlikely, to say the least.
European governments and banks ultimately will need a solution similar to Brady bonds, which worked quite well in overcoming the 1990s Latin American debt crisis and the threat that it posed to highly exposed US money-center banks.
As was true then, a menu of exit options and credit extensions will have to be negotiated.
The politics of this approach will be difficult, particularly in the rich countries; but, structured properly, concerted structural reform could help to restore growth, which would feed back into healthier budgets, more jobs, better balance sheets, and less financial risk.
The third option is rethinking and reworking the EU itself, from the euro to its basic institutions.
As a free-trade arrangement, the EU has been a major success.
But the euro makes economic sense only for a subset of its current members, not for countries such as Greece in its current situation.
Some economists have proposed a two-track euro, with “problem” countries using a “euro-B” that floats against the “euro-A” until they abide by the economic and financial rules and earn re-entry.
Enhanced labor mobility has been another great benefit brought about by the EU.
But the European Commission’s rigid bureaucratic diktats have taken some regulation too far, and efforts to force lower-tax countries to “harmonize” their rates would be devastating to their citizens and firms.
While it is unlikely that much progress will be made along the lines of the second or third options in the near future, Europe’s elected leaders should constantly test what makes sense and what needs to be reformed.
The recent election was a wake-up call; Europe’s leaders need to open their eyes.
The Irrelevant German Consumer
MUNICH – With global rebalancing set to be high on the agenda at the next G-7 and G-20 meetings, Germany, with its persistent export surplus, will again come under pressure to boost domestic demand and household consumption.
But the German consumer is a sideshow.
What is needed is an investment surge in Germany and Europe, and a coordinated exit from ultra-loose monetary policies.
Massive external-account imbalances were a major factor behind the global financial and economic crisis that erupted in 2008, as well as in the eurozone instability that followed.
Now the world economy is in the process of rebalancing – but not in a way that many people had expected.
Asia’s formerly huge external surpluses have declined astonishingly fast, and Japan’s trade balance has even slipped into deficit.
China’s current-account surplus has fallen to 2% of GDP, from 10% in 2007.
Investment is still the Chinese economy’s main driver, but it has led to soaring debt and a bloated shadow banking sector, which the authorities are trying to rein in.
The European Union, however, has built up a large external surplus, owing mainly to positive trade balances in the eurozone.
The EU’s current-account surplus in 2014, at around $250 billion, will be even higher than that of emerging Asia.
With oil prices still above $100 a barrel, the combined surplus of oil-exporting countries is of a similar magnitude.
The United States, meanwhile, continues to run a sizeable current-account deficit of around $350-400 billion.
The surprise here is the continued growth in the EU’s surplus.
The collapse in imports suffered by bailed-out countries – Greece, Ireland, Portugal, and Spain – was entirely predictable, given how sharply their economies declined.
But few economists expected that these countries’ exports would improve as quickly as they did, especially in a subdued international environment.
While Germany’s current-account surplus is roughly where it was in 2007, the combined external balance of the bailout beneficiaries plus Italy (which has been part of the trade turnaround) has swung from a pre-crisis deficit of more than $300 billion to an expected surplus of around $60 billion this year.
Looking ahead, the appreciating euro (another surprise, especially to the many observers who doubted its survival less than two years ago) will compress the eurozone’s current-account surplus to some extent.
An exchange rate of close to $1.40 poses a challenge for many European exporters, including German companies.
And the euro has revalued even more against the yen and a number of emerging-market currencies.
Nonetheless, the European surplus is too large to ignore, and Germany in particular will be asked once more to rebalance its economy toward higher domestic demand, which for many people implies the need for a fiscal boost.
But the government is not obliging: Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble has just presented a balanced budget for 2015 – the first since 1969.
And, while some observers are calling for Germany to “end wage restraint” and thereby encourage higher household spending, this has actually happened already.
There is, however, a lot that the government could do about investment, which has fallen by almost four percentage points of GDP since 2000, to just over 17% in 2013 – low by international standards.
The government could shift more government spending toward infrastructure investment.
But, even more important, it should improve conditions for corporate investment at home, rather than watch German businesses move their capital expenditures abroad.
Germany’s attractiveness to investors would rise with simpler and more investment-friendly taxation, improved incentives for business start-ups and R&amp;D, less bureaucracy and red tape, and no further energy-cost increases.
Getting there will take time.
But, given the favorable earnings situation and the corporate sector’s large cash balances, a rebalancing of the tax system could have a rapid impact.
Investment from retained earnings should be as attractive as debt financing.
And some temporary adjustments of depreciation allowances could kick-start capital spending.
The need for more investment in transport, telecoms, energy, and education certainly is not only a German issue.
Given most European governments’ debt problems, the challenge is to attract more private capital into these areas.
Improved regulatory conditions for long-term investments and savings would help.
So would expansion of financing instruments for infrastructure investment – for example, by substantially increasing the supply of project bonds supported by the European Investment Bank.
Indeed, why not create “European Infrastructure Bonds,” backed by revenues generated by the investments or tax income from the countries that emit EIBs?
This would not only spur jobs and long-term growth; it would also stem the rise in Europe’s external surplus.
But the challenge of rebalancing the global economy is also closely connected to central banks’ monetary policies.
With credit and asset bubbles slowly but surely reappearing, the authorities’ goal should be to keep growth on a balanced and sustainable path – and thus to discouraging excessive risk taking.
This justifies the US Federal Reserve’s gradual exit from ultra-loose policies.
Somewhat surprisingly, the Fed’s reduction of its monthly asset purchases has been accompanied so far by dollar weakness against the euro, which is fostering external adjustment.
Looking forward, however, this may change.
If the Fed remains alone in scaling back its monetary stimulus and bond yields rise further, the dollar will almost certainly strengthen.
Clearly, a coordinated effort to limit exchange-rate variations is advisable.
If all countries try to keep their currencies weak, monetary expansion on a global scale will be over-extended.
The fact that inflationary pressure is still low is not a reason to postpone planning an exit from ultra-loose policy; on the contrary, the time for such discussions is when inflation is low and markets are calm.
Twenty years ago, markets panicked and bond rates soared as central banks hiked interest rates in the face of rising inflation.
They should not repeat that mistake by waiting for inflationary pressures – fueled by rising oil and commodity prices and economic recovery – to return.
The Climate-Change Agenda Heats Up
LONDON – For many people around the world this year, the weather has become anything but a topic for small talk.
Typhoon Haiyan in the Philippines, America’s record-breaking freeze, California’s year-long drought, and flooding in Europe have put the long-term dangers of climate change back on the political agenda.
In response, United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has sent an urgent letter to government, business, civil society, and finance leaders, urging them to attend a special Climate Summit in New York in September.
The event will be the first time that world leaders have met to discuss global warming since the UN’s fateful Copenhagen climate-change summit in 2009.
Amid high expectations – and subsequent recriminations – that meeting failed to achieve a comprehensive, legally-binding agreement to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions.
So, at September’s summit, leaders will be asked to re-boot the diplomatic process.
The goal is a new agreement in 2015 to prevent average global temperatures from rising by two degrees Celsius, the level that the international community has deemed “dangerous” to human society.
At first sight, that looks like a hard task.
Since Copenhagen, climate change has slipped down the global agenda, as the restoration of economic growth, voter concern about jobs and living standards, and violent conflict in key trouble spots have taken precedence.
But the tide may be turning.
More people are grasping the true extent of the dangers ahead.
In its latest authoritative assessment, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) concluded last year that scientists are now 95% certain that human activities are the principal cause of rising temperatures.
Over the next two months the IPCC will release further reports detailing the human and economic impacts of probable climate change and the costs and benefits of combating it.
US Secretary of State John Kerry recently described climate change as “perhaps the world’s most fearsome weapon of mass destruction,” warning of “a tipping-point of no return.”
Few serious commentators now dispute the science.
So the key question now is how the world’s leaders will respond.
There are grounds for cautious optimism.
First, New York will not be like Copenhagen.
Leaders are not being asked to negotiate a new agreement themselves; that job will remain with their professional negotiators and environment ministers.
Moreover, the process will not be concluded this year but at the UN climate conference in Paris in December 2015.
That provides plenty of time to translate political commitments made in New York into a legally-binding accord. 
Second, the world’s two largest greenhouse-gas emitters, the United States and China, are now more committed to action than they were five years ago.
US President Barack Obama has announced a far-reaching plan that authorizes the Environment Protection Agency to take dramatic measures in the next few months to limit power-station emissions, virtually ending coal-fired electricity generation altogether.
In China, worsening air pollution and growing concerns about energy security have led the government to consider a cap on coal use and an absolute reduction in emissions within the next 10-15 years.
The government is experimenting with carbon pricing, and investing heavily in low-carbon wind, solar, and nuclear energy.
Further, the two countries are actively cooperating.
Last year Obama and Chinese President Xi Jinping committed to phase out hydrofluorcarbons, a potent greenhouse gas.
In February, they announced their intention to work together on climate policy – a marked contrast to Sino-US tensions over Pacific security and trade issues.
With the European Union also preparing to commit to new 2030 climate targets, hopes for a global deal are rising.
A third cause for optimism is the re-appraisal of climate-change economics.
Five years ago, policies aimed at cutting greenhouse-gas emissions were seen as a cost burden on the economy.
Negotiations were therefore a zero-sum game, with countries seeking to minimize their obligations while asking others to do more.
However, new evidence may be altering the economic calculus.
According to research conducted by the Global Commission on the Economy and Climate, far from hurting the economy, well-designed climate policy may actually boost growth.
Chaired by former Mexican President Felipe Calderón and comprising former prime ministers, presidents, and finance ministers, the Commission is analyzing how investments in clean-energy infrastructure, agricultural productivity, and urban transport could stimulate sluggish economies.
Its conclusions will be presented at September’s summit; if accepted, the Commission’s work could mark a turning point, transforming the way in which climate policy is perceived by the world’s economic policymakers.
None of this guarantees success.
Powerful vested interests – not least the world’s fossil-fuel industries – will no doubt seek to limit progress, and most governments are not yet focused on the problem.
But one thing is certain: the reality of climate change is making it impossible to ignore.
Combating Konzo
EAST LANSING, MICHIGAN – Too many preventable diseases, from AIDS to yellow fever, have long afflicted Sub-Saharan Africa.
But eradicating them requires an understanding of the disease in question, money, education, government support, planning, and, not least, an interest from the community and the wider world in solving the problem.
Consider a preventable disease that most people have never heard of: konzo, a permanent, irreversible, upper-motor neuron disorder, common in rural areas of Sub-Saharan Africa that rely on the bitter varieties of the cassava plant as a staple crop.
Konzo occurs when cassava tubers are not properly prepared before consumption, which usually requires soaking them until they ferment and then drying them in the sun to allow for the breakdown of cyanogenic compounds.
Hundreds or thousands of people in a village region can be affected with every outbreak.
Konzo is especially common in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the Central African Republic, Mozambique, and Tanzania, and often follows droughts or conflicts, when food is scarce.
Women and children are the worst affected, especially during times of economic hardship, when they have the least access to meat, beans, and other sources of sulfur amino acids necessary for the liver to detoxify cyanide in the body.
The effects are not easy to miss.
The World Health Organization defines konzo as a visible spastic abnormality of gait while walking or running; a history of onset within one week in a formerly healthy person, followed by a non-progressive course; and exaggerated jerking of the knees or ankles without signs of spinal disease.
In documenting neurocognitive impairments in children with konzo, my colleagues and I also noted sub-clinical symptoms even in konzo-free children living in konzo-affected households, a finding based on their performance on more specialized neurocognitive tests of memory and learning.
These subtler symptoms may constitute a pre-konzo condition, providing a warning that a child is approaching the disease’s threshold.
Thus, the neurocognitive effects documented for non-konzo children in konzo-affected households and communities make it all the more important to ensure food safety in regions dependent on bitter varieties of cassava with high levels of cyanogenic compounds.
To this end, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation has supported research leading to the development of nontoxic, high-yield varieties of cassava.
These genetically engineered strains can thrive even in degraded soil, so that people no longer have to turn to the more toxic varieties.
But disseminating these safer strains is proving difficult.
Konzo-affected regions lack the agricultural, educational, and public-health capacity and infrastructure needed to implement the necessary changes.
For the same reasons, these regions fail to diversify their food staples to include safer crops such as millet, maize, or beans.
Because there is no cure for the neurological damage that konzo causes, the battle against the disease must focus on prevention.
While that means continuing to demonstrate the benefits of new strains of cassava and other staples, the first priority must be to educate people, especially village women, about the hazards of eating unprocessed cassava, and to teach them how to prepare it safely.
Using culturally appropriate social marketing, similar to those used in anti-HIV education, the message can be spread through social networks, mobile phones, radio, and television.
To be sure, communities in affected regions have long followed safe, traditional practices.
But they may be unaware of why these practices are so important, and therefore of the consequences of not adhering to them.
Especially during times of upheaval and increased food scarcity, soaking the peeled tubers for three days until fermentation, and then sun-drying them for a day, might seem like an unaffordable luxury.
It is not.
Millions are at risk of konzo, and outbreaks can occur at any time.
The neurological injury can be debilitating, and it is permanent.
Because we know how to prevent it, we are obliged to act.
The UN’s Half-Full Glass
NAIROBI – Families trapped by the fighting in Syria are reportedly eating “salads’’ made of leaves and grass to stave off hunger.
According to the United Nations refugee agency, more than two million Syrians have fled to neighboring countries.
Back home, many more face a brutal winter without adequate food, medicine, or shelter.
And, as if conditions could not be worse, the country is facing a polio outbreak.
The international response to Syria’s crisis has been nothing short of disastrous.
Indeed, Syria seems to be the embodiment of failure on the part of the UN.
The Security Council is deadlocked.
In Damascus, would-be peacemakers come and go, talking diplomacy but achieving nothing.
Relief agencies are blocked from operating where they are needed most.
Yet it is clear that without the UN, the situation would be even worse.
Lebanon, Jordan, and Turkey would be under even more pressure from the refugees flooding across their borders.
And while efforts to achieve a ceasefire have failed, diplomacy has not – at least not entirely.
In October, UN inspectors took initial steps to destroy Syria’s chemical-weapons stockpiles and facilities, with the government’s full cooperation.
In Syria – as in so many other conflict-affected areas, where the UN is fighting to promote peace and stability – there is no such thing as a clear victory.
As an experienced statesman once told me, “At the UN, we do not settle for failure, nor do we expect success.”
In diplomatic negotiations, you take what you can get.
In humanitarian crises, you do what is possible – usually too little, and often too late.
“We drink from a cup that is eternally half full,” he concluded.
This conflicted view aligns with public perceptions of the UN.
In the United States, for example, a recent poll by Better World Campaign suggested that 57% of Americans view the UN favorably; but, according to a more recent Gallup survey, only 35% of Americans believe the UN is doing a good job.
When the UN was founded in 1945, polls showed similarly conflicted views.
While slightly more than 60% of Americans embraced the importance of the UN and its global mission, only 39% believed that its lofty goals for peace and human development were achievable.
This discrepancy reflects a deep divide – in the US and elsewhere – between people’s hopes for the UN and their expectations of its ability to deliver.
In fact, the UN’s contribution to peace and development should not be understated, though its successes clearly do not receive the publicity they deserve.
For example, UN peacekeepers were recently deployed successfully in Mali.
Last month, they defeated the M23 rebels in the Democratic Republic of Congo, ending a major threat to regional peace and security.
But most of the UN’s achievements have had shortcomings.
In 2011, after Côte d’Ivoire’s President Laurent Gbagbo refused to cede power following his electoral defeat the previous year, the UN, backed by French forces, arrested him and transferred him to the International Criminal Court, cutting short a potentially devastating civil war.
Nonetheless, their intervention came too late for the hundreds of civilians who were killed in the city of Duékoué.
When Libya’s Muammar el-Qaddafi threatened to kill his rebellious detractors like “rats,” a UN coalition intervened under an emerging global doctrine: the responsibility to protect.
But three years after Qaddafi’s ouster, Libya remains hobbled by weak national institutions and roiled by factional fighting.
During the early days of the Arab Spring protests, the UN, led by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, spoke out forcefully for human rights and democracy.
But the UN’s capacity to ensure desirable outcomes is limited; while the hope that drove the Arab Spring may not be depleted, it has clearly diminished significantly.
In just a few years, the UN has managed to push climate change – which, until recently, was barely understood by world leaders – toward the top of the global agenda.
But a comprehensive agreement on climate change remains a distant hope.
And while the Millennium Development Goals have produced remarkable progress in key areas – including education, infant mortality, and diseases like malaria and tuberculosis – there is still a long way to go.
In pursuing a political solution in Syria, it is important to set realistic expectations.
The country has descended into warlordism – a take-no-prisoners fight among armed groups, some allied with the government, others with Al Qaeda, and all preying on innocent civilians.
In such an environment, the prospects for diplomacy are dim.
The UN must settle for what it can get and do the most it can to help those in need.
After all, a half-full glass is better than an empty one.
Beyond the Nairobi Massacre
NAIROBI – Kenya heaved a collective sigh of relief when the four-day siege at Nairobi’s Westgate shopping mall finally ended.
Yet the aftermath of the massacre is in many ways turning out to be as dramatic – and grisly – as the event itself.
The sophistication of the plot has stunned investigators.
The attackers –&nbsp;members of the Somali Islamist extremist group al-Shabaab – spent weeks reconnoitering the site.
They knew every exit and safe haven, and they appear to have leased a shop where they pre-positioned ammunition, explosives, and heavy weaponry.
Their use of social media was a case study in digital virtuosity.
The attackers issued a clear demand: Kenya must withdraw the forces that it deployed two years ago as part of an international effort to drive al-Shabaab out of Somalia and return the country to government rule and a semblance of normal life.
Their strike, they said, was intended chiefly as a warning to Kenya’s government: change your policy, or else.
The attackers also made a great show of telling the world that they had taken special care to safeguard the lives of fellow Muslims during the assault.
Tell that to a colleague here in Nairobi who was trapped in the mall for five hours as gunfire echoed all around.
She emerged unharmed to find that two members of her family were dead and a third wounded.
The survivor was a nine-year-old boy, shot in the hip.
As he lay bleeding, terrorists trained their guns on his mother and 15-year-old sister.
Recite a passage from the Koran, they ordered.
Being Muslim, they did so.
The terrorists shot them anyway.
“Why did you do that?
Why did you shoot them?” the little boy wailed.
“Because,” replied one of the gunmen, “they were not wearing the hijab.”
Amid the chaos, a French woman grabbed the child and carried him to safety.
We have heard many such stories in recent days.
Brutal as they sound, worse is likely to come.
A police doctor working with forensic teams left the scene in shock, telling reporters of seeing bodies beheaded, and others bearing clear evidence of unspeakable torture.
He recounted entering the still-smoldering ruins of the mall last week and seeing bodies hanging from hooks.
Many of those taken hostage suffered terrible deaths.
There were bodies with their noses and ears wrenched off with pliers.
Others had their eyes gouged out.
The terrorists seem to have used knives to shave some victims’ fingers like pencils, he said, forcing them to write their names in their own blood.
At least 72 people were killed in the attack.
How much that toll increases, and how graphic investigators will be in describing the scenes they encounter, remains to be seen.
It is important to understand what is at stake in this gruesome episode, not only for Kenya but for the region and beyond.
President Uhuru Kenyatta made clear almost immediately that last week’s events will not weaken Kenya’s determination to maintain its policy on Somalia, even as he confirmed that he, too, lost loved ones in the Nairobi massacre.
The warlords of al-Shabaab are not the only threat to the region’s security.
Today, an arc of crisis stretches from Somalia on the Indian Ocean across the African Sahel to the Atlantic coast.
Sudan, another country in Kenya’s neighborhood, is fractured by rebellion.
In the south, secessionist groups are fighting in Kordofan and Blue Nile.
To the west, in Darfur, protesters burned government buildings in the provincial capital of Nyala while the siege in Nairobi played out.
Days later, riots erupted in cities across Sudan, including the capital, Khartoum.
According to news reports, security forces have shot over 100 people, adding to a toll of casualties that has made this year one of the deadliest in Sudan’s recent history.
Diplomats view these developments with alarm.
Over the past year, Darfur has spun out of government control.
As Darfur goes, many analysts say, so goes Sudan.
Conditions across the wider Sahel are similarly worrisome.
Mali may be stable for now, but, with the separatist Tuareg rebels in country’s north having just suspended their participation in peace talks, many experts believe that it is only a matter of time before the conflict there reignites and spreads.
Drug barons and local warlords control increasingly large swaths of territory from Guinea on the Atlantic coast through Senegal to Mali, Niger, and beyond.
Libya is already partitioned among rival warlords, with a “national” government that operates only at the indulgence of the armed groups that support it.
Against this background, the stakes in Kenya’s fight against terrorism in and emanating from Somalia are high.
It is not a struggle that Kenya should wage alone.
Small Countries’ Big Successes
ZURICH – Scotland’s vote on independence from the United Kingdom has spurred widespread debate about the secession of small states, such as Slovenia and Croatia in 1991, or the independence drive today in Spain’s autonomous region of Catalonia.
But the narrow focus on the political and economic implications for Scotland and the UK – or, for that matter, the referendum’s decisive pro-union outcome – should not overshadow one of the more overlooked geopolitical trends of our time: the rise of small countries.
Roughly 75% of today’s small countries were formed in the last 70 years, mostly as a result of broader democratic transitions and in tandem with trade growth and globalization.
Their successes and failures are more germane to current discussions than, say, the fiscal implications of Scottish independence.
The lessons to be learned from these cases are useful not only to new and potentially new small countries.
Relatively young small countries in Africa, the Caribbean, and the Middle East can also benefit by examining the secrets of Singapore’s success, the causes and effects of Ireland’s property bubble, and Denmark’s decision to build strong counter-terrorism capabilities, despite its relative safety.
Indeed, such considerations can help them to chart a path to economic prosperity and social cohesion.
Of course, in learning from one another, countries must always be careful to avoid the “folly of imitation.”
The Nordic countries, for example, have benefited significantly from deeply entrenched social, legal, and political characteristics that are not easy to transfer to their developing-country counterparts.
Moreover, young small countries must recognize that building the institutions and economies to which they aspire will take time.
In fact, age may well be the most important factor in small-country performance, with per capita GDP in small countries that were established before 1945 some four times larger than in their newer counterparts.
More established small countries also lead the rankings in other metrics.
For example, they occupy nearly half of the top 20 positions in the United Nations Human Development Index.
In general, older small countries outstrip medium-size and large countries in terms of economic and social performance, openness to international trade, and enthusiasm for globalization – features that younger countries should work to promote.
But small countries’ economic growth is often more volatile – a tendency that younger states must learn to contain if they are to prosper in the long term.
The question of “large” or “small” government is less relevant, despite the impression given by heated debates in large countries like the United States.
Overall government expenditure is only weakly correlated with the size of the government.
A better proxy would be public-sector salaries – the only area where large countries appear to benefit from economies of scale.
Smaller countries spend more, as a percentage of GDP, on education and health care – another habit that new small countries would do well to uphold.
Indeed, there is a strong positive correlation between the pace of economic growth and “intangible infrastructure” – the combination of education, health care, technology, and the rule of law that promotes the development of human capital and enables businesses to grow efficiently.
Small countries account for seven of the top ten countries for intangible infrastructure.
Add to that measures like the quality of institutions, suitability to thrive in a globalized world, stability of economic output, and level of human development, and one can generate a country strength index, in which 13 of the top 20 performers are small, with the most successful being Switzerland, Singapore, Denmark, Ireland, and Norway.
A cluster of larger countries is led by Australia, the Netherlands, and the UK.
Other “resilient” small countries include Finland, Austria, Sweden, and New Zealand.
To be sure, there is a clear “old European” bias here.
Developing small states like Croatia, Oman, Kuwait, and Uruguay may consider exhortations to emulate countries like Switzerland and Norway to be impractical.
But a useful set of priorities can be gleaned from their experiences.
Specifically, small developing countries should focus on building institutions, such as central banks and finance ministries, that explicitly seek to minimize the macroeconomic volatility associated with globalization.
They should also advance the rule of law, develop strong and efficient public education and health-care systems, and encourage domestic industry to emphasize return, rather than cost of capital, as their guiding metric.
Beyond emulation, small countries can help one another through direct alliances.
Surprisingly, very few such alliances exist, with many small countries – especially developing ones – cultivating close ties with “big brother” countries or immersing themselves in regional federal structures.
The risk, of course, is that their voices become drowned out by larger entities, impeding their ability to do what is best for their own citizens.
In a fast-changing geopolitical and economic environment – characterized by challenges like interest-rate rises spurred by high debt levels; competitive corporate-tax reductions; changing immigration patterns; and a possible slowdown in the pace of globalization – small countries must be able to identify and assess risks, and adjust their strategies accordingly.
Indeed, even without full independence, this is precisely what Scotland, which has been promised even greater autonomy within the UK than it already has, will have to do if it is to succeed.
Politics-Proof Economies?
MILAN – Governments’ inability to act decisively to address their economies’ growth, employment, and distributional challenges has emerged as a major source of concern almost everywhere.
In the United States, in particular, political polarization, congressional gridlock, and irresponsible grandstanding have garnered much attention, with many worried about the economic consequences.
But, as a recent analysis has shown, there is little correlation between a country’s relative economic performance in several dimensions and how “functional” its government is.
In fact, in the six years since the global financial crisis erupted, the US has outperformed advanced countries in terms of growth, unemployment, productivity, and unit labor costs, despite a record-high level of political polarization at the national level.
Of course, one should not paint with too broad a brush.
Unemployment is lower in Germany, Canada, and Japan.
And America’s income distribution is more unequal than most advanced countries’ – and is trending the wrong way.
Still, in terms of overall relative economic performance, the US clearly is not paying a high price for political dysfunction.
Without dismissing the potential value of more decisive policymaking, it seems clear that other factors must be at work.
Examining them holds important lessons for a wide range of countries.
Our premise is that the global integration and economic growth of a wide range of developing countries has triggered a multi-decade process of profound change.
These countries’ presence in the tradable sector of the global economy is affecting relative prices of goods and factors of production, including both labor and capital.
At the same time, declining semi-conductor costs have encouraged the proliferation of information and communication technologies that are replacing labor, dis-intermediating supply chains, and reducing routine jobs and lower-value-added jobs on the tradable side in advanced economies.
These are secular trends that call for forward-looking assessments and long-term responses.
Relatively myopic policy frameworks may have worked reasonably well in the early postwar period, when the US was dominant, and when a group of structurally similar advanced countries accounted for the vast majority of global output.
But they cease working well when sustaining growth requires behavioral and structural adaptation to rapid changes in comparative advantage and the value of various types of human capital.
What, then, accounts for the US economy’s relatively good performance in the post-crisis period?
The main factor is the American economy’s underlying structural flexibility.
Deleveraging has occurred faster than in other countries and, more important, resources and output have quickly shifted to the tradable sector to fill the gap created by persistently weak domestic demand.
This suggests that, whatever the merit of government action, what governments do not do is also important.
Many countries have policies that protect sectors or jobs, thereby introducing structural rigidities.
The cost of such policies rises with the need for structural change to sustain growth and employment (and to recover from unbalanced growth patterns and shocks).
No country is frictionless in this regard, but there are substantial differences.
Relatively speaking, Germany, northern Europe, the United Kingdom, Canada, Australian, New Zealand, and the US are relatively free of structural rigidities.
Japan intends to get there.
Southern Europe has a substantial agenda of flexibility-enhancing reform ahead of it.
Removing structural rigidities is easier said than done.
Some stem from social-protection mechanisms, focused on jobs and sectors rather than individuals and families.
Others reflect policies that simply protect sectors from competition and generate rents and vested interests.
In short, resistance to reform can be substantial precisely because the results have distributional effects.
Such reform is not market fundamentalism.
The goal is not to privatize everything or to uphold the mistaken belief that unregulated markets are self-regulating.
On the contrary, government has a significant role in structural transitions.
But it must also get out of the way.
Relative to the US, Europe has two sets of problems.
One is the need, especially in several southern European countries, to enhance structural flexibility and boost productivity.
In the euro’s first decade, the southern economies’ unit labor costs diverged from those in Germany and the north, with growth sustained either by excess public debt and the government component of domestic aggregate demand, or, in the case of Spain, by a leveraged housing bubble.
In the absence of the exchange-rate mechanism, resetting the system to allow the tradable sectors to generate growth involves painful relative deflation, a process that takes longer in a low-inflation environment.
Second, the eurozone permits these divergences because policies that affect growth are decentralized.
The common currency and monetary policy are in constant tension with decentralized policymaking on taxation, public-sector investment, and social policies – all of which affect countries’ structural flexibility.
Moreover, the single market is relatively complete in goods but not in services.
This is not a stable situation.
Europe eventually must gravitate either toward deeper political, fiscal, and policy integration, or toward a structure that includes adjustment mechanisms – for example, greater labor mobility – to accommodate divergences in productivity.
Many countries, not only in Europe, must undergo structural adjustment in order to achieve sustainable growth patterns.
All advanced economies’ structures and portfolios of employment opportunities are facing similar competitive and technological forces, and all are tending to shift income toward the upper end of the distribution and toward owners of capital.
The cross-country differences in performance partly reflect past policy choices affecting the speed of adjustment.
Initial conditions matter, and in this respect America’s policy framework seems to have ensured the US economy’s relatively higher resilience not only to the global crisis, but also to domestic political volatility.
Structural flexibility is not the whole answer; higher levels of public-sector investment would also help to generate sustainable recovery, especially in the advanced countries.
But, with severe fiscal constraints in many countries likely to delay that element of the policy response, flexibility-enhancing reforms are the right place to start.
Europe’s Bargain
MILAN – In July, the European Commission published its sixth report on economic, social, and territorial cohesion (a term that can be roughly translated as equality and inclusiveness).
The report lays out a plan for substantial investment – €450 billion ($583 billion) from three European Union funds – from 2014 to 2020.
Given today’s difficult economic and fiscal conditions, where public-sector investment is likely to be crowded out in national budgets, this program represents a major commitment to growth-oriented public sector investment.
The EU’s cohesion strategy is admirable and smart.
Whereas such investment in the past was heavily tilted toward physical infrastructure – particularly transport – the agenda has shifted to a more balanced set of targets, including human capital, employment, the economy’s knowledge and technology base, information technology, low-carbon growth, and governance.
That said, one can ask what the economic and social returns on these investments will be.
True, sustaining high growth rates requires sustaining high levels of public investment, which increases the return to (and hence the levels of) private investment, in turn elevating output and employment.
But public investment is only one component of successful growth strategies.
It will do some good in all scenarios, but its impact will be much larger beyond the short term if other binding constraints are removed.
Three complementary issues seem crucial.
One, mainly the province of the European Central Bank, involves price stability and the value of the euro.
The second is fiscal, and the third is structural.
Inflation rates, now well below the ECB’s 2% annual target, are in the deflationary danger zone.
Because deflation drives up the real burden of sovereign debt and public non-debt liabilities such as pension systems, its emergence would undermine the already fragile state of many countries’ public finances and kill growth.
In a post-crisis environment of aggressive and unconventional monetary policy in other advanced countries, the ECB’s less aggressive policies (owing to its more restrictive mandate) have resulted in an exchange rate that has damaged competitiveness and the growth potential of many eurozone economies’ tradable sectors.
This is crucial, because most economies experienced pre-crisis growth patterns characterized by unsustainably high levels of domestic aggregate demand.
So rebalancing requires shifting toward the tradable sector and external demand.
A weakening euro will help.
The ECB understands this, and, without being explicit about it, is expanding its asset-purchase programs to elevate inflation and bring down the euro.
ECB President Mario Draghi has been clear that restoring target inflation and weakening the currency is not a growth strategy.
Difficult reforms are needed to put many national economies’ fiscal affairs in order and to increase their structural flexibility.
The ECB cannot do it alone.
On the fiscal side, sovereign-debt levels are too high and still rising.
But the bigger challenge is the unfunded non-debt liabilities in pension funds and social-security systems, which are estimated to be four times or more the size of sovereign debt.
It is clearly necessary to implement credible plans to arrest the growth of these liabilities.
But these liabilities also have to be reduced, because they are already imposing a crushing fiscal burden, largely owing to rapid aging, with rising longevity a major contributor.
The US has a similar problem, though it is more distant.
A recent analysis for the US suggests that entitlements programs’ liabilities will hit the public budgets in about ten years.
By contrast, in Italy, for example, with its less favorable demographics, they have already hit.
Growth would reduce this burden, but growth in the short and medium term is highly problematic.
Inflation would reduce the real value of both debt and other non-indexed non-debt liabilities.
But even controlled inflation at higher levels has been ruled out; again, the current risk is deflation.
Governments could raise taxes to cover a larger fraction of the required expenditures.
But that is not likely to help growth, and it imposes the burden on the workforce and the young who are trying to enter it, a valuable subset of whom are mobile and could simply leave.
Likewise, issuing more debt to cover the portion of liabilities coming due would merely shift the composition of liabilities without reducing them.
The only other alternative is direct reduction.
For sovereign debt, that means default, which will happen only in extreme circumstances; for non-debt liabilities, it means changing systemic parameters – for example, increasing the retirement age – which is contentious and exceptionally difficult to do politically.
The third missing ingredient is structural flexibility, which is needed for two reasons.
First, most advanced economies have maintained the unbalanced growth patterns that led to the global crisis in 2008.
Restoring growth requires structural changes.
In the US, though growth remains well below potential, data suggest that about half of the recovery in growth has resulted from a shift in capital and labor to the tradable side of the economy, with shale gas providing a big boost.
That is either not occurring or happening at a glacial pace in southern European economies, where structural rigidities in labor and services markets need to be addressed.
The exception is Spain, which initiated labor-market reforms in late 2012.
Perhaps as these reforms’ impact becomes more visible, reform momentum will increase in other countries.
Even without crisis-related imbalances, structural flexibility in all economies is necessary to adapt to the shifts caused by globalization and the labor-saving and skill-biased technological shifts associated with the rising value of digital capital.
In the past 30 years, the global economy added 1.5 billion new connected workers in developing countries, with three billion new consumers in sight.
Digital technologies have eliminated millions of routine white- and blue-collar jobs, and we are rapidly entering the realm of cognitive-based employment.
If investment in human capital is to keep up with the changing composition of employment, structural flexibility is needed.
Europe has a real chance to conclude a bargain: member countries implement fiscal and structural reforms in exchange for short-run relaxation of fiscal constraints – not to increase liabilities, but to focus on growth-oriented investments to jump-start sustained recovery.
Private investors would take note, accelerating the recovery process.
The challenge now is to seize the opportunity.
Labor’s Digital Displacement
MILAN – Digital technologies are once again transforming global value chains and, with them, the structure of the global economy.
What do businesses, citizens, and policymakers need to know as they scramble to keep up?
Digitally enabled supply chains initially increased efficiency and dramatically shortened lead times.
Capital was mobile; labor less so.
Economic activity (production, research, design, etc.) moved to any accessible country or region that had relatively inexpensive labor and human capital.
With only a slight lag, complexity became manageable, and global supply chains’ linear model (something produced in country A is consumed in country B) gave way to a more complex model with more fragmented but more efficient supply networks.
Meanwhile, a dramatic shift occurred on the demand side, as emerging economies grew and became middle-income countries.
Developing country producers, who in an earlier era accounted for a relatively small fraction of global demand, became major consumers.
Global supply networks shifted again, accommodating fragmentation and dispersion on both the supply and demand sides of their structure, a process sometimes called technologically enabled atomization: the division of supply networks into finer and finer parts, breaking the bonds of proximity and the resulting transaction-cost constraints that previously prevailed.
For example, many services related to intermediate and final demand require knowledge, expertise, information, and communication for their delivery.
What they do not require is geographical nearness or the physical movement of goods.
They represent a large share of the global economy, and they are gravitating rapidly toward the tradable sector, with increasingly powerful digital and information technology chasing imperfectly mobile human resources and new rapidly growing markets.
In the course of this transformation, millions of people joined the global economy, with wide-ranging consequences – many of which remain challenging – for poverty, prices, wages, and income distributions.
Now comes a second, potentially even more powerful, wave of digital technology that is replacing labor in increasingly complex tasks.
This process of labor substitution and disintermediation has been underway for some time in service sectors – think of ATMs, online banking, enterprise resource planning, customer relationship management, mobile payment systems, and much more.
This revolution is spreading to the production of goods, where robots and 3D printing are displacing labor.
It is important to understand the economics of these technologies.
The vast majority of the cost comes at the start, in the design of hardware (like sensors) and, more important, in creating the software that produces the capability to carry out various tasks.
Once this is achieved, the marginal cost of the hardware is relatively low (and declines as scale rises), and the marginal cost of replicating the software is essentially zero.
With a huge potential global market to amortize the upfront fixed costs of design and testing, the incentives to invest are compelling.
In other words, unlike the preceding wave of digital technology, which motivated firms to gain access to and deploy underutilized pools of valuable labor around the world, the driving force in this round is cost reduction via the replacement of labor.
This transformation has important side effects.
For physical goods, there are costs associated with logistics and lead times, owing to inventories and poor forecasts of the market.
With digital capital-intensive technology, however, production will inevitably move toward the final market, wherever it is.
This re-localization constitutes a major shift in the structure of global supply networks.
An extreme form of this may be coming in the form of 3D printing, a technology that makes it possible to produce an astonishingly wide and growing range of products by printing them one layer at a time.
Examples include buildings, athletic shoes, designer lamps, aircraft wings, and much more.
As the costs of this technology decline, it is easy to imagine that production will become extremely local and customized.
Moreover, production may occur in response to actual demand, not anticipated or forecast demand.
In some sense, this represents the ultimate compression of supply chains, as firms produce to final demand with minimal delay.
Meanwhile, the impact of robotics (another technology with digital foundations), is not confined to production.
Though self-driving cars and drones are the most attention-getting examples, the impact on logistics is no less transformative.
Computers and robotic cranes that schedule and move containers around and load ships now control the Port of Singapore, one of the most efficient in the world.
Developing countries in the early stages of growth need to understand these trends.
Labor, no matter how inexpensive, will become a less important asset for growth and employment expansion, with labor-intensive, process-oriented manufacturing becoming a less effective way for early-stage developing countries to enter the global economy.
Re-localization will be seen everywhere, including lower-income countries.
Production will not vanish; it will just be less labor intensive.
All countries will eventually need to rebuild their growth models around digital technologies and the human capital that supports their deployment and expansion.
The retail sector, too, is being transformed.