From 2000 to 2008, these four countries’ share of global output rose rapidly, from 16% to 22% (in purchasing power parity terms), and their economies performed better than average in the subsequent global recession.
For investors, that outcome justified the creation of the catchy acronym.
But then a strange thing happened: the investors’ creature came to life.
In 2009, the four countries met for the first time in Russia in an effort to forge an international political organization.
South Africa joined the bloc in late 2010 primarily for political reasons.
As O’Neill recently told China Daily, “South Africa is quite fortunate enough to be in the group, as, economically, it is rather small compared to the others.”
Moreover, its economic performance has been relatively sluggish, with a growth rate of just 2.3% last year.
Indeed, while the BRICS may be helpful in coordinating certain diplomatic tactics, the term lumps together highly disparate countries.
Not only is South Africa miniscule compared to the others, but China’s economy is larger than those of all of the other members combined.
Likewise, India, Brazil, and South Africa are democracies, and occasionally meet in an alternative forum that they call “IBSA.”
And, while the large autocracies, Russia and China, find it diplomatically advantageous to tweak the Americans, both have different but crucial relationships with the United States.
And both have worked to thwart efforts by India, Brazil, and South Africa to become permanent members of the United Nations Security Council.
As I wrote three years ago, in analytical terms, it makes little sense to include Russia, a former superpower, with the developing economies.
Russia lacks diversified exports, faces severe demographic and health problems, and, in former President Dmitri Medvedev’s words, “greatly needs modernization.”
Little has changed since Putin returned to the presidency last year.
While economic growth benefited from the dramatic growth in oil and gas prices during the last decade, other competitive industries have yet to emerge, and the country now faces the prospect of declining energy prices.
While it aims to maintain 5% annual growth, its economy was relatively flat last year.
Unless it improves its infrastructure and literacy rate (particularly for women), India is unlikely to catch up with China.
So, should we take today’s BRICS more seriously than the BRICs of three years ago?
Tellingly, the meeting in Durban failed to produce any details of the structure of the proposed new development bank, suggesting that little progress had been made in the year since the BRICS’ last meeting in New Delhi, where the plan was announced.
In fact, despite a commitment to launch “formal negotiations” to establish the bank, disagreements about the size and shares of the bank’s capital have not been resolved.
That lack of unity is symptomatic of the BRICS members’ underlying incompatibilities.
In political terms, China, India, and Russia are vying with each other for power in Asia.
And, in economic terms, Brazil, India, and South Africa are concerned about the effects of China’s undervalued currency on their economies.
Three years ago, I wrote that, “BRIC is not likely to become a serious political organization of like-minded states.”
The BRICS’ most recent meeting has given me no reason to revise that assessment.
Why Capital Flows Uphill
LONDON – At first, it seems difficult to grasp: global capital is flowing from poor to rich countries.
Emerging-market countries run current-account surpluses, while advanced economies have deficits.
One would expect fast-growing, capital-scarce&nbsp;(and young)&nbsp;developing countries to be importing capital from the rest of world to finance consumption and investment.
So, why are they sending capital to richer countries, instead?
China is a case in point.
With its current-account surplus averaging 5.5% of GDP in 2000-2008, China has become one of the world’s largest lenders.
Despite its rapid growth and promising investment opportunities, the country has persistently been sending a significant portion of its savings overseas. &nbsp;
And China is not alone.
Other emerging markets – including Brazil, Russia, India, Mexico, Argentina, Thailand, Indonesia, Malaysia, and the Middle Eastern oil exporters – have all increased their current-account surpluses significantly since the early 1990’s.
Collectively, capital-scarce developing countries are lending to capital-abundant advanced economies.
Many observers believe that these global imbalances reflect developing economies’ financial integration, coupled with underdevelopment of domestic financial markets.
According to this view, these countries’ demand for assets cannot be met – in terms of both quantity and quality –&nbsp;at home, so they deploy part of their savings to countries like the US, which can offer a more diverse array of quality assets.
While plausible, this argument suggests that, as financial markets improve over time in developing countries, the global imbalances are bound to shrink.
But such a reversal is nowhere in sight.
Why?
A crucial dimension of globalization has been trade liberalization.
For China, foreign trade as a percentage of GDP soared from 25% in 1989 to 66% in 2006, largely owing to its admission to the World Trade Organization in 2001. &nbsp;
Most of what China and other developing countries produce and export are labor-intensive goods such as textiles and apparel.
This has allowed advanced economies, in turn, to produce and export more capital-intensive, higher-value-added products.
Globalization of trade enabled countries to tap the efficiency gains that specialization in their sectors of comparative advantage has brought about.
With a slight mental stretch, one can imagine that what a country produces and trades may affect its savings and investment decisions.
An economy in which the main productive activity is berry picking, for example, has little need for investment and capital accumulation.
Its laborers earn wages, consume, and save part of that income.
Since the production process requires little capital, there is no demand for domestic investment – and thus no savings vehicles.
Instead, the only way to save is by purchasing capital abroad – in economies with capital-intensive production and demand for investment.
This economy will always export its savings.
That may be an extreme example, but it illustrates a more general point about how merchandise trade can influence financial flows.
Countries that produce and export more labor-intensive goods – perhaps owing to increased trade openness, or faster labor-force and productivity growth, all of which are true of China – may experience a rise in saving, but a less-than-equivalent increase in demand for capital.
Rich countries, by contrast, are able to export more capital-intensive goods, and thus have a greater need for investment.
So they may be importing more capital – resulting in a greater current-account deficit – simply because they are producing more capital-intensive goods.
With developing countries – in particular, China, India, and the ex-Soviet bloc – bringing almost 1.5 billion workers into the world economy since the early 1990’s, it is not difficult to understand the potential impact of this effect.
After all, much of this labor force was absorbed by labor-intensive industries that eventually churned out products exported to the rest of the world.
Indeed, that massive addition of labor helped to drive down the relative price of labor-intensive goods, which fell by roughly 15% between 1989 and 2008.
As developing countries increased their labor-intensive production and exports, their current-account surpluses rose – by almost 3.6 percentage points, on average, between 1989-1993 and 2002-2006.
China’s current-account surplus increased by almost 11 percentage points over the same period, India’s by 2.5 percentage points, and Russia’s by seven percentage points.
These countries, as well as other large surplus economies, such as Brazil, Saudi Arabia, and Iran, all experienced a simultaneous increase in the labor content of exports.
This pattern contrasts with that of the United States and many other advanced countries, which have experienced a deterioration of their current-account balances as their production and exports have become more capital-intensive.
Many might doubt the view that China is exporting more labor-intensive goods, rather than upgrading its exports on the capital- and skill-intensity ladder.
But trade data suggest the opposite, perhaps because China’s accession to the WTO led to tariff reductions that released more labor-intensive production.
In fact, trade data may underestimate the true extent of China’s labor intensity andoverstate the capital and skill intensity of China’s exports.
China has witnessed rapid growth in the processing trade: assembling intermediate inputs – imported from countries like the US and Japan – that have high capital and skill content.
So, while the exports of these final goods may count towards China’s own capital and skill content, the country’s real role was only in the labor-intensive process of assembly.
A country’s production structure may very well determine how much capital it supplies and how much it needs.
So the fact that capital may flow towards rich countries that produce and export more capital-intensive goods should not be so puzzling, after all.
Why China Can’t Adjust
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA – China’s current economic slowdown has no shortage of causes: Europe’s financial turmoil, sputtering recovery in the United States, and weak domestic investment growth, to name the most commonly cited factors.
Since exports and investment account, respectively, for 30% and 40% of China’s GDP growth, its economy is particularly vulnerable to weakening external demand and accumulation of non-performing loans caused by excessive and wasteful spending on fixed assets.
But China’s vulnerability to these factors, as serious as they are, is symptomatic of deeper institutional problems.
Until these underlying constraints are addressed, talk of a new consumption-based growth model for China, reflected in the government’s recently approved 12th Five-Year Plan, can be no more than lip service.
After all, China’s major trading partners, international financial institutions such as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund, and senior Chinese officials themselves have long recognized the structural vulnerabilities caused by excessive investment and low household consumption.
And, for nearly a decade, China has been urged to undertake reforms to redress these economic patterns, which have undermined the welfare of ordinary Chinese and strained the global trading system.
The best-known feature of China’s macroeconomic imbalances is heavy dependence on exports for growth, which is typically attributed to weak domestic demand: as a middle-income country, China lacks the purchasing power to consume the goods that it produces.
With nearly unlimited access to advanced-country markets, China can tap into global external demand and raise its GDP growth potential, as it has done for the past two decades.
If this view is right, the solution is straightforward: China can correct its imbalances by increasing its citizens’ incomes (by cutting taxes, raising wages, or increasing social spending), so that they can consume more, thereby reducing the economy’s dependence on exports.
Indeed, nearly all mainstream economists prescribe this approach for China.
But there is another explanation for China’s excessive export dependence, one that has more to do with the country’s poor political and economic institutions.
Specifically, export dependence partly reflects the high degree of difficulty of doing business in China.
Official corruption, insecure property rights, stifling regulatory restraints, weak payment discipline, poor logistics and distribution, widespread counterfeiting, and vulnerability to other forms of intellectual-property theft: all of these obstacles increase transaction costs and make it difficult for entrepreneurs to thrive in domestic markets.
By contrast, if China’s private firms sell to Western multinationals, such as Wal-Mart, Target, or Home Depot, they do not have to worry about getting paid.
They can avoid all of the headaches that they would have encountered at home, because well-established economic institutions and business practices in their export markets protect their interests and greatly reduce transaction costs.
The Chinese economy’s institutional weakness is reflected in international survey data.
The World Bank publishes an annual review of “the ease of doing business” for 183 countries and sub-national units.
In its June 2011 survey, China was ranked 91st, behind Mongolia, Albania, and Belarus.
It is particularly difficult to start a business in China (151st), pay taxes (122nd), obtain construction permits (179th), and get electricity (115th).
Faced with such a hostile environment, Chinese private entrepreneurs have been forced to engage in “institutional arbitrage” – taking advantage of efficient Western economic institutions to expand their business (most export-oriented businesses are owned by private entrepreneurs and foreign firms).
Unfortunately, as China has already claimed a large share of the world’s merchandise exports (10.4% in 2010) and economic stagnation in the West is constraining external demand, this strategy can no longer work.
But reorienting their businesses toward the Chinese domestic market requires far more than government policies that put more money in consumers' pockets.
In order to enjoy the same low transaction costs that they have in exporting, China’s entrepreneurs need a much better business environment: an effective legal system, a sound regulatory framework, a government that protects their brands by fighting intellectual-property theft, dependable logistics and distribution networks, and a graft-resistant bureaucracy.
China cannot create such an environment quickly.
In essence, the Chinese government must transform a predatory state into a nurturing one, and treat private entrepreneurs as creators of wealth rather than targets of extraction.
In nearly all other countries, such a transformation was accomplished by establishing the rule of law and/or moving from autocracy to democracy.
The impossibility of sustaining growth in the absence of the rule of law and political accountability presents the Chinese Communist Party with an existential dilemma.
Ever since it crushed the pro-democracy movement in Tiananmen Square in 1989, the party has vowed not to surrender its political monopoly.
The investment boom and the globalization dividend of the last two decades allowed the Party to have its cake and eat it – maintaining its rule on the basis of economic prosperity, while failing to establish the institutions critical to sustaining such prosperity.
Today, this is no longer possible.
So in a sense, the Chinese bubble – as much an intellectual and political bubble as an economic one – has burst.
As China’s economic deceleration exposes its structural vulnerabilities and flawed policies, the much-hyped notion of “Chinese exceptionalism” – that China can continue to grow without the rule of law and the other essential institutions that a modern market economy presupposes – is proving to be nothing but a delusion.
The Lessons of the China-India War
NEW DELHI – This month marks the 50th anniversary of China’s military attack on India, the only foreign war that communist-ruled China has won.
Yet that war failed to resolve the disputes between the world’s two most populous countries, and its legacy continues to weigh down the bilateral relationship.
While their economic heft is drawing increasing international attention, their underlying strategic rivalry over issues ranging from land and water to geopolitical influence in other regions usually attracts less notice.
The international importance of the China-India relationship reflects the fact that together they account for 37% of humanity.
Although they represent markedly different cultures and competing models of development, they share a historical similarity that helps shape both countries’ diplomacy: each freed itself from colonial powers around the same time.
Throughout their histories, the Indian and Chinese civilizations were separated by the vast Tibetan plateau, limiting their interaction to sporadic cultural and religious contacts; political relations were absent.
It was only after China’s annexation of Tibet in 1950-1951 that Han Chinese troops appeared for the first time on India’s Himalayan frontiers.
Just over a decade later, China surprised India’s ill-prepared army by launching a multi-pronged attack across the Himalayas on October 20, 1962.
Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai publicly said that the war was intended “to teach India a lesson.”
Taking an enemy by surprise confers a significant tactical advantage in war, and the invasion inflicted an immense psychological and political shock on India that greatly magnified the initial military advances that China achieved.
China’s blitzkrieg created a defeatist mindset in India, forcing its army to retreat to defensive positions.
India, fearing unknown consequences, even shied away from employing its air power, although the Chinese military lacked effective air cover for its advancing forces.
After more than a month of fighting, China declared a unilateral ceasefire from a position of strength, having seized Indian territory.
The Chinese simultaneously announced that they would begin withdrawing their forces on December 1, 1962, vacating their territorial gains in the eastern sector (where the borders of India, Myanmar, Tibet, and Bhutan converge) but retaining the areas seized in the western sector (in the original princely state of Jammu and Kashmir).
These withdrawal parameters meshed with China’s pre-war aims.
Just as Mao Zedong started his invasion of Tibet while the world was preoccupied with the Korean War, so he chose a perfect time to invade India, as recommended by the ancient strategist Sun Tzu.
The attack coincided with a major international crisis that brought the United States and the Soviet Union within a whisker of nuclear war over the stealthy deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
China’s unilateral ceasefire coincided with America’s formal termination of its naval blockade of Cuba, marking the end of the missile crisis.
Mao’s shrewd timing ensured India’s isolation from sources of international support.
Throughout the invasion, the international spotlight was on the potential US-Soviet nuclear showdown, not on the bloody war raging in the Himalayan foothills.
India’s humiliating rout hastened the death of its prime minister, Jawaharlal Nehru; but it also set in motion the country’s military modernization and political rise.
Fifty years later, tensions between India and China are rising again amid an intense geopolitical rivalry.
Their entire 4,057-kilometer border – one of the longest in the world – remains in dispute, without a clearly defined line of control in the Himalayas.
This situation has persisted despite regular Chinese-Indian talks since 1981.
In fact, these talks constitute the longest and most futile negotiating process between any two countries in modern history.
During a 2010 visit to New Delhi, Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao stated bluntly that sorting out the border disputes “will take a fairly long period of time.”
If so, what does China (or India) gain by continuing the negotiations?
As old wounds fester, new issues have begun roiling bilateral relations.
For example, since 2006 China has initiated a new territorial dispute by claiming the eastern sector (the Austria-size Arunachal Pradesh state), from which its forces withdrew in 1962, describing it as “Southern Tibet.”
A perceptible hardening of China’s stance toward India since then is also reflected in other developments, including Chinese strategic projects and the country’s military presence in the Pakistani-held portion of Kashmir, a region where the disputed borders of India, China, and Pakistan converge.
Indian defense officials have reported increased military incursions by Chinese troops in recent years.
In response, India has been beefing up its military deployments along the border to prevent any Chinese land grab.
It has also launched a crash program to improve its logistical capabilities by constructing new roads, airstrips, and advanced landing stations along the Himalayas.
The larger strategic rivalry between the world’s largest autocracy and its biggest democracy has also sharpened, despite their fast-rising trade.
In the past decade, bilateral trade has risen more than 20-fold, to $73.9 billion, making it the only area in which bilateral relations have thrived.
Far from helping to turn the page on old disputes, this commerce has been accompanied by greater Sino-Indian geopolitical rivalry and military tension.
Booming bilateral trade is no guarantee of moderation between countries.
Although China set out to teach India a “lesson,” the 1962 war failed to achieve any lasting political objectives and only embittered bilateral relations.
The same lesson is applicable to the Sino-Vietnamese context: In 1979, China replicated the 1962 model by launching a surprise blitzkrieg against Vietnam that Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping admitted was designed to “teach a lesson.”
After 29 days, China ended its invasion, claiming that Vietnam had been sufficiently chastised.  But the lesson that Deng seems to have drawn from the PLA’s poor performance against Vietnam is that China, like India, needed to modernize every aspect of its society.
China is Not Collapsing
LONDON – One question has dominated the International Monetary Fund’s annual meeting this year in Peru: Will China’s economic downturn trigger a new financial crisis just as the world is putting the last one to bed?
But the assumption underlying that question – that China is now the global economy’s weakest link – is highly suspect.
China certainly experienced a turbulent summer, owing to three factors: economic weakness, financial panic, and the policy response to these problems.
While none on its own would have threatened the world economy, the danger stemmed from a self-reinforcing interaction among them: weak economic data leads to financial turmoil, which induces policy blunders that in turn fuel more financial panic, economic weakness, and policy mistakes.
Such self-reinforcing financial feedback is much more powerful in transmitting global economic contagion than ordinary commercial or trade exposures, as the world learned in 2008-2009.
The question now is whether the vicious circle that began in China over the summer will continue.
A sensible answer must distinguish between financial perceptions and economic reality.
Yet China is causing high anxiety, especially in emerging countries, largely because financial markets have convinced themselves that its economy is not only slowing, but falling off a cliff.
Many Western analysts, especially in financial institutions, treat China’s official GDP growth of around 7% as a political fabrication – and the IMF’s latest confirmation of its 6.8% estimate is unlikely to convince them.
They point to steel, coal, and construction statistics, which really are collapsing in several Chinese regions, and to exports, which are growing much less than in the past.
But why do the skeptics accept the truth of dismal government figures for construction and steel output – down 15% and 4%, respectively, in the year to August – and then dismiss official data showing 10.8% retail-sales growth?
One reason can be found in the financier George Soros’s concept of “reflexivity.”
Soros has argued for years that financial markets can create inaccurate expectations and then change reality to accord with them.
This is the opposite of the process described in textbooks and built into economic models, which always assume that financial expectations adapt to reality, not the other way round.
In a classic example of reflexivity, when China’s stock-market boom turned into July’s bust, the government responded with a $200 billion attempt to support prices, closely followed by a small devaluation of the previously stable renminbi.
Financial analysts almost universally ridiculed these policies and castigated Chinese leaders for abandoning their earlier pretenses of market-oriented reforms.
The government’s apparent desperation was seen as evidence that China was in far greater trouble than previously revealed.
Indeed, for 19 out of the PMI’s 36 months of existence, the value has been below 50, while Chinese manufacturing growth has averaged 7.5%.
Exaggerations of this kind have undermined confidence in Chinese policy at a particularly dangerous time.
China is now navigating a complex economic transition that involves three sometimes-conflicting objectives: creating a market-based consumer economy; reforming the financial system; and ensuring an orderly slowdown that avoids the economic collapse often accompanying industrial restructuring and financial liberalization.
Managing this trifecta successfully will require skillful juggling of priorities – and that will become much more difficult if Chinese policymakers lose international investors’ trust or, more important, that of China’s own citizens and businesses.
Vicious circles of economic instability, devaluation, and capital flight have brought down seemingly unbreakable regimes throughout history.
This probably explains the whiff of panic that followed China’s tiny, but totally unexpected, devaluation of the renminbi.
The renminbi, however, has recently stabilized, and capital flight has dwindled, as evidenced by the better-than-expected reserve figures released by the People’s Bank of China on October 7.
This suggests that the government’s policy of shifting gradually to a market-based exchange rate may have been better executed than generally believed; even the measures to support the stock market now look less futile than they did in July.
In short, Chinese economic management seems less incompetent than it did a few months ago.
Indeed, China can probably avoid the financial meltdown widely feared in the summer.
If so, other emerging economies tied to perceptions about China’s economic health should also stabilize.
The world has learned since 2008 how dangerously financial expectations can interact with policy blunders, turning modest economic problems into major catastrophes, first in the US and then in the eurozone.
It would be ironic if China’s Communist leaders turned out to have a better understanding of capitalism’s reflexive interactions among finance, the real economy, and government than Western devotees of free markets.
Why China is Right on the Renminbi
BERKELEY – After a period of high tension between the United States and China, culminating earlier this month in rumblings of an all-out trade war, it is now evident that a change in Chinese exchange-rate policy is coming.
China is finally prepared to let the renminbi resume its slow but steady upward march.
We can now expect the renminbi to begin appreciating again, very gradually, against the dollar, as it did between 2005 and 2007.
Some observers, including those most fearful of a trade war, will be relieved.
Others, who see a substantially undervalued renminbi as a significant factor in US unemployment, will be disappointed by gradual adjustment.
They would have preferred a sharp revaluation of perhaps 20% in order to make a noticeable dent in the US unemployment rate.
Still others dismiss the change in Chinese exchange-rate policy as beside the point.
For them, the Chinese current-account surplus and its mirror image, the US current-account deficit, are the central problem.
They argue that current-account balances reflect national savings and investment rates.
China is running external surpluses because its saving exceeds its investment.
The US is running external deficits because of a national savings shortfall, which once reflected spendthrift households but now is the fault of a feckless government.
There is no reason, they conclude, why a change in the renminbi-dollar exchange rate should have a first-order impact on savings or investment in China, much less in the US.
There is no reason, therefore, why it should have a first-order impact on the bilateral current-account balance, or, for that matter, on unemployment, which depends on the same saving and investment behavior.
In fact, both sets of critics have it wrong.
China was right to wait in adjusting its exchange rate, and it is now right to move gradually rather than discontinuously.
The Chinese economy is growing at potential: forecasts put the prospective rate for 2010 at 10%; the first-quarter flash numbers, at 11.9%, show it expanding as fast as any economy can safely grow.
China successfully navigated the crisis, avoiding a significant slowdown, by ramping up public spending.
But, as a result, it now has no further scope for increasing public consumption or investment.
To be sure, building a social safety net, developing financial markets, and strengthening corporate governance to encourage state enterprises to pay out more of what they earn would encourage Chinese households to consume.
But such reforms take years to complete.
In the meantime, the rate of spending growth in China will not change dramatically.
As a result, Chinese policymakers have been waiting to see whether the recovery in the US is real.
If it is, China’s exports will grow more rapidly.
And if its exports grow more rapidly, they can allow the renminbi to rise.
Without that exchange-rate adjustment, faster export growth would expose the Chinese economy to the risk of overheating.
But, with the adjustment, Chinese consumers will spend more on imports and less on domestic goods.
Overheating having been avoided, the Chinese economy can keep motoring ahead at its customary 10% annual pace.
Evidence that the US recovery will be sustained is mounting.
As always, there is no guarantee.
But the latest data on sales of light vehicles, as well as the Institute of Supply Management’s manufacturing index and the Bureau of Labor Statistics employment report, all point in this direction.
Because the increase in US spending on Chinese exports will be gradual, it also is appropriate for the adjustment in the renminbi-dollar exchange rate to be gradual.  If China recklessly revalued its exchange rate by 20%, as certain foreigners recommend, the result could be a sharp fall in spending on its goods, which would undermine growth.
Moreover, gradual adjustment in the bilateral exchange rate is needed to prevent global imbalances from blowing out.
US growth will be driven by the recovery of investment, which fell precipitously during the crisis.
But, as investment now rises relative to saving, there is a danger that the US current-account deficit, which fell from 6% of GDP in 2006 to barely 2.5% of GDP last year, will widen again.
Renminbi appreciation that switches Chinese spending toward foreign goods, including US exports, will work against this tendency.
By giving American firms more earnings, it will increase corporate savings in the US.
And it will reconcile recovery in the US with the need to prevent global imbalances from again threatening financial stability.
Chinese officials have been on the receiving end of a lot of gratuitous advice.
They have been wise to disregard it.
In managing their exchange rate, they have gotten it exactly right.
China’s Reform Anxiety
BEIJING – Since 2010, global financial circles have been obsessing about China’s slowing economy.
But, while the country barely met the official target of 7.5% annual GDP growth in the second quarter of this year – generating significant anxiety worldwide – China’s government seemingly remains calm, showing no indication that it plans to launch yet another stimulus package.
Do China’s leaders really have the situation under control?
In fact, the Chinese government’s stance – based on Premier Li Keqiang’s “Likonomics,” which prioritizes structural reform over rapid GDP growth – will prove to be in the best interests of China and the rest of the world.
China’s structural problems – including restrictions on labor mobility, a rigid and risk-laden financial system, and excessive reliance on government investment – are threatening its stability and economic development.
Given that China’s GDP growth rate remains respectable relative to the rest of the world, the need to emphasize structural reform is clear.
But, despite well-intentioned statements and narrow gestures, China’s new leadership has yet to establish a concrete, bold reform plan capable of resolving the economy’s deep-rooted problems.
For example, last February, the State Council announced plans to reform the hukou (household registration) system, which assigns legal residency according to a person’s place of birth.
The system makes relocating very difficult, as those who do not manage to acquire local residency permits face major hurdles in gaining access to public services when they migrate to other provinces.
Indeed, their children are even prohibited from taking college entrance exams.
The reform plan was supposed to improve the situation by allowing migrants in towns and small cities to acquire local residency permits more freely, while easing the requirements in medium-sized cities.
But efforts to reform the system have been met with strong resistance, especially from local governments and residents, who fear the strain that unregulated migration to their cities will have on resources, employment, and services.
As a result, a genuine hukou reform strategy remains elusive.
Similarly, the government has been slow to formulate and implement effective financial-market reforms.
Hopes were high early this year, when the State Council announced a strategy aimed at liberalizing the capital account, establishing a more flexible exchange-rate policy, and opening the financial sector to domestic private capital.
But the government then heeded influential economists’ warnings of the risks of relaxing capital controls too hastily.
In fact, the opposite should be happening.
Narrow policies like the government’s recent credit tightening will make it difficult to direct financial resources to the real economy – one of the primary objectives of “Likonomics.”
Genuine progress depends on Chinese leaders’ willingness to address the structural flaws – namely, the restrictions on domestic private capital – that are impeding the financial system’s ability to channel savings to the most promising economic sectors.
Despite several rounds of deregulation, it remains very difficult to establish private banks in China, and rules on non-banking financial institutions are often unclear.
As a result, shadow banking, which provides capital at triple the cost implied by the official base interest rate, is flourishing – and generating significant uncertainty and risk.
Although the government recently attempted to attract capital back to the official banking sector by eliminating the lending rate’s lower bound, more substantial reform is needed – and that will likely have to wait until the interest rate on deposits is fully liberalized and the financial sector is open to private banks.
In many other areas, too, China’s government either remains indecisive or is offering only rhetoric and small gestures.
For example, the devolution of some project-approval powers to local governments will not solve the underlying problem of excessive state intervention in the economy; on the contrary, it may even enhance the state’s role by giving local governments more freedom to carry out investment projects.
China’s leaders know what is wrong with the country’s economy.
But, as their efforts over the last several months have highlighted, they are uncertain as to how to go about fixing it – a fact that is generating significant anxiety in financial markets and among the general public.
As senior Chinese officials gather for their annual summer meeting in Beidaihe, a coastal resort near Beijing, they must recognize the need for a bold plan for genuine structural reform.
Otherwise, anxiety will eventually give rise to mistrust, making a comprehensive reform strategy even more difficult to implement.
Is State Capitalism Winning?
CAMBRIDGE – In the age-old contest of economic-growth models, state capitalism has seemed to be gaining the upper hand in recent years.
Avatars of liberal capitalism like the United States and the United Kingdom continued to perform anemically in 2012, while many Asian countries, relying on various versions of dirigisme, have not only grown rapidly and steadily over the last several decades, but have also weathered recent economic storms with surprising grace.
So, is it time to update the economics textbooks?
In fact, economics does not say that unfettered markets are better than state intervention or even state capitalism.
The problems with state capitalism are primarily political, not economic.
Any real-world economy is riddled with market failures, so a benevolent and omnipotent government could sensibly intervene quite often.
But who has ever met a benevolent or omnipotent government?
To understand the logic of state capitalism, it is useful to recall some early examples – not the socialist command economies or modern societies seeking to combat market failures, but ancient civilizations.
Indeed, it seems that, like farming or democracy, state capitalism has been independently invented many times in world history.
Consider the Greek Bronze Age, during which many powerful states, organized around a city housing the political elite, formed throughout the Mediterranean basin.
These states had no money and essentially no markets.
The state taxed agricultural output and controlled nearly all goods production.
It monopolized trade, and, in the absence of money, moved all of the goods around by fiat.
It supplied food and inputs to weavers and then took their output.
In essence, the Greek Bronze Age societies had something that looked remarkably like state capitalism.
So did the Incas as they built their huge Andean empire in the century before the Spanish arrived.
They, too, had no money (or writing); but the state conducted decennial censuses, built roughly 25,000 miles (40,000 kilometers) of roads, operated a system of runners to send messages and collect information, and recorded it all using knotted strings called quipus, most of which cannot be read today.
All of this was part of their control of land and labor, based on centrally planned allocation of resources and coercion.
How is it that societies as disparate as the Greek Bronze Age cities of Knossos, Mycenae, or Pylos, the Inca Empire, Soviet Russia, South Korea, and now China all ended up with state capitalism?
The answer lies in recognizing that state capitalism is not about efficient allocation of economic resources, but about maximizing political control over society and the economy.
If state managers can grab all productive resources and control access to them, this maximizes control – even if it sacrifices economic efficiency.
To be sure, in many parts of the world, state capitalism has helped to consolidate states and centralize authority – preconditions for the development of modern societies and economies.
But political control of the economy generally becomes problematic, because those running the state do not have social welfare or optimal resource allocation in mind.
The state capitalism of the Greek Bronze Age or the Inca Empire was not motivated by economic inefficiency; nor did it necessarily create a more efficient economy.
What it did was help to consolidate political power.
At a deeper level, the real dichotomy is not between state capitalism and unfettered markets; it is between extractive and inclusive economic institutions.
Extractive institutions create a non-level playing field, rents, and narrowly concentrated benefits for those with political power and connections.
Inclusive institutions create a level playing field and give incentives and opportunities to the great mass of people.
But herein lies the problem for state capitalism: inclusive institutions require a private sector powerful enough to counterbalance and check the state.
Thus, state ownership tends naturally to remove one of the key pillars of an inclusive society.
It should be no surprise that state capitalism is almost always associated with authoritarian regimes and extractive political institutions.
This is not an endorsement of unfettered markets.
The state plays a central role in modern society, and rightly so.
Modern economic growth, even under inclusive institutions, often creates deep inequalities and tilted playing fields, endangering those institutions’ very survival.
The modern regulatory and redistributive state can, within certain bounds, help to redress these problems.
But the success of such a project crucially depends on society having control over the state – not the other way around.
To argue that state capitalism’s success proves its superiority is to put the cart before the horse.
Yes, South Korea grew rapidly under state capitalism, and China is doing likewise today.
But state capitalism emerged not because there was no other way to ensure economic growth in these countries, but because it enabled growth without destabilizing the existing power structure.
The genius of China’s state capitalism is that it ensured the continued dominance of Communist Party elites while improving the allocation of resources, not that it alone could have provided price incentives to farmers and then managed liberalization of urban markets.
State capitalism will persist so long as existing elites are able to maintain it and benefit from it – even if economic growth ultimately stalls.
And there is a good reason why it eventually will.
Sustained economic growth presupposes inclusive institutions, because innovation – and the creative destruction and instability that it wreaks – depends on them.
Extractive institutions in general, and state capitalism in particular, can support economic growth for a while, but only the sort of catch-up growth that South Korea experienced from the 1960’s to the 1980’s, before starting to transform its society and economy more radically.
As the low hanging fruit from catch-up growth is consumed, China, too, will be forced to choose between the economic and social freedom, innovation, and instability that only inclusive institutions can underpin and continued economic, political, and social control in the service of the elites who control the state.
Quitting the Quota
HONG KONG – On March 1, China’s State Council announced a new batch of restrictions aimed at reining in property prices by curbing speculative demand. The measures include tighter limits on home purchases by non-locals in cities with excessive price gains, a reinforced 20% capital-gains tax, mandatory 70% down payments, and a 30% benchmark interest-rate premium for second mortgages.
While the previous round of housing-sector restrictions, implemented less than two years ago, dampened market sentiment temporarily, it failed to curb rising property prices.
Likewise, although the latest measures might have some impact, cooling China’s turbulent property market – which relies on cheap credit – in the long term will require addressing underlying monetary-policy weaknesses.
In order to control the money supply, the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) has long used credit quotas as “window guidance” to banks.
The policy is rooted in central planning, which, three decades ago, led to artificially low prices and, in turn, to shortages of basic necessities and key production inputs, such as grain and steel.
As the free market developed, a dual-price system emerged, in which those with access to quota-allocated goods paid less.
As a result, the government was compelled to grant subsidies to the system’s “losers” – such as urban residents and state-owned enterprises (SOEs) – until strong supply responses to rising market prices eliminated the need for quotas on manufactured products.
A decade later, in response to the global financial crisis, China loosened credit quotas and planning controls on SOE-run local-government infrastructure projects.
Between November 2008 and June 2009, China’s banks issued more than ¥8.6 trillion ($1.3 trillion) in new loans.
As a result, the rate of credit growth increased from 14% in September 2008 to 35% a year later, and property prices more than doubled in many cities.
Excessively low interest rates have generated a mismatch between housing prices and the available supply, because they serve as hidden subsidies for those who can borrow – for example, the rich and SOEs – and thus stimulate demand for luxury property.
In order to curb this trend, policymakers have reverted to the quota as a macroeconomic tool, but this time for housing credit.
Like quotas on manufactured products, these new quotas are generating a dual-price allocation system, in which SOEs can borrow at significantly lower interest rates than small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs), which must rely on the informal market at interest rates as high as 2% monthly.
But eliminating quotas in order to allow prices to reach market-clearing levels is not an option this time, owing to the complexity and competitiveness of the real-estate and bank-credit markets.
Three major factors are impeding policymakers from raising interest rates to market-clearing levels.
First, the domestic interest groups that benefit from low borrowing costs have become a barrier to their liberalization.
There is a “common-sense consensus” among borrowers – in China, as well as in highly indebted advanced economies – that raising interest rates would undermine GDP growth, employment, and asset prices.
Second, many argue that raising interest rates would trigger a flood of speculative capital from low-yielding advanced economies.
With the PBOC unable to sterilize the inflows, upward pressure on the renminbi’s exchange rate would threaten competitiveness.
Finally, an inadequate understanding of structural inflation (the growth in prices for non-tradable assets) has generated the false belief that China can maintain similar levels of inflation and exchange-rate stability as the OECD economies.
As a result, over the last decade, the Chinese authorities’ implicit target for annual inflation and currency appreciation has been only about 3%.
But China has attained much higher GDP growth than the OECD economies, driven largely by the rapid productivity gains that characterize the initial “catch up” phase of emerging-market development.
As China continues to implement market-oriented reforms, the prices of non-tradable assets – such as property, natural resources, utilities, services, and wages – will continue to rise much faster than in the OECD countries, until they eventually converge.
This process will inevitably lead to higher structural inflation and currency appreciation in China.
If nominal interest rates are lower than the real return on investment – associated with GDP growth – the result is financial repression and increased income and wealth inequality.
To avoid this outcome, as long as China’s GDP growth exceeds that of OECD economies, its nominal interest rates must also be higher, its exchange rate must be more flexible, and it must tolerate higher structural inflation.
Indeed, despite domestic resistance, the PBOC must raise nominal interest rates so that they are in line with structural inflation.
Such a move would deter excessive investment in productive capacity, and ease the implementation of a more flexible exchange-rate regime.
At the same time, one need only recall the damage that unregulated carry trades wrought on Asian economies in the 1990’s to understand why China must erect barriers to protect its domestic markets from inflows of hot money.
The alternative to this price-oriented approach – continued dependence on the quota system – would incur considerable administrative expenses, efficiency losses, and social costs stemming from rent-seeking and corruption.
Much like the quota system of 30 years ago, the current reliance on quotas is unsustainable in the long term.
To manage exorbitant demand for financial and physical assets, China’s leaders must address its root cause: the low cost of capital.
Doing so will require maintaining some capital-account control, while raising interest rates to market-clearing levels.
This, not the unsustainable imposition of quotas, is the real monetary-policy challenge facing China today.
Why Cutting Carbon Emissions is not Enough
Twenty years ago, governments adopted the Montreal Protocol, a treaty to protect the Earth’s ozone layer from emissions of destructive chemicals.
Few could have foreseen how far-reaching that decision would prove to be.
The Protocol explicitly aimed at phasing-out substances such as chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) – found in products such as refrigerators, foams, and hairsprays – in order to repair the thin gassy-shield that filters out the sun’s harmful, ultra-violet rays.
By 2010, close to 100 ozone-depleting substances, including CFCs, will have been phased-out globally.
Without the decisions taken 20 years ago, atmospheric levels of ozone-depleting substances would have increased ten-fold by 2050.
This could have led to up to 20 million additional cases of skin cancer and 130 million more cases of eye cataracts, not to speak of damage to human immune systems, wildlife, and agriculture.
But this is only part of the story that we celebrate on the International Day for the Preservation of the Ozone Layer (September 16).
Over the past two years, it has been established that the Montreal Protocol has also spared humanity a significant level of climate change, because the gases that it prohibits also contribute to global warming.
Indeed, a study in 2007 calculated the climate mitigation benefits of the ozone treaty as totalling the equivalent of 135 billion tons of CO2 since 1990, or a delay in global warming of 7-12 years.
So the lessons learned from the Montreal Protocol may have wider significance.
Scientists now estimate that somewhere close to 50% of climate change is being caused by gases and pollutants other than CO2, including nitrogen compounds, low-level ozone formed by pollution, and black carbon.
Of course, a degree of scientific uncertainty about some of these pollutants’ precise contribution to warming remains. But they certainly play a significant role.
Meanwhile, many of these gases need to be curbed because of their wider environmental impact on public health, agriculture, and the planet’s multi-trillion dollar ecosystems, including forests.
Consider black carbon, a component of the soot emissions from diesel engines and the inefficient burning of biomass cooking stoves that is linked to 1.6 million to 1.8 million premature deaths annually as a result of indoor exposure and 800,000 as a result of outdoor exposure.
Black carbon, which absorbs heat from the sun, also accounts for anywhere from 10% to more than 45% of the contribution to global warming, and is also linked to accelerated losses of glaciers in Asia, because the soot deposits darken, ice making it more vulnerable to melting.
One study estimates that 26% of black carbon emissions are from stoves for heating and cooking, with more than 40% of this amount from wood burning, roughly 20% from coal, 19% from crop residues, and 10% from dung.
Some companies have developed stoves that use passive air flows, better insulation, and 60% less wood to reduce black carbon emissions by around 70%.
Mass introduction of such stoves could deliver multiple green-economy benefits.
While CO2 can remain in the atmosphere for centuries, other pollutants, including black carbon and ozone, remain for relatively periods – days, weeks, months, or years – so that reducing or ending emissions promises almost immediate climate benefits.
The international community’s over-arching concern must be to seal a serious and significant deal at the United Nations climate summit in Copenhagen in December to curtail C02 emissions and assist vulnerable countries to adapt.
If the world also is to deploy all available means to combat climate change, emissions of all substances that contribute to it must be scientifically evaluated and urgently addressed.
The Centrists Cannot Hold
WASHINGTON – In most advanced democracies, a large center-right party competes with a large center-left party.
Of course, the extent to which an electoral system favors large parties – by having high popular-vote thresholds to enter parliament, or through winner-take-all constituencies – affects the degree of political fragmentation.
But, by and large, the developed democracies are characterized by competition between large parties on the center left and center right.
What, then, are true centrists like Mario Monti, Italy’s respected technocratic prime minister, to do?
To be sure, regional and ethnic allegiances play a greater role in some places in Europe – for example, Scotland, Belgium, and Catalonia – but far more so in emerging countries, where political cleavages also reflect specific post-colonial circumstances and often the legacy of single-party rule.
Nonetheless, even in “emerging market” democracies, such as Chile, Mexico, South Korea, and India, a left-right cleavage plays an important role – while those who claim the political center generally remain weak.
The British Liberal Democrats, for example, have tried for decades to become a strong centrist third party, without success.
While the political vocabulary in the United States is different, the Democratic Party, since Franklin Roosevelt’s presidency, is indeed a center-left force, the Republican Party occupies the right, and no other significant party exists.
In France and Germany, there is more fragmentation.
Politics is still dominated by a large center-left party and a large center-right party, but smaller groups – some claiming the center and others the right and left extremes – challenge them to various degrees.
In some countries, the “Greens” have their own identity, close to the left; but, despite remarkable progress in Germany, they remain unable to reach the electoral size of the large center-right and center-left parties.
Variations of this basic structure exist in Spain, Portugal, Greece, Turkey, and the Nordic countries.
The situation is particularly interesting in Italy, where Monti, having decided to contest the upcoming general election, has had to position himself on the right (which he signaled by attending a gathering of the leaders of Europe’s center-right parties).
The left, by contrast, believes that markets, particularly financial markets, need considerable government regulation and supervision to function well; gives greater weight to public goods (for example, parks, a clean environment, and mass-transit systems); seeks to reduce economic inequality, believing that it undermines democracy and the sense of fairness that is important to well-being; and is more willing to pursue international cooperation as a means to secure peace and provide global public goods, such as climate protection.
When looking at actual economic policies as they have evolved over decades, we see that they always combine center-right and center-left elements.
Repeated financial crises have tempered even the right’s faith in unregulated markets, while the left has become more realistic and cautious about state planning and bureaucratic processes.
Likewise, the choice between privately consumed and publicly consumed “goods” is often blurred, as politicians tend to reinforce citizens’ understandable tendency to demand public goods while rejecting the taxes needed to pay for them.
As income inequality has increased – dramatically in some countries, such as the US – it is moving to the forefront of the debate, reinforcing the traditional political divide.
Nonetheless, the center right and the center left are arguing about the degree of redistribution, not about the need for some progressivity in taxes and transfers.
Both also agree on the need for international cooperation in an increasingly interdependent world, with differences mainly concerning how much effort to spend on it.
So, given that differences in policies as they are implemented have become largely a matter of degree, why do centrist parties remain weak?
Why have they failed to unite moderates on both sides of the ideological divide?
One reason is that only a minority of any population is active politically.
Active party members hold more ideologically consistent views – and hold them more strongly – than most of those who are politically less engaged, giving activists disproportionate influence in the political process.
After all, more nuanced ideas and policy proposals are relatively difficult to propagate effectively enough to generate broad and enthusiastic popular support.
But there also really are fundamental differences in values and economic philosophies, as well as in economic interests, leading to a fairly consistent positioning of voters on the right or left.
Disagreement may lead to compromises, but that does not change the underlying differences in starting positions.
It is probably a good thing that structured competition between large center-right and center-left parties persists.
Such parties can help to integrate the extremes into the political mainstream, while facilitating alternation in power, which is essential to any democracy’s dynamism; a system in which a large centrist party remained permanently in power would be far less desirable.
Those, like Monti, who want to mount a challenge from the center, however personally impressive they may be, have steep obstacles to overcome, and for good reasons.
Why Democracy Requires Trusted Experts
PARIS – Last month, I wrote a commentary asking why voters in the United Kingdom supported leaving the European Union, defying the overwhelming weight of expert opinion warning of the major economic costs of Brexit.
I observed that many voters in the UK and elsewhere are angry at economic experts.
They say that the experts failed to foresee the financial crisis of 2008, put efficiency first in their policy advice, and blindly assumed that the losers from their policy prescriptions could be compensated in some unspecified way.
I argued that experts should be humbler and more attentive to distributional issues.
Remarkably, I also received comments from professionals in the natural sciences who said that citizens’ growing distrust of experts was pervasive in their disciplines, too.
Scientific views in fields like energy, climate, genetics, and medicine face widespread popular rejection.
In the United States, for example, a Pew Research survey found that 67% of adults think that scientists lack a clear understanding about the health effects of genetically modified organisms.
Mistrust of GMOs is even higher in Europe.
Whereas overall support for science remains strong, many citizens believe that it is manipulated by special interests, and on some issues, the common view departs from the established evidence.
This divide between experts and citizens is a cause for deep concern.
Representative democracy is based not only on universal suffrage, but also on reason.
Ideally, deliberations and votes result in rational decisions that use the current state of knowledge to deliver policies that advance citizens’ wellbeing.
This requires a process in which experts – whose competence and honesty are trusted – inform decision-makers of the available options for meeting voters’ stated preferences.
Citizens are unlikely to be satisfied if they believe that experts are imposing their own agenda, or are captured by special interests.
Distrust of experts fuels distrust of democratically elected governments, if not of democracy itself.
Why is there such a divide between experts and society?
Every country has had its own series of high-profile public health or safety scandals.
Experts have been guilty of sloppiness and conflicts of interest.
Hard-won reputations have been quickly lost.
But critics often fail to recognize that science involves more – and more stringent – scrutiny than, say, business or government.
It is actually the standard-bearer of good practices concerning the validation of analyses and the discussion of policy proposals.
Errors regularly occur in academia, but they are more swiftly and systematically corrected than in other fields.
The collective nature of scientific validation also provides guarantees against capture by special interests.
The problem may, in fact, be deeper than the common grievances against experts suggest.
A few decades ago, it was widely assumed that progress in mass education would gradually bridge the gap between scientific knowledge and popular belief, thereby contributing to a more serene and more rational democracy.
The evidence is that it has not.
As Gerald Bronner, a French sociologist, has convincingly shown, education neither increases trust in science nor diminishes the attraction of beliefs or theories that scientists regard as utter nonsense.
On the contrary, more educated citizens often resent being told by experts what science regards as truth.
Having had access to knowledge, they feel empowered enough to criticize the cognoscenti and develop views of their own.
Climate change – which the scientific community overwhelmingly regards it as a major threat – is a case in point.
According to a 2015 Pew Research survey, the three countries where concern is the weakest are the US, Australia, and Canada, whereas the three in which it is the strongest are Brazil, Peru, and Burkina Faso.
Yet average years of schooling are 12.5 for the first group and six for the second.
Evidently, education alone is not the reason for this difference in perception.
If the problem is here to stay, we had better do more to address it.
First, we need more discipline on the part of the community of experts.
The intellectual discipline that characterizes research is often lacking in policy discussions.
Humility, rigorous procedures, the prevention of conflicts of interest, an ability to acknowledge mistakes and, yes, punishment of fraudulent behavior are needed to regain citizens’ trust.
Second, there is a case for revising curricula to equip future citizens with the intellectual tools they will need to distinguish between fact and fiction.
Society has everything to gain from citizens whose minds are both less suspicious and more critical.
Finally, we need better venues for dialogue and informed debate.
Serious magazines, general-interest journals, and newspapers traditionally filled the space between the ether of peer-reviewed journals and the deep sea of hoaxes; yet they all struggle to survive the digital revolution.
Other venues, perhaps new institutions, are needed to fill that space.
What is clear is that democracy cannot thrive if it is left empty.
Emerging-Market Resilience
NEW YORK – With most of the world focused on economic instability and anemic growth in the advanced countries, developing countries, with the possible exception of China, have received relatively little attention.
But, as a group, emerging-market economies have been negatively affected by the recent downturn in developed countries.
Can they rebound on their own?
The major emerging economies were the world’s main growth engines following the eruption of the financial crisis in 2008, and, to some extent, they still are.
But their resilience has always been a function of their ability to generate enough incremental aggregate demand to support their growth, without having to make up for a large loss of demand in developed countries.
A combination of negligible (or even negative) growth in Europe and a significant growth slowdown in the United States has now created that loss, undermining emerging economies’ exports.
Europe is a major export destination for many developing countries, and is China’s largest foreign market.
China, in turn, is a major market for final products, intermediate goods (including those used to produce finished exports), and commodities.
The ripple effect from Europe’s stalling economy has thus spread rapidly to the rest of Asia and beyond.
Moreover, not only is the tradable sector of Japan’s economy highly vulnerable to a slowdown in China, but the recent conflict over the Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands raises the prospect of economic decoupling.
Apart from that, Japanese economic performance is set to remain weak, because the non-tradable side is not a strong growth engine.
The key questions for the world economy today, then, are how significant the growth slowdown will be, and how long it will last.
With wise policy responses, the impact is likely to be relatively mild and short-lived.
One key issue clouding the future is trade finance.
European banks, traditionally a major source of trade finance, have pulled back dramatically, owing to capital-adequacy problems caused by sovereign-debt capital losses and, in some cases, losses from real-estate lending.
This vacuum could reduce trade flows even if demand were present.
In Asia, especially, filling the vacuum with alternative financing mechanisms has become a high priority.
In particular, although China’s tradable sector is highly exposed to developed economies, the government is likely to accept some short-run slowdown, rather than adopting potentially distorting stimulus measures.
Given the risk of re-inflating asset bubbles, no one should expect a dramatic easing of credit of the type that followed the 2008 meltdown.
An accelerated public-investment program that avoids low-return projects is not out of the question.
But the best and most likely responses are those that accelerate domestic consumption growth by increasing household income, effectively deploy income from state-owned assets, and strengthen China’s social-security systems in order to reduce precautionary saving.
Indeed, these are all key components of China’s recently adopted 12th Five-Year Plan.
Admittedly, China’s major systemic reforms await the country’s leadership transition, now expected in November.
By most accounts, the pace of reform directed at expanding the market side of the economy needs to pick up quickly to achieve the ambitious economic and social goals of the next five years.
Some countries have bucked the global trend.
Indonesia, for example, has experienced accelerating growth, with rising business and consumer confidence boosting investment to almost 33% of GDP.
Likewise, Brazil’s growth has been dented, but now looks set to recover.
Moreover, overall economic performance in Brazil masks an important fact: growth rates have been substantially higher among the country’s poorer citizens, and unemployment is declining.
The aggregate growth rate does not capture this inclusiveness, and thus understates the pace of economic and social progress.
The main challenge for Brazil is to increase its investment rate from 18% of GDP currently to closer to 25%, thereby sustaining rapid growth and economic diversification.
Commodity dependence, even with the creation of considerable domestic value added, remains high.
Economic-growth rates in other systemically large countries, including Turkey and Mexico, have risen as well, despite European and US headwinds.
Many African countries, too, are showing a broad pattern of sound macroeconomic fundamentals, durable growth acceleration, economic diversification, and investor confidence.
The outlook for India’s economy remains more uncertain.
While growth slowed recently from very high rates – owing to a combination of exposure to developed-country weakness, internal loss of reform momentum, and declining investor confidence – that trend appears to be reversing after recent decisive corrective moves by the government.
The main question is whether India’s parliament will pass crucial legislation or remain paralyzed by hyper-partisan, scandal-fueled infighting.
Combining this general picture with more general developing-country trends – rising incomes, rapid growth in middle classes, expanding trade and investment flows, bilateral and regional free-trade agreements, and a growing share of global GDP (roughly 50%) – these economies’ growth momentum should return relatively rapidly, over the next 1-2 years.
Most of the downside risk to this scenario lies in the systemically important economies of Europe, the US, and China.
To derail emerging economies’ growth momentum at this stage probably would require either an additional major demand shock from the advanced economies, or some kind of failure in China’s leadership transition that impedes systemic reform and affects the country’s growth.
Notwithstanding low growth forecasts for the entire developed world, these systemic risks, taken individually and in combination, appear to be declining (though certainly not to the point that they can be dismissed).
On balance, then, the multispeed growth patterns of the past decade are likely to continue.
Even as the developed economies experience an extended period of below-trend growth, the emerging economies will remain an important growth engine.
Why Did Economists Not Foresee the Crisis?
CHICAGO – At the height of the financial crisis, the Queen of England asked my friends at the London School of Economics a simple question, but one for which there is no easy answer: Why did academic economists fail to foresee the crisis?
Several responses to that query exist.
One is that economists lacked models that could account for the behavior that led to the crisis.
Another is that economists were blinkered by an ideology according to which a free and unfettered market could do no wrong.
Finally, an answer that is gaining ground is that the system bribed economists to stay silent.
In my view, the truth lies elsewhere.
It is not true that we academics did not have useful models to explain what happened.
If you believe that the crisis was caused by a shortage of liquidity, we had plenty of models analyzing liquidity shortages and their effects on financial institutions.
If you believe that the blame lies with greedy bankers and unthinking investors, lulled by the promise of a government bailout, or with a market driven crazy by irrational exuberance, we had studied all this too, in great detail.
Economists even analyzed the political economy of regulation and deregulation, so we could have understood why some US politicians pushed the private sector into financing affordable housing, while others deregulated private finance.
Yet, somehow, we did not bring all this understanding to bear and collectively shout our warnings.
Perhaps the reason was ideology: we were too wedded to the idea that markets are efficient, market participants are rational, and high prices are justified by economic fundamentals.
But some of this criticism of “market fundamentalism” reflects a misunderstanding.
The dominant “efficient markets theory” says only that markets reflect what is publicly known, and that it is hard to make money off markets consistently – something verified by the hit that most investor portfolios took in the crisis.
The theory does not say that markets cannot plummet if the news is bad, or if investors become risk-averse.
Critics argue that the fundamentals were deteriorating in plain sight, and that the market (and economists) ignored it.
But hindsight distorts analysis.
We cannot point to a lonely Cassandra like Robert Shiller of Yale University, who regularly argued that house prices were unsustainable, as proof that the truth was ignored.
There are always naysayers, and they are often wrong.
There were many more economists who believed that house prices, though high, were unlikely to fall across the board.
Of course, these expectations could have been distorted by ideology – it is hard to get into the past minds of economists.
But there is a better reason to be skeptical of explanations relying on ideology.
As a group, neither behavioral economists, who think that market efficiency is a joke, nor progressive economists, who distrust free markets, predicted the crisis.
Could it be corruption?
Some academic economists consult for banks or rating agencies, give speeches to investor conferences, serve as expert witnesses, and carry out sponsored research.
It would be natural to suspect us of bias.
The bias could be implicit: our worldview is shaped by what our friends in industry believe.
Or it may be an explicit bias: an economist might write a report that is influenced by what a sponsor wants to hear, or give testimony that is purely mercenary.
There are enough instances of possible bias that the issue cannot be ignored.
One remedy would be to ban all interaction between economists and the corporate world.
But if economists were confined to the ivory tower, we might be unbiased, but we would also be ignorant of practicalities – and thus even less capable of predicting problems. One way to restore trust may be disclosure – for economists to declare a monetary interest in a particular analysis and, more generally, to explain who pays us.
A number of universities are moving in this direction.