Given this, it is likely – indeed, desirable – that “Asia for Asians” will remain a mere slogan.
In fact, Xi has lately toned down his description of China’s aims, recently telling Communist Party leaders that, “We should increase China’s soft power, give a good Chinese narrative, and better communicate China’s message to the world.”
But, even as rhetoric, the phrase “Asia for Asians” is problematic for historical reasons.
In the 1930s, Japanese militarists used the idea of an “East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere” as a cover for their imperial ambitions and conquests.
The slogan was widely ridiculed, particularly in China, for its transparent absurdity.
This may help to explain the lukewarm reception that the concept of “Asia for Asians” has received this time around.
The smartest thing for Chinese leaders to do would be to drop it, once and for all.
Asia in the World
NEW YORK – Before I became the UN’s Secretary-General, I was an Asian diplomat.
While I was foreign minister of the Republic of Korea, my Government and I strongly advocated détente with the North.
When some in the world called for sanctions and punitive action, South Korea pushed for dialogue.
That requires listening as well as speaking.
It means sticking to principles, but also attempting to understand the other side, however irrational or intransigent it may sometimes appear.
This remains my style at the United Nations.
I believe in the power of diplomacy and engagement.
I prioritize dialogue over debate or declaration.
Above all, I seek results.
We are doing that now in Myanmar.
My Special Adviser, Ibrahim Gambari, has been back in Yangon.
His brief is to be the honest broker, the facilitator of a dialogue between government and opposition leaders, particularly Aung San Suu Kyi.
The goal is for Myanmar’s Government to release all detained students and demonstrators, engage with the opposition, move toward a more democratic society, and rejoin the international community.
This brand of diplomacy is not quick or easy.
There is seldom applause, and often no outward evidence of movement.
It is a quiet, painstaking slog behind the scenes.
You have to work the phones, cajole world leaders to do this or that.
It is a symphony – often not a very harmonious one – of small steps that you hope will lead to something greater.
You expect nothing.
You can only keep trying, keep pushing.
Maybe it works, maybe not.
Then you try some more, in a different way, aiming all the while for some small progress that makes the next step possible.
We are at this point in Darfur.
I have spent hundreds of hours working behind closed doors with various parties to the conflict – Sudan’s Government, rebel leaders, neighbouring countries, and African Union partners.
Meanwhile, we are pushing ahead with one of the most complex peacekeeping operations in our history, feeding and protecting hundreds of thousands of displaced people, and sponsoring difficult peace negotiations in Libya.
But even as I push my brand of “Asian” diplomacy, it can sometimes feel a bit lonely to be an Asian at the international community’s diplomatic roundtable.
We Asians inhabit the world’s largest continent, with the world’s largest population and its fastest-growing economies.
We have a rich history and ancient cultures.
Yet our role in international affairs is far less than it could, or should be.
Asia’s contribution to the UN, though significant, could be greater.
Its humanitarian assistance, to put it politely, is less than generous.
We are the only continent where regional integration and common markets have not taken hold.
Latin Americans and North Americans dream of creating a free-trade zone.
Europeans speak of building a United States of Europe.
The African Union aspires to become a United States of Africa.
Why no United States of Asia?
There are many reasons why Asia is different: history, cultural diversity, unresolved territorial and political disputes, a lack of multilateral experience, and the predominance of one or two centers of power.
But the main reason is that we have not tried.
Asia does not do itself justice.
As an Asian Secretary-General, I hope to see this change.
I hope to see an Asia that is both better integrated and more internationally engaged.
I expect particularly great things of my fellow Koreans, a remarkable people who have come into their own.
I hope to see Korea assume more responsibility in the world, commensurate with its growing economic clout – especially in the area of development, one of the three pillars of the UN Charter.
Koreans need to step up, speak out, and do more, and that should start with more generous official development assistance.
Koreans have already shown their penchant for multi-lateral diplomacy and trouble shooting through the six-party talks.
Now, they, and Asians at large, need to bring both their skills and their success to bear on the most pressing global issues of the day.
This is not just my hope, it is also Asia’s obligation.
Asia’s Almighty Middle Class
SEOUL – Despite recent economic uncertainty, Asia’s middle class is growing fast.
In the coming decades, this burgeoning demographic segment will serve as a keystone for economic and political development in the region, with significant implications for the rest of the world.
The OECD estimates that the global middle class (defined as households with daily expenditures of $10-100 per person, in 2005 purchasing power parity terms) will swell to 4.9 billion people by 2030, from 1.8 billion in 2009.
Two-thirds are expected to reside in Asia, up from 28% in 2009, with China home to the largest share.
Indeed, if China pursues the structural reforms and technological upgrading needed to maintain rapid economic growth, its middle class should exceed one billion people in 2030, up from 157 million in 2009.
The rapid emergence of Asia’s middle class will bring far-reaching economic change, creating new market opportunities for domestic and international companies.
Already, demand for consumer durables has increased in the region, with China becoming the world’s largest market for automobiles and mobile phones.
But there remains substantial room for more consumption in luxury goods and technological products, as the purchasing power of the developing world’s middle class catches up to that in the advanced countries.
This convergence will contribute to more sustainable economic growth, with Asia’s economies rebalancing toward domestic demand, especially household consumption, and thereby becoming less vulnerable to external shocks.
Given the decline in export demand since the global economic crisis, this shift could not be timelier.
And the benefits will not be confined to Asia; as imports to the region increase, global trade imbalances will decline, improving the sustainability of economic growth worldwide.
Indeed, Asia’s growing middle class will transform a region known as a global manufacturing hub into a consumption powerhouse.
As demand rises, more and better jobs will be created not only in Asia, but also globally, along supply chains and across production networks.
With rising prosperity comes improved education and health care, which promise to help drive long-term economic growth by improving productivity.
In China, this would represent a significant shift from prevailing conditions, in which the children of poor households, especially in rural areas, lag in terms of nutrition and school enrollment, despite significant progress in recent decades on lowering infant mortality and raising educational attainment.
Equipped with high-quality education, Asia’s rising middle class will demand higher-quality public services.
Increased confidence in their country’s political systems and institutional structures, enhanced by improved perceptions of upward mobility, will help to strengthen the rule of law.
And there will be more opportunities for women to learn and work, leading to greater gender equality.
Most important, the rise of the middle class is likely to be accompanied by growing demands for political freedom and civil liberties, thereby fostering democratization.
Indeed, an examination of a large sample of countries, from the nineteenth to the twenty-first centuries, reveals that a larger population of affluent, educated citizens – especially women – brings about more political participation and greater support for democracy, particularly in less-developed countries.
In the West, capitalism and democracy progressed in tandem, as the development of markets reduced the power of landlords and increased that of the working and middle classes.
By participating actively in politics, basing their electoral choices on rational self-interest, and developing the sense of moderation needed to resist dictatorship, the middle class promotes democratic progress.
At the same time, the growth of private organizations associated with the rise of the middle class prevents state institutions from monopolizing political resources.
In Asia, South Korea experienced a similar progression, with rapid economic growth spurring the rise of a large middle class, which in turn drove democratization in the 1980s.
That history may repeat in China before long.
Given the benefits of having a large middle class, Asian countries should be nurturing theirs by improving health care, upgrading infrastructure, investing in universities and technical training, and addressing income and educational disparities.
Moreover, social safety nets should be created or strengthened, in order to help safeguard the middle class from negative shocks and boost consumption growth (which continues to be hampered by precautionary saving).
Finally, public policies – aimed at strengthening the rule of law, promoting trade, and achieving sound macroeconomic management – are essential to sustain growth, thereby ensuring the continuous upward mobility of lower-income families.
That upward mobility is the key to keeping in motion a virtuous circle of middle-class expansion and economic growth.
The Short Asian Century?
TOKYO – The British Marxist historian Eric Hobsbawm once called the epoch stretching from the French Revolution of 1789 to World War I’s outbreak in 1914 as the “long nineteenth century.”
A little over a decade ago, people began to speculate about an emerging “Asian century,” driven by an unstoppable China and enabled by America’s supposed inevitable decline.
But with China’s economy in turmoil, key East Asian “tiger” economies like Malaysia and Thailand floundering, and even Singapore facing questions about the vitality of its economic model, is this “Asian century” coming to a premature end?
Political and economic troubles plague the region from east to west.
In India and Indonesia, hopes that the election of Prime Minister Narendra Modi and President Joko Widodo, respectively, would spark a new wave of economic reform now seem to be running into the sand.
Similarly, in South Korea, two successive presidents have failed to follow through on their bold promises to rein in the chaebol, the country’s massive family-owned conglomerates, in order to unleash the animal spirits of entrepreneurship.
And in Japan, although Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has implemented far-reaching reforms, they have yet to reignite economic dynamism, and efforts to address the demographic threat posed by a rapidly aging population have not even begun.
Then there are Asia’s serious political and security challenges, including the growing strategic rivalry between the United States and China, signs of resurgent nationalism across the region, and the fracturing of Hong Kong’s “one country, two systems” mode of government.
More destabilizing, China is making vast territorial claims in the East and South China Seas, as well as to the Indian province of Arunchal Pradesh.
And, perhaps most dangerous, the isolated and unpredictable North Korean regime is becoming more unstable than ever under the callow and violent leadership of Kim Jong-un.
In the absence of coherent regional frameworks, it is no surprise that rival structures are being built, with the US championing the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), which will link 12 Pacific Rim countries into a vast free-trade area, governed by an advanced set of agreed rules.
For its part, China is working to establish, through the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and its “Silk Road” initiative, a Sino-centric trade area that perpetuates not only its regional hegemony, but also its state-capitalist model.
All of this uncertainty reveals critical flaws in the Asian century’s foundations – flaws that, until recently, were masked by the region’s rapid economic growth.
Indeed, vast production chains linking businesses across countries gave the impression of a uniquely Asian superstructure.
As long as the region’s economies were thriving, there was little incentive to identify – much less address – the problems facing them.
The resulting policy inertia lay at the heart of many of the region’s emerging economic troubles.
And this torpor will be difficult to address, partly because it is built into some countries’ systems of government.
India’s federal system, for example, has proved to be a much bigger roadblock to reform than Modi anticipated, with state governments balking at measures like a new unified sales tax and land reform – both crucial to enable India to build a unified internal market underpinned by world-class infrastructure.
Vietnam faces a similar problem of policy paralysis, owing to divisions within its collective communist-party leadership.
China’s top-down state capitalism has enabled it to avoid this problem, with the ruling Chinese Communist Party relatively united on the economic agenda.
But the economy’s virtually unchecked growth over the last few decades has created other huge challenges – namely, environmental degradation on a scale unseen anywhere else on the planet, a massive volume of local-government debt, and large-scale corruption.
All have now burst into the open.
And the Party’s ability to address them cannot be taken for granted, as its muddled management of recent stock-market volatility made clear.
The actual depth of China’s economic woes is unclear, given that both decision-making and key statistics remain shrouded in secrecy.
What is clear is that the authorities sought-after shift to a more sustainable services- and consumption-driven economy will require far-reaching market-oriented reforms.
This represents an existential choice for China’s rulers, as the ceding of government control that successful reform demands clashes directly with President Xi Jinping’s goal of strengthening the Party’s grip on the country.
Malaysia and Thailand also face a near-existential choice between continuing on their current paths – one-party ethnocracy in Malaysia and elite/military rule in Thailand – and beginning a process of political reconciliation, aimed at bringing large, marginalized portions of their populations into the fold.
So far, however, it seems that both countries’ leaders are blind to the choice facing them.
Perhaps the most hopeful story is that of Japan, which, after two decades, has finally begun to reverse its entrenched policy inertia.
Old habits of coddling agriculture, electric power, and other economic sectors are being disregarded.
More needs to be done, of course, particularly ratification of the TPP, which will unshackle more areas of Japan’s economy.
With his bold approach, Abe has emerged as a model for Asia’s other leaders – in particular, the Chinese.
If the Asian century is to endure, such boldness will be vital.
Uniting for an Asian Century
SEOUL – There is no question that Asia’s standing in the global economy is stronger than ever.
The region now produces about 40% of the world’s GDP, measured according to purchasing power parity.
During the recent economic crisis, Asia accounted for more than half of global GDP growth.
Add to that a massive population and growing political influence, and Asia finally appears ready to lead on a world stage long dominated by the West.
But it is too early to open the champagne.
The United States and Europe maintain an advantage, in terms of global strategic influence, while Asian countries are facing major political, economic, and security challenges.
In fact, Asia’s growth momentum is declining.
China is working overtime to achieve an economic soft landing, following decades of breakneck expansion.
Japan is preoccupied with escaping slow growth and coping with population aging.
Asia’s other economic powerhouses – India, Indonesia, and South Korea – each face their own set of economic and political problems.
Across the region, rising income inequality, financial instability, and environmental degradation are hampering development.
More problematic, despite being deeply interdependent, the region’s countries struggle to act collectively.
The persistence of power rivalries, historical resentments, and territorial disputes, together with pronounced disparities in economic and military might, create substantial obstacles to unity.
A recent surge in coercive behavior by China, a nationalist revival in India, and a shift toward conservatism in Japan have exacerbated these challenges.
But, at a time when Western countries are moving toward isolationism – exemplified by the Brexit vote in the United Kingdom and the election of Donald Trump as US president – intra-regional trade and investment are more important than ever.
Beyond the economic benefits, integration would yield important political benefits, with an integrated Asia enjoying more influence on the international stage.
To reap those benefits, Asia must mitigate regional military and political conflicts and develop a long-term vision for regional integration.
Asia is home to some of the world’s most dangerous flashpoints.
There is a risk of armed clashes in the East and South China Seas, and North Korea continues to develop nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles, despite tougher sanctions pushed by the United States and the United Nations.
Stronger cooperation among Asian countries, together with the international community, could ease regional tensions and lead North Korea to abandon its nuclear weapons programs.
Some regional institutions have already been established, including the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), ASEAN+3 (the ten members of the ASEAN plus China, Japan, and South Korea) and the East Asia Summit (EAS).
Such institutions will be critical to resolving conflicts and establishing a framework for peace that can support regional prosperity and global leadership.
But that is only the first step. And whether Asian leaders share a common vision for regional integration remains unclear.
Judging by Europe’s experience – from the creation of the European Coal and Steel Community in 1951 to the establishment of the European Union in 1993 – there is no need to rush the integration process. But it will take a lot of time and effort.
Perhaps the best way to kick-start this process is to identify areas where the region can gain the most from integration, and take steps that will bring quick returns.
For example, Asian countries can move toward a single market with common rules governing trade and free movement of workers, especially skilled ones.
Launching the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership, a free-trade agreement currently being negotiated by ASEAN and six partners (Australia, China, India, Japan, South Korea, and New Zealand), would be an important step in this direction.
Given the vulnerability of cross-border capital flows, Asia must also pursue joint action on financial supervision, surveillance, and regulatory issues to prevent and manage crises.
One specific goal should be to improve the Chiang Mai Initiative Multilateralization, a $240 billion currency-swap arrangement, and its surveillance unit, the ASEAN+3 Macroeconomic Research Office.
Another should be to establish a de facto Asian Monetary Fund with a broader membership.
It should be noted that none of these efforts would aim to supplant existing sub-regional, regional, and global institutions.
Rather, by making Asia a more effective and united actor, new regional trade and financial measures would complement and strengthen current arrangements.
For any of this to work, bureaucracies and the private sector, including business leaders and academics, must actively support high-level political commitments to integration.
Such support should not be too difficult to muster.
After all, integration would facilitate the exchange of valuable knowledge, from effective economic and social policies to technological and scientific insight.
Forums and dialogues on regional public goods could also prove valuable by promoting cooperation on cross-border challenges, including epidemics, natural disasters, and environmental degradation.
Person-to-person connections would help to highlight for Asian societies their cultural commonalities and shared values, fostering progress in areas where particular countries might lag.
At a time when the global order is increasingly uncertain, Asia should take its fate into its own hands, by pursuing closer economic and political regional cooperation.
If Asian countries can develop a shared vision for an economic community and a political association, this century could be theirs.
Asian Footsteps in Africa
CAMBRIDGE – Don’t look now, but capitalism – maligned in these bailout-ridden recessionary days – is reshaping Africa inexorably.
What is different today is that it is emanating from China and India, rather than from the conventional bastions of capitalist prowess.
Devi Shetty, a celebrated cardiac surgeon in Bangalore, brings health relief to India’s masses through his Narayana group of hospitals.
Some years ago, I witnessed his early experiments with rural telemedicine, especially in the Indian states of Karnataka and West Bengal.
In my visit last month, the wall was adorned by a large map of Karnataka festooned with colored pins, to indicate that he now served most district capitals in the remotest parts of the state.
Moreover, a world map showed outreach to rural areas of East Africa and Southeast Asia, and the room has been upgraded to reflect a still-expanding global reach.
All this comes from carefully acquired experience – technical and sociological – with delivering expert medical advice through teleconference facilities, aided by satellite links.
Shetty’s team has successfully participated in telemedicine consultations – multi-specialty, non-stop availability, and supplemented by continuing education – with hospitals in 14 African countries.
This effort is part of then Indian President A. P. J. Abdul Kalam’s ambitious pan-African e-Network project to link all 53 African capitals to tertiary care facilities across India.
Shetty is a healer, first and foremost.
But he is also an entrepreneur, and this is the latest in his many efforts to create successful, low-cost, but cutting-edge medical ecosystems in tough locations worldwide.
He aspires audaciously to what he calls the universal Walmartization of healthcare – a reshaping of medical care that the world’s indigent need, and in Africa more than most other locations.
Cynics say that India’s e-Network is currying favor with Africa in exchange for natural resources. Perhaps.
But in that effort, India must contend with its neighbor, China, which speaks with a louder voice and carries a larger stick.
Chinese Communist Party President Hu Jintao’s peripatetic diplomacy across Africa has ensured that the Chinese are omnipresent there.
China has traded much investment in physical infrastructure in places otherwise shunned – Angola, Sudan, and Zimbabwe – for access to natural resources.
Witness also an unprecedented convening of 48 African heads of state and senior officials in Beijing in 2006 to signal unequivocally that China would speak with the loudest voice.
India tried to mimic the event, with an India-Africa summit in New Delhi in 2008.
Fourteen countries attended to discuss food price inflation, energy needs, etc.
Alas, India’s voice was drowned out, not by China’s attempts to provide medicine and education to Africa, but by the sheer magnitude of Chinese state-owned enterprises’ investments in physical infrastructure.
But loud voices need not be the most effective.
Indian influence will no doubt exploit assets less available to others, particularly the Indian diaspora in countries like South Africa, Kenya, Tanzania, and Nigeria.
India and Africa have been linked over the centuries by trade, religion, and post-imperial political consciousness.
Gandhi and the Non-Aligned Movement remain important symbols.
Indians are more part of Africa’s social tapestry than are the Chinese, a fabric that has been strengthened through opportunity and adversity through the ages.
Consider Olam, a Singapore-headquartered but Africa-centric global agribusiness company.  From the soybean farms of Brazil’s Matto Grosso to the granaries of Ukraine, Olam is prized for its ability to add value in disparate conditions.
Olam was started by Indians in Nigeria and remains a world-beating trader in cotton, coffee, cashews and the like.
To succeed, Olam has had to work “up-country” ­– a euphemism for difficult conditions far from comfortable port cities – requiring it to rely on Indians’ familiarity with, and willingness to work in, Africa’s interior.
Indeed, so competent is Olam that when Wilmar, a Southeast Asian firm run by overseas Chinese and a force in its own right in China and across Asia, sought to expand in Africa, it sought out Olam in a joint venture.
The connection between Nigerian cashew farmers and Devi Shetty’s pediatric cardiac surgery is that they both represent decentralized private activity, undertaken through the market, unlike the operations of the China National Petroleum Corporation, Sinopec, and others in Darfur and elsewhere.��They all add value, but decentralized market-based activity appears likelier to engender additional goodwill.
But there is more reshaping to come, again fostered by mutual self-interest, rather than by fiat.
CAMBRIDGE – Will war break out in the seas of East Asia?
After Chinese and Japanese nationalists staged competing occupations of the barren landmasses that China refers to as the Diaoyu Islands and Japan calls the Senkaku Islands, angry demonstrators in the southwestern Chinese city of Chengdu chanted, “We must kill all Japanese.”
Likewise, a standoff between Chinese and Philippine vessels in the Scarborough Shoal in the South China Sea led to protests in Manila.
And a long planned step forward in cooperation between South Korea and Japan was torpedoed when the South Korean president visited the barren island that Korea calls Dokdo, Japan calls Takeshima, and the United States calls the Liancourt Rocks.
One should not be too alarmist.
The US has declared that the Senkaku Islands (administered by the Okinawa Prefecture when it was returned to Japan in 1972) are covered by the US-Japan security treaty.
Meanwhile, the standoff over the Scarborough Shoal has calmed down, and, while Japan recalled its ambassador from South Korea over the Dokdo incident, it is unlikely the two countries would come to blows.
But it is worth recalling that China used lethal force to expel Vietnamese from the Paracel Islands in 1974 and 1988.
And China prevailed upon the Cambodian host of this year’s ASEAN summit to block a final communiqué that would have called for a code of conduct in the South China Sea – the first time in the ten-member association’s four-decade history that it failed to issue a communiqué.
The revival of extreme nationalism in East Asia is both worrisome and understandable.
In Europe, while Greeks may grumble about the terms of German backing for emergency financing, the period since World War II has seen enormous progress in knitting countries together.
Nothing similar has happened in Asia, and issues dating back to the 1930’s and 1940’s remain raw, a problem exacerbated by biased textbooks and government policies.
The Chinese Communist Party is not very communist any more.
Instead, it bases its legitimacy on rapid economic growth and ethnic Han nationalism.
Memories of the Sino-Japanese War of 1894-1895 and Japanese aggression in the 1930’s are politically useful and fit within a larger theme of Chinese victimization by imperialist forces.
Some American defense analysts view China’s maritime strategy as being clearly aggressive.
They point to increasing defense expenditures and the development of missile and submarine technology designed to cordon off the seas extending from China’s coast to “the first island chain” of Taiwan and Japan.
Others, however, see a Chinese strategy that is confused, contradictory, and paralyzed by competing bureaucratic interests.
They point to the negative results of China’s more assertive policies since the economic crisis of 2008.
Indeed, China’s policies have damaged its relations with nearly all of its neighbors.
Consider the Senkaku incident in 2010, when, after Japan arrested the crew of a Chinese trawler that had rammed a Japanese coast guard vessel, China escalated its economic reprisals.
The result, as one Japanese analyst put it, was that “China scored an own goal,” immediately reversing what had been a favorable trend in bilateral relations under the ruling Democratic Party of Japan.
More generally, while China spends billions of renminbi in efforts to increase its soft power in Asia, its behavior in the South China Sea contradicts its own message.
I have asked Chinese friends and officials why China follows such a counterproductive strategy.
The first and formal answer is that China inherited historical territorial claims, including a map from the Nationalist period that sketches a “nine-dotted line” encompassing virtually the entire South China Sea.
Today, with technology making underwater as well as fisheries resources more exploitable in the area, it is impossible to abandon this patrimony.
In 2009-2010, some mid-ranking officials and commentators even referred to the South China Sea as a sovereign “core interest” like Taiwan or Tibet.
But China’s leaders have never been clear about the exact location of the “nine-dotted line,” or about whether their claims refer only to certain land features, or also to more extensive continental shelves and seas.
When asked why they do not clarify their claims, my Chinese interlocutors sometimes say that to do so would require difficult political and bureaucratic compromises that would provoke domestic nationalists.
Moreover, sometimes they say that they do not want to give away a bargaining chip prematurely.
In 1995, and again in 2010, the US declared that the waters of the South China Sea should be governed by the 1982 United Nations Law of the Seas Treaty (which, ironically, the US has not yet ratified), but that the US takes no position on the territorial claims.
Instead, the US urged that competing claims be resolved through negotiation.
In 2002, China and ASEAN agreed on a legally non-binding code of conduct for managing such disputes, but, as a large power, China believes that it will gain more in bilateral rather than multilateral negotiations with small countries.
That belief was behind China’s pressure on Cambodia to block ASEAN’s final communiqué this summer.
But this is a mistaken strategy.
As a large power, China will have great weight in any circumstance, and it can reduce its self-inflicted damage by agreeing to a code of conduct.
As for the Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands, the best proposal comes from The Economist.
China should refrain from sending official vessels into Japanese waters, and use a hotline with Japan to manage crises generated by nationalist “cowboys.”
At the same time, the two countries should revive a 2008 framework for joint development of disputed gas fields in the East China Sea, and Japan’s central government should purchase the barren islands from their private owner and declare them an international maritime protected area.
It is time for all countries in East Asia to remember Winston Churchill’s famous advice: “To jaw-jaw is always better than to war-war.”
Asia Adrift
NEW DELHI – The year 2012 began with festering Chinese sovereignty claims in the South and East China Seas, but also with hope that a code of conduct brokered by the Association of Southeast Asian Nations would enable them to be resolved peacefully.
The year is ending, however, with those hopes dashed and ASEAN more divided than it has ever been.
Indeed, a handful of its members now seem eager to subordinate their national interests – and the interests of ASEAN – to those of China.
China’s increasing assertiveness in staking its claims contributed to the landslide victory of the defense-minded Liberal Democrats in Japan, and to the conservative Park Geun-hye’s election as South Korea’s first-ever female president.
Rising regional tensions also provided the backdrop to US President Barack Obama’s trip to Southeast Asia shortly after his re-election.
Obama announced the United States’ strategic “pivot” to the Asia-Pacific region in January 2012, and a whirlwind of activity there – from Australia to Indonesia to India – marked America’s security diplomacy throughout the year.
In Japan, too, worries about Chinese assertiveness have become so powerful that a government that showed considerable hostility to the US-Japan alliance when it came to power three years ago had, by November, begun to trumpet the alliance’s mutual-defense commitments as it confronted China’s claim to the Senkaku (Diaoyu) Islands.
The security concerns that have animated this diplomacy are forging a broad coalition, bringing in not only the region’s democracies, but also countries like Vietnam, which is embroiled in its own territorial dispute with China that centers on maritime oil exploration.
Even India, which has been cautious about deepening its security ties with the US, has now embraced the idea of regional mutual defense – not only with America, but also with Japan and other East Asian countries.
This new emphasis on regional security is not confined to governments.
Popular support for the creation of a pan-Asian security structure can be found not only in the election outcomes in Japan and South Korea, but also in the ecstatic crowds that greeted Obama in Myanmar (Burma) during his recent tour.
Ordinary Burmese well understand that their country’s democratic transition is the direct result of its recoil from China’s excessive demands on its natural resources.
So far, China’s reaction to all of this new activity has been to dig in its heels and insist on addressing its territorial disputes with ASEAN’s militarily inferior members on a bilateral basis.
In November, China foiled ASEAN members’ efforts to create a multilateral forum and an agreed code of conduct to govern economic and security activity in the South China Sea.
By doing so, it split the group and may well have thwarted ASEAN’s ambition to transform itself into a European Union-like regional bloc by the end of 2015.
China succeeded by winning over Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen, the host of November’s ASEAN summit, who cut off discussion of China’s assertive role in the South China Sea by falsely claiming that ASEAN’s members had reached a “consensus” against “internationalizing” the issue.
(Ironically, in 1984, when Hun Sen was Foreign Minister, the ministry published a book entitled The Chinese Rulers’ Crimes against Kampuchea, which documented China’s backing for the genocidal Khmer Rouge.)
That ASEAN debacle has had serious consequences.
The foreign minister of the Philippines, which is also currently engaged in a heated territorial conflict with China, called on Japan to rearm itself to balance China militarily, notwithstanding his country’s bitter legacy of Japanese occupation.
The landslide election of Shinzo Abe, who campaigned on a robust defense platform, may well lead to a serious Japanese push to invigorate the country’s military capabilities.
A recent announcement by the provincial government in Hainan, China, which has responsibility for the South China Sea territories claimed by China, has probably reinforced that impulse.
According to the Hainan authorities, from January 1, 2013, China’s police will be authorized to board and detain ships that are suspected of “illegal activities” in what China claims are its territorial waters.
What constitutes “illegal” activity in the eyes of the Hainan authorities was not spelled out, but many worry that the order will give carte blanche to the maritime police to interfere with commercial activity in the South China Sea.
This approach, according to Stephanie Kleine-Ahlbrandt of the International Crisis Group, appears to be “part of an overall strategy by Beijing to more forcefully defend its sovereignty claims” by “operational means.”
As a result of China’s hardening stance, Surin Pitsuwan, ASEAN’s outgoing secretary-general has said that Asia is entering its “most contentious” period in recent years.
Indeed, he warns that “the South China Sea could evolve into another Palestine,” unless countries try harder to defuse rather than inflame tensions.
One reason to hope that matters will not get out of hand is China’s deep integration into the global economy.
But, within China, as the American political scientists Andrew Nathan and Andrew Scobell argued recently in Foreign Affairs, there is growing tension between domestic economic priorities and Chinese leaders’ belief that “China’s political stability and territorial integrity are threatened by foreign actors and forces.”
The fears of China’s rulers, I suspect, do not bode well for reaching a peaceful resolution of its territorial disputes in the South and East China Seas.
A country that is “unstable at the grass roots, dejected in the middle strata and out of control at the top,” as a group of Chinese scholars recently put it, may see adventurism abroad as the best means of maintaining unity at home.
Asian Women on Top
NEW YORK – India’s Indira Gandhi, Sri Lanka’s Sirimavo Bandaranaike, Pakistan’s Benazir Bhutto, Sheikh Hasina of Bangladesh, Corazon Aquino of the Philippines, and Megawati Sukarnoputri of Indonesia – these women leaders dominated South and South East Asia for much of the past four decades.
Each belonged to a special class of women whose husbands or fathers were their country’s recognized founding father or longstanding political leader. But, while their dynastic links brought them to power, they were not the sole factor keeping them there.
When first elected, none of these women had any serious professional or political qualifications.
For some, this “shortcoming” was seen as an advantage, enabling some of them to project an image of innocence and purity, even martyrdom, as they stood in the place of their deceased husbands or fathers.
None was particularly focused on a women’s agenda (at least not in their first terms in office), and studies show that rural women did not fare particularly well under their rule.
But something very different emerged in Asia in 2011.
We still have women leaders who came to power at least partly because of their family ties. But they now seem to use their positions with far more confidence in putting women and their concerns squarely at the center of their agendas.
And perhaps more importantly, a growing number of women are reaching for the highest political echelons in their countries by dint of their political talents alone.
Sonia Gandhi, the Italian-born wife of former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi and daughter-in-law of the late Indira Gandhi, became India’s most powerful woman for dynastic reasons but she has consistently demonstrated that she is a shrewd behind-the-scenes political operator.&nbsp; For her, the main task at hand is to strengthen the Congress Party, which in early 2011 she was elected to lead for an unprecedented fourth term.
But she has also expended considerable energy on promoting women, particularly their representation in politics.
Indeed, she pushed hard in backing Pratibha Patil to become India’s first woman president.
Similarly Sheikh Hasina, Bangladesh’s prime minister, who carries the mantle of her assassinated father, has become a keen advocate of development issues, with a special emphasis on women and their needs.
That agenda, missing in her first term, has dominated her current period in office.
In East Asia, too, women are on the rise politically.
Park Geun-hye, daughter of Park Chung-hee, President of South Korea from 1961 to 1979, is now one of the two likely candidates to succeed President Lee Myung-bak.
While Park derives some of her power from her family pedigree, she has proven to be an astute and seasoned politician –&nbsp;one who climbed the Grand National Party’s leadership ladder over the last two decades to emerge as a national figure.
Her role in championing an inclusive agenda for women provides a new lens through which to assess the power of Asia’s new leaders.
Compare Park to Corazon Aquino, who, when elected President of the Philippines, famously remarked that she was simply a housewife, not a professional politician or an experienced leader. It was clear that voters elected her because she was the widow of the slain opposition hero Benigno Aquino.
By contrast, no one would deny Park’s professional credentials.
She is taken seriously more for her own experience and political power than for her family connections.
Even in Japan, a similar change is in the air, but with no hint of dynastic trappings.
Yuriko Koike, a former defense minister and national-security adviser, is one of the country’s most powerful figures; indeed, she could become Japan’s next prime minister.
Unlike many other leaders of her Liberal Democratic Party, Koike has no real family connection to any major political figure.
Instead, her standing reflects her unique political talents: an academic background in Arabic studies (she studied at Cairo University) and fluency in English, which give her a global perspective that most of her male colleagues lack.
Koike is not the only Asian woman without family ties forging a political career that may lead to the top.
Indonesia’s Sri Mulyani Indrawati, a former finance minister and currently a managing director of the World Bank, is often mentioned as a leading presidential candidate in her country.
Indeed, a party has been formed specifically to entice her to run for president in 2014.&nbsp;
In Taiwan, Tsai Ing-wen, is making a sustained and powerful challenge to the incumbent president in the election due in January 2012.&nbsp; Having helped to draft Taiwan’s special state-to-state act that regulates relations with China, and then having headed the country’s Ministry for Mainland Affairs Council, she is well positioned to manage the thorniest issue any Taiwanese leader will face: the relationship with China.
Another newcomer to political leadership is Yingluck Shinawatra, Thailand’s Prime Minister.
Clearly, one reason she swept to power this year were her ties to her brother, exiled former Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra, who controls the country’s strongest political party.
But she made it clear during the campaign that she is her own person, a seasoned business leader with appropriate professional degrees.
Then, of course, there is the Burmese Nobel Peace Prize laureate Aung San Suu Kyi.
The daughter of the founder of independent Burma, Suu Kyi is now engaged in perhaps the most delicate task of her remarkable political career – trying to engineer a true democratic transition from decades of military dictatorship.
Unlike the first generation of Asian women leaders, who gained power primarily because of their familial connections, the emerging crop are strong, confident, and ready to take on the challenge of leading their nations on their own terms.
Their followers appear to see in them harbingers, unjaded by history, of the change for which their societies are clamoring.
At a time when, despite economic growth in Asia, there is much social and income inequality, as well uncertainty about the durability of peace in the region, the desire to find fresh solutions to problems has given a powerful boost to women leaders.
They are poised to take their seats at the top table – and perhaps to change its shape.
The Trials of Asian Democracy
TOKYO – These are times of trial – literally in the courts – for a growing number of Asia’s democracies.
The list of major national political leaders in the region who have faced, or are about to face, criminal charges has grown so extensive that it is plausible to wonder whether democracy itself can survive in a number of these countries.
Perhaps the gravest allegations have been leveled at Bangladesh’s opposition leader Khaleda Zia, who has been charged with murder in a case going back many years.
India’s former prime minister, Manmohan Singh, who lost power less than a year ago, is being questioned by prosecutors in connection with allegations of corruption in the privatization of coalmines under his government.
Following a military coup that overthrew her democratically elected government, Thailand’s former prime minister, Yingluck Shinawatra, is facing charges of official malfeasance over rice subsidies.
Then there is the long-running saga of Malaysia’s opposition leader and former Deputy Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim.
His conviction on sodomy charges will effectively ban him from politics for five years, at a moment when the opposition is posing the most serious challenge to Malaysia’s ruling United Malays National Organization (UMNO) since the country gained its independence from the British Empire in 1958.
Moreover, Anwar’s daughter has now been detained for questioning the integrity of her father’s trial in a speech in the Malay parliament, in which she is an elected member in her own right.
Each of these politically tinged trials has different origins, of course.
And each was or will be conducted in court systems that vary greatly in terms of their development and independence.
Yet all of them have called into question, to varying degrees, the rule of law and the prospect for a democratic future in each country.
Singh’s questioning by government prosecutors is perhaps the least worrying case, because India’s democracy is rock-solid, and its judiciary is fearsomely jealous of its independence.
His supporters at home and abroad should have no fear for his rights, or that his case will become some political plaything to keep the opposition Congress party down.
Indeed, the politically shrewd Prime Minister Narendra Modi is far too smart to even contemplate attempting to distort the investigation of Singh for partisan gain.
Sadly, fidelity to judicial independence and the rule of law cannot be guaranteed as thoroughly in the other cases.
Bangladesh, the world’s fourth largest Muslim democracy, has historically had a patchy record in this regard, suggesting scope for political intervention in the case against Zia, if only by officials eager to curry favor with Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina.
Indeed, the two leaders’ mutual loathing is long and legendary.
Each has been Prime Minister, and both have sought, while in office, to use the courts to keep the other out of power, even out of politics altogether – seemingly without regard to the cost.
The murder charges leveled against Zia have already spurred protests, and could incite massive civil disturbances if a trial actually takes place, jeopardizing the economic success that the country has had under Hasina’s rule.
And yet government prosecutors who are ultimately responsible to the prime minister are pressing ahead with the case.
Shinawatra’s looming trial in Thailand and Ibrahim’s repeat conviction in Malaysia lack even the fig leaf of judicial independence.
Shinawatra’s overthrow by the military was clearly a bid by the country’s generals to end by force the electoral lock that she and her brother, Thaksin Shinawatra – himself a former prime minister who was deposed by a military coup in 2006 – have had on Thailand for almost 15 years.
So now the generals and their allies in the Bangkok elite seem determined to turn back the clock; Yingluck’s looming trial appears to be a signal that the Thaksins’ popularity rules out anything more than “managed” democracy in Thailand.
But the current quiescence of the pro-Thaksin forces should not encourage anyone to think that the military can suppress Thai democracy forever or without a fight.
Sadly, Malaysia may soon become prone to the same type of violent protest and economic decline that have gripped Thailand in recent years.
Here, it seems clear that UNMO’s political interests have been allowed to dictate that the country’s key opposition leader should be tried on charges that no real democracy that embraces the rule of law would even consider leveling, and convicted on evidence that no truly independent court would accept.
Political leaders in Thailand and Malaysia, and in other countries in the region, frequently tout the model pioneered by Singapore’s founder and longtime leader Lee Kuan Yew, who died this month.
Yet the path on which both countries have embarked was not Lee’s path.
Yes, Lee’s system enabled him to remain in power for 31 years, and he did use the civil – not criminal – courts to harry his opponents.
But Lee, more importantly, also relied on elements of democratic contestation to ensure that meritocracy triumphed over patronage.
This formula underpinned the rapid consolidation of good government, based on rigorous standards of official conduct that limited the elite’s arbitrary power.
Putting one’s opponents in the criminal dock seems unlikely to produce a similar result.
Asia’s Age of Thaksin?
The retirements from frontline politics of Singapore’s Lee Kuan Yew and Malaysia’s Mahathir Mohamed have deprived Southeast Asia of its senior leaders.
Can Thailand’s Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra fill the regional leadership vacuum?
A series of bold foreign-policy strokes – the Asia Cooperation Dialogue, the Economic Cooperation Strategy for the development of mainland Southeast Asia, and America’s designation of Thailand as a “major non-NATO ally” – turned the international spotlight on Thaksin during his first term.
Violence in Thailand’s predominantly Muslim south seemed to dent his ambitions last year, but his Thai Rak Thai (TRT) party’s landslide victory last February gave his bid for regional leadership a new lease on life.
With the TRT capturing over 75% of the seats in the lower house of parliament, Thaksin is now politically invincible at home.
Indeed, he has become the first elected Thai leader to finish a four-year term, be re-elected, and preside over a one-party government.
Thaksin’s dominance of Thai politics is unprecedented, and his resilient popularity in the face of a fickle electorate is unparalleled.
Apart from his complete control of domestic politics, Thaksin commands other prerequisites of regional leadership.
Already eyeing a third term, he can count on political longevity on the order of Mahathir’s 22-year rule.
Notwithstanding the one-party system that the TRT is cultivating, Thaksin is armed with democratic legitimacy in a global arena bent on democracy promotion, and he speaks English decently enough to articulate his views and vision to a global audience.
He even has his own development strategy, dubbed “Thaksinomics,” a self-styled approach that blends neo-liberal export-led growth with grassroots-based domestic demand.
The Thai economy emerged out of its post-1997 crisis doldrums under Thaksin’s watch, and is now firmly positioned on a 6% annual growth trajectory.
While it relies on profligate subsidies and cash handouts, Thaksinomics also banks on structural reforms to propel economic growth.
The strategy’s most promising prospects include the promotion of industrial upgrading, niche industries, and competitiveness-boosting cluster projects that aim to make Thailand a global and regional hub for food, fashion, tourism, automobiles, and healthcare.
A vibrant economy – GDP growth is second only to China’s in Asia – is indispensable for regional leadership.
Of the policies that will determine his future role in the region, the Asia Cooperation Dialogue and Economic Cooperation Strategy stand out.
Based on the concept of “Asia for Asians,” the nascent ACD’s membership straddles the Asian landmass from the Korean Peninsula to the Middle East, with Thailand at the geographic center.
Although its future directions are uncertain, this 26-member forum trumps Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), and ASEAN Plus Three, which includes China, Japan, and South Korea.
The region-wide crisis in 1997, weak progress on free trade, and the region’s security vulnerabilities have made Thaksin aware of ASEAN’s limitations.
As Indonesia’s size makes it a natural leader of ASEAN, the ACD lends Thaksin a broader platform that stresses Thailand’s geographical advantages.
It allows him to trumpet Thailand’s strategic objectives and the region’s major issues, sometimes in confrontation with the interests and the demands of the West.
Within the ACD framework, Thaksin launched the $1 billion “Asia Bond” last year in an effort to match Asia’s financial capital with its financing requirements.
In a smaller sphere of operations, the ECS envisages economic development in Cambodia, Laos, Myanmar, and Vietnam.
Under Thaksin, Thailand graduated from aid recipient and became a donor country for the first time, having turned away development assistance from countries like Japan.
A Thai fund of 10 billion baht was established to provide outright aid and soft loans to the ECS members.
Like the ACD, the ECS shifts Thai foreign policy priorities to the Southeast Asian mainland, highlighting Thailand’s role and Thaksin’s canny leadership.
Two major obstacles stand in Thaksin’s way.
The raging violence in southern Thailand over the past 15 months has made him look bad, as his myriad strategies and tactics have failed repeatedly.
Nor have his bluster and ill temper improved matters.
Thaksin initially dismissed the violent attacks as the work of bandits.
Only late last year did he admit that southern Muslim separatism was the cause.
Signs of a symbiotic relationship between local separatists and regional terrorists have emerged.
If the attacks widen beyond the three southernmost provinces of Yala, Pattani, and Narathiwat, Thaksin’s regional leadership chances will be dimmed.
Thaksin knows this.
Since his sweeping re-election, he has been surprisingly modest and magnanimous.
He has appointed Anand Panyarachun, a former Thai prime minister who recently headed a United Nations reform panel, to select and direct a blue-ribbon national commission to seek reconciliation with the southern separatists.
In addition, Thaksin will have to do something about Myanmar if the international community is to accept his wider role.
To many, Thai-Myanmar relations are too cozy.
Critics accuse Thaksin of conflicts of interest, as his family-owned telecommunications conglomerate holds sizeable investments in Myanmar.
It is now largely up to Thaksin himself.
If he is enlightened enough to make amends with disaffected southerners and move beyond his vested interests in Myanmar, he retains a good shot at becoming Asia’s next spokesman.
Asia’s BRICs Hit the Wall
NEW DELHI –India’s democratic credentials do not impress Francis Fukuyama, who two decades ago prophesied the “end of history,” as being a catalyst for the country’s economic growth.
Fukuyama finds excessive “patronage politics and fractiousness” in India – flaws that stand in stark contrast to China’s speedier, though not necessarily cleaner, political system.
The reality is, however, somewhat different.
China’s local governments have been accumulating mountains of debt to fund their construction binges, raising serious concerns about potential defaults.
Premier Wen Jiabao himself recognizes the urgent need to address the country’s inequitable growth, calling for means to be found to “share prosperity evenly,” and thus to reduce the widening gaps between “rich and poor, cities and countryside.”
The economist Nouriel Roubini has predicted that China’s economy will most likely slow sometime between 2013 and 2015, the point at which its fixed-asset investments of nearly 50% of GDP will demand social and monetary returns.
Until now, says Roubini, China’s export-led growth has depended on “making things that the rest of the world wants, at a price that no other country can match,” a consequence of cheap labor and economies of scale. This cost advantage is diminishing fast.
India is facing severe difficulties as well, but of a different nature.
For example, outward investment by Indian companies is expanding fast.
Some believe that this is a natural development for a rising power, but critics view outward investment as a reflection of the scarcity of opportunities at home.
Rising interest rates, high inflation, and severe policy gridlock amid a spate of government corruption scandals have impeded both foreign and domestic investment in India, thus slowing economic growth to a level that is below its potential.
An unpredictable regulatory environment, inadequate infrastructure, and a sluggish, monsoon-dependent agricultural sector are adding to the economy’s problems.
Clearly, economic turbulence is roiling both of Asia’s major economies, the giants of the so-called BRICs (Brazil, Russia, India, and China).
Consider inflation. On July 6, the People’s Bank of China raised its benchmark interest rate for the fifth time since October 2010.
This has generated apprehension about property markets, and fear that local governments could default on part of their staggering debt of $1.65 trillion.
In India, the government’s failure to contain rising prices, pursue structural economic reforms vigorously, attract foreign direct investment, advance infrastructure development, manage expenditure, and avoid liquidity crunches underscores the many challenges it faces.
Moreover, a continued standoff between the government and the opposition has weakened political effectiveness, further undermining India’s growth prospects.
Indeed, India’s core challenge remains political.
With food prices rising sharply, the poor are being hit the hardest, fueling greater poverty, inequality, and resentment.
But the same is true in China: anti-inflation protests are now roiling both countries, owing mainly to rising energy, food, and raw-material prices, with food accounting for one-third of household spending in China and around 45% in India.
China, meanwhile, finds itself at a critical juncture.
Its leadership will change next year – at a time when income inequality is on the march and the Party lacks any consensus on how to stop it.
Given that less than 9% of China’s ruling communist party members are actually “workers” nowadays, the regime’s leaders must be even more uncomfortable with growing inequality.
But, in the absence of serious political reform, income inequality will widen as crony capitalism sinks its roots more deeply.
India and China both need a renewed commitment to structural reform to sustain their economic growth.
Cheap labor and monetary management will not do the trick on their own.
The credibility that both governments gained after their countries avoided the worst of the global financial crisis of 2008 is beginning to wear thin.
For, as inflationary fears in the BRIC giants grow, second thoughts about the shift in the world economy’s center of gravity are beginning to gain currency.
What both countries need are short-term corrections and long-term structural changes.
China needs to prepare itself for an economy whose performance is not dependent on exports and low domestic wages.
India must find other drivers of economic modernization than new information technologies (as welcome as these are).
Workers in both countries are now demanding better living standards – a demand that even China’s tightly controlled political system cannot ignore.
India, for its part, needs to open up its economy further in order to take advantage of its continuing rapid population growth and the ongoing changes in the structure of the global economy.
It must recommit itself to feeding its population – and thus to attaining its stated objective of a “Second Green Revolution” in agriculture.
China and India have used very different political models to achieve their ambitious GDP-growth targets.
Nonetheless, as their economies mature, both will need to embrace structural change – and to address the challenges of overdue political reforms.
Dynastic Asia
SINGAPORE – To the extent that culture matters in politics, the recent spate of leadership changes in Northeast Asia suggests that Asian societies are more tolerant – if not supportive – of dynastic succession.
South Korea’s recently elected president, Park Geun-hye, is the daughter of Park Chung Hee, who ruled the country from 1961 to 1979.
China’s incoming president, Xi Jinping, is the son of Xi Zhongxun, a former vice premier.
Japan’s new prime minister, Shinzo Abe, is the grandson and grandnephew of two former Japanese prime ministers, and the son of a former foreign minister.
Kim Jong-un is the son and grandson of his two predecessors in North Korea.
This pattern is not confined to Northeast Asia.
President Benigno Aquino III of the Philippines is the son of former President Corazon Aquino.
Prime Ministers Najib Abdul Razak and Lee Hsien Loong of Malaysia and Singapore, respectively, are also sons of former prime ministers.
In India, Rahul Gandhi is waiting in the wings, preparing to step into the shoes of his great-grandfather (Jawaharlal Nehru), grandmother (Indira Gandhi), and father (Rajiv Gandhi).
In Pakistan, Bilawal Bhutto Zardari – son of President Asif Ali Zardari and the assassinated former prime minister, Benazir Bhutto, and grandson of former Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto – recently made his political debut.
Is dynastic succession becoming the norm throughout Asia?
There is no denying that a distinguished lineage gives political candidates an advantage over rivals.
But it is also clear that having distinguished relatives is no guarantee of success.
Consider the checkered record of former Philippine President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo.
Her father was a respected president; yet she could well be remembered as one of the country’s most corrupt.
The key issue is leaders’ attitude when they assume office.
If they do so with a sense of entitlement from their lineage, they are likely to fail, as Arroyo did.
Fortunately for East Asia, most seem to approach power with a keen sense of duty and a commitment to strengthening their countries.
The term “princeling” is probably an unfair description of China’s Xi.
After all, he hardly can be said to have led a charmed life.
After his father was purged by Mao Zedong, he went to work in the countryside, even before the 1966-1976 Cultural Revolution, experiencing firsthand all of the hardships that many of his generation endured.
Having risen to the top, he feels no sense of entitlement.
From all accounts, he feels an even greater sense of responsibility to prove that he gained his position on the basis of merit, not privilege.
Xi must also be aware that the children of the People’s Republic’s second generation of leaders face considerable public resentment, owing to their rapid accumulation of wealth.
That explains his focus on combating corruption.
If he fails to do so, he will be deemed a failure, and the Chinese Communist Party’s political monopoly may end sooner than anyone anticipates.
Xi carries a huge burden on his shoulders.
So does Park Geun-hye.
Like Xi, she had to struggle to reach the top.
Her father lifted South Korea out of poverty and turned it into an economic tiger.
But his rule was also brutally repressive.
To make matters worse for Park, many of her predecessors are perceived as failures.
Two former presidents, Roh Tae-woo and Chun Doo-hwan, were prosecuted; another, Roh Moo-hyun, committed suicide.
There are also unkind rumors swirling around outgoing President Lee Myung-bak.
South Korea is clearly a successful country that is struggling to define itself.
In theory, it should be celebrating its economic and cultural achievements.
In practice, as a small country in a troubled neighborhood – and with North Korea a constant source of tension – it lives in existential anxiety.
And Park, whose victory has not diminished her people’s ambivalent attitude toward her father, must know that healing the obvious divisions in South Korean society will not be easy.
The most difficult job is the one that awaits Rahul Gandhi.
No single party can dominate Indian politics as the Congress Party has done since independence, implying a future of difficult and quarrelsome coalitions.
In these circumstances, India needs, above all, decisive leadership.
Yet, like Hamlet, Rahul seems uncertain.
He could have taken the job several years ago, if he had chosen to do so.
His hesitation must reflect a deep anxiety.
Yet his reluctance is understandable.
Again, dynastic succession does not ensure success.
Malaysia’s Razak, for example, has made an enormous effort to reunify his country with his “1Malaysia” message.
Yet all the indications are that he will face an extremely hard-fought election in 2013.
Though unlikely, his Barisan Nasional coalition could fall apart.
No such prospect faced his predecessors.
In Japan, Abe is universally regarded to have performed badly in his first stint as Prime Minister in 2006-2007, despite his distinguished lineage.
Now he takes over an even more troubled country with huge domestic and external challenges.
Few are betting on his succeeding.
In short, Asia’s pattern of dynastic leadership does not render it immune from the challenges that the rest of the world faces.
As Asia creates the world’s largest middle class – projected to grow more than three-fold, from 500 million to 1.75 billion, by 2020 – it will also have to cope with demands for more competent and more accountable governments.
In Asia today, uneasy lies the head that wears the crown.
Asia’s Hard Road
MANILA – Next year will present significant challenges and new responsibilities – political, economic, and social – for developing Asia.
The path to sustainable, inclusive economic growth will be difficult, but it will also entail exciting opportunities for Asia and the rest of the world.
Five years into the Great Recession, recovery remains elusive in advanced economies.
Europe’s leaders must make tough decisions in order to resolve the euro crisis and revive growth.
And, although the United States is beginning to show signs of economic recovery, the country faces a political stalemate over the so-called “fiscal cliff.”
Indeed, while leading indicators may be stronger than they were a year ago, risks have only intensified.
In Asia, fiscal prudence allowed the stimulus measures that were needed to revive global economic growth in 2010.
But the economic transformation that has occurred over the last several decades has reached a crossroads.
Notwithstanding a few low-income economies catching up, the years of double-digit GDP growth are unlikely to continue – particularly in China and India – owing to the anemic external environment, together with internal weaknesses.
Asia needs to adjust to a new era of more moderate growth, while addressing widespread inequality and improving sustainability.
The unprecedented economic expansion that has lifted millions out of poverty has been accompanied by widening income disparities, as well as serious environmental damage.
As a result, Asia now has two faces: a prosperous and growing middle class, and those who have yet to benefit from the region’s rapid economic development – and whose health and well-being is being adversely affected by acute problems like air and water pollution.
In short, the key challenges facing Asia today are to sustain economic growth – at lower, but still enviable, rates – and to improve its quality.
Asia needs strong, inclusive, green, knowledge-led growth, which implies the need to rebalance the sources of economic dynamism to emphasize domestic, regional, and inter-regional “South-South” demand.
Economic relations with the West would not be diluted by this shift.
Just as the West has provided exports and expertise to bolster Asia’s economic expansion, Asia offers opportunities for advanced economies to transform their growth models to cope with the challenges of globalization.
Indeed, the coming year will mark a seminal moment for developing Asia in terms of advancing its own agenda, which, in turn, will give developed economies the flexibility and opportunities that they need to fulfill their own economic potential.
To be successful, Asia’s leaders must not allow diplomatic distractions – including territorial disputes in the region, which intensified in 2012 – to destabilize further an already uncertain economic and geopolitical environment.
Given current global economic uncertainties, there is no room for this kind of disruption.
Continued geopolitical volatility will delay, if not obstruct, the emergence of a new, world-class Asia.
In this context, Asian leaders ascending to power in 2013 – for example, in China, Japan, and South Korea – must prioritize enhanced regional economic and political cooperation.
Such relationships will be all the more crucial if global economic conditions deteriorate.
Political disputes must not be allowed to hinder the adjustments needed to ensure long-term sustainable development.
And those adjustments are many.
Over the last two decades, Asia’s economic boom was largely driven by intra-regional manufacturing linkages, in which intermediate goods and parts were sourced from within Asia to be assembled into final goods for export to developed markets – earning the region the moniker “factory Asia.”
But the protracted global slowdown has highlighted the risks of excessive reliance on exports.
In order to ensure long-term stability, Asia must find new sources of growth, increase productivity, and improve efficiency.
Expanding South-South trade and investment links could enhance the region’s growth potential and contribute to global economic stability by promoting worldwide rebalancing.
To facilitate this, developing Asia must work to reduce internal trade and investment barriers – which remain higher than those in place vis-à-vis industrialized nations – and continue to promote global and regional integration.
Developing a vibrant service sector is also crucial.