Frederick Smith, CEO of Federal Express, has argued that “the primary task of leadership is to communicate the vision and values of an organization.”
But one must be cautious about visions.
Sometimes leaders think that vision can solve most of their problems, but the wrong vision – or an overly ambitious vision – can do damage.
George H.W. Bush was faulted (and faulted himself) for not having what he called “the vision thing.”
When pressed by his staff to speak more boldly and expansively, he replied, “It’s just not me.”
After the shock of the September 2001 terrorist attacks, his son, George W. Bush, developed a far more ambitious vision.
As one former adviser put it, he was “irresistibly drawn to Big Ideas like bringing democracy to the Middle East, Big Ideas that stood in sharp contrast to the prudent small ball played by his father.”
Yet the elder Bush turned out to have had the better foreign policy.
Some aspiring leaders think that they must proclaim a vision that overawes their followers. In practice, however, a successful vision often arises from the needs of the group, which are then formulated and articulated by the leader.
The vision that Martin Luther King, Jr., expressed in his “I Have a Dream” speech, for example, was deeply rooted not only in America’s professed values of equality and inclusion, but also in African-Americans�� experience of subordination and exclusion.
At the same time, the pressure to articulate a vision can get a leader into difficulty.
As one university president put it: “Everyone asks, ‘What’s your vision?’
But you offend many people and get into trouble by answering too quickly.
The smart response at the beginning is, ‘What do you think?’ and then listen before you articulate your vision.”
A successful vision has to be attractive to various circles of followers and stakeholders.
What plays well with one group may not sit well with another.
And, to be sustainable, a successful vision must also be an effective diagnosis of the situation that a group faces.
Leaders must get the question right before proposing answers.
To choose goals and articulate them in a vision, they need not only to solicit input from their followers, but also to understand the context of their choices.
They must be able to assess reality accurately.
The boldness of a vision varies with the type of leadership involved.
Leaders of social movements can call forth larger visions than public officials can.
A movement leader can promote a vision that is miles ahead of his followers, while a prime minister with multiple objectives and responsibilities must maintain a continuous dialogue with the public, which keeps him or her from moving too far ahead of citizens.
After former US Vice President Al Gore lost his bid for the presidency in 2000, he became a leader of the social movement to combat global climate change, and his style changed from pragmatic to inspirational and prophetic.
Analysts judge a government leader’s vision in terms of whether it creates a sensible balance between realism and risk, and whether it balances objectives with capabilities.
Anyone can produce a wish list, but effective visions combine inspiration with feasibility.
Critics of former British Prime Minister Tony Blair, for example, acknowledged that his ability to articulate a vision was one of his great strengths as a leader, but complained about his lack of attention to detail.
Similarly, two twentieth-century US presidents, Woodrow Wilson and George W. Bush, were good at articulating an ambitious foreign-policy vision, but were poor at refining and reshaping their vision when they encountered implementation challenges.
Both promoted democracy, but both did so in a manner that generated a backlash against democracy promotion.
Of course, prudence is not enough.
Sometimes leaders need to stretch the boundaries of realism to inspire their followers and call forth extra effort, as Winston Churchill did in Great Britain in 1940.
But, without a degree of prudence based upon comprehension of the context, visions turn from grand to grandiose and undercut the values that they seek to promote.
Like Franklin Roosevelt, who acted very cautiously in trying to persuade American opinion to abandon isolationism in the 1930’s, Merkel has proceeded cautiously on saving the euro.
She faced public skepticism about using German funds to bail out the Greek economy.
Her coalition was divided on the issue, and her party lost state elections.
If she had acted more boldly, she might have lost even more support, but the steps that she agreed to remained insufficient to reassure markets.
At the end of October, however, she finally articulated a vision of the future of Europe that persuaded the German Bundestag to agree to a package of measures to save the euro.
Whether she waited too long – and whether her vision will prove convincing – will be determined in the coming months.
PISA’s Promise
PARIS – By assessing the capabilities and knowledge of students in the highest-performing and most rapidly improving education systems, the OECD’s Program for International Student Assessment provides valuable options for reform and information on how to achieve it.
PISA brings together policymakers, educators, and researchers from around the world to discuss what knowledge students need to become successful and responsible citizens in today’s world, and how to develop more effective, inclusive education systems.
Some claim that the PISA results are based on too wide a range of factors to be relevant, while others point out the challenges inherent in testing students in various languages and with different cultural backgrounds.
Of course, comparing education across countries is not easy, but PISA remains the most useful tool yet developed for policymakers attempting to improve their national education systems.
Before PISA, many governments claimed that they oversaw the world’s most successful education systems, and insisted that they had already taken the steps needed to address any shortcomings.
By exposing weaknesses in a particular country’s system, PISA assessments help to ensure that policymakers recognize – and, it is hoped, address – remaining deficiencies.
The sense of accountability that PISA fosters among governments and education ministers has helped to spur them into action.
They increasingly turn to one another to learn how to apply innovations in curricula, pedagogy, and digital resources; how to offer personalized learning experiences that maximize every student’s chances of success; and how to cope with diversity in the classroom.
The OECD established PISA as a global assessment, because in today’s globalized world students must be able to collaborate with people from diverse backgrounds and appreciate different ideas, perspectives, and values.
To give students the best possible chance to succeed, education must prepare them to handle issues that transcend national boundaries.
But PISA’s most important outcomes lie at the national level, because it inspires innovation and broadens educational perspectives within countries.
Education systems as diverse as those in Finland, Japan, China, and Canada – which seldom registered on policymakers’ radars before – have become global reference points for excellence in education, helping other countries to design effective reforms.
When Brazil emerged as the lowest-performing education system in the first PISA assessment, released in 2000, many people rightly questioned the fairness of comparing an emerging economy to advanced countries like Finland and Japan.
But Brazil rose to the challenge, making massive investments in improving the quality of teaching.
The country now boasts one of the world’s most rapidly improving education systems.
Germany also featured in PISA 2000, recording below-average performance and large social inequalities in education – an outcome that stunned Germans and initiated a months-long public debate.
Spurred into action, the government launched initiatives to support disadvantaged and immigrant students, and made the notion of early childhood education a driving force in German education policy.
Today, PISA reports confirm that the quality and fairness of Germany’s education system have improved considerably.
Even in the world’s best-performing education systems, PISA helps to pinpoint areas for improvement.
For example, PISA assessments have revealed that, while Japanese students excel at reproducing what they have learned, they often struggle when asked to extrapolate from that knowledge and apply it creatively.
The effort that this has inspired to create more innovative learning environments was apparent last April, during a visit to the Tohoku schools destroyed by the 2011 tsunami.
This experience offers yet another lesson: even in cases where social and cultural factors seem to be the main force shaping a country’s education style, improvements are possible.
Countries like Japan do not have to change their cultures to address their educational shortcomings; they simply have to adjust their policies and practices.
Creating a global platform for collaboration in education research and innovation has been the PISA initiative’s aspiration from its conception in the late 1990s.
Since then, policymakers, researchers, and experts have built the world’s largest professional network dedicated to the development of robust, reliable, and internationally comparable information on student learning outcomes.
At the same time, PISA measures students’ social and emotional skills and attitudes toward learning, as well as educational equity and parental support – all of which provides indispensable context for understanding scores on international assessments.
Of course, assessments do not cover every important skill or attitude.
But there is convincing evidence that the knowledge and skills that the PISA system assesses are essential to students’ future success, and the OECD works continuously to broaden the range of cognitive and social skills that PISA measures.
PISA has already prompted important advances in education worldwide.
The OECD will continue to work with the 80 participating countries to develop the program further, so that it can continue to help policymakers and educators design and implement better education policies – and give their citizens access to the tools that they need to build better lives.
An IMF We Can Love?
CAMBRIDGE – What a difference the crisis has made for the International Monetary Fund.
It was just a few months ago that this important but unloved institution, a landmark of post-war global economic arrangements, seemed destined to irrelevance.
The IMF has long been a whipping boy for both left and right – the former because of the Fund’s emphasis on fiscal rectitude and economic orthodoxy, and the latter because of its role in bailing out indebted nations.
Developing nations grudgingly took its advice, while advanced nations, not needing the money, ignored it.
In a world where private capital flows dwarf the resources at its disposal, the IMF had come to seem an anachronism.
And, when some of the IMF’s largest debtors (Brazil and Argentina) began to prepay their debts a few years ago with no new borrowers in sight, it looked like the final nail in the coffin had been struck.
The IMF seemed condemned to run out of income, in addition to losing its raison d’être .
It shrank its budgets and began to downsize, and, while it was handed some new responsibilities in the meantime – surveillance over “currency manipulation,” in particular – its deliberations proved largely irrelevant.
But the crisis has invigorated the IMF.
Under its capable managing director, Dominique Strauss-Kahn, the Fund has been one of the few official agencies ahead of – instead of behind – the curve.
It moved quickly to establish a fast-disbursing emergency line of credit for countries with “reasonable” policies.
It ardently championed global fiscal stimulus on the order of 2% of world GNP – a position that is all the more remarkable in view of its traditional conservatism on all fiscal matters.
And, in the run-up to the G-20 summit in London, it thoroughly overhauled its lending policies, de-emphasizing traditional conditionality and making it easier for countries to qualify for loans.
Even more significantly, the IMF has emerged from the London meeting with substantially greater resources, as well as new responsibilities.
The G-20 promised to triple the Fund’s lending capacity (from $250 billion to $750 billion), issue $250 billion of new Special Drawing Rights (a reserve asset made up of a basket of major currencies), and permit the Fund to borrow in capital markets (which it has never done) if necessary.
The IMF was also designated as one of two lead agencies – along with an expanded Financial Stability Forum (now renamed the Financial Stability Board) – charged with providing early warning of macroeconomic and financial risks and issuing the requisite policy recommendations. 
Another piece of good news is that the Europeans have now given up their claim on naming the IMF’s managing director (as have the Americans their corresponding claim on the World Bank presidency).
These senior officials are henceforth to be selected “through an open, transparent, and merit-based selection process.”
This will provide for better governance (although Strauss-Kahn’s leadership has been exemplary), and will enhance both institutions’ legitimacy in the eyes of developing nations.
So the IMF now finds itself at the center of the economic universe once again.
How will it choose to deploy its newfound power?
The greatest risk is that it will once again over-reach and over-play its hand.
That is what happened in the second half of the 1990’s, as the IMF began to preach capital-account liberalization, applied over-stringent fiscal remedies during the Asian financial crisis, and single-handedly tried to reshape Asian economies.
The institution has since acknowledged its errors in all these areas.
But it remains to be seen if the lessons have been fully internalized, and whether we will have a kinder, gentler IMF in lieu of a rigid, doctrinaire one.
One encouraging fact is that developing countries will almost certainly get a larger say in how the Fund is run.
This will ensure that poorer nations’ views receive a more sympathetic hearing in the future.
But simply giving developing nations greater voting power will make little difference if the IMF’s organizational culture is not changed as well.
The Fund is staffed by a large number of smart economists, who lack much connection to (and appreciation for) the institutional realities of the countries on which they work.
Their professional expertise is validated by the quality of their advanced degrees, rather than by their achievements in practical policymaking.
This breeds arrogance and a sense of smug superiority over their counterparts – policymakers who must balance multiple, complicated agendas.
Countering this will require proactive efforts by the IMF’s top leadership in recruitment, staffing, and promotion.
One option would be to increase substantially the number of mid-career recruits with actual practical experience in developing countries.
This would make the IMF staff more cognizant of the value of local knowledge relative to theoretical expertise.
Another strategy would be to relocate some of the staff, including those in functional departments, to “regional offices” in the field.
This move would likely face considerable resistance from staff who have gotten used to the perks of Washington, DC.
But there is no better way to appreciate the role of context than to live in it.
The World Bank, which engaged in a similar decentralization a while back, has become better at serving its clients as a result (without facing difficulties in recruiting top talent).
This is an important moment for the IMF.
The international community is putting great store in the Fund’s judgment and performance.
The Fund will require internal reforms to earn that trust fully.
Leveling the Afghan Playing Field
NEW YORK – Afghanistan’s security and political situation remains plagued by uncertainty, stemming from the withdrawal of United States and NATO combat troops, the upcoming presidential election, and the stalled peace negotiations with the Taliban.
Recognizing that continued economic insecurity will exacerbate this perilous situation, the government has announced a new package of economic incentives aimed at attracting foreign direct investment.
The package includes the provision of land to industrialists at dramatically reduced prices, tax exemptions of up to seven years for factory owners, and low-interest loans of up to ten years for farmers.
Such incentives are targeted at foreign investors and the local elite, with the aim of stopping or even reversing capital flight.
But the new measures ultimately amount to more of the same: a fragmented policy approach that will prove inadequate to solve Afghanistan’s fundamental economic problems.
In the early stages of the post-war transition, FDI increased rapidly, rising from 1.2% of GDP in 2002 to a peak of 4.3% of GDP in 2005.
Most of these inflows were directed toward the construction and services sectors – the main drivers of GDP growth – and aimed to satisfy international demand, both civilian and military.
But, in 2006-2007, FDI levels began to fall, owing to a sharply deteriorating security situation, a continued lack of electricity and adequate infrastructure, a shortage of skilled labor, inadequate legal and regulatory systems, inefficient bureaucratic procedures, and the need to renew companies’ licenses annually.
Land grabs, chronic corruption, impunity, the inability to enforce contracts, and the fragmentation and ineffectiveness of aid deterred foreign and domestic investment further.
As a result, FDI collapsed to less than 0.5% of GDP annually in 2011-2012.
Moreover, in the effort to develop two of the world’s largest mines, investors’ greed prevailed over their security and business-climate concerns.
In 2007, the Metallurgical Corporation of China won the concession for the Aynak copper deposit in Logar Province.
In 2011, a group of Indian state and private companies won the concession for the Hajigak iron-ore deposit in Bamyan Province.
But, despite these projects’ reported billion-dollar price tags and high expectations, the investments have catalyzed little progress, owing partly to security issues.
Worse, the mines’ displacement of residents, underpayment of workers, and environmental damage have generated resentment in local communities, which is likely to grow in the future.
After all, the granting of mineral resources to foreigners reduces – and could even eliminate – their benefits for local people.
As it stands, Afghanistan’s economy is a house of cards.
Aid levels are comparable to GDP, with donors covering roughly two-thirds of government expenditure and the entire current-account deficit, which amounts to 40% of GDP.
But aid is falling and expected to drop sharply after 2014.
Rather than continuing to pursue piecemeal measures like those that it has just approved, the government needs to implement an integrated and targeted strategy for the reactivation of investment, employment, and trade.
Indeed, a drastic shift in policy is essential to avoid economic collapse.
In order to reduce the risks associated with investing in Afghanistan, the government must create a system that benefits local communities and foreign investors alike.
This can be achieved with a strategy based on two distinct but mutually beneficial “reconstruction zones”: an export-oriented zone (ERZ) and a local-production zone (LRZ).
The ERZ, focused exclusively on producing goods for export, would provide tax incentives, basic infrastructure and services, security, and a stable legal framework to investors.
In exchange, investors would commit to train local workers, create employment by purchasing local inputs and services, improve corporate practices and local providers’ standards, facilitate technology transfers, and establish links with local technical schools and universities.
The LRZ would enable local people to improve their livelihoods though the production of agricultural goods, the efficient delivery of services, and light manufacturing.
Such a scheme would also help to bolster gender equality by providing a level playing field for all Afghans in terms of security, social services, infrastructure, credit, and inputs (such as seeds, fertilizers, and agricultural machinery).
Moreover, it would boost food supplies and reduce Afghanistan’s exorbitant dependence on imports.
By focusing exclusively on foreigners and domestic elites for investment, Afghanistan is missing out on the vast potential of micro-entrepreneurs and small businesses to contribute to steady GDP growth.
Achieving long-overdue peace and stability will be impossible without them.
An Inconvenient Peace Prize
This year’s Nobel Peace Prize justly rewards the thousands of scientists of the United Nations Climate Change Panel (the IPCC).
These scientists are engaged in excellent, painstaking work that establishes exactly what the world should expect from climate change.
The other award winner, former US Vice President Al Gore, has spent much more time telling us what to fear.
While the IPCC’s estimates and conclusions are grounded in careful study, Gore doesn’t seem to be similarly restrained.
Gore told the world in his Academy Award-winning movie (recently labeled “one-sided” and containing “scientific errors” by a British judge) to expect 20-foot sea-level rises over this century.
He ignores the findings of his Nobel co-winners, the IPCC, who conclude that sea levels will rise between only a half-foot and two feet over this century, with their best expectation being about one foot.
That’s similar to what the world experienced over the past 150 years.
Likewise, Gore agonizes over the accelerated melting of ice in Greenland and what it means for the planet, but overlooks the IPCC’s conclusion that, if sustained, the current rate of melting would add just three inches to the sea level rise by the end of the century.
Gore also takes no notice of research showing that Greenland’s temperatures were higher in 1941 than they are today.
Gore also frets about the future of polar bears.
He claims they are drowning as their icy habitat disappears.
However, the only scientific study showing any such thing indicates that four polar bears drowned because of a storm.
The politician-turned-movie maker loses sleep over a predicted rise in heat-related deaths.
There’s another side of the story that’s inconvenient to mention: rising temperatures will reduce the number of cold spells, which are a much bigger killer than heat.
The best study shows that by 2050, heat will claim 400,000 more lives, but 1.8 million fewer will die because of cold.
Indeed, according to the first complete survey of the economic effects of climate change for the world, global warming will actually save lives.
The IPCC has magnanimously declared that it would have been happy if Gore had received the Nobel Peace prize alone.
I am glad that he did not, and that the IPCC’s work has rightfully been acknowledged.
Gore has helped the world to worry.
Unfortunately, our attention is diverted from where it matters.
Climate change is not the only problem facing the globe.
Our blinkered focus on it – to the detriment of other planetary challenges – will only be heightened by the attention generated by Gore’s Nobel Peace Prize.
Gore concentrates above all else on his call for world leaders to cut CO2 emissions, yet there are other policies that would do much more for the planet.
Over the coming century, developing nations will be increasingly dependent on food imports from developed countries.
This is not primarily a result of global warming, but a consequence of more people and less arable land in the developing world.
The number of hungry people depends much less on climate than on demographics and income.
Extremely expensive cuts in carbon emissions could mean more malnourished people.
If our goal is to fight malnutrition, policies like getting nutrients to those who need them are 5,000 times more effective at saving lives than spending billions of dollars cutting carbon emissions.
Likewise, global warming will probably slightly increase malaria, but CO2 reductions will be far less effective at fighting this disease than mosquito nets and medication, which can cheaply save 850,000 lives every year.
If we focus on solving today’s problems, we will leave communities strengthened, economies more vibrant, and infrastructures more robust.
This will enable these societies to deal much better with future problems – including global warming.
Committing to massive cuts in carbon emissions will leave future generations poorer and less able to adapt to challenges.
Gore has an unshakable faith that climate change is the biggest challenge facing the world.
To be fair, he deserves some form of recognition for his resolute passion.
However, the contrast between this year’s Nobel winners could not be sharper.
The IPCC engages in meticulous research where facts rule over everything else.
Gore has a very different approach.
An India-Pakistan Diplomatic Test Match
LAHORE – In 2005, during a visit to Islamabad, I met Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf and told him of a conversation I had had with Prime Minister Manmohan Singh of India.
The Indian leader, whom I have known for years, had said that he wanted better relations with Pakistan as one his legacies.
Musharraf’s response was interesting.
He said he had the same aspiration, but that it would need effort from both sides to move things along.
“I have invited Manmohan a half-dozen times to visit Pakistan. I have also offered to take him to his village near Chakwal, a few miles south of Islamabad, where he was born.
When it came, it carried Singh’s characteristic warmth.
At the end of a speech in the Lok Sabah, the lower house of India’s parliament, Singh issued his formal invitation. “How nice it would be to conduct our affairs in this august House with the same spirit of sportsmanship that our cricketers exhibit on the playing fields of the sub-continent,” he said.
“I am happy to inform the honorable members of this House that I have decided to invite President Musharraf to come to India to watch the cricket match between our two teams.
It is my earnest desire that the people in our neighborly countries and their leaders should feel free to visit each other whenever they wish to do so.
Be it to watch a cricket match; be it do some shopping; be it to meet friends and families – India is proud to be an open society, an open economy.
I do hope that President Musharraf and his family will enjoy their visit to our country.”
The prime minister’s statement was received with cheers, not the jeers that some of his aides had feared.
Musharraf went to Ferozeshah Kotala cricket ground in Delhi and saw his team win the match.
He and Singh also found time during the game to talk about bilateral relations, and agreed to launch what came to be called the “composite dialogue,” covering eight contentious issues that had soured ties for so long.
Three years later, a Pakistan-based terrorist group killed more than 160 people in Mumbai, India’s financial capital – and, with them, the diplomatic opening initiated by cricket.
Once again, however, cricket has revived dialogue between the sub-continent’s two nuclear-armed rivals.
This time, the initiative came from Singh, who invited his Pakistani counterpart, Prime Minister Yousuf Raza Gilani, to visit Mohali, near New Delhi, to watch the two countries play the semi-final in the Cricket World Cup. The match was played on March 30, with Pakistan losing narrowly.
On the political side, however, the two countries were not evenly matched.
Of the troika that currently governs Pakistan – the president, the prime minister, and the chief of staff of the army – it is the prime minister who carries the least amount of authority.
It was Gilani who sat next to Singh to watch the game; but, ultimately, process, rather than protocol, will determine how bilateral relations move forward.
After the match, Singh said that “India and Pakistan should be working together to find cooperative solutions and need permanent reconciliation to live together in dignity and honor.
We should put our ancient animosities behind us to attend to the problems our two nations face.”
Gilani expressed the same sentiment: “We need to focus on dealing with our common enemies – inflation, poverty, hunger, disease, and unemployment – for the prosperity of the two countries.”
There have been indications of a gradual thaw.
Senior officials from the ministries of commerce, defense, and foreign affairs will meet in the next two months followed by a meeting of the foreign ministers.
Gilani invited Singh to visit Pakistan, an invitation that “will be considered carefully,” according to Indian Foreign Secretary Nirupama Rao. And she spoke of a new environment: “Today, it is the Mohali spirit that pervades our relationship.
This was an extremely positive and encouraging spirit that has been generated as a result of today’s meetings.”
We have been here before, of course, only to see prospects for improved India-Pakistan relations snuffed out.
There are no guarantees that this time will be different. But, for both countries, hope dies last.
An Inequality Tax
The economic booms in China and India have helped to reduce global inequality.
Over the two last decades, masses of Indians and Chinese have closed the gap (in relative terms) with the rich world.
But, at the same time, many of the world’s truly poor countries have fallen further behind (particularly in Africa, where developments are often described as catastrophic), and inequality within most countries has risen.
Widening inequality has been recorded in the United States (starting with Ronald Reagan’s administration), the United Kingdom (starting with Margaret Thatcher), Russia during its privatization, and more recently in China and India.
These developments seem to add to global inequality.
So, on balance, it seems that global inequality has been relatively stable during the last two decades.
Should anything be done about this?
Many think that no global action to fight economic inequality is necessary.
They argue that only poverty reduction matters.
In the words of Anne Krueger, the Deputy Managing Director of the IMF, “Poor people are desperate to improve their material conditions…rather than to march up the income distribution [ladder].”
Thus, even if the absolute income gap between an average American and an average African increases, why worry?
After all, such people argue, the average African would be a bit less poor.
But this assumes that our income relative to the income of others does not matter.
On the contrary, psychological studies invariably show that people care not only about their absolute income, but also about where they stand in the social pyramid and whether their position is fair.
In the past, a poor African might have looked at his compatriots and resented their wealth; now, both he and his better-off compatriots look at the rich world and resent the huge income gaps they see.
The gaps are most obvious where people from different countries work together, as in many multinational companies.
An “expatriate” may be paid ten times more than local staff for the same job.
A wage premium based solely on citizenship is grating.
But even when people do not work together, globalization, by bringing the world to everyone’s living room (or hut), enables them to make much wider comparisons of their living standards.
It erodes the relative security in which the rich world could shelter itself, as in a cocoon.
Now, all can see these income differences.
This is why international action to address both global poverty and global inequality is needed.
Global redistribution through taxes that would be levied by an international body may seem far-fetched today, but the logic of development that we are witnessing – particularly the move away from nation-states as the locus of sovereignty – suggests that it may eventually come to pass.
One such opportunity was missed in the early 1990’s.
When Russia faced its worst crisis, aid was given to the corrupt Yeltsin regime.
But it should have been disbursed directly in cash to the most needy Russians: pensioners whose earnings plummeted due to inflation and economic contraction.
An international organization could have simply used the existing infrastructure of the Russian state to distribute cash grants to some 20 million pensioners – money that would have been much better targeted and spent than by giving the same amount to the government.
If this had been done, Russians would have fondly remembered receiving cash aid from the international community rather than blaming it for transferring funds to corrupt leaders.
But the same or a similar approach could be taken in many countries today, from Angola to Zimbabwe.
The approach is simple and powerful.
It involves three steps: raise money from the globally rich, do not deal with governments, and transfers funds in cash to the poor.
Those who advocate leaving globalization exclusively in the hands of the private sector may resent the idea of vesting tax-raising authority in a global agency.
But they cannot fail to notice that the processes they support undercut their own position by rendering the wealth gap more obvious and the fairness of the actual global distribution more questionable.
They will ultimately realize that their self-interest lies in supporting some form of global action to deal with both poverty and inequality.
An Inflation Reality Check
CAMBRIDGE – As inflation continues to soar everywhere, maybe the world’s central bankers need a jolt to awaken them from complacency.
How about holding one of their bi-monthly meetings in hyperinflationary Zimbabwe?
It might not be comfortable, but it would be educational.
According to Zimbabwe’s official statistical agency, inflation topped 66,000% in 2007, which looks more like Weimar Germany than modern-day Africa.
While no one is quite certain how the government managed to estimate prices, given that there is virtually nothing for sale in the shops, most indicators suggest that Zimbabwe does have a good shot at breaking world records for inflation.
Of course, curious as they might be, central bankers could decide that meeting in Harare would be too inconvenient and politically unpalatable.
Fortunately, there are lots of other nice – albeit less spectacular – inflation destinations.
Inflation in Russia, Vietnam, Argentina, and Venezuela is solidly in double digits, to name just a few possibilities.
Indeed, except for deflation-ridden Japan, central bankers could meet just about anywhere and see high and rising inflation.
Chinese authorities are so worried by their country’s 7% inflation they are copying India and imposing price controls on food.
Even the United States had inflation at 4% last year, though the Federal Reserve is somehow convinced that most people won’t notice.
Many central bankers and economists argue that today’s rising global inflation is just a temporary aberration, driven by soaring prices for food, fuel, and other commodities.
True, prices for many key commodities are up 25% to 50% since the start of the year.
But if central bankers think that today’s inflation is simply the product of short-term resource scarcities as opposed to lax monetary policy, they are mistaken.
The fact is that around most of the world, inflation – and eventually inflation expectations – will keep climbing unless central banks start tightening their monetary policies.
The US is now ground zero for global inflation.
Faced with a vicious combination of collapsing housing prices and imploding credit markets, the Fed has been aggressively cutting interest rates to try to stave off a recession.
But even if the Fed does not admit it in its forecasts, the price of this “insurance policy” will almost certainly be higher inflation down the road, and perhaps for several years.
America’s inflation would be contained but for the fact that so many countries, from the Middle East to Asia, effectively tie their currencies to the dollar.
Others, such as Russia and Argentina, do not literally peg to the dollar but nevertheless try to smooth movements.
As a result, whenever the Fed cuts interest rates, it puts pressure on the whole “dollar bloc” to follow suit, lest their currencies appreciate as investors seek higher yields.
Looser US monetary policy has thus set the tempo for inflation in a significant chunk – perhaps as much as 60% – of the global economy.
But, with most economies in the Middle East and Asia in much stronger shape than the US and inflation already climbing sharply in most emerging-market countries, aggressive monetary stimulus is the last thing they need right now.
The European Central Bank is staying calm for the moment, but it, too, is probably holding back on interest-rate hikes partly out of fear of driving the euro, already at record levels, even higher.
And the ECB worries that if the US recession proves contagious, it may have to turn around and start slashing rates anyway.
So what happens next?
If the US tips from mild recession into deep recession, the global deflationary implications will cancel out some of the inflationary pressures the world is facing.
Global commodity prices will collapse, and prices for many goods and services will stop rising so quickly as unemployment and excess capacity grow.
Of course, a US recession will also bring further Fed interest-rate cuts, which will exacerbate problems later.
But inflation pressures will be even worse if the US recession remains mild and global growth remains solid.
In that case, inflation could easily rise to 1980’s (if not quite 1970’s) levels throughout much of the world.
Until now, most investors have thought that they would rather risk high inflation for a couple of years than accept even a short and shallow recession.
But they too easily forget the costs of high inflation, and how difficult it is to squeeze it out of the system.
Maybe they, too, should try holding a few conferences in Zimbabwe, and get a reality check of their own.
An Intelligent War on Terror
Terrorism is an existential threat.
In our European Security Strategy, it was deemed one of the key strategic threats facing the European Union, and to fight it we are using all instruments at our disposal, particularly in the intelligence area.
The first objective of intelligence is to find terrorists, prevent them from acting, and track them after they do attack.
This is the kind of operational intelligence that is best done at the national level.
Many arrests and disruptions of terrorist operations in Europe result from cooperation between EU members' intelligence services.
I was recently asked by journalists whether inter-agency cooperation is sufficient and whether European mechanisms for sharing operational intelligence should be created.
Later that very day, a joint operation resulted in simultaneous arrests in five European countries.
The operation's success was no accident.
Last year, the Union concluded two Europol agreements, as well as an Extradition and Mutual Legal Assistance Agreement.
Europe's security services are working closely together within the Counter-Terrorist Group, and Europol's Counter-Terrorist Task Force has been re-established.
A high-level group on border and transport security is at work, and links between member states' police chiefs are strengthening.
But widespread sharing is not always needed or appropriate.
Member states also need intelligence derived from ongoing casework, not to inform policy, at least not directly, but to disrupt and dismantle networks and prevent attacks.
This information is in many ways more sensitive, and services share it on a "need to know" basis, not for the sake of promoting cooperation.
I see another role for intelligence: to inform political action.
Intelligence services can educate the public, explaining the origins of the alienation that underpins terrorism, how radicalization and recruitment occur, and highlight terrorists' goals, methods, and targeting strategies.
Only when we understand this can we develop appropriate and concrete policies.
For this we need good strategic assessments of intelligence.
The EU's members have structures to provide this, and with their support and input we are building structures at a Europe-wide level, to bring this information to EU policymakers.
Europol is performing a similar function with material derived from police work, and we are working to ensure synergy between these two efforts.
This is a different level of intelligence, more analytical, where close collaboration adds significant value.
In the aftermath of the Madrid bombings, the EU focused on internal aspects of the fight against terrorism.
But this does not mean that the Union has become introverted.
On the contrary, the EU regards international cooperation as fundamental in the fight against terrorism.
Generally, counter-terrorism is very high on our international agenda and is becoming better integrated into the Union's political dialogue with other countries.
We are better targeting our external assistance and capacity building programs, and we are ready to use our trade and economic muscle, when necessary, by demanding counter-terrorism clauses in bilateral treaties.
There has also been a sea change in transatlantic cooperation between the EU and the US.
Deeds speak louder than words, and deeds on the transatlantic level have been swift and decisive - for example, joint efforts aimed at choking off terrorist financing - even when we had strong divergences over Iraq.
Still, I am not complacent.
To facilitate the extremely complex task of counter-terrorism policymaking in the EU, we now have a Plan of Action, approved by the European Council, which clearly specifies who does what, and by when.
This will also help national parliaments understand EU objectives and facilitate their legislative planning.
I have recently appointed a counter-terrorism coordinator to assist me in following through on the Plan of Action.
We also have a considerable number of new instruments in the area of justice and home affairs.
The European Arrest Warrant is already producing concrete results, and we are moving towards the "free movement of judicial decisions" in the EU, through which judicial decisions - such as arrest and surrender of suspects, confiscation, and freezing of assets - will be mutually recognized.
Furthermore, the European Border Agency will become operational in 2005.
As requested by the European Council, I am developing, in cooperation with the European Commission, a strategy to shut down terrorist financing.
This is where the real test of cooperation lies, for our success will rely on securing the appropriate interaction and flow of intelligence between the relevant services and the financial and banking communities.
I firmly believe that the military option alone cannot defeat terror.
Judicial, police, and intelligence cooperation should be the focal point for action.
This does not mean that we are not working on how European Security and Defense Policy (ESDP) can offer a meaningful contribution. But ESDP is not at the core of our efforts.
Aside from security and intelligence efforts, we must also work to deny "oxygen" to the terrorists. This means addressing the factors that contribute to support for and recruitment by terrorist groups.
Regional conflicts cause anger and resentment.
The unresolved Arab-Israeli problem leads to the rise of radicalism and extremism.
There is entirely too much fuel for terrorist propaganda.
The EU will be tough on terrorism. But it must also be tough on the causes of terrorism.
These are not two fights, but one.
Argentina’s Sovereign Bondage
WASHINGTON, DC – Sovereign debt has been back in the news recently, this time because of a United States Supreme Court ruling concerning Argentine debt.
As a result of the ruling, a complicated issue is likely to become even more so.
Sovereign debt has been a major feature of the international financial system for centuries.
Kings borrowed, often internationally, to finance wars and other expenditures.
When they couldn’t pay, as sometimes happened, sovereigns defaulted.
Today, sovereigns are more often democratically elected governments, but they still borrow.
And they still occasionally find themselves in situations in which their debt has become unsustainable and they need outside help to continue to meet their debt-service obligations.
When private firms (or subnational governments) become insolvent, there are normally legal bankruptcy procedures to determine what to do.
Without such procedures, a market economy would be unable to function.
In part, this is because creditors would otherwise stop extending credit and demand repayment at the first sign of trouble.
This is because the first creditors to be paid would receive the full amount owed to them, leaving less for later creditors – and thus creating an incentive for all creditors to rush for the exits even before debt servicing had become impossible.
Moreover, in many cases, the value of the troubled entity’s assets as a going concern is greater than it would be if the assets were sold separately.
In such cases, all creditors would be better off with a debt write-down than with dissolution.
Bankruptcy law thus protects creditors from each other by preventing an outcome that would needlessly harm all of them.
In the case of sovereign debt, however, there is no binding international law that permits bankruptcy.
Though some routine practices have emerged as international capital markets have grown, they remain ad hoc.
Given the uncertainty involved, and that sovereign debtors can repay domestic-currency debt simply by printing money, creditors have typically demanded significantly higher interest rates if bonds are not issued under the law and in the currency of an advanced country – often the United States or the United Kingdom.
When a sovereign decides that its foreign debt is unsustainable, the government and its creditors have had to negotiate among themselves about what to do.
For sovereign bonds held by other sovereigns, the Paris Club of creditor countries has developed procedures for handling the debt.
But when private creditors hold sovereign debt, organizing them creates a new challenge with each episode.
When debt is unsustainable, there are several possible negotiating outcomes.
Sometimes, debt-service payments are rescheduled and perhaps stretched out over a longer period, thus giving the debtor country time to regain its ability to pay.
Sometimes, creditors agree to exchange the old bonds for new ones, which have either a lower face value or lower interest payments.
Few governments refuse to pay at all in any form.
Argentina defaulted on its debt in 2001.
After several difficult years, the country managed to negotiate an exchange of outstanding bonds for bonds with a considerably lower face value. About 93% of creditors accepted the exchange and received new bonds with a face value that was about one-quarter of that of the old bonds.
After 2005, Argentina maintained debt service on the new bonds.
But some creditors held out, and sued Argentina in New York (as the bonds were issued under New York law).
Argentine bonds (like most others) had a so-called pari passu clause that committed the government to treat all bondholders alike.
The holdouts claimed that, if the new bonds were being serviced in full (as they were), equal treatment required that the holdouts should receive the full amount owed to them (including not only interest but also principal).
The US Second Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that Argentina was bound to honor its obligations to the holdout bondholders in the same proportion (namely 100%) as the holders of the exchange bonds.
It was that ruling that the Supreme Court recently upheld.
Under the court order, Argentina may not pay the holders of the new bonds unless it also pays the holdouts, and no US financial institution can serve as an intermediary to make payments for Argentina.
As a result, Argentina must either pay the holdouts in full or default on the new bonds.
Regardless of how the current impasse is resolved, the ruling raises many questions for issuers and holders of sovereign debt.
If creditors now believe that holding out makes it more likely that they will receive full value at a later date, restructuring sovereign debt and restoring a debtor economy’s normal functioning will be more difficult.
Since the Argentine crisis, most new bonds have been issued with collective action clauses (CACs), under which bondholders are obliged to accept restructuring if a specified share (usually around 70%) agree to it.
As time passes, there are fewer and fewer outstanding bonds that do not contain CACs.
But CACs may not resolve the problem entirely, because a vote would be required for each separate bond issue, and a holdout position could be achieved by buying up the blocking percentage of a small issue.
It is also possible that language will be found in future bond issues that replaces the pari passu clause but provides sufficient assurance to bondholders to let the market function much as it did until the current ruling.
Until the euro crisis, it was generally believed that problems servicing sovereign debt occurred only in emerging markets and the least developed countries.
The US Supreme Court’s decision on Argentina adds a new wrinkle, and may well further increase the risk attached to holding sovereign debt – and this to the cost of issuing it.
Families of the Future
WASHINGTON, DC – It is graduation season in many countries, a time when classes of bright and fortunate young people don their caps and gowns, receive their diplomas, and hear advice from their elders.
Some commencement speakers focus on the graduates’ accomplishments; others emphasize the career-related challenges that lie ahead.
But there is another critical aspect to success and happiness that is often overlooked during these garlanded celebrations of academic achievement: family.
In fact, these ceremonies are about the graduates’ families – that is, those who have loved and supported them, regardless of their biological connection – as much as they are about the graduates themselves.
Whatever each family’s experience, the result has been a child reaching a level of education of which many people can only dream.
Beyond noting and appreciating what their families have done for them, graduates must consider the kind of family that they want to nurture.
And here they have no choice but to reflect on gender roles and relations.
Given the vastly different expectations and experiences of men and women – depending, of course, on the cultural context – the questions that they must ask themselves vary considerably.
The question of how to balance work and family, typically posed to young women, is actually a critical consideration for young men as well.
The traditional male role as “provider” has often led work to take precedence over time spent with family.
Indeed, in reflecting on their childhoods, many graduates may lament that their fathers spent too little time at home, or were less nurturing than they could have been.
Men must determine how to develop the caring side of their personality, in addition to the competitive side that will enable them to advance their careers.
They must aim to love and give fully, not only as fathers, but also as sons, husbands, brothers, uncles, and even friends.
To this end, they should ask their own fathers and grandfathers what they wish they had done differently – and plan accordingly.
Instead of waiting for challenges to arise, young men should begin establishing their priorities now.
How can they ensure that their relationship with their future partner is equal?
How will they adapt to enable their partner to fulfill his or her career aspirations?
Will they be willing to move for their partner’s job?
Would they be prepared to stop working or reduce their workload, in order to care for a child or parent?
Through all of this, men should remember that, by adopting a new approach, they are not abandoning their roles as providers.
After all, providing care is every bit as important as providing cash.
The reward is the close relationship with their children that women have traditionally enjoyed.
Women, too, must think carefully about the future that they would find most fulfilling.
For many women, the challenge is abandoning the assumption that their work/family balance will have to tip in favor of family, that it is they who will have to sacrifice their careers.
Of course, many women might choose to emphasize family (as would many men).
The point is the choice: the choice of how much energy to devote to one’s home, the choice of a career based on passion, and the choice of a genuinely equal partner.
Upholding an equal partnership of caregivers and breadwinners will require compromises on both sides.
A woman with great career ambitions should be able to find a partner who is willing to slow down or stop working to support her, just as a man should.
But bucking gender roles works both ways.
Indeed, for such a dynamic to work, the woman must recalibrate her expectations of her spouse.
If she wants to build a family with a man, she must not become caught up in traditional perceptions of masculinity.
If she is uncomfortable, say, out-earning her husband, she is limiting both partners.
Simply put, the kind of support that young women’s fathers and grandfathers probably offered to their mothers and grandmothers is not the only kind of support a woman can or should expect from her partner.
Her role should be determined not by old-fashioned rules, but by her individual strengths and ambitions.
And her partner should have the confidence and competence to encourage her to fulfill her potential.
Finally, graduation does not mean that the family’s job is complete.
Parents and grandparents must continue to play a critical role in reshaping expectations – or at least supporting the choices that their children and grandchildren make.
This means accepting the decision of a son or grandson not to use his hard-earned university degree to become the primary breadwinner in his future household. And it means understanding that what a daughter or granddaughter needs may not be a traditional “provider,” but a partner who makes career sacrifices to enable her to advance hers.
Graduation is a day of ending and beginning.
It is a day for young people to recall the sacrifices that their families have made for them, and consider the kinds of sacrifices they will make for their families.
And it is a day to recognize that, if family comes first, work does not come second; rather, life comes together.
Bringing the Iran Deal Back Home
WASHINGTON, DC – The United States government’s initial statements on the “first-step agreement on Iran’s nuclear program” have been focused, above all, on the great deal that the US and the West have gotten.
Iran has agreed to halt enrichment of uranium above 5% purity; neutralize its stockpile of uranium enriched to near 20% purity; stop building its stockpile of 3.5% enriched uranium; forswear “next generation centrifuges”; shut down its plutonium reactor; and allow extensive new inspections of its nuclear facilities.
In return, Iran will get “limited, temporary, targeted, and reversible relief” from international sanctions.
The agreement covers only the next six months, during which both sides will try to reach a final comprehensive agreement.
For now, as President Barack Obama put it, the burden remains, from the US point of view, “on Iran to prove to the world that its nuclear program will be exclusively for peaceful purposes.”
Framing the issue this way reflects the need to sell even a limited, temporary deal to a skeptical US Congress.
Israel’s manifest displeasure with the entire negotiating process, which Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu has emphasized to anyone who will listen over the past three months, reverberates loudly among Israel’s many congressional friends.
Indeed, Israel’s stance bolsters the desire of Obama’s Republican opponents to paint him as weak and naïve in negotiating with Iran, a country that still describes the US as “the great Satan.”
Both Republicans and Democrats are threatening to pass a new round of tough sanctions against Iran in December.
Thus, Obama must focus as much on pushing back against domestic hardliners as on taking a hard line with Iranian negotiators.
This is hardly surprising.
One hopes that the Iranian government’s announcement to its own people reads roughly the same, in reverse, focusing on the important concessions that Iranian negotiators have won.
That includes suspension of international sanctions on Iran’s exports of oil, gold, and cars, which could yield $1.5 billion in revenue; unfreezing $4.2 billion in revenue from oil sales; and releasing tuition-assistance payments from the Iranian government to Iranian students enrolled abroad.
Iranian President Hassan Rouhani needs to marshal support for the deal just as much as Obama does, above all by reducing inflation and getting his country’s economy moving again.
If domestic tensions, above all within Iran’s restive middle class, ease as a result, the government will receive the credit, while the Iranian Republican Guard and other hardliners will be weakened.
The West had better hope that the Iranian narrative proves true, because the political space for any meaningful diplomatic agreement – both the desire for a deal and the room to achieve it – is created at home.
This is particularly true when a new government comes to power with promises of improving the economy.
Rouhani can undercut hardliners who would seek to block any ultimate deal only if the Iranian population both experiences economic relief and attributes it to his administration.
The true test of this interim agreement, therefore, is whether both sides can secure the domestic space to continue negotiating.
The stakes have never been higher – and not only because of the very real and dangerous geopolitical consequences of an Iranian bomb.
As Obama put it, “If Iran seizes this opportunity, the Iranian people will benefit from rejoining the international community, and we can begin to chip away at the mistrust between our two nations.
This would provide Iran with a dignified path to forge a new beginning with the wider world based on mutual respect.”
Let us imagine, just for a moment, what the Middle East and Central Asia could look like if the US and Iran could once again talk to each other.
As we saw briefly after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, the drug trade from Afghanistan could be sharply curtailed.
Moreover, a regional agreement involving Iran, India, Pakistan, Russia, China, Turkey, the European Union, and the US would become much more likely, providing the framework for security and economic growth that diplomats from Henry Kissinger to the late Richard Holbrooke always claimed would be necessary for lasting peace in Afghanistan.
Perhaps most important, a peace settlement in Syria would be much more likely – and more likely to endure – if the US could talk to Iran, which has far more leverage with President Bashar al-Assad’s regime than Russia does.
After all, it was fighters from Hezbollah, Iran’s Lebanese proxy, who turned the tide of battle decisively against the opposition this past summer.
Iran has long made clear that it wants to resume its historic position as a major regional – and indeed global – power, an ambition that can only grow stronger as it watches Turkey’s geopolitical stature rise.
Iran and Turkey, after all, are the 17th and 18th largest countries in the world by population, respectively, with sophisticated elites and illustrious and ancient pasts.
The ultimate winner in the interim agreement with Iran is the cause of diplomacy itself.
US Secretary of State John Kerry, EU High Representative Catherine Ashton, and the other parties to the talks – all supported by able teams of diplomats – hammered out the deal’s details over months, staying at the table, compromising, holding firm, and managing the expectations of multiple players (including the press).
The Obama administration committed itself to global leadership through civilian rather than military power.
That is what it takes.
Obama Versus the Islamic State
WASHINGTON, DC – US President Barack Obama has laid out a detailed strategy for how his administration plans to combat the Islamic State, which controls a substantial portion of Syria and Iraq.
Though I have been harshly critical of Obama’s policy toward Syria for two and a half years, his new strategy reflects a mature and coherent foreign policy – albeit one that does not fully live up to his proclaimed values.
That omission may yet defeat his plan.
Obama’s approach is praiseworthy for three reasons.
First, it combines force and diplomacy.
Second, it attaches careful conditions to the type and scope of American military action.
Third, it ties the fate of these efforts to the existence and effectiveness of a broad Middle East coalition, making clear that though the United States is prepared to lead, it cannot and will not assume the role of global policeman.
In the Middle East game of thrones, Obama is playing his hand as well as he can.
He knows that a US-led military effort can significantly weaken the Islamic State, but that only a combined military-political effort can defeat it.
He created political leverage for himself by drawing a clear line, announcing that the US would “expand our efforts beyond protecting our own people and humanitarian missions” only together with the newly-formed Iraqi government.
If that government makes good on its promises of political inclusion, the US will help it get its country back; if not, not.
Equally important, but less evident, is the leverage that this position provides with respect to Iran.
Obama never mentioned Iran during his speech; but commentators have speculated about whether his strategy gives Iran greater leverage over the US, on the theory that Iranian-backed fighters are critical to the success on the ground in the fight against the Islamic State.
But Iraq’s Shia government is one of Iran’s major strategic anchors in the region; before the US began airstrikes against the Islamic State, it was far from certain that the Iraqi government would survive.
Iran needs US airpower at least as much as the US needs Iranian-backed ground troops.
The US emphasis on a regional coalition to fight the Islamic State is also deft diplomacy.
Secretary of State John Kerry has made it&nbsp;clear that for now Iran is not a welcome member.
Iran, without which the coalition essentially becomes a Sunni front, can have a place at the table – and play a large and overt role in resolving the Syrian civil war – but only if it is willing to reach a deal to rein in its nuclear program.
There has never been a better time to do so.
Where Obama’s strategy is weakest is in reaching ordinary people: the networked web of human relationships that transmits rage, hatred, and despair or hope, trust, and loyalty.
His doctrine that the US will use force to defend its “core interests,” but will mobilize others “to address broader challenges to international order,” is sound logic and good politics in a war-weary US.
But, as a Syrian tweeted to me, what the world hears Obama saying is that the US will use force to avenge the deaths of two American journalists, but will stand by while 200,000 Syrians are slaughtered.
Unless US military action is seen as actually protecting the lives and property of the Iraqi and Syrian people, the US will quickly lose the propaganda war to the Islamic state.
As many experts warn, the first time a drone strike kills a woman or child, a video of the scene and the funeral will be posted for the Muslim world to see.
Even if that video does not actually increase support for the Islamic State, it will convince millions of Muslims that the US is up to its old military tricks: bombing for oil, or for Israel, or simply to crush all Muslims.
Those anti-American attitudes, newly hardened once again, will make it much more difficult to get the necessary intelligence against the Islamic State on the ground and to deprive them of the support of other Sunni militias.
That will not just hurt the US in Syria and Iraq. It will shape popular views in other Arab states, limiting their governments’ ability to work with the US.
Most damaging of all, a purely strategic justification for military action – in defense of core US interests – leaves no room to do what actually needs to be done in Syria.
The only way to bring Syrian President Bashar al-Assad to the negotiating table is to weaken him and the Islamic State simultaneously.
And the only legal or moral justification for striking his air force, ammunition dumps, or heavy weaponry is the international responsibility to protect his people from him – just as the US helped to protect the Yezidis from the Islamic State.
For, contrary to Obama’s claim, the brutality of the Islamic State is not “unique.”
Assad has killed more than 200,000 people, mostly civilians, in a conflict that started with his government’s torture of children.
Simply talking about the responsibility to protect, as Obama once did, accompanied by even limited strikes – perhaps as punishment for Assad’s reported recent use of chlorine gas against civilians – would change the game quickly.
Iran would understand that America’s restraint in Syria is not indefinite; Sunni governments could be shamed in the eyes of their own people for not doing more; and the Islamic State’s narrative of brutality would collide with a narrative of humanity.
The fate of peasants has a direct and important impact on that of kings.
Obama’s policy wavers between geopolitical calculations based on national interest and the rhetoric of universal values, of standing for “our common security and common humanity.”
But, while the shutdown of the United States government, initiated by radical congressional Republicans seeking to block implementation of President Barack Obama’s health-care legislation, is over – at least for now – three enduring lessons have emerged.
First, the next time the eurozone crisis flares up, the US will simply have to bite its tongue; after all, the shutdown spectacle revealed pathologies no less severe than those that have characterized the European Union’s economic and political negotiations over the past five years.
Irresponsible behavior threatening the health of the global economy?
Check.
Political posturing and outlandish claims foreclosing any possibility of compromise?
Check.
Breathtaking brinkmanship and 11th-hour decision-making leaving all bystanders wondering whether this time the cart might in fact go over the cliff?
Among non-democracies, China had the Bo Xilai scandal, which was worthy of a spy novel, with illicit affairs, rampant corruption, murder, and a senior police official’s dramatic quest for asylum in a US consulate.
Against this backdrop, the US government shutdown looks a little different.
Yes, it was a clear symptom of deep political dysfunction, stemming from the politicized demarcation of electoral districts and the distorting effects of America’s campaign-finance system.
Nonetheless, it is noteworthy that the entire crisis played out according to constitutional rules.
Indeed, as the deadline for raising the debt ceiling neared, Henry Aaron, a distinguished senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, pointed out that the US Constitution requires the president “to spend what Congress has instructed him to spend, to raise only those taxes Congress has authorized him to impose, and to borrow no more than Congress authorizes.”
Honoring all three of those legal obligations simultaneously is impossible if Congress refuses to raise the debt ceiling, but raising the debt ceiling without Congressional approval, though illegal and an impeachable offense, was the least-bad choice.
Even in the face of deeper political polarization than the US has seen in many decades (and, in many places, a visceral hatred of the country’s first African-American president), Americans and their politicians understand that breaking the rules means dissolving the constitutional glue that holds the polity together.
This understanding means that the cure for the current dysfunction will be found at the ballot box rather than in the streets.
And it is this collective commitment to the law governing how political power can be exercised that is the essence of liberal democracy.
But Americans are in no mood to celebrate.