The list tells us two things.
One is that a surprising number of populist leaders have managed to get themselves into power in recent years.
Their success reflects the electorate’s uncertainties and, increasingly, the perceived injustices of globalization, as well as the fear of many about minorities, immigrants, and foreigners in general.
These populists promise solutions that dispense with the habits and norms of moderation, notably with centrist democratic policies and an internationalism that seeks to promote peace and prosperity. One sometimes wonders whether we are experiencing not so much the end of history as the end of enlightened history, perhaps of the enlightenment itself.
But another look at the list of populists tells us something else as well: most of them do not last.
As long as they accept elections and election results, they may be gone almost as quickly as they arrived.
It does not take long for voters to discover that the promises of populists were empty.
Once in power, they simply make for bad government.
Taking two recent European examples, Poles and Slovaks will likely soon realize that their new populist governments do more harm than good to the people and their country.
To be sure, this is not much of a consolation.
For one thing, some populist leaders may not accept the result of the next elections.
It took Silvio Berlusconi quite a while to admit that he had lost.
Beyond that, populist episodes are signs of an underlying instability that neither serves national progress nor contributes to international order.
Austria paid a price for its Haider interlude, and France did not exactly benefit from the runoff between President Jacques Chirac and Le Pen in the last Presidential election.
Is there a remedy?
Political parties have had a bad press in recent years, and there are good reasons for this.
Still, they do fulfill a useful function by bundling interests and issues, thereby providing an element of stability in the political system.
Existing parties urgently need to recapture the support of citizens.
To succeed requires programmatic clarity, organizational honesty, and an understanding of the concerns of societies that have lost their traditional structures.
Those structures are gone forever, but a liberal-democratic order cannot succeed through situational politics built on popular resentments. It requires a sense of the medium term and a commitment to rational debate of issues, for one tradition that can be revived – that of enlightened thinking – is the most important of all.
Rethinking International Institutions
OXFORD – When the United Nations and the Bretton Woods institutions were established nearly seven decades ago in the aftermath of World War II, economic and political power was concentrated in the hands of a few “victor” countries, making it relatively easy to reach consensus on how to restore international order.
But, since then, global governance has become increasingly muddled, impeding progress in areas of worldwide concern.
Not only do more than 190 countries now belong to the UN; publicly funded international institutions have proliferated, with not one multilateral institution having been shuttered since WWII.
The result is an inefficient and confusing amalgam of overlapping mandates.
Meanwhile, significant portions of the international system lack sufficient funding to deliver meaningful progress in critical areas – a problem that will only worsen as the needs and expectations of an ever-expanding global population grow.
In this context, progress on global issues like climate change, cybercrime, income inequality, and the chronic burden of disease are proving elusive.
To be sure, the efforts of many publicly funded bodies have a real and lasting positive impact on the world.
Indeed, international institutions have spearheaded breakthroughs in a wide range of areas, including health, finance, economics, human rights, and peacekeeping.
But such institutions are largely perceived as inaccessible, inefficient, and opaque, leading national governments to neglect them.
As their legitimacy and funding diminish, so does their effectiveness.
Overcoming twenty-first-century challenges will require a comprehensive review and renewal of international institutions.
In its report Now for the Long Term, the Oxford Martin Commission for Future Generations – a group of experienced leaders and scholars (including us) convened to help formulate responses to global challenges – proposes mechanisms for undertaking this process.
For example, embedding sunset clauses in the governance structures of publicly funded international institutions would ensure regular reviews of organizational performance and purpose.
Institutions that have fulfilled their mandate or proved unable to respond effectively to changing demands should be shuttered, and their resources redirected to more productive endeavors.
In order to escape that fate, existing institutions must adapt to shifting global power dynamics.
This means increasing representation not only for the major emerging economies, such as China, India, and Brazil, but also for countries like Nigeria and Indonesia, which together are home to more than 400 million people.
International affairs and international organizations largely operate under mid-twentieth-century arrangements, which has two serious shortcomings.
First, countries with a diminishing stake retain disproportionate power.
Second, global decision-making now involves four times as many countries as it did in the immediate post-war era, not to mention a plethora of non-governmental organizations and civil-society groups, making for a messy – and often unproductive – process.
With the world’s problems becoming increasingly complex and interconnected, global decision-making processes must be as streamlined and efficient as possible.
When numerous committees meet in parallel, the countries with the largest teams of experts dominate proceedings, effectively locking most countries out of key decisions and impeding meaningful dialogue.
In order to increase the productivity of global negotiations, the Oxford Martin Commission recommends creating coalitions of motivated countries, together with other actors, such as cities and businesses.
As outcomes improve, international bodies’ legitimacy would be strengthened, which over time would enhance countries’ willingness to delegate powers to them.
Moreover, the commission proposes creating voluntary platforms to facilitate the creation of global treaties in vital areas.
For example, a taxation and regulatory exchange would help countries to tackle tax avoidance and harmonize corporate taxation, while promoting information sharing and cooperation.
Likewise, a cyber-security data-sharing platform could prove vital to understanding, preventing, and responding to cyber attacks.
As governments learn to collaborate with one another and with other actors, such as businesses and civil-society groups, faith in the power of international cooperation would be restored.
In such an environment, breaking the gridlock on urgent global issues would be far easier than it has become in the current atmosphere of disillusionment and mistrust.
The simple fact is that with interconnectedness comes interdependence.
In order to protect the global commons, world leaders must pursue shared solutions as inclusively and efficiently as possible – a process that can be accomplished only through international institutions.
Failure to do so would threaten the tremendous progress that globalization has facilitated in recent decades.
The necessary changes will not happen overnight.
But if governments, businesses, and civil society work together, they are feasible – promising a more sustainable, inclusive, and prosperous future for all.
The Other Nigeria
LAGOS – Nigeria has been getting a lot of bad press lately, owing largely to the militant Islamist group Boko Haram’s abduction of more than 200 schoolgirls in April, part of a brutal campaign of kidnappings, bombings, and murder.
But, while these developments certainly merit international concern, they should not be allowed to obscure Nigeria’s recent achievements – or spur the outside world to turn its back on the country.
What is lost in most discussions about Nigeria today is the strong economic record that it has established over the last decade.
In fact, a recent year-long study of the country by the McKinsey Global Institute (MGI) showed that, over the next 15 years, Nigeria has the potential to become a major global economy.
With roughly 170 million inhabitants, Nigeria has Africa’s largest population.
But it has only recently been acknowledged as having the continent’s largest economy – 26th in the world – following the release of “rebased” data putting GDP at $510 billion last year.
MGI estimates that, in 2013-2030, Nigeria could expand its economy by more than 6% annually, with its GDP exceeding $1.6 trillion – moving it into the global top 20.
Moreover, if Nigeria’s leaders work to ensure that growth is inclusive, an estimated 30 million people could escape poverty.
The problem is that Nigeria remains subject to outdated assumptions, which are limiting its prospects, especially among foreign companies and investors.
For example, many believe that Nigeria is a petro-economy, wholly at the mercy of the world oil market.
But the resources sector accounts for only 14% of GDP – meaning that, while oil production remains a critical source of revenue and exports, the Nigerian economy is far more diverse than many assume.
A related myth is that Nigeria’s economic growth is unstable, with large and unpredictable shifts in performance from year to year.
In fact, as Nigeria has diversified its economy and detached public-spending plans from current oil prices (part of a 2004 budget reform), it has become increasingly stable, both economically and fiscally.
Indeed, in recent years (2010-13, in “re-based” terms), GDP has grown by a steady 6-7%, owing more to rising productivity than to favorable demographics.
Finally, there is a general misunderstanding about the Nigerian economy’s evolution.
Despite widespread poverty and low (though improving) productivity in almost all industries outside of the resources sector, Nigeria has a rapidly growing consumer class that will play an increasingly important role in driving growth.
By 2030, more than 34 million households, with about 160 million people, are likely to be earning more than $7,500 annually, making them aspiring consumers.
This implies a potential rise in consumption from $388 billion annually to $1.4 trillion – a prospect that is already attracting investments by multinational consumer-goods producers and retailers.
Nigeria’s prospects are enhanced further by its strategic location, which will enable it to take advantage of booming demand across Africa and other parts of the developing world.
Add to that a large and growing population and an entrepreneurial spirit, and the future looks bright.
In order to unleash this potential and ensure that the next decade of growth brings sharp reductions in poverty, Nigeria’s leaders must pursue reforms aimed at increasing productivity, raising incomes, and delivering essential services like health care and education more efficiently.
For example, to increase productivity and incomes in the agricultural sector, the government could pursue land-title reform aimed at opening more farmland without deforestation; expand the use of fertilizer and mechanized equipment; and support a shift to more profitable crops.
Moreover, improvements in distribution and marketing would allow farmers to keep more of the proceeds from the sale of their crops.
In urban areas, productivity suffers from a high degree of informal employment, sometimes even by major corporations.
This keeps too many Nigerians in low-skill, low-paying jobs and deprives the economy of the dynamism that competitive small and medium-size enterprises create.
The spate of Internet startups that have emerged in Nigeria demonstrates that the skills are there, and tapping Nigeria’s diaspora can augment that talent pool.
To make it easier to do business in Nigeria, the government also will need to streamline processes for registering and running a legal business and, together with aid agencies and the private sector, increase investment in infrastructure.
It will also need to intensify its fight against endemic corruption, which represents a tax on all businesses.
Finally, to promote inclusive growth – essential to relieving human suffering and mitigating social and political tensions – Nigeria must improve public-service delivery dramatically.
The fact that Nigeria lags behind countries that spend comparable amounts on public services proves that it has scope to improve.
All that is needed to ensure that assistance – from seed subsidies to immunization – reaches those who need it most, regardless of where they live in the country, is a strong commitment from Nigeria’s leaders to build more effective and transparent government agencies.
Nigerians do not need sympathy or even outrage from the global community. What they need is support and encouragement.
Only with stable and inclusive growth can Nigeria escape the clutches of brutal forces like Boko Haram and give its citizens the security and prosperity that they deserve.
The Fall of the House of Samuelson
LONDON – To read The Samuelson Sampler in the shadow of the Great Recession is to gain a glimpse into the mindset of a bygone era.
The sample is of the late Paul Samuelson’s weekly columns for the magazine Newsweek from 1966-1973.
Samuelson, a Nobel laureate, was the doyen of American economists: his famous textbook, Economics went through 14 editions in its author’s lifetime, introducing future economists worldwide to the rudiments of their craft.
If not the sole originator, he was the great popularizer of the “neoclassical synthesis” – the mix of neoclassical and Keynesian economics that defined the mainstream of the field for 50 years.
Samuelson was a convinced Keynesian, though in a limited sense.
He dismissed most of Keynes’s attack on the orthodox economics of his day as unnecessary, writing “had Keynes [started] with the simple statement that he found it realistic to assume that money wages&hellip;were sticky and resistant to downward movements...most of his insights would have remained just as valid.”
For Samuelson, Keynes’s real contribution was the tools he gave governments to prevent depressions.
Reading The Samuelson Sampler, it is extraordinary to realize just how confident economists of his generation were that the New Economics (as the Keynesian approach was called in America) had solved the problem of depression and mass unemployment.
As Samuelson put it in his 1973 introduction, “the specter of a repetition of the depression of the 1930s has been reduced to a negligible probability.”
Yes, there would still be small fluctuations; but, as he wrote in 1966, “Great Depressions – cumulative slumps that feed on themselves – are indeed extinct.”
The reason was that governments now had the tools, especially discretionary fiscal policy, to check any incipient downturn.
“What is important about the budget,” he said in 1970, “is whether it is inflationary or deflationary, not whether [it is] balanced or unbalanced.”
In other words, “A deficit in a good cause is good business.”
How many economists or politicians believe this today?
Because governments knew how to stop depressions, voters would insist that they use this knowledge.
“If printing bits of green can save banks and business from ruin,” he argued in 1966, “today’s electorate will ensure that either party in power will [so] act.”
This was irrespective, Samuelson thought, of the ideological preferences of those in power.
The Republican Richard Nixon was elected US President in 1968 on a platform of scaling down the Democrats’ expensive Great Society programs.
“I am not an economic determinist,” Samuelson wrote in November 1968, “But I can predict with confidence that Richard Nixon will be using the New Economics if only for the reason that new times make it inescapable.”
And so it turned out.
Rather than deflating the economy, Nixon took America off the gold standard in 1971 and imposed wage, price, and import controls, proclaiming bluntly, “I am now a Keynesian in economics.”
But that was the last of Samuelson’s successful predictions.
Less than a decade after his Newsweek columns ended, the New Economics, which he had extolled as a permanent addition to knowledge, was in flight from the ideological assaults of Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher.
Despite his faith that voters would not allow a return to depression, Thatcher’s third election victory, in 1987, came just after unemployment in the United Kingdom had peaked at three million, the highest level since the 1930s.
So what went wrong?
“Still to be argued out within the guild [of economists],” Samuelson wrote in 1969, “is the proper quantitative potency of monetary versus fiscal policy.”
This question eventually was resolved in favor of monetary policy.
More important, as he pointed out in 1970, was that “even Keynes could not guarantee that mankind would live happily ever after.
He left us with an unsolved problem.
How can we have full employment and also price stability?”
Reluctantly, Samuelson concluded that there needed to be permanent controls over prices and wages to stop cost-push inflation.
“Our mixed economy,” he wrote in 1970, “does not know how to have a satisfactory incomes policy that will back up monetary and fiscal policy....Here then lies the unsolved frontier in modern economics.”
It was the same frontier that Friedrich von Hayek first surveyed in The Road to Serfdom in 1944.
Hayek feared that deliberate policies to maintain full employment would lead to increasing state encroachment on the free market and political liberty.
It was this fear that led, from the 1980s onwards, to the piecemeal abandonment of the policy system of the mixed economy – indeed, to the dismantling of the mixed economy itself.
Samuelson was half right: Governments do know how to stop a slide into another Great Depression.
They used this knowledge in the autumn of 2008 and 2009, which is why we had only a Great Recession.
But, contrary to what Samuelson believed, governments are haunted by fears of large fiscal deficits.
With few exceptions, they have not been prepared to use fiscal policy to jolt their economies out of post-crisis stagnation.
Instead, they have relied on monetary expansion, which is politically more acceptable, but also much weaker in its effects, as it is undermined – just as Keynes predicted – by “several slips between the cup and the lip.”
More important, governments have abandoned the goal of full employment; as a result, all of those bits of interventionist policy previously thought necessary to keep economic activity on an even keel have gone by the wayside as well.
The New Economics may be temporarily resurrected to deal with extreme situations, but policymakers no longer take precautions to prevent extreme situations from arising.
How to do this, while preserving freedom and efficiency, is now the “unsolved frontier in modern economics.”
Microeconomics for All
TOULOUSE – For the last half-century, the world’s leading universities have taught microeconomics through the lens of the Arrow-Debreu model of general competitive equilibrium.
The model, formalizing a central insight of Adam Smith’s The Wealth of Nations, embodies the beauty, simplicity, and lack of realism of the two fundamental theorems of competitive equilibrium, in contrast to the messiness and complexity of modifications made by economists in an effort to capture better the way the world actually functions.
In other words, while researchers attempt to grasp complex, real-world situations, students are pondering unrealistic hypotheticals.
This educational approach stems largely from the sensible idea that a framework for thinking about economic problems is more useful to students than a ragbag of models.
But it has become burdened with another, more pernicious notion: as departures from the Arrow-Debreu model become more realistic, and thus more complex, they become less suitable for the classroom.
In other words, “real” microeconomic thinking should be left to the experts.
To be sure, basic models – for example, theories of monopoly and simple oligopoly, the theory of public goods, or simple asymmetric-information theory – have some educational value. But few researchers actually work with them.
The bread-and-butter theories for microeconomics research – incomplete contracts, two-sided markets, risk analysis, inter-temporal choice, market signaling, financial-market microstructure, optimal taxation, and mechanism design – are far more complicated, and require exceptional finesse to avoid inelegance.
Given this, they are largely excluded from textbooks.
In fact, microeconomics textbooks have remained practically unchanged for at least two decades.
As a result, undergraduate students struggle to understand even the abstracts of papers on the complex representations of microeconomic reality that fill research journals.
And, in many areas – such as antitrust analysis, auction design, taxation, environmental policy, and industrial and financial regulation – policy applications have come to be considered the domain of specialists.
This does not have to be the case.
While it is true that realistic microeconomic models are more complex than their idealized textbook counterparts, grasping them does not necessarily require years of research experience.
A case in point is the economics of two-sided markets, which involve competition between platforms whose principal “product” consists in connecting two categories of users, who then offer each other network benefits.
When markets are two-sided, many of the standard assumptions of antitrust analysis no longer hold: market entry can be bad for consumers, exclusive contracts can increase the number of firms in a market, and pricing below cost may not be predatory.
A survey by David Evans and Richard Schmalensee describes numerous situations in which applying old assumptions could lead to mistakes by, say, an anti-trust regulator with only an undergraduate degree.
The unmistakable message is, “Don’t try this at home.”
But every behavioral divergence between two-sided and traditional markets can be understood using simple tools of elementary microeconomics, such as the distinction between substitute and complementary products.
When producers of substitutes collude, they usually raise prices; producers of complements, by contrast, collaborate to lower them.
So, if two platforms that appear to be performing similar services are complementary – for example, because one platform connects consumers with a set of users that helps them to value another set of users more highly – market entry can be bad for consumers.
In fact, two platforms can even be complementary for one set of users and substitutes for another.
The different stages of a televised soccer (football) tournament, for example, are complementary for viewers and substitutes for advertisers.
Moreover, exclusive dealing can increase competition by allowing two platforms to occupy distinct market niches, with the alternative being that one drives out the other.
In short, with a solid understanding of the difference between complements and substitutes, one can do almost everything the fancy models do – without hiring a single expensive expert.
Undergraduate-level microeconomics should empower students, not alienate them.
While the Arrow-Debreu model has its value – namely, it explains why an unplanned economy can produce order – it is discouraging for students to find that what they are deemed capable of comprehending offers little insight into real-life situations.
Restructuring the microeconomics syllabus would send a far more inspiring – and accurate – message: even complex ideas developed by experts can be understood and applied by educated laypeople.
Paying the Price of Reform
Angela Merkel’s poor showing in Germany’s recent election has now put into cold storage any hope of a serious overhaul of the country’s famously rigid economy.
Tony Blair was waiting for her to help launch a drive to make the current British Presidency of the European Union a historical turning point for the Union’s economy.
Now Blair has no project, and all would-be reformers are most likely downsizing their ambitions.
Europe appears to be more stuck than ever.
But is it?
To start with, the private sector is doing well.
Technology travels fast and is swiftly adopted.
Firms have responded to inhospitable conditions by cutting workforces and boosting productivity through more capital-intensive production processes and, when needed, by offshoring their capacities.
The laggards are to be found only in the service industry, which is largely insulated from international production chains and even from internal European competition.
More fundamentally, there is no such thing as a “European economy.”
The Union’s 25 member countries are very diverse.
The Nordic countries are high-tech leaders; Spain has slashed its unemployment rate by half (it stood at 25% not so long ago); and the new members from Central and Eastern Europe are cruising briskly along a steady catch-up path.
The really sick countries are three of the EU’s four biggest: France, Germany, and Italy.
But even they have carried out some reforms – not enough and too recently to make a difference yet; nonetheless, they have started to move.
More importantly, no one ignores that the old ways have to go if prosperity is to be maintained.
Except for a fringe of die-hard Marxists – which can still collect up to 10% of the votes – there is a keen sense that deep reforms are needed to come to grip with the high unemployment and poor growth of the last decade.
Continuing budget deficits have visibly failed to deliver what die-hard Keynesians had promised.
These days, no politician dares to suggest that continuing to pile up debt is the way to go, even though few are prepared to articulate a credible plan for fiscal consolidation.
The problem, of course is that the most urgently needed reforms will hurt a lot of people.
Most economists agree that high levels of employment protection merely hold down the creation of new jobs rather than reduce joblessness.
But reducing employment protection scares every worker in the private sector.
This is understandable, given an unemployment rate of around 10% in France, Germany, and Italy; with so few new jobs, becoming unemployed is a major disaster.
To be sure, comfortable unemployment benefits soften the blow.
The problem, though, is that some people have even become addicted; they now aim at living on welfare benefits alone.
This is why economists want to change the unemployment and welfare systems to raise the incentives to go back to work.
Successful experience notwithstanding, most people interpret “incentives” as painful kicks in the butt, and they want none of it.
Then consider these countries’ bloated public services, where jobs are guaranteed for life, promotion is by seniority rather than merit, and customers are seen as a nuisance.
The result is red tape all over and a huge drag on productivity.
Shaping up the public sector is an obvious goal, but civil servants are adamantly opposed to what would in effect mean new and much less attractive work contracts.&nbsp;
Economists know that important parts of the population are bound to lose from reform.
Their answer is that more people stand to benefit, and that the benefits far outweigh the costs.
This is true, but it provides little solace for the potential losers.
Reforms are relatively easier in smaller countries, probably because winners and losers are likely to be personally connected to each other as relatives, neighbors, or friends.
In large countries, the fear of being on the losing side is not outweighed by people’s appreciation that the country as a whole will do better.
One solution is just to go ahead and reform anyway, regardless of the resistance.
This is the Thatcher solution, which took almost everyone by surprise.
Angela Merkel was sometimes called the German Iron Lady, and that seems to have scared enough people to rob her of an expected victory.
Even if she becomes Chancellor, she has no mandate for deep reform.
Meanwhile, the French presidential hopeful, Nicolas Sarkozy, who was associating himself with Merkel and articulating a bold reform program, suddenly seems weak.
Clearly, if reforms are to be carried out in Europe, something else must be tried.
Here is one idea.
Why shouldn’t winners compensate the losers?
Surely, for example, there is a price tag that can be attached to breaking civil servants’ existing work contracts.
If a fair one-time payment is offered, it is likely to be taken up by a majority of civil servants, and public opinion will frown upon the greedy or lazy ones who turn it down.
It might be expensive to compensate all potential losers, but we must put our money where our mouth is; if a reform is certain to pay off handsomely, it will pay for the buy-offs, and more.
Governments can borrow what they need to pay out now, and service this debt as reforms yield benefits.
Not only is paying up-front against future benefits efficient and fair, but it also can provide strong incentives for policy makers to weed out bad reforms.
If a reform is as good as we think it is, then so is public debt to finance its political acceptability.
Peace, Not a Peace Offensive
TOKYO – When a North Korean dove clutching an olive branch suddenly appears, the world should challenge it to reveal its hidden talons.
This is the only prudent stance for South Korea to adopt when face-to-face negotiations with the North begin on February 8.
For what Kim is now offering is not peace, but a “peace offensive” – a tactic used by the North repeatedly since the armistice of 1953 in order to sow division whenever the regime’s adversaries have demonstrated unity and resolve.
Kim’s less-than-innocent intentions are demonstrated by his regime’s secret construction of a massive uranium-enrichment facility, containing more than 2,000 centrifuges, revealed to Stanford University’s Siegfried Hecker, a former director of America’s Los Alamos National Laboratory.
The existence of the facility seems as clear a declaration as possible that the regime is committed to achieving the capacity to intimidate its neighbors with its nuclear arsenal.
Some believe that North Korea has begun displaying its growing nuclear threat in order to secure the succession to power of Kim Jong-un, Kim Jong-il’s rotund, twenty-something youngest son.
But, given how long this facility must have been under construction, this cannot possibly be the sole, or even the main, motivation.
The “Dear Leader’s” key objective is most likely to secure his own position, given the North’s dire economic condition.
For it now seems that the only way for Kim Jong-il to defend his family dynasty against any domestic challenge is to make a show of force as a nuclear power.
The challenges facing Kim are piling up.
Deification of the leader, once the foundation of the regime, is disintegrating.
Economic failure, chronic food shortages, mounting public distrust of and animosity toward Kim’s government, and an apparent reluctance within elements of the North Korean military to go to war all point to the regime’s increasing fragility.
There are also signs of growing adoration of liberal countries such as the US and South Korea throughout North Korean society – a sentiment that the regime has sought to appease by broadcasting one or two Western films on state television.
More ominously, crime is on the rise and a breakdown in state-controlled health care is fueling the spread of various types of infectious disease.
Kim’s hope must be that, by showing off his nuclear arsenal, he can bully the US, Japan, and South Korea into helping him to resolve some of his regime’s domestic crises.
Most immediately, Kim’s aim is to pressure Barack Obama’s administration into weakening the US-led sanctions against North Korea, having evidently decided that his dynasty has no future so long as the sanctions remain in place.
To drive the point home, his regime has been refusing to attend multilateral talks.
Here Kim has shown just how fundamentally flawed his understanding of the workings of Western democracy is.
He apparently believed that, following the defeat that Obama absorbed in the mid-term elections, the US would lack the will to stand up to a fresh nuclear threat and would move to conclude a peace accord with his regime, thus perpetuating his dynasty.
“We are ready for both dialogue and war,” Kim has declared.
But, of course, just the opposite is true: the victory of conservative Republicans in Congress has left Obama with even less room to offer carrots to the North.
Moreover, nuclear brinkmanship is a particularly poor tactic, since Kim’s behavior is now becoming fused in American minds with arguably the most serious strategic threat on the US agenda: Iran’s push to secure nuclear weapons of its own.
Indeed, there is considerable talk among Western security services that the recently disclosed centrifuges were not actually assembled in the Nyeongbyeon facility, implying that Kim’s regime is hiding another facility.
The question then becomes, who helped Kim build these facilities?
Who transferred the technology that the North needed?
Although there is mounting circumstantial evidence of cooperative exchanges between North Korea and Iran, no conclusive proof has been found.
It has been reported that more than 200 North Koreans are currently working surreptitiously in Iran.
If these include personnel from Room 99, Kim’s secret nuclear directorate, and Room 39, the bureau that controls his slush fund of hard currencies, more attention is needed.
Of course, the inner workings of Kim’s regime are shrouded in mystery, not only to the outside world, but also to most of North Korea’s government.
The only way to increase transparency from outside is to shine a light on North Korea’s external activities, which means exposing as many connections and links between North Korea and Iran as can be found.
Nuclear cooperation between North Korea and Iran is no doubt assisting both countries to flaunt international norms – and now it appears that Burma has joined this axis of illicit nuclear proliferation.
One country could help the world gain the transparency – and the leverage – that it needs: China, over whose territory Iran and North Korea must be conducting their nuclear relations.
Assuming that China does not approve of this unholy alliance, it has a responsibility to call a halt to these exchanges.
Vague expressions of concern, such as those offered by President Hu Jintao during his Washington summit, will not do the job.
Peace, Not Process
RAMALLAH – The United States should stop pushing for the resumption of the Palestinian-Israeli peace process. Doing so might be the best way to achieve peace – a paradox that reflects the huge gap between a peace process and achieving genuine peace.
Make no mistake: this is not a call to arms or an appeal for a violent uprising.
Peace between the conflicting parties east of the Mediterranean and west of the Jordan river can and must be achieved through negotiations.
But if one party is more interested in a process than in the need for peace, something must be wrong.
For Israel, an occupying power whose people enjoy democratic civilian authority and a GDP tens times that of the people it is denying basic rights of freedom and independence, photo opportunities provided by meeting and greeting Palestinian leaders has replaced achieving peace.
A serious look back at the 17 years since Yassir Arafat and Yitzhak Rabin shook hands on the White House lawn is revealing.
The number of illegal Jewish settlements and settlers has more than doubled in the areas Israel occupied in 1967.
Negotiators have parsed every possible solution to the permanent-status issues of Jerusalem, borders, settlements, refugees, and economic relations.
Leaders of the world’s superpowers, United Nations officials, the Elders, and tens of people of goodwill have offered their goodwill offices and their services to bring about peace.
All to no avail.
The US efforts, led by Special Envoy George Mitchell, have shown clearly that the current ruling coalition in Israel is incapable of doing the minimum required for peace.
The Obama administration staked its reputation on getting Israelis and Palestinians to agree at least on security and borders. The results are mixed, at best.
Palestinians complied with all Israeli and international requirements for security, while Binyamin Netanyahu’s Israeli government, which gives lip-service to the two-state solution, has yet to elucidate where Israel’s borders will be.
Meanwhile, the Israeli government wants to continue building settlements in occupied areas, in total violation of international law and the minimum requirements for peace detailed in the “roadmap” sponsored by the Quartet (the US, UN, European Union, and Russia).
The US tried to bribe the Israelis – with $3 billion in fighter jets and political support at the UN – into suspending settlement activities for three months.
Instead, Netanyahu stuck his fingers in America’s eyes, counting on the Republicans’ mid-term election victory to help him afterwards.
Not only did Israel’s leaders reject the world community’s requests, but they had the chutzpah to claim that they had convinced the US to drop this requirement for the resumption of talks.
Withdrawal by the US from the current push to restart negotiations would send a clear message that bad behavior will not be tolerated, and would encourage Israelis, who overwhelmingly want peace, to force a change in their own government’s position.
Israel’s Labor Party has consistently said that it would bolt from the current coalition if peace talks were halted.
This would force at least a change in the coalition’s makeup (possibly the replacement of the right-wing Yisrael Beitenu, headed by Foreign Minister Avigdor Lieberman, with the more moderate Kadima, headed by Tzipi Livni, Lieberman’s predecessor as foreign minister).
Public-opinion polls have consistently shown that the majority of Israelis and Palestinians want peace (not a peace process) based on a two-state solution.
Almost every learned pundit, expert, or politician in the Middle East and around the world knows pretty much what a solution to the conflict would look like – a Palestinian state on the 1967 borders with slight land swaps and an equitable negotiated solution of the Palestinian refugee issue.
One group of respected Israelis and Palestinians, the Geneva Group, even drew up a peace plan that tackles every possible negotiating point honestly and fairly.
So what is needed is not negotiations, but political will.
The Palestinians, for their part, have the necessary will.
Prime Minister Salam Fayyad’s latest chapter in his two-year plan – the “home stretch to freedom” – will be complete in August 2011.
In Fayyad’s vision, Palestinians, who bear the brunt of the occupation and are in a greater hurry than the Israelis are to be free of it, are to accept a peace strategy that aims at realizing statehood.
Once the institutions of the Palestinian state are in place, the will of the people, coupled with world support, will nonviolently overcome all efforts at denying Palestinians their right to self-determination.
In the meantime, there is no need for a process that has no chance of accomplishing peace.
Peace Now for Palestine
MADRID/WASHINGTON, DC – As revolutionary change sweeps across the Arab world, it is easy to think that now is not the time to push for peace between Israel and Palestine.
Until the dust settles on the new Middle East, the old roadmaps seem dated, and conventional wisdom holds that progress toward a peace agreement in the face of regional upheaval is wishful thinking.
But the opposite is true.
Even with so many failed efforts in the past, there is a clear window of opportunity for the United States and Israel to urgently push for a lasting settlement.
Everyone needs to start thinking differently about the Middle East.
The international community’s old approach was to prioritize stability over democracy and pursue Israeli-Arab peace on a completely separate diplomatic track.
This policy proved to be a failure – placing stability ahead of democracy brought neither, and isolated peace efforts went nowhere.
If the US and other world powers want to make headway on their three key objectives – stability, political reform, and peace – they need to understand how they are linked and pursue all three simultaneously and holistically.
Picking and choosing which challenges to care about only increases the risk that they will become intractable problems instead.
The US has been behind the curve from the moment the turmoil sparked, trying to play catch up as two authoritarian governments were toppled by popular protest and more regimes try to cling to power as long as they can.
The US needs to get out in front.
And, as the US and the broader international community attempt to address the unfolding events, it would be a mistake to leave the peace process off the agenda.
Whereas the demands of Arab demonstrators concern governance at home, the current turmoil can be used to help end a conflict that has confounded the world for decades. Delaying the Israeli-Palestinian peace process would be a costly blunder.
As we know from bitter experience, waiting only makes a peace settlement harder to achieve.
For the US, sympathy for Arab publics yearning for freedom cannot exclude compassion for Palestinians dreaming of lives of dignity, which for them includes ending the occupation.
The US should not be selective in its support for freedom and democracy.
This has never been more true than today, and if America is not seen as an avid supporter of a two-state solution, it will stay well behind the curve and damage its own interests in the Middle East.
Israel also needs to revisit its policies.
As political reform achieves results, Israel will no longer be able to claim that it is the only democracy in the Middle East; with conditions changing on the ground, it will be increasingly difficult to ignore Palestinians’ demand for independence.
Israel’s concern that the region will grow more hostile will become a self-fulfilling prophecy if new democracies see the Israeli government impeding steps toward a viable and just solution.
At the same time, a peace process backed by elected and more legitimate Arab governments will actually help solidify long-term peace and stability.
With time for a two-state solution quickly running out, a speedy settlement is in everyone's best interest.
Waiting and hoping for more favorable conditions could easily backfire.
If there is no movement toward peace as new Arab democracies take shape, negative views of Israel and the US will be hardened.
And, as we have all witnessed in recent months, Arab public opinion clearly matters.
Bad perceptions only complicate future peace efforts, making a breakthrough even less likely.
And the US could have less of a role in a new Middle East with new governments less forgiving than their predecessors about the continuation of the occupation.
To argue that peacemaking can’t be successful when governments and regimes are in flux ignores the fact that it is precisely in such circumstances that outsiders can help shape the process.
Instead of operating in an environment with little influence or room for maneuver, pushing the peace process now could help endear the Arab public to the West and give the US more sway in the new Middle East.
We don’t need never-ending bilateral negotiations between Israel and Palestine; there needs to be a regional solution.
Tomorrow’s Middle East will not be the same as it was a mere two months ago, but the shape the region will ultimately take is unknown.
The US has a chance to get on the right side of history and help shape its direction by supporting real reform and advancing a deadlocked peace process.
In the end, an uprising against poor governance presents an opening to achieve not only democracy, but also stability and peace.
This crisis, like so many others, would be a terrible thing to waste.
Peace or Poison
HAIFA – Contrary to the hopes of many, the end of the Second World War and the shock of the Nazi atrocities did not mean the end of war and genocide.
Indeed, the decades following it have been rife with bloody conflicts in which entire population groups have been murdered.
Remember Angola’s civil war, the Khmer Rouge’s massacre of millions of Cambodians, Rwanda’s tribal wars, the bloody disintegration of Yugoslavia, and the extermination of Christians in Southern Sudan.
Nor should we forget the Stalinist crimes against the peoples of the former Soviet Empire.
And yet there is something unique about the Holocaust that made the United Nations single it out and devote a special day to its commemoration.
The difference lies not only in the mind-boggling number of victims and the ferocity with which it was perpetuated, but also in the absence of the usual motives found in other massacres and genocides.
The Nazis did not kill the Jews because they wanted their territory – the Jews had none; or because the Jews were followers of a rival religious faith – the Nazis and their henchmen were atheists and enemies of all religion.
Even less did the Nazis kill Jews because of their ideological differences – Jews had no peculiarly “Jewish” ideology.
Nor did the Nazis exterminate the Jews in order to take their property – most Jews were poor, and those who owned anything probably would have given it up gladly in order to save themselves.
The Nazis looked at Jews as a strain of “microbes,” and it was for this reason that they wanted to destroy them so brutally and meticulously.
The Holocaust was born of an absurd and hallucinatory mechanism that associated the Jews with an invented congenital threat, and that gave rise to a deranged, burning, irrational hatred.
It is a hatred that did not disappear with Nazism, and that one can still, 65 years after the liberation of Auschwitz, glimpse in terrifying manifestations.
The world must therefore be alert, so that this hatred does not reawaken and direct itself against Jews or other peoples.
Israel’s leaders, in particular, have sought to reinforce the defenses against the anti-Semitism that still persists in the world.
That is why they have tried to obtain political support against the nuclear ambitions of Iran, which periodically threatens Israel, at times proclaiming its desire to wipe it off the face of the earth.
Iran is not Nazi Germany.
Its political regime, its ideology, and its military and economic potential are very different from that of Hitler’s state.
Modern Israel is also not like the weak Jewish communities dispersed throughout Europe in the past.
Still, Iran’s rulers have adopted a bizarre and total opposition to Israel’s very existence, a position that can revive the same nefarious mechanism that led to the genocidal hatred of the Holocaust.
If Iran gains nuclear weapons, it may, like Nazi Germany before it, be engulfed by murderous folly, threatening disaster for Israel.
What can be done to prevent this?
The sanctions directed by the international community against Iran are not guaranteed to convince its leaders to desist from developing nuclear weapons.
And any attempt to destroy militarily Iran’s nuclear potential could entangle Israel in a prolonged and exhausting struggle that might unite all the enemies of the Jewish state.
The bleakness of these alternatives has led many to believe that the best and most moral way of neutralizing the Iranian threat would be for Israel to sign a peace treaty with the Palestinians.
Last month, during a public prayer in Ramallah, the Palestinian Minister of Religion, Mahmoud Habash, delivered a speech that gives hope to proponents of this solution.
Before TV cameras and in the presence of the Palestinian Authority’s senior leaders, he lambasted Iran’s interference in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Essentially, what he said to the Iranians was this: “Why are you entering this conflict?
We don’t need your patronage or your support.
Instead of helping us and the Israelis reach a solution acceptable to all – two states for two peoples – you do everything to exacerbate the conflict.
For your own reasons that have nothing to do with our struggle, you encourage the extremism of Hamas, thus provoking Israel’s violent reaction, aggravating our suffering, and pushing back the solution that we all want.
Not one Iranian soldier has ever shed his blood for our people the way the soldiers of Egypt and Jordan did, yet their governments later signed peace agreements with Israel.”
The Palestinian leadership knows that if Iran ever launches a nuclear attack against Israel, their people would suffer terribly as well.
On the other hand, peace between Israel and the Palestinians might neutralize the poison of Iranian hatred and break the hallucinatory political mechanism that identifies Israel with absolute evil – the “small Satan” that should be annihilated at all cost.
The conclusion of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict would be far more effective than any military undertaking.
A united front of Israelis and Palestinians could push the Iranian people, who until recently maintained good relations with the Jewish state, to rebel against the folly that seems to have taken hold of their leaders.
By contrast, Israeli or American military action against Iran would risk worsening the situation, prolonging and intensifying the suffering in this very sensitive region of the world.
Peace Process or Real Peace?
RAMALLAH – Direct talks between Palestinian and Israeli leaders are the most obvious way to achieve peace in the Middle East conflict.
But history has shown time and again that a high-profile peace process alone is no recipe for success.
The Arab League is set to meet later this month to advise the Palestinian leadership whether or not to engage in direct talks with Israel.
Palestinian officials say that there is no use in holding direct talks that are nothing more than a photo opportunity intended to create the impression of a peace process while avoiding any substantive commitments.
For Palestinians, the first step in real peace talks must include some accord on the basic issues of borders and security.
The Palestinians have presented to their Israeli counterparts (through the Americans) a written offer that includes giving up lands occupied by Israel in 1967 and now populated by Israeli settlers. These lands would be swapped for other lands equal in size and importance.
Israel has yet to produce a single written document outlining its position on the territory that will become a Palestinian state alongside Israel.
Israel insists that any serious progress will happen only if both sides can sit at the negotiating table face to face.
According to this view, Netanyahu's right-wing coalition might be persuaded to accept the continuation of the partial settlement freeze, but only if the Israeli public sees President Mahmoud Abbas and Netanyahu publicly engaged in negotiations.
But the history of such negotiations tells a much different story.
All successful efforts in the Middle East conflict have not occurred in front of cameras and through publicly declared direct talks.
The visit to Jerusalem of Egypt's then-President Anwar el-Sadat, and the ensuing Egypt-Israel breakthrough at Camp David, took place only after successful behind-the-scenes understandings.
The public Madrid talks failed to bring about any breakthroughs, whereas the much more secretive Oslo channel brought about the PLO-Israel agreement.
Even some of the most explosive situations on the ground between Israel and its northern neighbors have been defused as a result of understandings that often included neutral third parties.
Former United States senator George Mitchell represents a relatively neutral third party supervising the current talks.
These “proximity talks” allow Mitchell to ensure that each side is making serious offers.
If the proximity talks are replaced with direct talks in which the US is not physically inside the negotiating room, there is no guarantee that the stronger partner will not try to bully the weaker one.
Direct talks also have some well-known liabilities.
Failed direct talks have often led to a spike in violence.
Neither side, nor the rest of the world, wants that.
When former US president Bill Clinton tried to set up the second Camp David summit, Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat hesitated. He felt that the situation was not right for direct talks.
What worried Arafat was the possibility of failure and the potential of a blame game if the talks didn't produce the desired goal.
Clinton, who was embroiled in domestic problems, badly needed an international success, and assured Arafat that fingers would not be pointed at either party if the talks failed.
But no sooner had the parties left Washington after the talks broke down than Clinton joined Israel's then-Prime Minister Ehud Barak in blaming the Palestinians.
That failure, and the emotional responses from both sides as to what was or was not offered in the talks, helped spark the violence which led to the second intifada in the winter of 2000.
To his credit, Clinton and his staff decided, despite the violence, to make one last attempt in Taba, Egypt late in his presidency.
That effort is said to have been the closest the two parties have ever been to a breakthrough.
It would be helpful if the Taba understanding or the more recent efforts by Abbas and former Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert could become the basis for direct talks.
The Netanyahu government has refused to agree to any such clear reference point before talks begin.
The Israelis want talks without conditions, even though Netanyahu has imposed his own condition on the Palestinians: recognition of Israel as a Jewish state, and acceptance of a demilitarized Palestinian state that does not include Jerusalem and the Jordan valley.
Every expert on the Middle East agrees that the best avenue to a serious breakthrough in Palestinian-Israeli negotiations is quiet, behind-the-scenes negotiations.
The biggest stumbling block for any successful conclusion is the public on both sides, so the more the public is kept out of the day-to-day talks, the better.
Of course, the public can and should be included through a national referendum in assessing the results once the talks have reached fruition and a comprehensive settlement is reached that both leaders say they can live with.
But, until that happy day arrives, or at least until the two sides have reached the contours of an agreement, direct talks and photo opportunities should be considered counter-productive.
After all, Palestinians and Israelis are no longer interested in the peace process. They just want peace.
The Last Guerrillas
BOGOTÁ – During the Cold War, tensions between the West and the Soviet Union affected virtually all countries worldwide.
As a result, throughout Latin America, guerrilla groups emerged, seeking to destabilize military dictatorships and attain democracy, freedom, and policy reform – goals that they believed could not be achieved peacefully.
Above all, it was the Cuban Revolution of 1959 – in which armed revolutionaries successfully overthrew the military dictator Fulgencio Batista – that inspired this movement.
Indeed, Che Guevara, an icon of the revolution, died in Bolivia while attempting to export the guerrilla project.
At the end of 2012, conditions in Latin America are very different.
Democracy is not the exception, but the rule; military regimes have succumbed to the power of the ballot box; and guerrilla groups have largely become a relic of the past.
But Colombia – the region’s oldest and most stable democracy – is still plagued by illegal, armed guerilla organizations.
Unlike in other countries, where guerrillas pursued exclusively political demands, Colombia’s guerilla groups became involved in drug trafficking, which transformed them into lethal institutional monsters, one part subversive organization and one part criminal mafia.
In response, citizens illegally formed armed self-defense groups.
But these organizations ultimately exacerbated violence, generated land dispossession and forced displacement, and helped to prolong the conflict for nearly five decades.
As a result, generations of Colombians have grown up surrounded by violence, never having known real peace.
Former members of several of the guerrilla groups that arose during the 1960’s and 1970’s have been reintegrated into Colombian society following peace agreements.
Some have even held important political positions, serving as ministers, members of congress, governors, and mayors.
For example, Bogotá’s current mayor, Gustavo Petro, was a member of the M-19 guerrilla group in the 1980’s.
Nowadays, only two groups remain immersed in an anachronistic struggle: the Colombian Revolutionary Armed Forces (FARC), the larger, older, and better funded of the two, and the National Liberation Army (ELN).
After winning the presidency in 2002, Álvaro Uribe vowed to defeat the guerrillas – who have added terrorism to their repertoire – mounting an offensive that employed all of the power of the state and its law-enforcement authorities.
I have had the opportunity – first as Uribe’s defense minister, and now as President – to deal the strongest blows to the guerrillas and drug-trafficking gangs.
The government’s commitment to the fight against terrorism has already caused FARC’s membership to plummet, from more than 20,000 a decade ago to little more than 8,000 today.
We will not let up until Colombia is free of guerilla armies.
But this irrevocable commitment to defeat terrorism does not preclude us from also prudently pursuing a solution to the conflict through dialogue – while avoiding mistakes made in an earlier round of talks, during which a prolonged cease-fire allowed the FARC to regain some strength.
Last month, after nearly two years of exploratory conversations, formal peace talks were initiated in Oslo, Norway.
This month, the talks moved to Havana, Cuba, where they will be held until their conclusion.
The talks will be direct, will follow a brief and precise thematic agenda, and will be conducted within a defined time horizon.
Norway and Cuba have served not only as host countries, but also as guarantors of the dialogues.
Representatives from Venezuela and Chile are also attending the negotiations.
The Colombian people are counting on the talks to result in agreement on a clear path toward the end of internal armed conflict.
This opportunity must not be wasted.
But, given that the guerrillas have thwarted Colombians’ hopes in the past, we are approaching the negotiations with cautious optimism.
The peace talks will not paralyze the state or weaken its ability to act.
Indeed, until a final agreement is reached, Colombian law-enforcement authorities will continue to confront forcefully all illegal armed groups whose members insist on threatening the peace and lives of the Colombian people.
Moreover, the government will continue to take action to build peace.
This includes implementing social and economic programs aimed at reducing poverty and creating jobs, defending the victims of the conflict, ensuring that stolen land is returned to displaced peasants, and creating more equitable conditions throughout the country.
The serious, realistic, and sober peace process that we have begun with the FARC could end the internal armed conflict in Colombia, implying the defeat, once and for all, of the continent’s guerrilla groups and bringing down the curtain on a half-century of senseless violence.
Indeed, this outcome would contribute to peace and stability for the entire region.
The conflict’s end would also bolster development efforts in Colombia – already a model of democracy and political and economic stability.
Even in the wake of the global economic crisis, Colombia’s economy has been growing at an average rate of close to 5%, while benefiting from unprecedented inflows of foreign investment.
And Colombian governance is admired worldwide.
Reaching an agreement with the FARC to end the conflict – which implies the group’s disarmament and demobilization – would allow Colombia’s star to shine more brightly than ever.
The Colombian government is committed to making every possible effort to realize the dream of a guerilla-free country – and continent – in 2013.
Peace this Time?
JERUSALEM – The imminent resumption in Washington of direct Israeli-Palestinian peace talks is good news.
But whether these talks will lead to an agreement, let alone within one year as US President Barack Obama hopes, is another matter.
When Obama, two days into his presidency, appointed former Senator George Mitchell as his special envoy to the Middle East, many hoped that within two years his efforts would lead to an agreement between Israel and the Palestinians – and to a comprehensive peace between Israel and all its Arab neighbors.
Whether these exaggerated hopes should be traced to Obama’s inexperience or to hubris – or both – is a moot point: what is clear is that, after 18 months and numerous visits to the region, Mitchell was able to achieve only an agreement in principle by Israel and the Palestinians to start talking to each other.
The problem is that they have been talking to each other now for 17 years, under different Israeli and Palestinian leaders, and under two US Presidents.
To bring them to the negotiating table again is not a breakthrough, but rather an attempt at damage control.
And, while Mitchell’s successful track record in achieving reconciliation in Northern Ireland seemed like an excellent credential for his current job, it may have hindered him in the Middle East.
The conflict in Northern Ireland was always territorial: not even the most radical Irish Republican group ever denied the legitimacy of Great Britain – only its rule over the six northern provinces of what they consider United Ireland.  The crux of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, by contrast, only partly concerns Israel’s borders.
The Palestinians contest not just the post-1967 occupation of the West Bank; since the United Nations partition plan of 1947 – which called for the establishment of two states, one Jewish and one Arab – Palestinians have refused to recognize Israel’s right to exist, and most Israelis are not convinced that they have totally abandoned that stance.
Being tone-deaf to these fundamental issues, Mitchell started on the wrong foot by initially acceding, with Obama’s encouragement, to the Palestinians’ demand for a freeze on further construction in Israeli settlements on the West Bank prior to the start of negotiations.
A stop to settlement activities in Palestinian territories is a reasonable demand, and the Palestinians could naturally insist on it in the negotiations.
But making a settlement freeze a precondition for negotiations was obviously unacceptable to the Israeli government, which maintained that no preconditions for negotiations should be set.
More than a year was wasted on this, causing, among other things, tensions between Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s government and the Obama administration.
With a lack of grace, Netanyahu finally agreed to a temporary freeze – due to expire at the end of September – and eventually the Palestinians, this time under US pressure, relented to open negotiations without an explicit Israeli assurance that the freeze would be continued.
Not only was precious time wasted, but further damage was done.
Even Israelis who do not agree with Netanyahu’s hard-line positions didn’t like to see their prime minister treated by the US as if he were the leader of Upper Volta.
Indeed, he did, after all, announce last year that contrary to his Likud Party’s previous position, he was now willing to accept a two-state solution – a position that is still anathema to many Likud members, as well to at least three of the smaller parties in his government coalition.
Now that the talks are to begin, will they achieve anything substantial, or will the summit in Washington merely be another photo opportunity, like President George W. Bush’s Annapolis summit in 2007? Only an unreconstructed optimist would give the talks more than a 50% chance of succeeding.
The reasons are more immediate than the intractable character of Middle East peace-making.
Even if Netanyahu is willing to bow to realism, some of his coalition partners might leave his government.
On the Palestinian side, Mahmoud Abbas’s Palestinian Authority lost control in 2006 of the Gaza Strip – now ruled by an illegitimate Hamas-led government – and thus cannot speak anymore for all Palestinians.
With more than 600 Palestinians killed in Gaza since Hamas’s violent putsch, making peace among the Palestinians may be as difficult as making peace between them and Israel.
Moreover, before Israeli-Palestinian talks broke down two years ago, the previous Israeli government, under Prime Minister Ehud Olmert and Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni, negotiated for two years with the Palestinian Authority.
This was the most moderate Israeli government conceivable, and the same can be said about the Fatah movement controlling the Palestinian Authority.
Yet, after dozens of meetings, public and private, the two sides failed to reach an agreement.
Even the most moderate leaders on both sides could not agree on the core issues of the conflict: borders, settlements, Jerusalem, and the fate of 1947-1948 Palestinian refugees and their descendants.
Both sides had an immediate stake in reaching an agreement: for Olmert, an agreement might have rescued his position as prime minister, and it would have been a trump card for Abbas in Fatah’s de facto civil war with Hamas.
The failure to reach agreement under such apparently auspicious conditions does not bode well for the coming talks.
But Netanyahu has said that once negotiations start, “we will surprise everyone,” and the Palestinians have gone further than ever before in building the institutions needed for national independence.
Even a lapsed optimist can see that this time the chances for reconciliation just might be better after all.
Peace Through Development
New York – American foreign policy has failed in recent years mainly because the United States relied on military force to address problems that demand development assistance and diplomacy.
Young men become fighters in places like Sudan, Somalia, Pakistan, and Afghanistan because they lack gainful employment.
Extreme ideologies influence people when they can’t feed their families, and when lack of access to family planning leads to an unwanted population explosion.
President Barack Obama has raised hopes for a new strategy, but so far the forces of continuity in US policy are dominating the forces of change.
The first rule in assessing a government’s real strategy is to follow the money.
America vastly overspends on the military compared with other areas of government.
Obama’s projected budgets do not change that.
For the coming 2010 fiscal year, Obama’s budget calls for $755 billion in military spending, an amount that exceeds US budget spending in all other areas except so-called “mandatory” spending on social security, health care, interest payments on the national debt, and a few other items.
Indeed, US military spending exceeds the sum of federal budgetary outlays for education, agriculture, climate change, environmental protection, ocean protection, energy systems, homeland security, low-income housing, national parks and national land management, the judicial system, international development, diplomatic operations, highways, public transport, veterans affairs, space exploration and science, civilian research and development, civil engineering for waterways, dams, bridges, sewerage and waste treatment, community development, and many other areas.
This preponderance of military spending applies to all ten years of Obama’s medium-term scenario.
By 2019, total military spending is projected to be $8.2 trillion, exceeding by $2 trillion the budgeted outlays for all non-mandatory budget spending.
US military spending is equally remarkable when viewed from an international perspective.
According to the Swedish International Peace Research Institute, total military spending in constant 2005 dollars reached roughly $1.4 trillion in 2007.
In other words, the US spends roughly the same amount spent by the rest of the world combined – a pattern that the Obama administration shows no signs of ending.
The policy decisions of recent months offer little more hope for a fundamental change in US foreign policy direction.
While the US has signed an agreement with Iraq to leave by the end of 2011, there is talk in the Pentagon that US “non-combat” troops will remain in the country for years or decades to come.
It is easy to see how the persistence of instability in Iraq, Iranian influence, and al-Qaeda’s presence will lead American policymakers to take the “safe” route of continued military involvement.
Some opponents of the Iraq War, including me, believe that a fundamental – and deeply misguided – objective of the war from the outset has been to create a long-term military base (or bases) in Iraq, ostensibly to protect oil routes and oil concessions.
As the examples of Iran and Saudi Arabia show, however, such a long-term presence sooner or later creates an explosive backlash.
The worries are even worse in Afghanistan and Pakistan.
NATO’s war with the Taliban in Afghanistan is going badly, so much so that the commanding US general was sacked this month.
The Taliban are also extending their reach into neighboring Pakistan.
Both Afghanistan and the neighboring provinces of Pakistan are impoverished regions, with vast unemployment, bulging youth populations, prolonged droughts, widespread hunger, and pervasive economic deprivation.
It is easy for the Taliban and al-Qaeda to mobilize fighters under such conditions.
The problem is that a US military response is essentially useless under these conditions, and can easily inflame the situation rather than resolve it.
Among other problems, the US relies heavily on drones and bombers, leading to a high civilian death toll, which is inflaming public attitudes against the US.
After one recent disaster, in which more than 100 civilians died, the Pentagon immediately insisted that such bombing operations would continue.
A recent survey showed overwhelming Pakistani opposition to US military incursions into their country.
Obama is doubling down in Afghanistan, by raising the number of US troops from 38,000 to 68,000, and perhaps more later.
There are also risks that the US will get involved much more heavily in the fighting in Pakistan.
The new US commanding general in Afghanistan is reportedly a specialist in “counter-insurgency,” which could well involve surreptitious engagement by US operatives in Pakistan.
If so, the results could prove catastrophic, leading to a spreading war in an unstable country of 180 million people.
What is disconcerting, however, is not only the relentless financing and spread of war, but also the lack of an alternative US strategy.
Obama and his top advisers have spoken regularly about the need to address the underlying sources of conflict, including poverty and unemployment.
A few billion dollars has been recommended to fund economic aid for Afghanistan and Pakistan.
But this remains a small amount compared to military outlays, and an overarching framework to support economic development is missing.
Before investing hundreds of billions of dollars more in failing military operations, the Obama administration should re-think its policy and lay out a viable strategy to US citizens and the world.
It’s high time for a strategy of peace through sustainable development – including investments in health, education, livelihoods, water and sanitation, and irrigation – in today’s hotspots, starting with Afghanistan and Pakistan.
Such a strategy cannot simply emerge as a byproduct of US military campaigns.
Rather, it will have to be developed proactively, with a sense of urgency and in close partnership with the affected countries and the communities within them.
A shift in focus to economic development will save a vast number of lives and convert the unthinkably large economic costs of war into economic benefits through development.
Obama must act before today’s crisis explodes into an even larger disaster.
Brazil’s Statute of Virtual Liberty
RIO DE JANEIRO – It seems like the plot of a horror movie – the type where a little-noticed glitch in the matrix threatens to cause global chaos.
This time, it was a simple, but fateful, programming misstep that suddenly left millions of consumers’ most sensitive information vulnerable to hackers.