Big and small firms can create a wide variety of externalities, and these have to be examined carefully and dispassionately – exactly as Stein is recommending.
And yet, though assessing systemic risk is a technical matter, there is ultimately and inevitably a political question.
The FSOC can figure out where the risks are lurking, but will it be allowed to do its job?
If not, when the next crisis comes, those who opposed the FSOC’s proper functioning will bear the lion’s share of the responsibility.
Two Views of Finance
WASHINGTON, DC – The International Monetary Fund’s annual meetings will be held on October 10-12 in Washington DC, and the world’s financial sector is a central item on the agenda.
That will make for an interesting meeting, because two diametrically opposed views of the global financial system will face off against each other.
The first view is that “we have done a lot” since the global financial crisis erupted in 2008.
According to this view, which is put forward on a regular basis by some US Treasury officials and their European counterparts, there may be a bit more to do in terms of implementing reforms, but our banks and other financial firms have already become much safer.
The crisis of 2008 cannot soon be repeated.
The second view is that we are a long way from completing the far-reaching changes that we need.
Even worse, on at least one key point, the very language used among policymakers and leading journalists to describe finance is badly broken.
The issues are complex and nuances abound, but much of what divides the two sides in this debate comes down to this: Is it acceptable to say that banks “hold” capital?
This is an expression used with great regularity among top finance reporters (though not, for example, by Bloomberg/BusinessWeek, which has long been much more careful on this point).
“Banks will need to hold more capital” is a common refrain, describing efforts by regulators – and, in the United States, some legislators – to require that financial institutions fund themselves with relatively more equity and less debt.
Using “hold” in this way is both completely conventional and deeply misleading.
In any other common English language usage, “hold” is an active verb or a noun with a similar connotation.
You hold a baby in your arms.
Please hold on tight to this rope.
He had a strong hold over his colleagues.
This matters, because “holding” capital has become a disguised or implicit metaphor.
The implication is that banks are being asked to sequester part of the asset side of their balance sheets – and this naturally leads to the perception that somehow “less is available” to lend, for example, to the real (non-financial) economy.
I encounter this view frequently, even in sophisticated circles – for example, on Capitol Hill.
Higher capital requirements mean, in essence, more equity funding and – by implication, under any sensible definition – relatively less debt for a given balance-sheet size.
This is an attractive and sensible policy, because today’s global banks have relatively small slivers of equity underpinning their operations.
The best comparable measures of bank capital are those found in the Global Capital Index produced by Thomas Hoenig, Vice Chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
Hoenig looks at how much equity banks have in the simplest and most transparent measure (also known as leverage).
Six years after the world’s largest financial crisis, our megabanks have equity amounting to no more than 5% of their balance sheets.
(In fact, some banks have not much more than 3% equity.)
That means that 95% of their operations are financed by debt – and thus that only a small negative shock would be needed to push them toward insolvency.
Many measures are still needed to address this vulnerability, including the formalization of international cooperation to handle failing financial firms.
We need these firms to be able to fail without causing a global panic.
They should prepare meaningful “living wills,” to show how this will be possible; in fact, such plans are a requirement – still unimplemented – of the 2010 Dodd-Frank financial reforms in the US.
But there is a much simpler step that would make a big difference: A senior policymaker, such as a member of the Federal Reserve’s Board of Governors or the president of the New York Fed, should make a speech that explains clearly what bank capital is (and what it is not).
Journalists who ignore the guidance on terminology in this speech should be called – in private – by the Fed.
The Fed devotes considerable effort to ensuring that the public understands its monetary policy; officials should devote similar effort to communicating regulatory policy precisely.
And Hoenig’s index should be picked up and publicized by a major organization, such as the IMF.
We need not only more precise use of language, but also timely and accurate measurement of banks’ capital levels.
Washington Recaptured
WASHINGTON, DC – Two hundred years ago, Washington DC was captured by the British – who then proceeded to set fire to official buildings, including the White House, Treasury Department, and Congress.
Today, it is a domestic interest group – very large banks – that has captured Washington.
The costs are likely to be far higher than they were in 1814.
America’s largest bank holding companies receive an implicit government subsidy, because they are perceived to be “too big to fail.”
The authorities will not allow the biggest banks to default on their debts, through bankruptcy or in any other fashion, owing to the need to prevent the financial system from collapsing.
This doctrine became starkly apparent in late 2008 and early 2009; it remains in force today.
This effective exemption from the risk of bankruptcy means that anyone who lends to the largest half-dozen banks receives a government guarantee – free insurance against the risk of a catastrophe.
This allows these banks to obtain more debt financing on better terms (from their perspective).
In particular, their executives operate highly opaque firms, with risks effectively masked from outsiders and very little in the way of loss-absorbing shareholder equity.
Simply put, without their government backstop, these murky empires could not exist.
Democratic Senator Sherrod Brown of Ohio and Republican Senator David Vitter of Louisiana, along with some important colleagues, have long sought to phase out this implicit subsidy.
And independent analysts, such as Anat Admati of Stanford University, have explained all of the relevant details of how – and why – this should be done. Those details – for example, in Admati’s recent testimony to the Senate subcommittee chaired by Brown – are not in doubt.
Thanks to Admati and her colleagues, we have a clear rendering of them in straightforward, non-technical language.
Unfortunately, the leading federal government officials remain in denial.
The most spectacular recent example of this is a report issued this summer by the Government Accountability Office.
The GAO had a simple task: At the request of Brown and Vitter, it was charged with assessing the scale and impact of the implicit guarantees provided by the government to large bank holding companies.
The GAO responded by producing a deeply muddled report that followed the financial industry’s suggestion of focusing almost exclusively on the difference in bond spreads (interest rates on various forms of financing) between the largest banks and some of their competitors.
Such spreads are only a small component of the funding advantage for big banks, and they are also highly cyclical – meaning that the advantage for the biggest banks manifests itself the most when markets are under pressure, as they were in the fall of 2008.
The GAO concluded that these spreads had indeed been high in 2008, and that now they have fallen.
But, as Admati pointed out in her testimony, if the authors had included 2006 and earlier years in their analysis, they would have seen low spreads using their own methodology – despite the obvious fact that massive implicit subsidies were already in place.
All that the GAO established is that the macroeconomy was previously in bad shape and it is now doing somewhat better – hardly a profound finding.
The GAO report also refers to the Dodd-Frank financial reforms of 2010, including the requirement that large bank holding companies create “living wills.”
The industry contends that the existence of these living wills – showing how a big bank’s collapse could be handled without causing global financial panic – means that “too big to fail” is over.
Sadly for the GAO, shortly after their report appeared, the Federal Reserve and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation rejected the most recent living wills as completely inadequate – meaning that there is still no road map for handling the failure of a very large bank.
Either such a firm would be allowed to fail, with dire consequences for global finance, or there would be some sort of backdoor bailout.
The GAO’s failure to see and state this problem clearly is a major disappointment.
As FDIC Vice Chairman Tom Hoenig put it, “Despite the thousands of pages of material these firms submitted, the plans provide no credible or clear path through bankruptcy that doesn’t require unrealistic assumptions and direct or indirect public support.”
To be fair, the GAO is not the only part of official Washington seemingly beguiled by large banks.
While the Fed now recognizes that living wills are inadequate, it has taken an extraordinarily long time to reach this rather obvious conclusion – and the Fed’s Board of Governors is still dragging its feet on forcing the banks to simplify their operations.
American forces performed disastrously at the Battle of Bladensburg in August 1814, allowing the British to capture and burn the capital.
Two hundred years later, we may well be witnessing that battle’s intellectual and policymaking analogue.
How to Become an Oligarch
WASHINGTON, DC – Let’s say that you would like to become one of the richest people on the planet, someone with enormous wealth and access to the top rung of political power.
This is not an unreasonable aspiration for any fresh college graduate in today’s winner-take-all economies.
But how realistic is it?
You could have a good idea for a new technology with potentially widespread demand.
With the right credentials and some luck, you could attract investment from a venture-capital fund.
Many such ventures do not pan out; but – particularly in the United States – such equity-financed rapid-growth companies are strongly encouraged.
Or you could issue a lot of debt.
This might seem like a strange idea in the immediate aftermath of a major debt-fueled financial crisis, and with many homeowners still underwater on their mortgages (they owe more than the house is worth, even if they can still afford the monthly payments).
In any case, to the extent that any recent American graduate thinks about debt, it is in the context of paying student loans.
But a new book, Private Equity at Work, by Eileen Appelbaum and Rosemary Batt, explains exactly how a few people have become immensely rich through the shrewd strategic use of debt.
The authors present a broad, detailed, and fair assessment of private equity – the business of investing in established companies through debt-financed purchases of controlling stakes.
(By contrast, venture capitalists support start-ups almost entirely through equity.)
And Appelbaum and Batt are careful to point out that many private-equity firms bring better management or other efficiency improvements to their portfolio companies.
But some of the largest funds – in fact, most of the brand names in the industry – use the clever trick of securing the debt they issue with collateral owned by the company they buy.
This is a little bit like buying a house.
A bank or mortgage originator lends you a large amount of money, which is secured by the house as collateral.
In other words, if you fail to make your payments on time, the lender can foreclose on the loan and take possession of the property – as millions of homeowners have experienced in the last decade.
And yet there is a major difference between how private equity operates and how a family buys a home.
Only a small part of the equity ownership acquired by any private equity fund comes from money provided by the partners who found and operate the fund.
Most of it is raised from outside investors.
(This would be like a family financing its down payment not from its own savings but from distant relatives about whom the family cares little.)
The fee structure in this overall arrangement is such that the people running the private-equity fund want to have as much debt as possible; this will increase the way upside returns are calculated, which in turn is the main driver of the compensation that the controlling “general” partners can receive.
More debt, of course, also means more risk; but this is not a sector focused primarily on risk-adjusted returns.
If the company cannot make its interest payments, its assets will need to be sold or its activities otherwise scaled back.
But, in contrast to the case of the struggling homeowner, not much of those downside costs typically fall on the general partner.
In addition, there are various other fees – charged to portfolio companies and to investors – that further encourage high levels of debt.
The US tax code allows interest payments to be deducted as a business expense; there is no equivalent allowance for payments to equity investors.
Appelbaum and Batt document in impressive detail the way in which top-tier private-equity funds have been able to earn high returns and ultimately enormous wealth for their founders, while not necessarily helping the companies in which they invest.
Interestingly, when returns are measured properly, the outside “limited” partners in private equity – including pension funds, insurance companies, and university endowments – also do not necessarily do so well.
However, before graduates flock to private equity, they should know that only the very big funds can use debt to skew returns for insiders in this way, primarily because only they can raise the capital needed to buy well-established companies that are rich in fixed assets, and thus in potential collateral.
Smaller private-equity funds typically buy into younger, smaller companies without such fixed assets, and the leverage in those deals is commensurately less.
Regulators have recently woken up to the incentives for excessive leverage in this sector – and to the risks that such leverage poses to lenders and the broader economy.
Not surprisingly, big private-equity firms seem determined to ignore or otherwise circumvent new restrictions.
As the policy debate on this issue heats up, one hopes that all participants will become better informed by reading Private Equity At Work.
If the new graduate in your life has the connections to join a very large brand-name private-equity fund, the path to immense wealth, political influence, or even power becomes much clearer.
Without such initial connections, however, it is very unlikely that he or she will become an oligarch.
But you knew that already.
Big Banks’ Shadow Dance
WASHINGTON, DC – One of the great myths propagated by very large financial institutions is that, if they were to become effectively regulated again, many investors and financial transactions would flee to “shadow banks.”
That sounds bad.
Anything that lurks in shadows must have nasty intent, potentially dangerous consequences, or both.
And its very shadowiness implies that nothing can be done about it – whatever is there must be beyond the reach of regulation or effective supervision.
So perhaps financial-system risk would increase, not decrease, if we regulated very large non-shadow banks properly.
So much for scary fairytales.
In reality, there are three kinds of “shadow��� activities, all of which are obvious, operate in plain sight, and could be controlled in a straightforward and responsible fashion.
Whether we have the political will to implement effective controls is, as always, another question – in large part because the big banks are very powerful and they would like the shadows to remain as shadowy as they are now.
The first set of shadow activities includes those conducted by the banks themselves, for example, as a way to reduce the amount of equity funding that they need.
The people who run big banks like leverage: More borrowed money (and less of their own) means that they get more upside, in the sense of a higher return on capital, unadjusted for risk.
When things go against them, it also means more losses.
But that is why it is good to be big – you can get more downside protection from the Federal Reserve or other official sources.
For example, Citigroup created so-called “special-purpose vehicles” to invest in mortgage-related securities prior to 2007.
They funded this activity with a lot of short-term debt and a wafer-thin cushion of equity.
When the market boomed, such schemes’ authors were heralded as geniuses.
But when house prices fell and mortgage-backed securities (and derivatives based on them) became illiquid, Citigroup took the liabilities back onto its balance sheet – and then needed to be rescued through massive, repeated bailouts.
These shadow activities were the work of Citigroup and other large complex financial institutions that are subject to regulation.
Their boom-and-bust character reflected nothing more than the relevant regulators’ failure – or refusal – to understand the risks involved.
The regulators were “captured” – meaning that they identified so closely with the intellectual perspective and worldview of large complex financial institutions that they were persuaded to allow something that was actually very dangerous.
Unfortunately, despite all we have been through in the past five years, these big banks’ shadows survive in various forms today – and regulators do not seem sufficiently inclined to turn on the lights.
The second set of shadow activities involves banking-type activities that really are conducted outside banks.
The most prominent example is money-market mutual funds.
These entities take money from investors and buy various kinds of assets, some of which may be risky – like short-maturity corporate debt.
The problem is that these funds create the impression that anything invested with them is just as safe as a deposit at an insured bank.
You can write checks on a money-market account, and your monthly statement shows it to have a stable value – just like your bank account.
In fact, the value of assets held by such funds fluctuates, and it is only an accounting convention – permitted by regulators – that allows them to report a stable value.
As a result, when the possibility arises that a money-market fund will be unable to pay investors in full – as happened after the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008 – all hell breaks loose.
There were similar fears recently when it became known that US-based money-market funds had lent heavily to European banks.
And some leading US banks also rely on money-market funding; here, too, the “shadows” and the banks have aligned interests.
There is a simple fix to this problem – require money-market funds to show the actual floating value of their assets, so that everyone understands that it is not a fixed number.
Some US regulators are pushing in this direction.
Unfortunately, the money-market funds – and their friends in the big banks – are pushing back hard.
The third set of shadow activities includes those that may yet emerge.
We should not underestimate the creativity of financiers seeking to escape capital requirements and leverage up.
A brilliant book by Anat Admati and Martin Hellwig, The Bankers’ New Clothes, demonstrates the pervasiveness of this problem and highlights its potentially devastating consequences for the economy.
The right approach is to search for and prevent excessive systemic risk wherever it manifests itself.
The US authorities now have a legal mandate to do this.
But will they be able to stand up to the powerful lobby of big banks and their shadowy allies?
The Importance of Being Boring
WASHINGTON, DC – The International Monetary Fund is an immensely useful organization, able to deliver substantial amounts of financial and technical assistance at short notice to almost any place in the world.
It also has the great advantage of almost always being perceived as incredibly boring.
Unfortunately for the IMF, it now needs a slightly higher public profile to convince the US Congress to agree to some important reforms.
The Ukrainian crisis may prove helpful, though that appears less likely now – which may be a good thing to the extent that one unintended consequence could be a loan to Ukraine that is larger than it really needs.
In the realm of international economics, being perceived as boring confers power to the extent that it allows major decisions to be made without a great deal of external scrutiny.
From 1918 to 1939, international economic cooperation was hard to come by – in large part because all of the attempted deals were put together at high-profile international conferences.
Following the creation of the IMF in 1944, many of the same decisions became routine, a lot less interesting, and much easier to implement.
The IMF rarely makes front-page headlines in the United States or other big countries, except when there is a racy personal dimension.
The last time that many read a news story about the Fund may have been when then-Managing Director Dominique Strauss Kahn was forced out in May 2011, following accusations that he sexually assaulted an employee in a New York hotel.
Since then, his successor, Christine Lagarde, has helped to restore the Fund’s reputation – and to return coverage of its programs and activities to newspapers’ dry and unemotional business sections.
(When I worked at the IMF in the 2000’s, page-three coverage of our events by leading newspapers was typically viewed as preferable to top billing.)
Of course, in countries receiving assistance – such as Greece in the last few years – the IMF excites great passion.
But in the halls of the US Congress, few people pay any attention.
In the highly charged partisan atmosphere of Washington, DC, this is without question almost always an advantage.
Imagine if the disbursement of all assistance to countries in trouble required Congressional approval, let alone spending from the US budget.
Nothing good would ever happen – and certainly not for the US.
The IMF is founded on the premise that it represents cooperation between all of the countries of the world.
The reality is that it stands for and operationalizes US power, in cooperation with America’s closest allies.
Anyone who doubts that should review a recent letter orchestrated by the Bretton Woods Committee, addressed to Congressional leaders on behalf of an impressive array of former Republican and Democratic cabinet secretaries.
The first paragraph reads, “The IMF has always been a valuable tool for advancing US national interests globally.”
The US does not dictate what happens at the IMF, but it does have a disproportionate influence.
Given the Fund’s origins in helping to rebuild Europe after World War II, European countries are also very well represented on its executive board and in terms of ownership shares (and thus voting weight on important decisions).
One major goal in recent decades has been to shift representation at the IMF somewhat away from Europe and toward the world’s emerging markets.
These countries’ global economic and financial significance has grown rapidly, yet they have relatively little representation at the Fund.
A package of reforms has been agreed.
Like most products of international negotiations, the agreement is not perfect; but it does move the ball forward.
(For the technical details, I recommend a recent paper by Edwin M. Truman, my colleague at the Peterson Institute for International Economics.)
These reforms need to be agreed, in legislative form, by the US Congress before they can take effect.
For whatever reason, President Barack Obama’s administration did not push this item hard in 2013 and early 2014 – and the agenda of encouraging further IMF reform has therefore languished.
The Obama administration proposed to tie IMF reform to the presumably imminent approval by Congress of funding for Ukraine.
This is sensible legislative tactics but not appealing as an economic strategy.
In effect, the administration tried to make the IMF more interesting, particularly to encourage Republicans in the House of Representatives to support the reforms.
The latest indications are that the Republicans will not be so enticed.
But the bigger problem is that Ukraine does not really need a massive loan from the IMF.
What Ukraine needs is a sharp reduction in corruption, as well as real legitimacy (through the ballot box) for people who want to rein in the influence of oligarchs – a group that has sapped the economy through plunder and incompetence over the past two decades.
IMF reform is sensible and should be supported.
The Europeans do not need their current level of representation, and the positions and voices of middle- and lower-income countries should be strengthened.
The Obama administration needs to make this case more directly and forcefully to Congress.
The inherent dullness of the IMF makes that hard.
Is China a Friend of Africa?
YAOUNDÉ – For many developing countries, foreign direct investment is viewed as something very positive.
International companies can bring cash, skills, technology, and high ethical standards to a host country.
But others do not always regard such investors favorably: many stand accused of political meddling, polluting the environment, labor abuses, and other unscrupulous practices.
This debate is particularly animated with respect to Chinese investment in Africa – a continent with a long history of political, economic, and commercial exploitation by foreign powers.
The so-called “neocolonialist school,” popular among China skeptics, considers China’s economic relationship with Africa as essentially imperial.
It is, they claim, focused exclusively on extracting maximum, short-term profit, with little regard for governance standards, let alone host countries’ longer-term development goals.
Others consider the relationship less a matter of exploitation than a simple function of capitalism’s free-market principles, according to which those without a strong negotiating position must accept tough terms.
Still others hold a more benign view: Sino-African relations constitute a partnership, in line with the New Partnership of Africa’s Development, a pan-African organization that seeks to empower African states in their international relations.
Who is right?
Any assessment must address several common accusations about Sino-African relations.
The first is that China’s trade-and-aid strategy targets only states with abundant natural resources and weak – and thus easily influenced – governments.
This assertion does not withstand scrutiny. China supports almost all Sub-Saharan African states (except those that do not accept China’s “One China” policy and continue, for example, to recognize Taiwan as an independent country).
Indeed, China is no more interested in the continent’s natural resources than are firms from any developed country.
Another widespread claim is that Chinese companies prefer to employ their own nationals rather than locals.
This is a serious accusation, given that one of the big attractions of foreign direct investment is local job creation.
But Chinese firms say that few local workers have the necessary skills; if they do, African governments can dictate some employment terms, including the proportion of local recruits on a project, as the Democratic Republic of Congo and Angola have done.
Critics have also highlighted the poor living conditions provided for Chinese workers, especially when compared to those offered to Western expatriates.
Again, this seems unfair, as Western employees tend to be hired for senior managerial or technical posts, which are more difficult and more expensive to fill.
One must also recognize that low labor costs are an essential component of China’s competitive advantage.
Along with tighter margins, low-cost financing, and cheaper materials, this allows Chinese firms to compete for projects with tenders for as little as half the price sought by their Western competitors.
Skeptics might add that China’s cost advantage also includes circumventing environmental and social regulations.
But this point appears to be based more on anecdotes than serious research.
And Western multinationals are hardly immune from charges of such abuses in Africa (often stretching back many years).
Insofar as some Chinese firms do lag behind Western standards, they are becoming increasingly sensitive to foreign criticism and are learning fast.
Finally, there is the argument that Chinese FDI fails to transfer technologies and skills to local businesses – what economists refer to as “positive spillovers.”
These can occur, for example, by bringing local businesses into supply chains, or by working with local experts on research and development.
Such spillovers require the investor to be closely integrated into the local economy.
China’s manufacturing investments, however, are often located in industrial parks or special economic zones (SEZs).
Such arrangements protect the investor from an unstable business environment, but they can also cut investors off from indigenous businesses; and when SEZs offer investors special tax breaks, the country is deprived of potential revenues.
Five SEZs were established in African markets in 2006, and five more were planned the following year.
Yet research on the impact of Chinese investment in Africa’s SEZs suggests that ties to local enterprises have been numerous and positive, and that they contribute to broader industrialization of the host economy.
Overall, there is little hard evidence to support a malign view of China’s investments in Africa.
Certainly, more can be done to strengthen institutions and ensure sustainable resource management.
Moreover, African governments could match China’s “Africa policy” with their own “China policy.”
This could encourage investment in a range of higher-value-added sectors, promote positive spillovers, and minimize adverse effects.
Only with a long-term strategy can host governments ensure that Chinese (and other) investments become a tool of development, not just a means of generating short-term profit.
Sinai’s Second-String Security
SHARM EL-SHEIKH – In the wake of an attack that killed 16 security officers in the Sinai Peninsula in August, the Egyptian military has ratcheted up the pressure against jihadis there.
Generals have promised an extended campaign to extinguish the terrorist threat, bringing in heavy armor and firing missiles at training camps to back up their pledge.
But, if past performance is indicative of future returns, the offensive is likely to be a fleeting affair.
The armed forces have never shown much interest in stabilizing Sinai, and previous operations to clear out jihadis have not prevented them from returning.
Egyptians blame the strictures of the 1979 Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty for their military’s inability to police Sinai.
The bilateral accord stipulates that Egypt can station only 22,000 troops in the western part of the peninsula, known as Zone A. In the eastern section bordering Israel, known as Zone C, the Egyptian presence is restricted to Central Security Forces personnel.
Composed of poorly trained cadets, the CSF is limited to carrying out “normal police functions,” according to the agreement’s security annex.
Jihadis have exploited the security void created by last year’s revolution to reinforce their presence in Sinai.
As the threat has mounted, Israel has allowed Egypt to increase troop levels in the peninsula beyond those stipulated in the peace accords.
But Egypt has not taken advantage of the offer.
Last August, the Israelis permitted an additional seven battalions and 20 tanks in Zone C. But the Egyptian armed forces never brought in the full number of additional troops, and did not even bother to transport the tanks across the Suez Canal.
Egypt’s approach toward Sinai troop deployments reflects its traditional neglect of the peninsula.
Historically, it has deployed only 70-80% of the 22,000 soldiers that the treaty allows in Zone A. And the military has never established a regional command in Sinai, preferring to allow units temporarily stationed there to report to their superiors scattered around Cairo and its environs.
Egypt’s new Islamist leaders may want to restore “full sovereignty” over the peninsula, as President Mohamed Morsi’s legal adviser, Mohamed Fouad Gadalla, recently noted.
Such saber-rattling comments vis-à-vis Israel are currently popular in the country.
But the generals, who have the final say on military matters, are likely to preserve the status quo.
Egypt’s indifference toward Sinai stems from its view of Israel.
When the guns fell silent following the two countries’ 1973 war, Egypt stopped viewing Israel as a threat.
In the cease-fire talks that followed, the two sides made so much progress that US Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, fearing that he would have nothing to negotiate when he arrived in the region weeks later, asked the Israelis to halt them.
Since then, Egypt has fought a war with Libya and sporadically clashed with Sudan. But not a shot has been fired across Sinai.
Employing CSF troops in the sensitive border region where jihadis have established their strongholds is similarly indicative of Sinai’s insignificance in Egyptian military thought.
Created to absorb army rejects who must still complete their mandatory national service, the CSF is a lower-rung security organization in a country whose armed forces are subpar to begin with.
Its members are uneducated rural men, some of whom are illiterate.
Their most crucial tasks include guarding banks and hotels.
These forces are poorly trained and badly equipped to take on fighters with experience in international jihadist campaigns.
And the CSF’s track record is dismal at best.
When it was deployed as part of the battle against the Islamist uprising of the 1990’s, insurgents penetrated a number of units.
The government’s counter-terrorism policies also work against an enhanced military role in quashing the Sinai jihadis.
Historically, Egypt has used its intelligence services, supplemented by the police and the CSF, to fight Islamist militants.
As a result, the army has neither the training nor the experience to grapple with Sinai insurgents.
The military’s recent offensive reflects this, relying on air strikes that imperiled civilians rather than a ground offensive that would have been more precise in achieving its objectives.
And dropping bombs instead of arresting jihadis prevented the military from gaining valuable intelligence about future attacks and transnational ties to other organizations and networks.
But, beyond such theoretical objectives, lay the operation’s practical realities.
Sinai residents claim that there were no funerals following the missile strikes.
The lack of evidence of casualties has left many Egyptian analysts believing that the military’s aim was not to target jihadis, but rather to silence its domestic and international critics.
If so, it is a tactic that can work only until the next attack.
And that will only lead to more civilian and military casualties in Egypt’s neglected war.
Turkey’s Iran Strategy
ISTANBUL – Following Iranian Foreign Minister Javad Zarif’s recent visit to the Gulf states, the Islamic Republic’s charm offensive is set to continue with President Hassan Rouhani’s trip to Turkey early next month.
Unlike the majority of Iran’s Arab neighbors, Turkey unequivocally welcomed the interim nuclear deal concluded last month between Iran and the P5+1 (the United Nations Security Council’s five permanent members and Germany).
But Turkish policymakers are keenly aware that the agreement may upend the Middle East’s fragile balance of power.
From Turkey’s perspective, the nuclear deal, if successfully implemented and made permanent after six months, is set to eliminate a major security concern.
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s government does not want to be faced with a nuclear Iran, fearing the emergence of an asymmetric power relationship with the Islamic Republic after centuries of balanced ties.
But Turkey also did not want a military intervention in Iran, led by the United States.
It was believed that a military strike would create even more problems in terms of regional stability and security.
That is why Turkish policymakers have consistently championed a diplomatic solution to the Iranian conundrum, which is what they got with the latest deal.
There are other reasons why Turkish officials have welcomed the interim agreement so warmly.
First, they interpret the deal as vindication of their ill-fated effort in May 2010 (together with Brazil) to reach an agreement with Iran on the disposition of Iran’s nuclear fuel.
Turkish authorities continue to highlight that earlier tripartite agreement with Iran.
The foreign ministry, for example, released a statement noting that, “The agreement…constitutes the first concrete positive development concerning Iran’s nuclear program since the Tehran Declaration of 2010.”
Turkey is also satisfied that the deal does not weaken its position on sovereign rights under the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
Turkey has consistently defended the interpretation that states have the right to establish domestic uranium-enrichment programs under the NPT, provided that they comply with their treaty commitments.
Even at the peak of diplomatic tensions with Iran, Turkey refrained from adopting America’s more maximalist position, which challenged the validity of Iran’s right to enrich uranium.
So the tacit and conditional acceptance of this right is a satisfactory outcome for Turkey.
Though Turkey currently has no plans to develop a fuel cycle of its own, its ambitious agenda for developing nuclear power has made policymakers intent on safeguarding the rights recognized by the NPT, including the right to enrich uranium.
There are also significant economic considerations for Turkey, which relies on Iran for a substantial share of its energy imports.
Equally important, as a neighboring country, Iran has been a traditional trading partner – a relationship worth more than $15 billion per year.
As a result, Turkey’s export potential has been negatively affected by the rising stringency of the sanctions regime against Iran, with trade losses estimated at $6 billion for the first nine months of 2013.
The gradual easing of the sanctions is expected to benefit Turkey’s export industries, which hope to satisfy pent-up Iranian demand for consumer and investment goods.
Finally, in contrast to Arab states like Saudi Arabia, Turkey is generally comfortable with the deal’s geopolitical ramifications.
The improvement of Iran’s relationship with the West and the easing of diplomatic pressure on the Islamic Republic is not a major concern.
But, for the Gulf states – and also possibly for Israel – this scenario is viewed as opening the door to stronger Iranian influence throughout the region.
These countries believe that, following the interim agreement, the US will fail to demonstrate sufficiently strong resolve to deter Iran from seeking regional hegemony.
In that case, tensions between Saudi Arabia and Iran will become more acute in the years ahead, emerging as the main destabilizing factor in the region.
It is in this context that Turkey’s role as a secular power, one capable of transcending the sectarian divide, will become more important than ever.
Turkish policymakers would be well advised to seize this opportunity to consolidate the country’s effectiveness as a regional actor, one that is uniquely positioned to stem the danger of a widening – and potentially extremely dangerous – rift.
Erdoğan’s Pyrrhic Victory
ISTANBUL – Turkey’s beleaguered Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan and his Justice and Development Party (AKP) have emerged victorious from this week’s local elections.
Still, the AKP’s triumph is unlikely to ameliorate the country’s internal conflicts, much less revive its tarnished international standing.
The local elections were widely seen as a referendum on Erdoğan.
The AKP received 44% of the national vote and now controls 49 of Turkey’s 81 metropolitan municipalities, including Istanbul and the capital, Ankara.
The main opposition force, the center-left Republican People’s Party (CHP), received 26% and won only 13 municipalities.
The outcome can be seen as a vindication of Erdoğan’s strategy of using political polarization to consolidate his support and counter the challenge to his rule posed by followers of his former ally, the US-based Islamic preacher Fethullah Gülen.
With the AKP’s initial support, the Gülen movement gradually infiltrated state institutions, particularly the judiciary and law enforcement, until the alliance eventually ended in an acrimonious split over the distribution of power within Turkey.
The end result was a dirty war of graft allegations spread through social media, apparently by Gülen’s followers primarily.
In response, the government has branded its opponents as enemies, and sought to promulgate new laws undermining the independence of the judiciary and restricting freedom of expression – including shutdowns of Twitter and YouTube.
Erdoğan’s strategy sought to complement this exercise in damage limitation with a demonstration of its popular legitimacy.
With the AKP’s overwhelming triumph in the local elections, Erdoğan can now justifiably claim that the Turkish electorate backs his approach, including his government’s suspension of the rule of law in order to obstruct corruption investigations that it views as a judicial coup attempted by Gülen’s followers.
Yet the AKP’s electoral victory heralds two specific dangers for the future of Turkey’s democracy.
The first is the persistence of intense political polarization in the run-up to the presidential election in August and the parliamentary election in the first half of 2015.
In Turkey, polarization does not have the same political costs as it does elsewhere: Given a weak system of checks and balances, the Turkish executive still has ample room to manage the state’s affairs.
And Erdoğan’s recent victory will embolden him to continue his polarizing politics as the basis of a presidential run.
The other danger is that of growing alienation from the West.
With a renewed popular mandate, the government is likely to begin prosecuting Gülenists for alleged criminal behavior.
But the creation of a wider siege mentality to boost domestic support also requires the invention of external co-conspirators – global financial markets, the international media, or even Turkey’s NATO allies.
Such allegations have been a part of the government’s conspiratorial rhetoric since last summer’s protests, and the authorities dismissed the recent corruption accusations against Erdoğan in the same way.
Turkey’s international standing has thus suffered enormously from Erdoğan’s strategy of internal polarization.
Long gone are the days when the prospect of accession to the European Union sustained a powerful dynamic of democratic reform.
With hope of EU membership fading, reform momentum has been lost, and the European Commission is expected to issue a sharply critical progress report in October.
The bilateral relationship with the United States is also under strain.
President Barack Obama and Erdoğan rarely speak with one another anymore, whereas Obama once considered Erdoğan among his favorite world leaders.
Turkey has also lost several regional allies, particularly some of the Gulf monarchies, which are angry at the Erdoğan government’s unconditional support for the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt.
Turkey’s much-vaunted soft-power diplomacy and neighborhood policy now lie in tatters.
Yet Turkey remains a large and important regional power.
With his popularity reaffirmed, Erdoğan could still move in a different direction.
Aware of the dangers of extreme polarization and reassured by the level of support obtained by the AKP in the local elections, Erdoğan may opt to lower the political temperature at home in the hope of repairing Turkey’s frayed relations abroad.
How Erdoğan behaves will not only determine the intensity of domestic political conflict; it will also greatly affect Turkey’s potential to regain the regional clout that it once enjoyed.
If Erdoğan believes that a higher level of antagonism is necessary to retain power, he may remain oblivious to the harm done to Turkey’s international standing.
The Sino-American Codependency Trap
NEW HAVEN – Increasingly reliant on each other for sustainable economic growth, the United States and China have fallen into a classic codependency trap, bristling at changes in the rules of engagement.
The symptoms of this insidious pathology were on clear display during Chinese President Xi Jinping’s recent visit to America.
Little was accomplished, and the path ahead remains treacherous.
Codependency between America and China was born in the late 1970s, when the US was in the grips of wrenching stagflation, and the Chinese economy was in shambles following the Cultural Revolution.
Both countries needed new recipes for revival and growth, and turned to each other in a marriage of convenience.
China provided cheap goods that enabled income-constrained American consumers to make ends meet, and the US provided the external demand that underpinned Deng Xiaoping’s export-led growth strategy.
Over the years, this arrangement morphed into a deeper relationship.
Lacking in saving and wanting to grow, the US relied increasingly on China’s vast reservoir of surplus saving to make ends meet.
Anchoring its currency to the dollar, the Chinese built up a huge stake in US Treasuries, which helped America fund record budget deficits.
America provided China with both stability and growth anchors.
China enabled the US to sidestep the mounting perils of subpar saving, reckless fiscal policy, and weak household income growth.
But economic codependency is as unstable as human codependency.
One partner eventually changes, while the other is left hanging, feeling scorned.
China is now changing, and America doesn’t like it.
Not only is China rebalancing its economic model from exports to consumption; it is also redefining its national character.
It has adapted a more muscular foreign policy in the South China Sea, embraced the nationalistic longing of rejuvenation, framed by what Xi calls the “China Dream.”
And it has started to reshape the international financial architecture with new institutions such as the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, the New Development Bank, and the Silk Road Fund.
The US response has put China on edge, particularly America’s so-called “Asian pivot,” or “strategic rebalancing,” with its subtext of containing China.
The US recognizes the need to increase China’s role in the existing Bretton Woods institutions (the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank); but when it fails to deliver, it chafes at Chinese institution building.
And while the US has long urged China to tilt its growth model toward private consumption, it is uncomfortable with many of the implications of this shift.
In large part, America’s unease reflects a failure to address its core economic problems – mainly a lack of domestic saving.
The net national saving rate (businesses, households, and the government combined) stood at just 2.9% of national income in mid-2015, less than half the 6.3% average over the final three decades of the twentieth century.
As China shifts from surplus saving to saving absorption – using its surpluses to build a safety net for the Chinese people rather than subsidize the savings of Americans – a saving-short US will find it tough to fill the void.
America’s monetary policy reveals another layer of codependency.
With domestic demand still weak – real consumption has grown at an anemic 1.4% pace over the past 7.5 years – the US needs export growth more than ever.
So the outlook for China, America’s third-largest and most rapidly growing major export market, is crucial for a Fed that has failed to gain much traction from its unconventional post-crisis monetary policies.
This aspect of codependency is global in scope.
Over the past decade, China has accounted for an average of 1.6 percentage points of world GDP growth per year – more than double the combined 0.7-percentage-point contribution of the so-called advanced economies.
Even if its GDP growth slows to 6.8% this year, China would account for slightly more growth than is likely from the advanced world.
Little wonder that China’s growth prospects are such a big deal for policymakers worldwide.
Speaking in Seattle on September 22, Xi stressed the need for both the US and China to deepen their “mutual understanding of strategic intentions” as a key objective for the bilateral relationship.
And yet his deliberations with US President Barack Obama were lacking in precisely that respect.
The agenda was shaped more by disconnected issues – cyber security, climate change, and market access – rather than by an appreciation of the strategic challenges that both countries face alone and together.
Moreover, there was little sign of meaningful progress even on the issues that Xi and Obama discussed.
Both sides hailed a newfound commitment to high-level exchanges on cyber crime; but the US is about to impose sanctions on Chinese companies that have benefited from egregious hacking.
Likewise, they stressed yet again the need for a “high standard” bilateral investment treaty; but there was little indication of serious movement on the industries that would be shielded from such an agreement (the “negative list.”).
To its credit, China did announce an important shift in environmental policy – a nationwide cap-and-trade system for greenhouse-gas emissions, to go into effect in 2017.
But, without similar actions by the US, China’s move hardly tempers the perils of global climate change.
Trapped in a web of codependency, the US-China relationship has become fraught with friction and finger pointing.
In human behavior, the endgame of this pathology is usually a painful breakup.
The just-concluded summit between Obama and Xi did little to dispel this possibility.
Sixty Years of the Palestinian “Catastrophe”
As the state of Israel celebrates its 60th birthday, Palestinians remember the Nakbeh,  or “catastrophe” – their story of dispossession, occupation, and statelessness.
But, for both sides, as well as external powers, the events of 1948 and what has followed – the occupation since 1967 of the remaining lands of historic Palestine – represents a tragic failure.
Israel is most at fault for this failure, owing to its continued military occupation and illegal settlements.
Despite giving lip service to peace, the Israeli army’s refusal to leave the occupied territories continues to be in direct contravention to what the preamble to United Nations Security Council resolution 242 termed the “inadmissible taking of land by force.”
But the international community, Palestinians, and Arabs all bear responsibility as well, albeit at different levels.
Indeed, the list of disappointments pre-dates Israeli statehood and the Nakbeh itself: the King-Crane Commission of 1919, the 1937 Peel Report, the British White Paper of 1939, the Anglo-American Committee of Inquiry of 1945, and the UN Partition Plan of 1947.
Since then, we have had UN resolutions 194, 242, and 338, the Rogers Plan, the Mitchell Plan, the Tenet Plan, Camp David, Taba, the Saudi plan, the “road map,” the Geneva Initiative, the People’s Choice, and the Arab Peace Initiative.
To be sure, Palestinians and Arabs are also to blame for their inability to empathize, recognize, and understand the plight of the Jewish people.
Although Palestinians had nothing to do with European anti-Semitism and the Nazi Holocaust, they should not have turned a blind eye to the Jews’ tragedy.
Palestinians were so locked in their opposition to Zionism that they were unable to appreciate the Jews’ existential needs, just as they failed to appreciate the effects of indiscriminate acts of violence against Israeli civilians.
Consumed with legitimate anger, Palestinians and Arabs failed to come up with a serious approach to reach out to Israelis and failed to devise a workable political strategy that would address Palestinian daily needs and national aspirations.
Cross-border attacks, hijackings, Arab and international diplomacy, secret talks, non-violent resistance, suicide bombings, rockets, regional Arab initiatives, international peace envoys: nothing has succeeded in ending the occupation.
With each approach, Palestinian leaders, believing Arab states’ hollow proclamations of solidarity with their cause, have failed to measure accurately their own powers vis-à-vis the Israelis.
Indeed, the Arab states have come nowhere close to matching the level of US and European aid to the Palestinians, much less the even higher level of Western support – political and military, as well as financial – that has been the key to Israel’s ability to withstand Palestinian demands for freedom.
While European public and private support to Israel, especially in its founding years, is believed to be very extensive, the US has created a firewall of vetoes and political protection for Israel, in addition to providing massive financial support.
Writing in the Washington Report on Middle East Affairs , Shirl McArthur, a retired US Foreign Service officer, estimates that direct US aid to Israel between 1949 and 2006 totaled $108 billion.
After the US, Germany is the principal donor of both economic and military aid to Israel.
By far the largest component of German aid has been in the form of restitution payments for Nazi atrocities.
Total German assistance to the Israeli government, Israeli individuals, and Israeli private institutions has been roughly $31 billion, or $5,345 per capita, bringing combined US and German assistance to almost $20,000 per Israeli.
In the face of Israel’s strength, the Palestinian national movement’s failure has now played into the hands of Islamists.
The Islamic Resistance Movement (known by its Arabic acronym, Hamas), which emerged during the first Intifada in 1987, grew more powerful in the 1990’s, after the return of the PLO’s Yasser Arafat and the creation, as a result of the Oslo Accords, of the Palestinian Authority.
Hamas’s rejection of the Oslo Accords bore political fruit as it became increasingly clear to Palestinians that the handshakes on the White House lawn would not produce the coveted end to the Israeli occupation, or even of Israel’s illegal settlement activities.
Yet, despite history’s long train of failures, Hamas’s June 2007 seizure of control of Gaza, and its pariah status in the West, we are repeatedly told by the US that 2008 will be the year of a peace agreement.
Meanwhile, the Arab peace proposal, which calls for a Palestinian state on the 1967 borders and a fair solution to the refugee problem in exchange for normalization of Arab states’ relations with Israel, appears doomed.
After 60 years of failures, and as the generation that lived through the Nakbeh passes from the scene, a political settlement that can provide Palestinians with freedom in an independent state alongside a secure Israel and a fair solution of the refugee problem is more necessary – but also appears less possible – than ever.  
Slamming the Euro Door
LONDON – Last week, central bankers from around the world assembled in Frankfurt to bask in the glory of the euro’s first ten years.
But for those coming from euro candidate countries, the event was a cold shower.
Just as the global financial crisis has made euro membership seem more urgent and necessary than ever, euro incumbents have started floating proposals that would raise the bar for entry. 
Under the proposal that was openly discussed in Frankfurt, in addition to the macroeconomic Maastricht criteria that have been in place since the euro’s launch, the quality of a country’s banking system would be used as an additional criterion for euro entry.
Leaving aside the hypocrisy of Western governments pontificating on this topic while they are bailing out banks after massive regulatory failures, the proposal is seriously flawed.
To fully appreciate the proposal’s absurdity, consider the extraordinarily successful East European growth model of the past two decades.
The model advocated by Western Europe and embraced by Eastern Europe has been based on the idea that capital should flow from capital-rich to capital-poor countries.
Economists have to go back to the nineteenth-century United States to find a similar textbook example of successful growth, with large current-account deficits financed mainly through foreign direct investment.
Financial flows have been accompanied by unprecedented financial integration, with most East European banks now controlled by Western parents.
This model has worked remarkably well not just in generating growth, but also, as documented in the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development’s 2008 
 Transition Report
 , in improving the institutions that support markets and democracy in Eastern Europe.
Mortgages in Swiss francs and car loans in Japanese yen have been common throughout the region.
But it was probably in Hungary, the first country to seek an IMF package, that these practices were most widespread.
Yet this vulnerability was largely created, or at least accommodated, by Western banks.
The funding from the parent banks that in the earlier phase of the crisis helped provide liquidity to the East European banking systems now appears more as a liability and possible source of contagion.
It was also the West European financial regulators and supervisors who, under “home rule,” were supposed to discourage these excesses.
The penetration of foreign banks has also effectively deprived countries in Central and Eastern Europe of monetary policy tools, leaving them with little control over extremely rapid credit growth. 
Add to this the impact of the current West European bank rescue packages on the banking systems of Eastern Europe.
On one hand, these programs help promote stability by supporting the parent banks active in the region.
On the other hand, the interventions have also undermined the East European financial systems.&#160; 
Governments in Eastern Europe cannot credibly match the broad deposit guarantees issued by their Western neighbors, and the generous recapitalizations have brought down Western banks’ relative funding costs, further weakening local institutions’ competitiveness.
Finally, many governments explicitly or implicitly restrict parent banks’ ability to use government funds to back up their East European subsidiaries, many of them critical to the stability of the local financial systems.
To make the quality of the banking system a new criterion for euro membership is not only hypocritical; it is also counterproductive.
Relatively high levels of inflation have been the main reason why euro membership was perceived as increasingly remote in most countries, and why the prospect of euro entry has had a diminishing impact on domestic reform efforts.
A small consolation in the current crisis is that inflation rates are now coming down.
More importantly, the crisis has demonstrated the value for these small economies of being part of a larger currency area. 
Instead of exploiting the current opportunity of unprecedented leverage over euro candidates to push them to meet the Maastricht criteria, euro incumbents are contemplating a new and exceedingly vague criterion based on the quality of banking systems.
And whose banks are these?
Who are we kidding?
Sleepwalking in the Balkans
SARAJEVO - Almost exactly 13 years ago, American leadership brought an end to Bosnia's three-and-a-half-year war through the Dayton peace agreement.
Today that country is now in real danger of collapse.
As in 1995, resolve and transatlantic unity are needed if we are not to sleepwalk into another crisis.
Bosnian Serb Prime Minister Milorad Dodik, once the darling of the international community (and especially the United States) for his opposition to the nationalist Serb Democratic party, has adopted that party's agenda without being tainted by their genocidal baggage.
His long-term policy seems clear: to place his Serb entity, Republika Srpska, in a position to secede if the opportunity arises.
Exploiting the weaknesses in Bosnia’s constitutional structure, the international community's weariness and EU inability to stick by its conditionality, he has, in two years, reversed much of the real progress in Bosnia over the past 13, crucially weakened the institutions of the Bosnian state, and all but stopped the country's evolution into a functioning (and EU-compatible) state.
Dodik's actions have been fuelled by Russian encouragement and petrodollars.
In addition his rival, the senior president of all of Bosnia-Herzegovina, Haris Silajdzic, has stressed the need to abolish the two entities that make up Bosnia, to create one non-federal country.
Dodik professes to respect Dayton and Silajdzic wishes to revise it, but both men are violating its basic principle: a federal system within a single state.
This toxic interaction is at the heart of today's Bosnian crisis.
As a result, the suspicion and fear that began the war in 1992 has been reinvigorated.
A destructive dynamic is accelerating, and Bosnian and Croat nationalism is on the rise.& Recent local elections gave a fillip to nationalist parties.
This tipping point is the result of a distracted international community.
While the Bush administration largely turned its back on Bosnia, the EU became deeply engaged; EU membership has been the critical lever for pressing reforms in Bosnia since it was made policy in 2003.
But the EU did not develop a coherent strategy, and by proclaiming progress where it has not been achieved, the EU weakened not only its own influence in the country, but also the Office of the High Representative (OHR) and the international military presence (the European Union Force, Eufor, which succeeded NATO) the drivers of progress in Bosnia since Dayton.
The degeneration of the OHR's influence coincided with the withdrawal of the US military and the hollowing-out of Eufor, which now has little in the way of operational capacity.
Despite the danger signals, France and Spain apparently want to pull the plug on Eufor altogether before the end of the year, seemingly to prove the purely technical point that EU missions can end.
The EU, fixated on a still undefined ampquot;transitionampquot; from OHR to an EU-centered mission, seems intent on emptying its toolbox before it knows what tools it will need to enable Bosnia's transition.
It failed, for example, to back its man on the ground, the able Slovak diplomat Miroslav Lajcak, at a crucial moment, fatally undermining his authority.
Like Dodik, Russia is exploiting weak EU resolve, making trouble for the US and EU where possible.
Yet the Kremlin’s stake in Bosnia pales in comparison to those of the EU or US.& Russia’s attempts to close the high representative's office, regardless of whether the job is done, must be rebuffed.
It has to remain open - or a similarly strong organization set up - until the conditions for the transition to a more normal EU presence are met.
The US, lame duck president or not, must re-engage.
Javier Solana, the EU's foreign policy chief, should initiate an independent study with the task of producing a new transatlantic policy, backed by America's full engagement and strong EU conditionality, which can lead to deeper and broader international involvement in Bosnia.
A collapse of the Dayton peace agreement would be an unnecessary and unwanted additional problem for the next US president.
The EU’s foreign policy attention has recently focused on Kosovo, but it is Bosnia that has always been the bigger and more dangerous challenge.
That country's decline can still be arrested, provided the EU wakes up, the new US administration gets engaged, and both renew their commitment to Bosnia's survival as a state, by maintaining an effective troop presence and beginning the process of strengthening the international community's approach long-term, including finding ways to untie Bosnia's constitutional knot.
It's time to pay attention to Bosnia again, if we don't want things to get nasty very quickly. By now, the entire world knows the price of that.
Five Reasons for Slow Growth
MILAN – A remarkable pattern has emerged since the 2008 global financial crisis: Governments, central banks, and international financial institutions have consistently had to revise their growth forecasts downward.
With very few exceptions, this has been true of projections for the global economy and individual countries alike.
It is a pattern that has caused real damage, because overoptimistic forecasts delay measures that are needed to boost growth, and thus impede full economic recovery.
Forecasters need to come to terms with what has gone wrong; fortunately, as the post-crisis experience lengthens, some of the missing pieces are coming into clear focus.
I have identified five.
First, the capacity for fiscal intervention – at least among developed economies – has been underutilized.
As former United States Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Frank Newman argued in a recent book, Freedom from National Debt, a country’s capacity for fiscal intervention is better assessed by examining its aggregate balance sheet than by the traditional method of comparing its debt (a liability) to its GDP (a flow).
Reliance on the traditional method has resulted in missed opportunities, particularly given that productive public-sector investment can more than pay for itself.
Investments in infrastructure, education, and technology help drive long-term growth.
They increase competitiveness, facilitate innovation, and boost private-sector returns, generating growth and employment.
It does not take a lot of growth to offset even substantial investment – especially given current low borrowing costs.
Research by the International Monetary Fund has indicated that these fiscal multipliers – the second factor overlooked by forecasters – vary with underlying economic conditions.
In economies with excess capacity (including human capital) and a high degree of structural flexibility, the multipliers are greater than once thought.
In the US, for instance, structural flexibility contributed to economic recovery and helped the country adapt to long-term technological changes and global market forces.
In Europe, by contrast, structural change faces resistance.
Fiscal stimulus in Europe may still be justified, but structural rigidity will lower its impact on long-term growth.
Europe’s fiscal interventions would be easier to justify if they were accompanied by microeconomic reforms targeted at increasing flexibility.
A third piece of the forecast puzzle is the disparity between the behavior of financial markets and that of the real economy.
Judged only by asset prices, one would have to conclude that growth is booming.
Obviously, it is not.
A major contributor to this divergence has been ultra-loose monetary policy, which, by flooding financial markets with liquidity, was supposed to boost growth.
But it remains unclear whether elevated asset prices are supporting aggregate demand or mainly shifting the distribution of wealth.
It is equally unclear what will happen to asset prices when monetary assistance is withdrawn.
A fourth factor is the quality of government.
In recent years, there has been no shortage of examples of governments abusing their powers to favor the ruling elite, their supporters, and a variety of special interests, with detrimental effects on regulation, public investment, the delivery of services, and growth.
It is critically important that public services, public investment, and public policy are well managed.
Countries that attract and motivate skilled public managers outperform their peers.
Finally, and most important, the magnitude and duration of the drop in aggregate demand has been greater than expected, partly because employment and median incomes have been lagging behind growth.
This phenomenon preceded the crisis, and high levels of household debt have exacerbated its impact in the aftermath.
The stagnation of incomes in the bottom 75% of the distribution presents an especially large challenge, because it depresses consumption, undermines social cohesion (and thus political stability and effectiveness), and decreases intergenerational mobility – especially where public education is poor.
Sometimes change occurs at a pace that outstrips the capacity of individuals and systems to respond.
This appears to be one of those times.
Labor markets have been knocked out of equilibrium as new technology and shifting global supply chains have caused demand in the labor market to change faster than supply can adjust.
This is not a permanent condition, but the transition will be long and complex.
The same forces that are dramatically increasing the world economy’s productive potential are largely responsible for the adverse trends in income distribution.
Digital technology and capital have eliminated middle-income jobs or moved them offshore, generating an excess supply of labor that has contributed to income stagnation precisely in that range.
A more muscular response will require an awareness of the nature of the challenge and a willingness to meet it by investing heavily in key areas – particularly education, health care, and infrastructure.
It must be recognized that this is a difficult moment and countries must mobilize their resources to help their people with the transition.
That will mean redistributing income and ensuring access to essential basic services.
If countering inequality and promoting intergenerational opportunity introduces some marginal inefficiencies and blunts some incentives, it is more than worth the price.
Public provision of critical basic services like education or health care may never be as efficient as private-sector alternatives; but where efficiency entails exclusion and inequality of opportunity, public provision is not a mistake.
One hopes that a growing awareness of the significance of these and other factors will have a positive effect on policy agendas in the coming year.
Misi: Perlindungan Lingkungan Hidup
CHEVY CHASE, MARYLAND – Bayangkan anda hidup di tahun 1966.
Saat ini anda berada di salah satu gedung pemerintah di Washington, DC dan menyaksikan seorang pejabat berkata pada pria berjas, “Misi anda adalah memusnahkan musuh yang menimbulkan korban lebih banyak dibandingkan dua Perang Dunia.
Anggaran anda tidak besar, tim cukup kecil, dan jika anda gagal, Menteri akan menyangkal segala tindakan anda.”
Itu tampak seperti sepotong adegan dari film Hollywood.
Sesungguhnya itu meniru adegan pembuka film serial televisi Mission: Impossible yang dikeluarkan pertama kali di tahun 1966.