Indeed, one of the largest bribes (a reputed $180 million) paid in recent times in Nigeria was by Halliburton, a company tightly intertwined with US political power.
(Dick Cheney went from being Halliburton’s CEO to the US vice presidency.)
Last year, the United Nations Environment Program (UNEP) issued a remarkable report on Ogoniland, a major ethnic homeland in the Niger Delta that has been at the epicenter of conflict between local communities and international oil.
The report was as scathing as it was scientifically clear.
The SDGs offer a critical opportunity for the world to set clear, compelling standards for government and corporate behavior.
Many major companies, including in the oil industry, have expressed their readiness to support sustainable development goals.
Cleaning up the Niger Delta would provide the strongest possible example of a new age of accountability.
Shell, Chevron, ExxonMobil, and other major oil companies should step forward and help to fund the necessary cleanup, ushering in a new era of responsibility.
The Nigerian government’s own accountability is on the line as well.
It is heartening that several Nigerian senators have recently been in the forefront of efforts to strengthen the rule of law in the oil sector.
The cleanup of the Niger Delta provides an ideal opportunity for Nigeria, the oil industry, and the international community to show convincingly that a new age has dawned.
From now on, sustainable development must not be a mere slogan, but rather an operational approach to global governance and well-being on a strained and crowded planet.
A Centerless Euro Cannot Hold
CAMBRIDGE – With youth unemployment touching 50% in eurozone countries such as Spain and Greece, is a generation being sacrificed for the sake of a single currency that encompasses too diverse a group of countries to be sustainable?
If so, does enlarging the euro’s membership really serve Europe’s apparent goal of maximizing economic integration without necessarily achieving full political union?
The good news is that economic research does have a few things to say about whether Europe should have a single currency.
The bad news is that it has become increasingly clear that, at least for large countries, currency areas will be highly unstable unless they follow national borders.
At a minimum, currency unions require a confederation with far more centralized power over taxation and other policies than European leaders envision for the eurozone.
What of Nobel Prize winner Robert Mundell’s famous 1961 conjecture that national and currency borders need not significantly overlap?
In his provocative American Economic Review paper “A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas,” Mundell argued that as long as workers could move within a currency region to where the jobs were, the region could afford to forgo the equilibrating mechanism of exchange-rate adjustment.
He credited another (future) Nobel Prize winner, James Meade, for having recognized the importance of labor mobility in earlier work, but criticized Meade for interpreting the idea too stringently, especially in the context of Europe’s nascent integration.
Mundell did not emphasize financial crises, but presumably labor mobility is more important today than ever.
Not surprisingly, workers are leaving the eurozone’s crisis countries, but not necessarily for its stronger northern region.
Instead, Portuguese workers are fleeing to booming former colonies such as Brazil and Macau.
Irish workers are leaving in droves to Canada, Australia, and the United States.
Spanish workers are streaming into Romania, which until recently had been a major source of agricultural labor in Spain.
Still, if intra-eurozone mobility were anything like Mundell’s ideal, today we would not be seeing 25% unemployment in Spain while Germany’s unemployment rate is below 7%.
Later writers came to recognize that there are other essential criteria for a successful currency union, which are difficult to achieve without deep political integration.
Peter Kenen argued in the late 1960’s that without exchange-rate movements as a shock absorber, a currency union requires fiscal transfers as a way to share risk.
For a normal country, the national income-tax system constitutes a huge automatic stabilizer across regions.
In the US, when oil prices go up, incomes in Texas and Montana rise, which means that these states then contribute more tax revenue to the federal budget, thereby helping out the rest of the country.
Europe, of course, has no significant centralized tax authority, so this key automatic stabilizer is essentially absent.
Some European academics tried to argue that there was no need for US-like fiscal transfers, because any desired degree of risk sharing can, in theory, be achieved through financial markets.
This claim was hugely misguided.
Financial markets can be fragile, and they provide little capacity for sharing risk related to labor income, which constitutes the largest part of income in any advanced economy.
Kenen was mainly concerned with short-term transfers to smooth out cyclical bumpiness.
But, in a currency union with huge differences in income and development levels, the short term can stretch out for a very long time.
Many Germans today rightly feel that any system of fiscal transfers will morph into a permanent feeding tube, much the way that northern Italy has been propping up southern Italy for the last century.
Indeed, more than 20 years on, Western Germans still see no end in sight for the bills from German unification.
Later, Maurice Obstfeld pointed out that, in addition to fiscal transfers, a currency union needs clearly defined rules for the lender of last resort.
Otherwise, bank runs and debt panics will be rampant.
Obstfeld had in mind a bailout mechanism for banks, but it is now abundantly clear that one also needs a lender of last resort and a bankruptcy mechanism for states and municipalities.
A logical corollary of the criteria set forth by Kenen and Obstfeld, and even of Mundell’s labor-mobility criterion, is that currency unions cannot survive without political legitimacy, most likely involving region-wide popular elections.
Europe’s leaders cannot carry out large transfers across countries indefinitely without a coherent European political framework.
European policymakers today often complain that, were it not for the US financial crisis, the eurozone would be doing just fine.
Perhaps they are right.
But any financial system must be able to withstand shocks, including big ones.
Europe may never be an “optimum” currency area by any standard.
But, without further profound political and economic integration – which may not end up including all current eurozone members – the euro may not make it even to the end of this decade.
Achieving a “Europe of Results”
BRUSSELS – The tsunami that has swept across financial markets is a global catastrophe.
If handled correctly, however, the crisis may yet raise the esteem of the European Union and its institutions.
The EU’s legitimacy problem has two different aspects: apathy, leading to a low turnout in the European parliamentary elections, and outright euro-skepticism.
The voter-turnout problem partly reflects frustration about the present state of the EU, and also people’s impression that they can exert little influence by voting one way or the other.
Euro-skepticism, on the other hand, and the looming threat of anti-European populism, is directly linked to the idea that the EU is not merely incapable of offering a solution to the crisis, but in fact is part of the problem.
So, although the EU represents our best hope of ensuring that Europe is internationally competitive in today’s increasingly difficult environment, it is actually being blamed for globalization.
Many people confuse these two aspects of the EU’s legitimacy problem, and believe that somehow turnout in European elections can be increased by pointing out to people how good and important the EU is.
But in most cases, this is not possible.
At first sight, the easiest answer to the problem of low voter turnout is to give more power to the European Parliament.
But if this was the solution, then we would not have had steadily declining turnouts since the high point of 63%, at the first elections to the European Parliament in 1979. After all, since then the EP’s influence and powers of joint decision-making have grown constantly.
The trouble is that, EP elections must be “about” something if voters are to be interested, which means they must involve a real choice.
And a real choice requires Europe-wide election campaigns by all parties. This would also involve making the choice of the European Commission’s president dependent on the outcome of the EP elections.
But, in fact, both of these conditions have already been met; in 2004, Portuguese Prime Minister José Manuel Durão Barroso was appointed President of the Commission because he came from the political organization with the strongest election result, the European People’s Party.
And this year’s elections saw a more intensive presence of party organizations at European level than ever before.
Instead, I believe that the most important way to reawaken voters’ interest in European elections will be to open up the election of the Commission’s President to them, and create a genuinely Europe-wide political debate during the next election campaign.
The Euro-skepticism problem can be tackled only if the Union itself starts to perform better, and is seen to be doing so.
That is why in the aftermath of the failed referenda four years ago in France and the Netherlands on the Constitutional treaty, the Commission tried to emphasize the idea of a “Europe of Results” that would seek to convince citizens of its worth through concrete achievements.
Given the gravity of the economic crisis, the time has come for the EU to demonstrate its strengths whenever possible.
The aim must be not only to win back the hearts of Europeans who have become skeptical, but also to convince them that the Union is indispensable to meeting the challenges Europeans face.
Europe’s citizens understand that the relatively small nation-states that make up the EU are no longer able to face these enormous challenges on their own.
In Ireland, last autumn’s financial crisis provoked a turnaround in public opinion about the EU, and even in Iceland, although it lies on the periphery of our continent, membership of the EU and the euro have become a priority.
European countries have become so interconnected that isolated national measures on issues like financial-market regulation are hopeless.
A changing world in which new powers like China and India play an increasingly important role will not wait for Europe to make up its mind.
The EU must instead show leadership through its efforts to solve the world’s current problems.
As for the European People’s Party, for us the economy is not an end in itself but should serve the people.
The economic crisis was caused by shortsightedness and a lack of control in the global financial system. Now we must redefine the role of regulators in financial markets and in the wider economy, for we cannot let the financial sector walk off with the profits and leave taxpayers bearing the losses.
That doesn’t mean that we are advocating a move to socialism; we want better and smarter regulation, not regulation for its own sake.
We see five keys to recovery:
New job creation must be a core priority, with reform and investment in education and life-long learning necessary to create opportunity for all;
A “Europe of Results” is achievable.
It can strengthen the EU’s legitimacy, though, only if policy recommendations such as these, and the successes that result from implementing them, are communicated clearly and effectively to the general public.
Roadmap Pendidikan 2030
LONDON – Ketika mengunjungi kamp pengungsi Zaatari di Yordania awal tahun ini, saya menemui anak-anak yang mengutarakan makna pendidikan bagi mereka.
Bagi pemuda-pemudi asal Suriah yang terpaksa meninggalkan rumah dan semua harta benda yang dimiliki, pendidikan lebih dari sekadar kualifikasi atau nilai ujian; pendidikan mewakili harapan mereka untuk masa depan.
Anak-anak yang hidup di penampungan seperti Zaatari dan jutaan lainnya di seluruh dunia merupakan pokok dari International Commission on Financing Global Education Opportunity, sebuah forum yang saya ikuti sejak September tahun lalu.
Komisi tersebut berkomitmen terhadap Tujuan 4 dari rumusan PBB tentang Sustainable Development Goals (Tujuan Pembangunan Berkelanjutan), yang bertujuan “menjamin pendidikan yang inklusif dan berkualitas serta mendorong kesempatan belajar seumur hidup bagi semua orang” pada tahun 2030.
Prospek realisasi tujuan tersebut masih jauh dari sempurna.
Di tengah isu-isu pembangunan lainnya yang menuntut perhatian kita, para pembuat kebijakan harus ingat bahwa pendidikan sangat fundamental; tapi di luar itu, pendidikan akan menjadi katalisator bagi kemajuan pembangunan lainnya.
Sebagaimana bunyi peribahasa kuno Afrika, mendidik seorang anak perempuan sama dengan mendidik sebuah bangsa.
Jaminan akses kepada pendidikan berkualitas bagi anak bangsa, terutama perempuan, akan berefek pada penurunan jumlah perkawinan anak di bawah umur dan buruh anak serta eksploitasi.
Pendidikan memiliki manfaat sosial jangka panjang: selain dari perluasan partisipasi politik, anak-anak yang berpendidikan akan menyumbangkan modal intelektualnya dan mengejar peluang-peluang kewirausahaan ketika mereka tumbuh, sehingga menggiatkan pertumbuhan ekonomi.
Kendala-kendala yang marak di dunia pendidikan bisa diatasi melalui dua prinsip yang melekat dalam tujuan tersebut.
Pertama, “bagi semua” (“for all”) berarti kita harus fokus pada anak-anak yang tertinggal.
Jutaan anak kini mengalami putus sekolah atau hanya mendapat pendidikan mutu rendah karena asal-usul atau tempat tinggal mereka.
Menurut UN High Commissioner for Refugees, kemungkinan anak-anak pengungsi mengalami putus sekolah adalah lima kali lebih besar dibandingkan anak-anak di negara yang menampung pengungsi.
Selain itu, di semua negara Afrika (kecuali dua negara), jumlah anak perempuan yang menyelesaikan pendidikan dasar masih lebih rendah dibandingkan anak laki-laki.
Diperlukan pendekatan baru yang menjawab persoalan eksklusi dan membuat pendidikan terjangkau dan relevan, agar anak-anak pun termotivasi untuk bersekolah dan menyelesaikan studinya.
Kedua, “berkualitas” (“quality”): pendidikan haruslah efektif agar anak-anak betul-betul mendapat pembelajaran.
Bagi 61 juta anak-anak yang terputus dari pendidikan dasar, pendidikan formal mustahil akan terpenuhi.
Tetapi, sama mendesaknya, lebih dari sepertiga anak usia sekolah dasar – 250 juta anak – tidak mendapatkan pembelajaran yang sifatnya mendasar, menurut temuan dalam UNESCO Education for All Global Monitoring Report.
Meski setengah diantaranya sudah mengenyam pendidikan selama setidaknya empat tahun.
Kita harus mengatasi hambatan-hambatan pembelajaran, baik di ruang kelas maupun di rumah, melalui perbaikan kualitas pengajaran dan kondisi ruang kelas serta mengajarkan cara-cara kepada orangtua untuk mendukung pendidikan anaknya.
Investasi tambahan diperlukan untuk menjunjung tinggi kedua prinsip di atas.
Tahun lalu, UNESCO memperkirakan pemerintah harus melipatgandakan belanja pendidikan dari porsi pendapatan negara untuk mencapai tujuan tersebut pada tahun 2030.
Dengan demikian, perlu adanya kenaikan pendapatan dari pajak dan pengintensifan upaya untuk mengumpulkan piutang negara.
Contohnya, hanya sepertiga dana bantuan pendidikan yang dikucurkan ke Afrika, meskipun di kawasan tersebut hampir dua pertiga anak-anak mengalami putus sekolah.
Selain itu, saat ini anggaran pendidikan umumnya regresif, sementara hampir setengah pengeluaran di negara-negara termiskin dialokasikan untuk porsi 10% penduduk yang paling berpendidikan.
Penyempurnaan investasi pendidikan mengharuskan tindakan atas dua bidang utama.
Pertama, kita memerlukan pembiayaan yang adil, yang mana investasi tambahan harus disediakan untuk pertumbuhan dan perawatan anak usia dini, sebab tindakan ini memiliki potensi terbesar untuk menghasilkan return.
Anggaran harus difokuskan untuk kelompok anak yang paling termarginalkan, dan pendidikan dasar harus digratiskan agar setiap anak bisa menikmati pembelajaran.
Kita juga sangat memerlukan transparansi dan akuntabilitas, jadi anggaran tersebut akan terbuka dan masyarakat pun bisa menyuarakan pendapatnya sesuai tata kelola yang berlaku.
Kedua, sistem pendidikan dalam negeri perlu diperkuat agar pemerintah bisa memenuhi perannya sebagai penyedia pendidikan berkualitas bagi warganya, bukan mengalihkan peran tersebut kepada badan pembangunan asing.
Selain itu, kita harus mendorong kerja sama antar pemerintah dan pelaku bisnis untuk meningkatkan sumber daya lokal untuk pendidikan, dan menghilangkan aliran modal tidak sah yang menggerogoti sumber pendanaan yang dimiliki pemerintah, seperti akibat dari penggelapan pajak dan pencucian uang lintas batas.
Mengingat sejumlah prioritas di atas, komisi pendidikan akan menyampaikan rekomendasinya di hadapan sidang Majelis Umum PBB pada tanggal 18 September, ketika Sekretaris Jenderal akan mendengarkan dan melaksanakannya.
Komisi pendidikan akan dinilai berhasil jika kami bisa meningkatkan pendanaan dan kemauan politik untuk menjamin setiap anak bisa belajar, terlepas dari jumlah pemasukan, lokasi, atau status sosialnya.
Pekerjaan kita belum berakhir sampai keinginan tersebut terwujud.
«Трампономиканың»  осал жері
НЬЮ-ХЕЙВЕН – Дональд Трамптың экономикалық стратегиясы негізінен дұрыс емес.  Жаңадан сайланған АҚШ президенті үнемдеудің созылмалы тапшылығы бар елде мемлекеттік бюджет тапшылығын қаржыландыру есебінен экономикалық өсуді қалпына келтіруге ниеттеніп отыр.
Бұл қазірдің өзінде нормадан әлдеқайда жоғары сауда тапшылығын еріксіз арттыруға апаратын ұлттық жинақ ақшасының одан әрі азаюына апарады.
Бұл динамика  «Трампономиканың»  осал жерін ашып көрсетеді: экономикалық өсуді сақтап қалу үшін шетел валютасындағы жинақтар және сауда тапшылығына Американың тәуелділігіне қайшы келетін тұрпайы протекционистік үрдіс.
Трамптың әкімшілігі күшті де тұрақты да емес американдық экономиканыны мұраға алады.
Ұлы құлдыраудан кейін қалпына келтіру қарқыны қалыпты циклдік жаңғыртудың тек жартысындай ғана - және бұл 2008-2009 жылдардағы айтарлықтай қысқартулар аясында орын алуда.
Және өкінішке орай, болашақтағы экономикалық  өсудің «егіс дәні» болып табылатын жинақтар тапшылығы жалғасуда.
Ұлттық жинақтардың таза мөлшерлемесі -  кәсіпорындар, үй шаруашылығы және мемлекеттің жинақтары, девальвацияны ескере отырғанда, 2016 жылдың бірінші жартысында ұлттық табыстың тек 2,4%-ын құрады. Ол 2008-2011 жылдарда жинақтар бойынша теріс позициямен салыстырғанда, жақсару болып саналса да,  ХХ ғасырдың соңғы үш онжылдығында болған 6,3% орташа мәннен айтарлықтау артта қалып отыр.
Бұл өте маңызды, өйткені Трамп қарсы шыққан деструктивті сауда тапшылығының себебін түсіндіреді.  Жинақтар тапшылығы және экономикалық өсу ынтасы тұрғысынан, АҚШ жетіспейтін жинақтарды шетелден импорттауы керек.
Ағымдағы төлем мен сауда теңгерімінің теріс сальдосы - шетелдік капиталды тартудың жалғыз жолы.
Бұл сандармен расталады: 2000 жылы ұлттық жинақтар деңгейі орташа көрсеткіштен айтарлықтай төмендегенде, ағымдағы төлем теңгерімінің теріс сальдосы  ЖІӨ-нің 3,8% -ын құрайтын орташа мәнге дейін өсті, бұл 1970 жылдан 1999 жылға дейінгі кезеңдегі 1% -бен салыстырғанда шамамен төрт есе артық.
Сол сияқты, таза сауда тапшы��ығы - елдің сауда теңгерімсіздігінің ең толық көрсеткіші - 2000 жылдан бері ЖІӨ-нің 4% -ын құрады, салыстыру үшін - ХХ ғасырдың соңғы үш онжылдығанда орташа мәні 1,1% болған.
«Трампономиканың» даму динамикасының осындай кейін бұруына себеп-салдары бар.
Ол Қытай мен Мексика тәрізді, сауда тапшылығы туындайтын елдерге ерекше көңіл бөліп, осы екіжақты тапшылық Америкада әлдеқайда тереңірек жинақтау мәселесінің белгісі екенін назардан тыс қалдыруда.
Бір сәтке делік, АҚШ, сауда тапшылығының ең ірі бірінші және төртінші компоненттері Қытай және Мексикамен тарифтер мен басқа да протекционистік шаралар арқылы саудасын тоқтатты деп ойлап көрейік (Солтүстік Америка еркін сауда жүйесіне (НАФТА) қатысты ұсынылған қайта келіссөздер жүргізу және Мексика қаржыландыратын шекара дауалын салуды қоса алғанда). Американың созылмалы жинақ тапшылығы проблемасын шешпей, сауда тапшылығының Қытай және Мексика компоненттері жай ғана басқа елдерге қайта бөлінеді және олар жоғары шығынды өндірушілер болуы ықтимал.  Нәтижесі мүшкіл халде жүрген американдық орта тапты отбасыларға салынатын салықтарды арттырудың функционалдық баламасы болады.
Бір сөзбен айтқанда, екі жақты іс-шаралармен көп жақты проблемалары шешіле алмайды. 2015 жылы АҚШ-тың 101 елмен сауда тапшылығы болды -бұл жинақ тапшылығының нәтижесі болып табылатын көп жақты мәселе және жеке елдерге сәйкес келген «құралдар» көмегімен тиімді шешілуі мүмкін емес.
Бұл АҚШ сауда әріптестері міндеттерін жауапсыз орындады және олар жазаланауы керек деу емес.
Алайда, Америка Құрама Штаттары, қайтадан жинақтарын толтыра бастамаса бұл теңгерімсіздік салдары болып табылатын, елдегі айқын созылмалы сауда тапшылығы мен жұмыспен қамтамасыз ету проблемаларын шешу үшін аз үміт бар дегенді білдіреді.
Өкінішке орай, сценарий күрделінуде.
«Трампономика» да  алдағы жылдары АҚШ қорларының тапшылығы проблемасын қоздыратындай. Tax Policy Center, the Tax Foundation, және Moody’s Analytics жасаған талдауларға сәйкес, алдағы он жылда, Трамп экономикалық жоспарын жүзеге асырса, федералдық бюджет тапшылығы ЖІӨ-нің кем дегенде 7% -ына оралады деп көрсетеді.
Трамптың экономикалық саясат бойынша аға кеңесшілері Питер Наварро және Уилбур Росс қыркүйекте жасалған өз позициясын көрсету меморандумда олар бұл болжау жарамсыз екенін айтты, себебі ол нормативтік және энергетикалық реформалардан алынатын «өсуді ынталандыратын күтпеген пайданы»  немесе Американың сауда тапшылығын күрт қысқарту нәтижесінде алынатын қосымша табысты ескермейді деді.
Шынында, Наварро-Росс талдауы «Трампономикадан» түскен күтпеген, табыс өсуін ынталандыратын пайданың толық 73%-ын алдағы онжылдықта жалпы сауда балансында жаппай дамуға тіркейді.
Дегенмен, ұлттық жинақтарда ғажайып өсу толқыны орын алмаса бұның бәрі екіталай.
Креативті есептің ұсыныс экономикасының басты өнімі ретінде бұрын алды мұндай қиялы бай емес еді.
Мұнда «Трампономиканың» ең айқын үйлеспейтін жағы жатыр.
Ұлттық үнемдеу бұрын-соңды болмаған үлкен қысымға таяп қалған уақытта сауданы  қатаңдату шараларын іске асыру ешбір ойға сыймайды.
Мемлекеттік бюджет тапшылығының ең шамалы есептемелеріне қарағанда  қазірдің өзінде қатты азайған таза ұлттық жинақ коэффициенті 2018-2019 жылдарының бір кезеңінде қайта теріс секторға кіруі мүмкін. Яғни, бұл ағымдағы төлем және сауда балансының теріс сальдосына жаңа қысым көрсетіп, жұмыс орындары және табыстан айрылуды қайта қалпына келтіруді қиындата түседі, саясаткерлер болса бұл үшін тез  арада Американың сауда әріптестері кінәлі деп жариялайды.
Қызығы, алдағы жинақтау корларының қысқару дәуірінде, АҚШ шетелден келетін артық қаражат жинақтарына барған сайын тәуелді болады.
Трамп әкімшілігі ірі шетелдік кредиторларға - атап айтқанда, Қытайға көзделсе - оның стратегиясы тез уақытта кері нәтиже беруі мүмкін. Кем дегенде, Американың шетелден қарыз алу шарттарына кері әсері болуы мүмкін; қазірдің өзінде айқын болып табылатын жоғары пайыздық мөлшерлемелер орын алып және түбінде долларды түсіретін қысым болуы мүмкін.
Және, әрине, ғаламдық сауда соғысының ушығуы орын алатын ең нашар сценарий де бар.
Протекционизм, әлсіз жинақтау және мемлекеттік бюджет тапшылығын қаржыландыру аса «улы коктейльді»  құрайды.
«Трампономика» барысында, Американың ұлылыған қайта қайтару өте қиын болады.
A Clarion Call for Emerging Markets
ITHACA – With 2012 underway, it is worth reflecting on how a decade of strong economic growth in emerging markets led to last year’s resounding political transformations.
From the dramatic events in the Middle East, to the groundswell of support for the anti-corruption crusader Anna Hazare in India, leaders in emerging markets are getting a clear message from the streets that growth is not everything.
They ignore this message at their peril.
Emerging-market economies delivered solid growth during the 2000’s, and even survived the global financial crisis without a growth collapse.
But the specter of rising corruption is compromising the legitimacy of their economic gains and eroding support for further reforms needed to sustain their growth momentum.
Corruption takes many forms, but, in emerging markets, a combination of factors has turned it into a cancer that ultimately topples regimes.
Relentless low-level corruption is a major irritant for poor people in many of these countries; indeed, it limits their access to the social services and basic government functions that they often depend upon for their very survival.
Another type of corruption involves siphoning enormous sums of money from large-scale projects.
In India, for example, the government lost as much as $30-40 billion of much-needed revenue when coveted band spectrum was sold through a rigged auction.
For ordinary people, large-scale corruption is less visible, because, while the sums involved are mind-boggling, the costs are not as directly felt as they are in the case of lower-level graft.
But the perception of this type of mega-corruption has changed as rapid growth has increased inequality.
In countries like China and India, rapid economic growth has lifted a huge number of people out of poverty.
But the fruits of globalization and rapid growth have not been evenly shared – the rich become super-rich, even as a large fraction of the population remains destitute.
Rising income inequality is hardly limited to emerging markets, but their combination of open corruption and pervasive inequities creates a toxic brew that is undermining support for reforms that would strengthen and consolidate their economic gains.
In many emerging markets, a lack of political freedom adds to the combustible mix.
The combination of corruption, inequality, and political repression builds up enormous pressure, and there are no institutional channels through which to release it.
But freer political regimes are not a panacea.
In a democracy like India’s, the politically well-connected benefit from skewed growth, thus increasing the resentment of those left behind.
The opportunity to “throw the rascals out” in each election cycle helps to let off some steam, but it does not resolve the problems that are generating it.
It is difficult to predict what triggers popular protest, but economic factors are key.
For example, rising food prices tend to hurt the poor, especially the urban poor, who spend a large share of their income on food; unlike agricultural workers, they receive none of the benefits of higher food prices.
With swelling urban populations, it will become increasingly difficult to keep a lid on these pressures.
Some governments have reacted to recent events with political repression, information blackouts, or a combination of authoritarian measures.
China, for example, blocked media coverage of the Egyptian protests.
The Arab Spring, however, reveals the fragility of repressive political regimes that try to maintain their legitimacy by limiting information flows.
The main lesson for dynamic emerging-market countries is that an exclusive focus on GDP growth may ultimately not be good for economic and political stability.
Even with rapid increases in national income, if these countries’ leaders do not distribute the benefits fairly, they will become vulnerable to popular discontent.
Tackling corruption is critical to improving long-term growth and maintaining social stability.
These economies need measures that help to keep the poor out of poverty traps, and that give them realistic opportunities to improve their economic well-being.
Such steps include broadening financial markets to give more people access to credit and investment, strengthening social safety nets to protect the economically vulnerable, and improving educational access and quality.
These lessons apply equally to advanced economies, which also suffer from rising inequality and subtle forms of corruption.
But, for those wealthy economies, restoring decent growth is now the major priority.
Emerging markets have a golden opportunity to build on their economic gains and lock in growth and stability by tackling deep-seated problems like corruption.
As the past year’s events have shown, the costs of inaction could be calamitous.
These are all very important issues.
But the mere figures are simply not enough. A different approach to the problem of climate change is needed.
The climate issue can only be solved on the basis of shared, deeply felt ethical principles.
Humanity has reached a critical moment in Earth’s history, at which peoples and nations will have to recognize their solidarity – with each other and with the Earth – and start acting upon it.
Similar to the way world leaders adopted the United Nations Millennium Declaration in September 2000, and embraced the resulting Millennium Development Goals, today’s climate negotiators will have to commit themselves to creating a basis of shared fundamental ethical principles.
Such a basis is not hard to find.
Its inspiration can be the Earth Charter, which, launched in 2000, was initiated by, among others, former USSR President Mikhail Gorbachev and Wangari Mathaai, who received the 2004 Nobel Peace Prize for her efforts in the Green Belt Movement, a pan-African tree-planting initiative.
The climate problem does not stop at borders.
In the next few decades, a low-lying country like the Netherlands will need to invest billions of euros to intensify its age-old struggle against rising water.
But in many other countries, the water is already flooding over the dikes, both literally and figuratively.
Climate change affects particularly those countries that lack the money needed to take adequate measures against rising sea levels, persistent droughts, or devastating storms, even though they had nothing to do with the primary cause of these problems – industrialization in the developed countries.
Apart from the necessary, often infrastructural adaptations to survive the effects of climate change, enormous efforts to prevent even worse things from happening are required.
Large investments in forestation, agriculture, and energy supply are called for.
In devising solutions, the role of women should be the main focus.
Women are often the first people who have to address the problem of gaining access to natural resources, and they are capable of playing a major role as pioneers in finding solutions to climate change and the way humankind should adapt to it.
In the short term, the world should become a sustainable global society of low CO2 emitters.
This is a mission for all humankind, in which patriotic feelings and thinking in terms of power blocs have no place.
The pursuit of a sustainable global society of low CO2 emitters requires a tremendous effort.
Precisely for this reason, it also requires a broadly shared ethical basis.
This would guide the negotiating parties in such a way that they look not only for solutions to a part of the problem, but first and foremost at a comprehensive solution to the entire problem.
The climate change issue is too important to be left in the care of politicians.
In Copenhagen, it is therefore imperative that not only nation states, but the business community and citizens combine their efforts to save our planet’s climate. That is not only a scientific necessity; it is an ethical imperative.
A Communist Party without Communism
PRINCETON – Russian President Vladimir Putin’s anointment of Alexander Medvedev to succeed him in what is supposed to be a democratic presidential election next March shows that Russia’s leaders have not changed a whit.
It looks increasingly likely that, as under Leonid Brezhnev, we will see the same names in the news for decades to come.
According to Gleb Pavlovsky, the Putin regime’s leading ideologist, the current Russian system is perfect in all respects but one: it doesn’t know its enemies.
Indeed, it seems as if everyone in the Kremlin is reading Carl Schmitt, the Nazi legal theorist who taught that naming your enemy is the central mission of politics.
In the spirit of Schmitt, Putin’s men designated a liberal party, the Union of Right Forces, as their ur-enemy.
Its public meetings were broken up by armed police; its leaders arrested and beaten; Putin called its supporters “coyotes.”
What is surprising is that this aggressive behavior occurred in response to no visible danger.
Oil prices are soaring, as are Putin’s approval ratings.
His appointees control everything that matters, from Gazprom to the Central Electoral Committee.
Since the pacification of Chechnya with violence and subsidies, the incarceration or emigration of a few financially viable opponents, and the massive “social investments” of recent years, which, under Medvedev’s personal supervision, have bribed the population, no credible force can seriously challenge Putin’s men.
Yet their regime is in crisis, and they know it.
Russia’s economy is more dependent on gas and oil than ever before.
Military reform has been reversed.
Despite increasing incomes, Russians are less educated and less healthy than they were when Putin came to power; they still die at a shockingly young age.
Russian involvement in world affairs is tainted by poison and corruption.
State monopolies undo what private businesses created.
With more money, ill-educated bureaucrats hire more ill-educated bureaucrats; as a result, the regime fails to rule the country.
The country is unruly, and its rulers know it.
So they panic.
Putin’s aim was to subject all power to the control of Russia’s security forces.
His generation of KGB officers watched the collapse of the Communist Party and all the governmental bodies that it “directed and controlled,” including the KGB.
Under Putin, the security service has had its revenge.
Its people have become powerful, arrogant, and enormously rich.
They have also become disobedient.
In 2004, General Viktor Cherkesov, then Putin’s representative in northwest Russia, published an essay that glorified the KGB as the only unspoiled authority in a corrupted country.
This essay, more than anything else, defined Putin’s second term.
In October 2007, Cherkesov (now chief of one of the most obscure and powerful services, the Federal Anti-Drug Administration) published another essay in which he lamented his colleagues’ degradation: warriors had turned into traders, he complained.
Earlier, generals from a competing service, the FSB, had arrested Cherkesov’s deputy for “illegal bugging.”
In a public gesture of despair, Cherkesov admitted the failure of Putin’s project to reanimate Russian governance by subordinating it to the security services.
Cherkesov’s deputy remains in prison.
Most believe that Putin is unable to intervene in his defense.
In the absence of Communist Party control, these security officers betrayed their corporate ethic and engaged in horse-trading, applying force when a trade did not go well.
That this happens to ordinary Russians is clear; what Cherkesov revealed was that Putin’s circle also confronts this situation.
What is to be done when ex-KGB warriors turn their swords and bugs against one another?
Cherkesov’s case exemplifies Putin’s nightmare.
But if your instincts betray you, you go back to even deeper ones.
Now that Putin’s people have left their predecessors’ neo-liberal ideas behind and feel disenchanted with the ex-KGB clique, the task is to recreate an omnipresent political party that controls the security services, the administration, business, and much else.
This party will be centralized under personal leadership and will reduce the state to a legal fiction.
Preaching nationalism, its managers will believe in their universal competence, as opposed to KGB-style professionalism and corporatism.
Boris Yeltsin forbade party cells in state-controlled institutions by decree.
Putin’s lawyers will reverse that decision; the party will have cells or committees in every factory, corporation, military unit, university department, etc.
Integrated by the leader’s charisma and party discipline, party members will direct and unify the desolated country.
This is Putin’s plan.
Like former Soviet leader Yuri Andropov, the only other KGB man to rule Russia, Putin will become the party’s general secretary.
As in the Soviet era, state and governmental officials will be reduced to party ciphers – the role that President Medvedev will play under General Secretary Putin.
And, of course, being General Secretary carries no constitutional term limit.
In the end, Putin has what history left him: not ideas, just a faction yearning to consolidate its grip on power.
Lenin and Trotsky needed a party to make their ideology a reality; Putin and Medvedev are devising an ideology to solidify their party.
It is a bizarre ideology.
Accusing warriors of being traders and traders of being thieves, it shuns its Marxist origins.
It will subordinate all who really do work – traders, warriors, journalists, and others – to party ideologues whose sole job is to search for enemies.
A Confederal Solution for Palestine
LONDON – Last month, while in New York City, I happened to be staying in the same hotel as Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu.
To accommodate his security needs, the hotel had been converted into a fortress, much like Israel itself.
Netanyahu was in the United States for yet another round of Middle East peace talks.
The US offered various sweeteners to induce Israel to freeze its West Bank settlement construction for another 90 days.
The Israelis refused; another impasse was reached.
What, then, might be the prospects of a negotiated peace between two peoples with claims to the same land?
The answer is: very poor.
All peace efforts since the Oslo accords of 1993 have been based on the “two-state solution,” according to which Israel is supposed to turn over the occupied territories to a Palestinian state, the Palestinians are supposed to renounce any claims on the Jewish state, and everyone is supposed to live happily ever after.
A negotiated “land for peace” solution still remains official Western doctrine.
As US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton put it in a recent speech, “a just, lasting, and comprehensive peace” has to be based on “two states for two peoples.”
Meanwhile, the two main parties to the dispute, Palestine and Israel, are searching for unilateral alternatives to the stymied “peace process.”
The Palestinians are pushing for international recognition of their statehood, while the Israelis are using their settlement policy to preempt a Palestinian state.
Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas has said that, if the latest peace talks collapse, he will press for UN recognition of a Palestinian state based on the 1967 borders.
This month, Brazil and Argentina recognized “Palestine,” and a cascade of Latin American countries is expected to follow.
Abbas is now setting his sights on Europe, and would ask Turkey to serve as a go-between.
The game is to use international recognition of an independent Palestinian state to pressure the US to retreat from its almost unconditional support for Israeli policy.
Israel’s main concern continues to be security.
The official Western doctrine is that Israel’s long-term security depends on the success of the “peace process.”
In practice, Israel has been taking other measures to secure its future.
Media attention has been focused on the “security wall,” which has certainly succeeded in reducing the level of violence.
But, to the hawks who now control Israeli politics, the key to Israel’s security depends on depth of defense, for which expansion of the settlements is indispensable.
The hawks’ recipe for survival is threefold: continued military and economic support from the US, defensible frontiers through a strategic settlement program, and the carve-up of the Palestinian West Bank into disconnected bantustans, or subordinate authorities, incapable of concerted opposition to Israeli policy.
Thus, while Abbas seeks to create a new “fact on the ground” by drumming up international support for a Palestinian state, Israel aims to trump him by making such a state unviable.
The ideal alternative to both strategies is a peace process that aims not to create two states, but rather to establish the political and economic basis for a single confederal state.
Indeed, the two-state solution was always an illusion.
There was never enough land to satisfy the passionate possessiveness of all those with claims to it.
And, over time, Israeli settler disengagement from the West Bank and East Jerusalem has become just as impossible as any attempt by Israel to expel its remaining Arabs.
Israeli Jews are bound to stay in the West Bank and East Jerusalem, and Israeli Arabs are bound to stay in Israel proper.
These are the “facts on the ground” that doom Palestinian hopes for a sovereign Palestinian state no less than Israeli hopes for a wholly Jewish state.
Moreover, land for peace never made sense from an economic point of view.
If compensation for wrongs to the Palestinians was to be the guiding principle, there were always better ways of going about it than to found a rickety, poverty-ridden new country dependent on foreign aid.
Most people have forgotten that the Paris Protocols of April 1994 established a customs union between Israel and the occupied territories, with a joint Economic Council to adjudicate trade disputes.
The free movement of goods, labor, and capital between the two parts could have given a tremendous economic boost to Palestinian GDP.
It could also have been the basis of a confederal state, whose Palestinian part would have benefited from the West Bank settlers’ productivity and taxes.
But this benign prospect was undermined by the violence needed to maintain the Jewish state and enable the emergence of a Palestinian one.
The official view remains that only an internationally guaranteed two-state settlement will bring about the security needed for the economic revival of the Palestinian territories.
But it is just possible that unilateral Israeli policy, implicitly backed by the US, will create interim conditions of peace that are sufficient for economic growth to cool Palestinian nationalism.
The Palestinian cause is not the overriding preoccupation of even the Arab states, so Netanyahu’s strategy of defense in depth stands a better chance of success than Abbas’s pursuit of statehood through international recognition.
Netanyahu’s project is not moral.
But that doesn’t mean that it won’t work, at least for a time.
A Confederation for Kosovo
Time is running out in Kosovo.
If a United Nations-backed settlement is not reached by early December, the province’s majority Albanian population is likely to declare independence unilaterally – a move that the United States has announced it may support.
That would be a disastrous step.
Russia would be furious, because it fears that Kosovo’s secession – whether or not it is internationally recognized – might fuel separatist movements in the former Soviet empire.
Serbia is even more strongly opposed.
Dusan Prorokovic, Serbia’s state secretary for Kosovo, has said that his country might use force to maintain its sovereignty.
Even if the government hesitates, ultranationalist groups might push Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica to send in troops: the current UN presence in Kosovo is very thin (only 40 “military observers” and 2,116 policemen) but the stationing of 15,000 NATO troops could make any armed clash very dangerous.
After eight years of international administration, Kosovo’s Albanian majority has tasted freedom and is eager for full independence.
But Serbia claims that the province remains an essential part of its historical and cultural tradition.
Moreover, independence would not be accepted by the Serbian public, which has already watched in dismay as “Great Serbia” has been gradually whittled away, most recently with the secession of Montenegro.
Serbia is prepared to concede only “enhanced autonomy” to Kosovo, and some capacity to enter into international agreements.
Yet, while the two parties now seem irreconcilable, it is not too late for compromise.
But this is possible only by resuscitating – and updating – an old institution of the international community: a confederation of states.
By means of a binding UN Security Council resolution, Kosovo could be granted full and exclusive authority over its citizens and territory, as well as limited capacity for action on the international scene.
It could be authorized to enter into trade agreements as well as agreements concerning individuals (for example, admission and circulation of foreigners, or extradition), plus the right to seek admission to the UN (which does not require full sovereignty and independence).
Kosovo would thus gain some essential trappings of statehood.
However, a decision-making body consisting of delegates from Kosovo, Serbia, and the European Union would be given full authority over major foreign policy issues (for example, alliances and relations with international economic institutions), defence, borders (in case Kosovo wished to join with Albania), and the treatment of Kosovo’s Serbian minority.
As a result, Kosovo and Serbia would constitute two distinct international subjects, bound by a confederation hinging on a common decision-making body.
Of course, this confederation would be asymmetrical, because the Serbian government’s sovereignty over the rest of Serbia would remain intact and unlimited, whereas the Kosovar government’s “sovereignty” over Kosovo would be restrained.
To avoid one of the two parties getting the upper hand and imposing arbitrary decisions, the common decision-making body should consist of four Serbian delegates, two Kosovar delegates, and three representatives of the EU, thus requiring both sides to gain the support of the European delegates.
In addition, the EU should create a small but effective military force (say, 5,000 troops) to back up the common body’s decisions.
As with any compromise, the contending parties would both gain and lose from this arrangement.
Serbia would save face, and would continue to have a say on crucial matters concerning Kosovo, including the treatment of the Serbian minority.
Kosovo would acquire limited independence, with its status rising from a province of a sovereign state to an international subject capable of entering into certain agreements with other states and even joining the UN.
The EU would benefit as well, by contributing to the stabilization of a highly volatile area.
Subsequently, the EU would monitor Kosovo and prevent any dispute that might turn violent.
A final advantage of this solution is that it would be temporary.
Historically, confederations sooner or later either become federations (as occurred in the US, Germany, and Switzerland) or, pushed by centrifugal forces, split up (as with the United Arab Republic, established in 1958, which split three years later into Egypt and Syria).
The confederation I advocate would thus constitute an intermediate stage (lasting five or ten years), at the end of which Kosovo is likely to become fully independent.
Delaying a final solution in this way would provide time to verify Kosovo’s prospects of joining the EU and thus eventually sharing “sovereign authority” with other independent states, which could deflate Kosovars’ dangerously robust nationalistic demands.
A Cool Calculus of Global Warming
The British government recently issued the most comprehensive study to date of the economic costs and risks of global warming, and of measures that might reduce greenhouse gas emissions, in the hope of averting some of the direst consequences.
Written under the leadership of Sir Nicholas Stern of the London School of Economics, who succeeded me as Chief Economist of the World Bank, the report makes clear that the question is no longer whether we can afford to do anything about global warming, but whether we can afford not to.
The report proposes an agenda whose cost would be equivalent to just 1% of annual consumption, but would save the world risk equivalent costs that are five times greater.
The reported costs of global warming are higher than in earlier studies because it takes into account the mounting evidence that the process of global warming is highly complex and non-linear, with a non-negligible chance that it may proceed much faster than had previously been thought and that the extent of warming may be much greater than had previously been thought.
Indeed, the study may actually significantly underestimate the costs: for instance, climate change may lead to more weather variability, a possible disappearance or major shift of the Gulf Stream – of particular concern to Europe – and a flourishing of disease.
When I served in 1995 on the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the scientific group that periodically assesses the science of global warming, there was overwhelming evidence that the concentration of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere had increased markedly since the beginning of the industrial revolution, that human activity had contributed significantly to those increases, and that they would have profound effects on climate and sea levels.
But few saw, for instance, the Artic ice cap melting as rapidly as now seems to be the case.
Still, some suggest that because we are not certain about how bad global warming will be, we should do little or nothing.
To me, uncertainty should make us act more resolutely today, not less.
As one scientist friend puts it: if you are driving on a mountain road, approaching a cliff, in a car whose brakes may fail, and a fog bank rolls in, should you drive more or less cautiously?
Global warming is one of those rare instances where the scientific community is more fearful of what may be happening than the population at large.
Scientists have glimpsed what the future may portend.
As the Stern report points out, as usual, the poor are the most vulnerable.
A third of Bangladesh will be underwater by the end of this century.
The Maldives and a host of Pacific Island states will disappear: our twenty-first-century Atlantis.
To an economist, the problem is obvious: polluters are not paying the full costs of the damage they cause.
Pollution is a global externality of enormous proportions.
The advanced countries might mean Bangladesh and the disappearing island states no harm, but no war could be more devastating.
A global externality can best be dealt with by a globally agreed tax rate.
This does not mean an increase in overall taxation, but simply a substitution in each country of a pollution (carbon) tax for some current taxes.
It makes much more sense to tax things that are bad, like pollution, than things that are good, like savings and work.
Although President George W. Bush says he believes in markets, in this case he has called for voluntary action.
But it makes far more sense to use the force of markets – the power of incentives – than to rely on goodwill, especially when it comes to oil companies that regard their sole objective as maximizing profits, regardless of the cost to others.
Exxon has reportedly been funding so-called think tanks to undermine confidence in the science of global warming, just as the tobacco industry funded “research” to question the validity of statistical findings showing the link between smoking and cancer.
Some companies even seem to celebrate the melting of the polar ice cap, because it will reduce the cost of extracting the oil that lies beneath the Arctic Ocean.
The good news is that there are many ways by which improved incentives could reduce emissions – partly by eliminating the myriad of subsidies for inefficient usages.
The US subsidizes corn-based ethanol, and imposes tariffs on sugar-based ethanol; hidden in the tax code are billions of dollars of subsidies to the oil and gas industries.
Most importantly, price signals that show the true social costs of energy derived from fossil fuels will encourage innovation and conservation.
Small changes in practices, when replicated by hundreds of millions of people, can make an enormous difference.
For example, simply changing the color of roofs in warm climates to reflect sunlight or planting trees around houses can lead to great savings on energy used for air conditioning.
We have but one planet, and should treasure it.
Global warming is a risk that we simply cannot afford to ignore anymore.
A Cool Head for the Hottest Issues
LONDON – Reading Barack Obama’s Dreams from My Father , the US president’s beautifully written reflections on his early life and identity, most people are struck by his cool and intellectual approach.
This is not to say that he is unemotional.
Obama can rage and weep.
But he rarely seems to act on the basis of raw sentiment or instinctive prejudice.
Pragmatic and highly intelligent, sooner or later every issue receives the full attention of his forensic curiosity.
Recalling Hillary Clinton’s famous Democratic primary television advertisement, Obama, it turns out, is exactly the sort of president that most of us would want to have in the post for that 3 a.m. phone call about an international crisis.
He would not be afraid to act, but he would be prepared to think first.
I do not think, therefore, that Obama will be too vexed by some of the criticism he faces at the end of his first year in office, though he will undoubtedly grimace at the defeat of the Democratic candidate in the special election in Massachusetts to fill Ted Kennedy’s old seat.
Obama was praised extravagantly a year ago; 12 months on, the criticism is over the top, too.
Obama inherited a terrible legacy – recession, financial meltdown, Iraq, Afghanistan. He has not solved all of these problems.
But it is difficult to see any really bad mistakes, except perhaps allowing himself to be pushed around by Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu and giving China the impression that he was prepared for a bilateral relationship entirely on China’s terms.
That seems to be changing now.
Obama may have come to understand that when you are the leader of the world’s only superpower, you need to be feared just a little if you are to be respected.
The left in America criticizes Obama for not turning the economy around already.
The right angrily denounces him as a crypto-communist because he wants every American to have health care.
With a dispassionate eye on the long game, what will the president himself be thinking?
Yet there are still 23,000 nuclear warheads on our planet, with the explosive power of 150,000 Hiroshima bombs.
Terrorist groups would undoubtedly like to get their hands on one.
In all, there are eight nuclear-weapon states – the US, Russia, Britain, France, China, Israel, India, and Pakistan.
North Korea may also have a few bombs. Iran is believed by many to be trying to develop one.
Other states, which have their own civil nuclear capacity, have the potential to develop a weapon. The number of countries in this category is bound to increase as the number of nuclear power reactors doubles over the next 20 years.
The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) has contained the number of nuclear states.
A conference is to be held in May to renew and review it.
Obama clearly recognizes that the NPT needs to be strengthened in order to prevent countries from turning their civil nuclear-power capacity into weapons.
But Obama also knows that if the existing nuclear states want others to accept tougher restrictions, they will have to cut back their nuclear arsenals. This is principally an issue for the US and Russia, which possess 95% of the world’s nuclear weapons.
In addition, it would help if the US could take a strong lead by ratifying the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty.
The nuclear issue is one of the biggest items on the Obama agenda. How it is handled will help to define his presidency.
Even before the talking gets serious in May, there will be the question of Iran to sort out.
Iran says that it seeks no more than its own ability to produce nuclear power.
Disbelief grows with every revelation of secret Iranian facilities and plans, and with every refusal by Iran to negotiate safeguards that would allow for civil use while preventing weaponization.
The US, the European Union, and Russia have tried to engage Iran on this issue, so far without success.
China seems likely to block effective sanctions on Iran because of its close energy relationship with the country.
How China eventually handles this will profoundly affect its standing in the US and Europe.
These are going to be some of the major questions for Obama over the next year and more.
If he gets them right, he can forget about his short-term critics.
Fortunately, he is smart enough to know this.
A Crisis in Full Flight
MUNICH – For a while, it looked as if the European Central Bank’s €1 trillion credit program to pump liquidity into Europe’s banking system had calmed global financial markets.
But now interest rates for Italian and Spanish government bonds are on the rise again, closing in on about 6%.
Of course, this may not be the breaking point beyond which the debt burden becomes unsustainable.
After all, interest rates in Southern Europe were well above 10% in the decade before the euro was introduced.
Even Germany at that time had to pay bondholders more than 6%.
Nevertheless, the markets are clearly signaling growing doubt about whether Spain and Italy will be willing to bear their debt burden.
The main problem is Spain, where private and public-sector foreign debt is larger than that of Greece, Portugal, Ireland, and Italy combined, and, as in Greece, is in the neighborhood of 100% of GDP (93% to be precise).
A quarter of the labor force and half of Spain’s youth are unemployed, reflecting the country’s loss of competitiveness in the wake of the real-estate bubble inflated by cheap euro credit in the pre-crisis period.
The current-account deficit remains at 3.5% of GDP, despite the recession-induced decline in imports, while economic contraction will cause Spain to miss its budget-deficit target again.
Moreover, Spain’s debt with the ECB’s TARGET settlement system rose by €55 billion ($72 billion) between February and March, because capital outflows of that amount had to be compensated.
Since July 2011, Spain’s TARGET debt has grown by €199 billion.
Capital is in full flight, more than offsetting the inflows from 2008-2010.
The cumulative total since the beginning of the first crisis year (2008) means that Spain has financed its entire current-account deficit via the printing press.
The picture is little better in Italy, where the current-account balance has swung from a surplus of around 2% of GDP to a 3%-of-GDP deficit over the last ten years.
The country’s TARGET debt grew by €76 billion from February to March, with the total since July 2011 reaching €276 billion.
Italy, too, is being drained of capital; in fact, the flight of investors accelerated after the ECB’s liquidity injection.
It is now clear that the ECB itself has caused a large part of the capital flight from countries like Spain and Italy, because the cheap credit that it offered drove away private capital.
The purpose of the ECB’s measures was to re-establish confidence and bring about a recovery of the inter-bank market.
In this, too, it has not really been successful, despite the huge amount of money that it put on the table.
Indeed, now the French are looking wobbly.
As capital fled the country between July 2011 and January 2012, France’s TARGET debt increased by €95 billion.
France, too, has become uncompetitive, owing to the cheap credit brought by the euro in its initial years.
According to a recent study by Goldman Sachs, the country’s price level must drop by an estimated 20% vis-à-vis the euro average – that is, depreciate in real terms – if the economy is to regain competitiveness within the eurozone.
Italy will have to depreciate by 10-15%, and Spain by roughly 20%.
While Greece and Portugal face the need for deflation totaling 30% and 35%, respectively, the figures for Spain and Italy are high enough to justify fears about the future development of the eurozone.
These imbalances can be redressed only with great effort, if at all, and only if one accepts a decade of stagnation.
For Greece and Portugal, staying in the eurozone will be a tight squeeze.
There are many who would solve the problem by routing more and more cheap credit through public channels – bailout funds, eurobonds, or the ECB – from the eurozone’s healthy core to the troubled South.
But this would unfairly force savers and taxpayers in the core countries to provide capital to the South on terms to which they would never voluntarily agree.
Already German, Dutch, and Finish savings amounting to €15,000, €17,000, and €21,000, respectively, per working person have been converted from marketable investments into mere equalization claims against the ECB.
No one knows what these claims will be worth in the event of a eurozone breakup.
Above all, however, the permanent public provision of cheap credit would ultimately lead to a lingering infirmity, if not to Europe’s economic collapse, because the eurozone would become a central management system with state control over investment.
Such systems cannot work, because they eliminate the capital market as the economic system’s main steering mechanism.
One cannot help but wonder how thoughtlessly Europe’s politicians have started down this slippery slope.
A Crisis in Two Narratives
CHICAGO – With the world’s industrial democracies in crisis, two competing narratives of its sources – and appropriate remedies – are emerging.
The first, better-known diagnosis is that demand has collapsed because of high debt accumulated prior to the crisis.
Households (and countries) that were most prone to spend cannot borrow any more.
To revive growth, others must be encouraged to spend – governments that can still borrow should run larger deficits, and rock-bottom interest rates should discourage thrifty households from saving.
Under these circumstances, budgetary recklessness is a virtue, at least in the short term.
In the medium term, once growth revives, debt can be paid down and the financial sector curbed so that it does not inflict another crisis on the world.
This narrative – the standard Keynesian line, modified for a debt crisis – is the one to which most government officials, central bankers, and Wall Street economists have subscribed, and needs little elaboration.
Its virtue is that it gives policymakers something clear to do, with promised returns that match the political cycle.
Unfortunately, despite past stimulus, growth is still tepid, and it is increasingly difficult to find sensible new spending that can pay off in the short run.
Attention is therefore shifting to the second narrative, which suggests that the advanced economies’ fundamental capacity to grow by making useful things has been declining for decades, a trend that was masked by debt-fueled spending.
More such spending will not return these countries to a sustainable growth path.
Instead, they must improve the environment for growth.
The second narrative starts with the 1950’s and 1960’s, an era of rapid growth in the West and Japan.
Several factors, including post-war reconstruction, the resurgence of trade after the protectionist 1930’s, the introduction of new technologies in power, transport, and communications across countries, and expansion of educational attainment, underpinned the long boom.
But, as Tyler Cowen has argued in his book The Great Stagnation, once these “low-hanging fruit” were plucked, it became much harder to propel growth from the 1970’s onward.
Meanwhile, as Wolfgang Streeck writes persuasively in New Left Review, democratic governments, facing what seemed, in the 1960’s, like an endless vista of innovation and growth, were quick to expand the welfare state.
But, when growth faltered, this meant that government spending expanded, even as its resources shrank.
For a while, central banks accommodated that spending.
The resulting high inflation created widespread discontent, especially because little growth resulted.
Faith in Keynesian stimulus diminished, though high inflation did reduce public-debt levels.
Central banks then began to focus on low and stable inflation as their primary objective, and became more independent from their political masters.
But deficit spending by governments continued apace, and public debt as a share of GDP in industrial countries climbed steadily from the late 1970’s, this time without inflation to reduce its real value.
Recognizing the need to find new sources of growth, towards the end of Jimmy Carter’s presidency, and then under Ronald Reagan, the United States deregulated industry and the financial sector, as did Margaret Thatcher in the United Kingdom.
Productivity growth increased substantially in these countries over time, which persuaded Continental Europe to adopt reforms of its own, often pushed by the European Commission.
Yet even this growth was not enough, given previous governments’ generous promises of health care and pensions – promises made even less tenable by rising life expectancy and falling birth rates.
Public debt continued to grow.
And the incomes of the moderately educated middle class failed to benefit from deregulation-led growth (though it improved their lot as consumers).
The most recent phase of the advanced economies’ frenzied search for growth took different forms.
In some countries, most notably the US, a private-sector credit boom created jobs in low-skilled industries like construction, and precipitated a consumption boom as people borrowed against overvalued houses.
In other countries, like Greece, as well as under regional administrations in Italy and Spain, a government-led hiring spree created secure jobs for the moderately educated.
In this “fundamental” narrative, the advanced countries’ pre-crisis GDP was unsustainable, bolstered by borrowing and unproductive make-work jobs.
More borrowed growth – the Keynesian formula – may create the illusion of normalcy, and may be useful in the immediate aftermath of a deep crisis to calm a panic, but it is no solution to a fundamental growth problem.
If this diagnosis is correct, advanced countries need to focus on reviving innovation and productivity growth over the medium term, and on realigning welfare promises with revenue capacity, while alleviating the pain of the truly destitute in the short run.
For example, Southern Europe’s growth potential may consist in deregulating service sectors and reducing employment protection to spur creation of more private-sector jobs for retrenched government workers and unemployed youth.
In the US, the imperative is to improve the match between potential jobs and worker skills.
People understand better than the government what they need and are acting accordingly.
Many women, for example, are leaving low-paying jobs to acquire skills that will open doors to higher-paying positions.
Too little government attention has been focused on such issues, partly because payoffs occur beyond electoral horizons, and partly because the effectiveness of government programs has been mixed.
Tax reform, however, can provide spur retraining and maintain incentives to work, even while fixing gaping fiscal holes.
Three powerful forces, one hopes, will help to create more productive jobs in the future: better use of information and communications technology (and new ways to make it pay), lower-cost energy as alternative sources are harnessed, and sharply rising demand in emerging markets for higher-value-added goods.
The advanced countries have a choice.
They can act as if all is well, except that their consumers are in a funk, and that “animal spirits” must be revived through stimulus.
Or they can treat the crisis as a wake-up call to fix what debt has papered over in the last few decades.
For better or worse, the narrative that persuades these countries’ governments and publics will determine their future –&nbsp;and that of the global economy.
Financing the Next Development Agenda
WASHINGTON, DC – As the 2015 target date for the Millennium Development Goals approaches, the United Nations is intensifying its efforts to foster debate about what comes next for promotion of development worldwide.
The outcome of these discussions will shape policies and investment aimed at spurring GDP growth, strengthening human capital, and promoting more inclusive prosperity.
With the global population expected to reach nine billion people by 2050 – a significant proportion of whom will reside in developing or underdeveloped countries – the international community must improve access to education, health care, and employment opportunities worldwide.
Meanwhile, the prospect of a rise in global temperature of more than 2°C (3.6°F) over pre-industrial levels by the end of this century (which would trigger global warming’s most damaging effects) calls for higher investment in sustainable urbanization, climate-smart agriculture, and social safety nets.
Both factors challenge us to define, in the longer term, more sustainable patterns of production and consumption.
Governments, civil society, and the private sector must rise to the challenge, cooperating to find and implement creative solutions.
But, first, they must anticipate the associated financing requirements, which will soon surpass the current capacities of governments and international donors, and take action now to activate new, reliable sources of financing.
To start, governments should design targeted, evidence-based policies and support the development of sound institutions.
This would make government services more effective, while helping to catalyze additional development aid from traditional donors and mobilize private-sector resources.
In many countries, there is considerable scope for domestic resource mobilization.
Broadening the tax base, improving tax administration, and closing gaps in the value-added tax could make a significant difference in lower-income countries, where tax revenues account for only about 10-14% of GDP, compared to 20-30% of GDP in high-income countries.
More equitable taxation would have a positive impact on governance, another important tool for mobilizing domestic resources.
With improved corporate and public governance and clear transfer-pricing policies, resource-rich countries could shore up their capacity to negotiate fair contracts with extractive industries, balance revenues and expenditures over time, and manage their natural endowments more transparently.
Progress in these areas would help governments to channel their spending more effectively toward those who would benefit the most.
For example, only 8% of the $409 billion spent on fossil-fuel subsidies in 2010 reached the poorest 20% of the population.
A targeted support program could increase substantially the efficiency of spending, freeing up resources for education, health, and poverty eradication.
Furthermore, promoting financial deepening and inclusiveness could accelerate private-sector growth, creating more opportunities.
Indeed, broader access to financial services would help the estimated 400 million micro, small, and medium-size enterprises in developing countries to prosper, while enabling the 2.5 billion people worldwide who currently lack access to such services to build their assets.
A deeper and more efficient financial sector would also reduce transaction costs and facilitate risk management.
Local-currency bond markets could help to develop domestic investor bases and mobilize domestic savings to support long-term investments.